Young people who lost their jobs during the pandemic in the UK have returned to less secure work, often in gig economy roles, according to research from a leading thinktank, which also found almost 50,000 more men under the age of 24 are now economically inactive. A report by the Resolution Foundation published on Monday found young people had returned to work rapidly in late 2021, with unemployment now slightly lower than pre-pandemic levels, but a third of the 18- to 34-year-olds back in the workplace were now in atypical, insecure work. The young “returners” – those who were employed pre-Covid but became unemployed in the pandemic – were now much more likely than those who stayed in work to be on a temporary or zero-hours contract, or doing agency work or unsteady hours. Thirty-three per cent of the returners, among 6,100 people surveyed by YouGov for the study, were now in such roles, compared with 12% of those who had stayed in work throughout the pandemic. While the thinktank said the furlough scheme had been a success in limiting youth unemployment, joblessness during the pandemic nonetheless had blighted future employment and pay prospects, as well as the mental health, of many. Although the youth unemployment rate decreased from 10.5% to 9.8% from spring 2020 to autumn 2021, the number of 18- to 24-year-olds who are economically inactive and not in full-time education, known as Neets, rose by 75,000 last year – with young men accounting for more than 60% of the increase, the report said. Researchers found about two-thirds of those who lost work reported mental health problems. The thinktank said policymakers should not be led into complacency by the headline unemployment figures, and needed to focus on tackling insecure work. Louise Murphy, an economist at the Resolution Foundation and author of the report, said: “One in three young people who experienced worklessness during the last lockdown have returned to atypical contracts, which often means insecure work. The fact that they are more likely to be looking for new or additional work suggests higher dissatisfaction with their current jobs. “And while unemployment has fallen, the number of young people dropping out of education and the labour market altogether has risen – especially young men. “A return to the workplace, on its own, is not enough. Ensuring that young people have the confidence and knowledge to find and apply for work, and access to good quality jobs and sufficient hours, must be a priority for employers and policymakers in the months and years to come.”When Melvin Van Peebles died last autumn, he was rightly remembered as a firebrand film-maker and the godfather of blaxploitation and independent cinema. His stage career as a theatre director, playwright, composer and lyricist is less well documented – mind you, so are his other lives as a novelist, painter and Wall Street trader. In 1971, in the wake of his explosively successful low-budget film Sweet Sweetback’s Baadasssss Song, Van Peebles made his Broadway debut with a “ghetto-life” musical, Ain’t Supposed to Die a Natural Death. He wrote its music, book and lyrics and the following year, ever the multi-hyphenate, he did the same for a second Broadway musical, Don’t Play Us Cheap. But this time he also produced and directed. The two shows ran concurrently in the summer of 1972, and that year he released a film version of Don’t Play Us Cheap starring the original Broadway cast. It’s now available in a Blu-ray Van Peebles box set from Criterion. Anyone who only knows Van Peebles for the brutal and bleak Sweetback may be surprised by the abundant warmth of Don’t Play Us Cheap, and also by its sheer goofiness. This is a musical with a prologue told by actors dressed up as a rat and a cockroach and a plot that finds two “devil bats” visiting Harlem and assuming human form to wreck a house party. But against this wacky backdrop, Van Peebles presents a close-knit circle of friends and family: “brothers and sisters getting their groove on” as the intro has it, which brings to mind how the opening sequence for Sweetback listed the main stars as “the black community”. Sweetback’s tale of a hustler on the run was propelled by a jazz-funk score by Earth, Wind and Fire (released on Stax Records) and by Van Peebles’ own defiant musical refrain: “They bled your momma. They bled your poppa. Won’t bleed me.” Don’t Play Us Cheap has a stirring and more expansive mix of R&amp;B, soul, jazz, doo-wop and blues. These songs are not used to move along plot or fill out characterisation in a traditional sense. Instead they collectively form a portrait of the time and place: a Saturday night in Harlem in the early 70s, where Earnestine (Rhetta Hughes) is celebrating her 20th birthday. Unlike musicals whose characters break seamlessly from book into song, Van Peebles has his characters directly discuss the tunes that form the soundtrack. We even see them selecting and spinning the records we hear – an act that invites us to listen more carefully to the lyrics. The film comes alive when Mrs Washington (played by Joshie Jo Armstead, a former Ikette turned soloist and songwriter) hears the opening bars to You Cut Up the Clothes in the Closet of My Dreams. “Ooh that’s it! That’s my song,” she declares, pouring herself a drink and rising from the sofa to deliver the ballad of heartbreak and recovery. Van Peebles gradually frames her in a tight close-up, the other house guests serving first as her audience and then as her chorus of backing singers. “I’m moving on” is a recurring line in that song and in the film itself, which is a hymn to endurance and going high, and celebrates a carefree night when you put the week’s work behind you, forget your worries and simply savour the next dish coming out of the kitchen. Van Peebles tells this tale of a circle of intergenerational family and friends through styles such as gospel and soul that are equally closely related. And the bonds of music are shown to be unbreakable: literally so when Joe Keyes Jr, as Trinity, sits on a pile of records but they don’t snap. Trinity is one of the devil bats who flap into this party with the same tricksy visual effects such as distortion and superimposition that Van Peebles used in Sweetback. But Esther Rolle, as the matriarch Miss Maybell, is hardly freaked out to find Trinity – clad in black and red, with cape and jutting lapels – in her apartment. And in a hot minute Earnestine has fallen for him. If there’s little chemistry between Hughes and Keyes Jr, Rolle has loving wisdom to spare and Miss Maybell gives the film its heart. Earthly ills from jealousy and suspicion to snobbery and hypocrisy are denounced while she exudes a generosity of spirit. “Everybody falls sometimes,” she observes. “The trick is to get back up.” Despite the bats’ best efforts to ruin it, the spirit of the party – just like those records – is unbreakable. After the arrival of another suitor along with a second devil bat named David, there’s not much more plot to bother with. Van Peebles’ film has the disjointed feel of a real party – a carousel of distractions and interruptions, snippets of conversation and jokes. It’s punctuated with rollicking piano lines, call-and-response, hand claps and dance routines that are authentic rather than overly choreographed. But if the feel is largely celebratory, and the whole bat plot fantastical, the story is also grounded in social commentary and politics: our rat host asks “are you hip to injustice?” in the prologue, Miss Maybell reflects on the “lying and killing” in the world beyond her triple-locked front door, and on her wall are photos of Malcolm X and of Martin Luther King whose assassinations were still reverberating in early-70s America. The apartment is filled with photos of other African American icons such as Isaac Hayes, on the album cover of Black Moses, and Van Peebles himself, on the cover of his LP As Serious As a Heart-Attack. Don’t Play Us Cheap earned Van Peebles a Tony nomination for best book and also brought actor Avon Long a nomination for his performance as David. The show ran for 164 performances; Ain’t Supposed to Die a Natural Death managed almost double that number. But it would be years until Van Peebles directed or wrote another major film or stage musical. None of his four theatre productions have had a Broadway revival although there are plans to bring back Ain’t Supposed to Die a Natural Death this year, with Van Peebles’ son Mario involved. But Don’t Play Us Cheap, even with the film’s dated visual effects and uneven comedy, is an irresistible soul-saver of a musical. It deserves its own 50th birthday party on stage.More airline passengers on UK domestic flights could receive compensation for delays and have simpler access to resolve claims under government proposals announced on Monday. Passengers would have the right to a partial refund of their fare after a one-hour delay instead of the current three-hour minimum – rising to 50% after two and a full refund after waiting three hours. However, the system could see many people receive less money than before. Under EU regulations, which Britain has retained after Brexit, passengers are entitled to at least a £220 payout after three hours’ delay. The Department for Transport said that the new model, based on the way rail and ferry operators offer compensation for delays, would be a significant shift and fairer. Budget airlines have argued that the levels of compensation often outstrip the fare. Airlines often do not pay compensation when delays are deemed beyond their control, for example due to extreme weather, security alerts or air traffic strikes. The government may also force all airlines to be part of the aviation industry’s alternative dispute resolution [ADR] scheme, which allows passengers to escalate complaints if they feel they have not been settled, without recourse to legal action. Currently membership is on a voluntary basis. Ryanair quit the scheme in 2019. The UK’s aviation regulator, the Civil Aviation Authority, would also have increased powers to enforce consumer protection law and fine airlines directly for breaches. Richard Moriarty, the CAA’s chief executive, said the consultation was “a clear indication of the need to enhance our enforcement powers, and bring us in line with other regulators”. Airlines could also be made to pay full compensation to wheelchair or mobility scooter users for any damage caused to their device in flight. Current liability under the Montreal convention is capped at about £1,200, far below the potential cost of repairs or replacement. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said the proposals “aimed to bolster airline consumer protections and rights” and would “help build a trustworthy, reputable sector”. Airlines UK, which represents a wide range of airlines including regional and domestic carriers, said it would “look forward to responding to the consultation [and] the sector’s eventual recovery from Covid”. In a sign of the airline industry’s revival, easyJet said it expects to recruit 1,000 cadet pilots over the next five years and has relaunched its training programme. The airline is to focus on attracting diverse candidates – an advertising campaign features a parent, a former gymnast and a DJ who now work as easyJet pilots. Only around 6% of pilots worldwide are women, although easyJet has doubled the number of female pilots in its ranks since starting a recruitment drive in schools in 2015. Johan Lundgren, the airline’s chief executive, said: “Whilst we have made progress, there is still work to do. Increasing diversity in all of its forms in the flight deck is a long-term focus for easyJet and so we will continue to ensure we lead the industry on this issue.” Both easyJet and British Airways are also looking to recruit thousands of cabin crew for summer 2022. EasyJet said in November it would need about 1,500 seasonal crew. BA said in October it would look to rehire former staff as it ramps up operations for a new Gatwick subsidiary, after laying off thousands of crew at the start of the pandemic.Up to a million women are at risk of being harmed by gambling, according to a study that found that traffic to online casino and bingo sites popular with women peaks in the winter months. While gambling addicts are disproportionately male, the number of women seeking treatment has doubled in the past five years, up from 1,134 in 2015-16 to 2,423 in 2020-21. But the great majority of them do not seek treatment, according to the gambling charity GambleAware, with two in five unwilling to do so due to stigma and embarrassment. Women often avoid seeking help despite being more likely than men to report mental health difficulties caused by gambling, such as stress or anxiety, GambleAware found. The rise in female gambling addiction has previously been attributed to the ease with which women can now access casino games and betting on smartphones, rather than needing to access traditionally male-dominated environments such as bookmakers. According to a study that GambleAware will publish later this year, 1 million women are now deemed to be at risk of suffering harm, with the danger particularly acute during winter. Visits to gambling websites with a majority female customer base – such as online bingo – typically rise by 29% between December and March, the charity said. The charity is responding with an advertising campaign, launching today, which highlights warning signs such as losing track of time, spending unaffordable sums and hiding gambling from friends and family. Jemima, whose name has been changed at her request, said her online gambling escalated when she became a mother and found her support networks lacking. “I became a mum at a young age, and that’s when I found online gambling. I saw it as my ‘me’ time – time to close off from the world around me,” she said. “I could do it anywhere – standing in the supermarket queue, waiting for my son to come out of school. I never switched off. Being women who gamble, we do sometimes face a unique stigma – especially in this day and age when you’re expected to do it all. It’s incredibly helpful to see more and more women coming forward to share their stories, and I hope it will help empower others to do the same.” Liz Karter, a leading UK expert in gambling addiction in women and a gambling addiction counsellor, said: “Gambling behaviours manifest themselves differently in women than men. For example, we know the easy availability of online gambling leads many women to games which appear innocent and socially acceptable. The games seem safe and familiar, as they are so similar to the free-play digital games we are all now used to playing. In addition, the hopes of financial gains can prove a powerful motivator.” The government is expected to publish proposals to tighten up gambling regulation within the next two months, amid mounting calls for a tougher regime. Anyone concerned about their gambling, or that of a loved one, can visit BeGambleAware.org for free, confidential advice and support. The National Gambling Helpline is available on 0808 8020 133 and operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week.Boris Johnson will attempt to seize back control of the government agenda this week with a policy blitz, a Brexit bill and flying visit to Ukraine, as Westminster remains in the grip of paralysis over the Sue Gray and police inquiries into No 10 parties. Amid frustration in No 10 at the uncertainty surrounding the report on rule-breaking parties in Downing Street, sources said Johnson was determined to deflect public outrage with a schedule of high-profile announcements and photo opportunities that he also hopes will show MPs he remains focused. On Monday, Johnson is announcing plans for legislation to make it easier to rip up EU regulations and protections, after criticism from Conservative MPs that the government has not taken sufficient advantage of Brexit. He is also expected to visit Ukraine with the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, early this week, and the levelling-up white paper is scheduled for publication on Wednesday. Whitehall sources said they also expected developments this week on help for families struggling with the cost of energy bills, after the prime minister and the chancellor definitively ruled out cancelling the national insurance rise and cutting VAT on energy bills. Johnson could receive the long-awaited report on lockdown breaches in No 10 as soon as Monday, after which he is expected to give an immediate statement to MPs. Scotland Yard’s special inquiries team will this week scour evidence of lockdown-breaking by Johnson’s aides sent to them by the Gray inquiry. Detectives received the information from the Cabinet Office on Friday and police chiefs have been stung by fierce and widespread criticism after pressing for Gray’s report to give only “minimal reference” to the gatherings under investigation. Those are believed to be the most clear-cut breaches of the lockdown rules, and probably the most politically dangerous for Johnson. The police request caused widespread fury in Westminster and the report’s contents are expected to be significantly weakened. The Met was unable to say on Sunday when it will start to write to those identified by Gray as having potentially breached lockdown rules. They will be asked if they have a reasonable excuse and then police will decide whether they should face a fine. Cabinet Office sources said on Sunday night that they were still in discussion with the Met. Opposition parties have been discussing what can be done to force the publication of a full version of the report, which is now only likely after a police inquiry has been completed. Johnson, who spent the weekend at his Chequers residence, is said to have been struck by MPs’ criticism that the government has been unable to communicate the benefits of Brexit. On Sunday night he unveiled plans for a new law – called the “Brexit freedoms” bill – intended to make it easier to amend or remove some of the bridging law kept on the statute book after Brexit. No 10 said that, as it stands, much of that regulation would require primary legislation to remove it, and the new bill could sidestep that process. Critics said Johnson must make clear whether he intends to target employment protections, and pointed out that businesses and government have already faced billions of pounds of costs as a result of additional red tape due to Brexit itself. Sarah Olney, the Liberal Democrat spokesperson for business, said: “This odd announcement raises questions about what kind of environmental rules, data protections and workers rights this government may look to water down. This bizarre press release leaves ministers with serious questions to answer.” A Labour source said: “The key question for the government is which of the proposed changes in regulation depend on the passage of this bill, and if the answer is none, what other changes are they planning that do? Until they can explain all that, we have to ask what the point of this bill is.” Downing Street said it would release a public catalogue of all retained EU laws to determine if they are beneficial to the UK. In a statement announcing the new bill, two years after Britain’s exit from the bloc, Johnson said: “Getting Brexit done two years ago today was a truly historic moment and the start of an exciting new chapter for our country. The plans we have set out today will further unleash the benefits of Brexit and ensure that businesses can spend more of their money investing, innovating and creating jobs. “Our new Brexit freedoms bill will end the special status of EU law in our legal framework and ensure that we can more easily amend or remove outdated EU law in future.” The government will also publish a riposte to critics who claim little advantage of Brexit has been taken, with a document titled The Benefits of Brexit: How the UK is Taking Advantage of Leaving the EU. It will claim that reforms have led to a more agile digital and AI sector and a less burdensome data rights regime compared with the EU’s GDPR. It will also claim that there have been benefits in changing clinical trials, strengthening environmental protections and establishing a domestic subsidy regime. With hopes rising in No 10 that Johnson can swerve a no confidence vote, the prime minister is also understood to have told staff he hopes to save his chief of staff, Dan Rosenfield, or move him to another role. Gray’s report will criticise the culture in No 10 and make a series of recommendations on changes to the organisation, according to those who have given evidence, but Rosenfield has not been implicated publicly in any egregious breaches. No 10 is braced for further damaging revelations in the press once Gray’s slimmed-down report is published. One of Johnson’s fiercest critics, Dominic Cummings, told NYMag on Sunday that it was his “duty to get rid” of Johnson as prime minister, describing it as “sort of like fixing the drains”. Cummings, who was Johnson’s chief adviser, called his former boss a “complete fuckwit” whose only preoccupations were “Big Ben’s bongs” and “looking at maps” to “order the building of things” in his honour.No single word can encapsulate Manipulate. The festival’s mix of animation, physical theatre and puppetry defies easy categorisation. The organisation itself opts for “visually led work”. On the strength of this year’s opening weekend, you could also call it a celebration of making something out of nothing. No more so is this the case than in Acqua Alta by the French duo Adrien M &amp; Claire B. Around a boardroom table, they have arranged a set of large books, opened to reveal pen-and-ink scribbles and simple pop-up structures. Ordinarily, you wouldn’t give them a second look. Only when you open the app on your phone do you make sense of them. Thanks to augmented-reality technology, the pages become miniature stage sets. Skipping around a flat-roofed house is a squabbling couple, inky black figures moving with balletic grace. Their argument ends as the rain starts. To see what happens next, you move to the next open book. Taking its name from the periodic flooding of Venice, Acqua Alta follows the couple as they are torn apart by rising waters, the man switching from a tiny swimmer lost at sea to an enormous figure, reaching for his partner’s hair as it morphs into a sea anemone. All the while, the room remains unchanged. It is as if we had imagined it. This is also true of Fauna, by the same team, a series of posters of dramatic landscapes – craters, cliffs, waterfalls – from which scores of amorphous black creatures emerge. Escaping into Summerhall’s corridors, they are comic and cute – and visible only to those in the know. Along the road in the Festival theatre’s Studio, two one-off performances also play on the imagination. The Chosen Haram elevates a routine boy-meets-boy love story into something dream-like thanks to the circus skills of a weightless Sadiq Ali and Hauk Pattison. Ali’s first full-length show has visual flair to match its technical prowess, even if his intriguing themes about Islam and sexuality are underexplored. In After Metamorphosis, Lewis Sherlock embodies Franz Kafka’s Gregor Samsa, his twitches and convulsions matched by the repeating phrases of Ali Maloney’s narration. With its pummelling techno soundtrack, the physical-theatre show makes up in intensity what it lacks in subtlety. Manipulate festival is at Summerhall and the Studio, Festival theatre, Edinburgh, until 5 February. The Chosen Haram is at Jacksons Lane, London, 4-6 February.A coalition of women’s rights organisations has called on the UK government to abolish a law that gives courts the power to send people to prison for their own protection, as part of a 10-point plan to tackle inequalities in the criminal justice system. On the fifth anniversary of the Lammy Review, leading women’s rights groups have derided the “lack of progress” in tackling persistent inequalities experienced by black, Asian, minority ethnic and migrant women in the criminal justice system. The coalition warned that these women faced the “double disadvantage” of gender inequality and racism when they encountered the criminal justice system, which prevented them getting the support they needed and left them at risk of reoffending. The coalition of organisations, including Hibiscus, Muslim Women in Prison, the Zahid Mubarek Trust, Agenda, Criminal Justice Alliance and Women in Prison, presented the government with the action plan. As well as abolishing the law that gives courts the power to send people to prison for their own protection, the coalition demands practical changes to training, recruitment and external scrutiny. It also calls on the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) to analyse and publish data on racial disparities in women’s contact with the criminal justice system. In 2018, the government published the Female Offender Strategy, which made a public commitment to tackle racial disparity, but the coalition argues it does not go far enough to meet the needs of BAME and migrant women. Amina, 27, who served a prison sentence, said: “My faith is really important to me and it’s the one thing that got me through my prison sentence but from what I saw the officers had no understanding of what being a Muslim means. “They only know the negative picture the media paints. For the first three months of my sentence, I had to pray on a towel because nobody gave me a prayer mat even though officers saw me pray on the towel. Another one of the girls had to fight my corner and get me one.” Ivory, 35, a woman supported by Hibiscus, an organisation working with BAME and migrant women at the intersection of the immigration and criminal justice, said: “In prison there is a lot of discrimination and racism against black and Asian women because of how we look and the colour of our skin. The way staff address white people is different, and I suffered bullying because of this. “This is an important issue that needs to be urgently looked into and changed.” Marchu Girma, the chief executive of Hibiscus, said: “Currently there are unacceptable levels of inequalities in the criminal justice system, that result in many black, Asian, minoritised and migrant women suffering. I am certain these inequalities are not mountains that cannot be moved.” Indy Cross, the chief executive of Agenda, an alliance for women and girls at risk, said: “It’s a national shame that the criminal justice system consistently fails so many black, Asian, minoritised, and migrant women. The double disadvantage of structural racism and gender inequality in the criminal justice system must be tackled.” A Ministry of Justice spokesperson said: “We are working across Government to tackle the deep-rooted causes of racial disparities in the justice system, including by improving education and healthcare so that opportunity is spread more equally. “The number of women entering the criminal justice system has fallen 30 per cent since we launched our Female Offenders Strategy and we are investing millions into community services like women’s centres, drug rehabilitation and accommodation so even fewer women end up in prison.”Boris Johnson has announced plans for legislation to make it easier to rip up EU regulations and protections, amid criticism from Conservative MPs that the government has not taken sufficient advantage of Brexit. The plans claim to cut £1bn in red tape expenses for businesses, but Johnson gave no firm details on which regulations are intended to be repealed or enhanced, instead stating five principles that would be applied, including the value of sovereignty and creating new markets. Critics said Johnson must make clear whether he intends to target employment protections, and pointed out that businesses and government have already faced billions of pounds of costs as a result of additional red tape due to Brexit itself. Sarah Olney, the Liberal Democrat spokesperson for business, said: “If this is the best Boris Johnson can muster up to save his job, then he is in big trouble. Try telling the thousands of lorry drivers stuck in queues at Dover that red tape is being cut.” A Labour source said: “The key question for the government is which of the proposed changes in regulation depend on the passage of this bill, and if the answer is none, what other changes are they planning that do? Until they can explain all that, we have to ask what the point of this bill is.” Johnson, who is battling to prevent a no confidence vote in the wake of multiple revelations of lockdown parties in Downing Street, has been criticised in private meetings with MPs that the government has not demonstrated how it is taking advantage of perceived post-Brexit freedoms. The new law – called the “Brexit freedoms” bill – is intended to make it easier to amend or remove some of the bridging law kept on the statute book after Brexit. No 10 said that, as it stands, much of that regulation would require primary legislation to remove it, and the new bill could shortcut that process. Downing Street said it would release a public catalogue of all retained EU laws to determine if they are beneficial to the UK. In a statement announcing the new bill, two years after Britain’s exit from the bloc, Johnson said: “Getting Brexit done two years ago today was a truly historic moment and the start of an exciting new chapter for our country. The plans we have set out today will further unleash the benefits of Brexit and ensure that businesses can spend more of their money investing, innovating and creating jobs.” “Our new Brexit freedoms bill will end the special status of EU law in our legal framework and ensure that we can more easily amend or remove outdated EU law in future.” The attorney general, Suella Braverman, said it was right that there was new scrutiny of the laws. “We can move away from outdated EU laws that were the result of unsatisfactory compromises within the EU, some of which the UK voted and lobbied against – but was required to adopt without question,” she said. “These rules often had limited meaningful parliamentary scrutiny and no democratic legitimacy in the UK at all. It is vital that we take the steps necessary, in this parliament, to remove unnecessary rules altogether, and where regulation is needed, ensure that it meets the UK’s objectives.” The government will also publish a new riposte to critics who claim little advantage of Brexit has been taken, with a new document titled The Benefits of Brexit: How the UK Is Taking Advantage of Leaving the EU. It will claim that reforms have led to a more agile digital and AI sector and a less burdensome data rights regime compared with the EU’s GDPR. It will also claim that there have been benefits in changing clinical trials, strengthening environmental protections and establishing a domestic subsidy regime. Emily Thornberry, the shadow attorney general, said the government was not taking advantage of one key aspect of leaving the EU – that it can cut VAT on energy bills, as Labour has been demanding. “The British public overwhelmingly support Labour’s proposed change, and it is time the government started listening,” she said.Hundreds of workers at NHS hospitals in London including porters, cleaners and catering staff are to go on strike from Monday in a dispute over pay. The staff employed by the outsourcing company Serco at St Bartholomew’s, the Royal London and Whipps Cross are walking out for two weeks. They are members of the Unite union, which claims that mainly black, Asian and ethnic minority staff are paid up to 15% less than directly employed NHS workers. Sharon Graham, Unite’s general secretary, said: “The NHS workers taking strike action have their union’s unwavering support. They face the same risks as NHS-employed staff. Why on earth are they being paid significantly worse while being treated disgracefully? “It’s time to end this injustice. It’s time to bring these workers, employed by Serco not the NHS, back into NHS employment.” Rallies are planned outside the Royal London hospital on Monday and later in the week at Barts and Whipps Cross. Peter Kavanagh, a regional secretary for Unite, said: “Our members have worked tirelessly through the pandemic, they deserve better. Serco and Barts need to deliver a pay increase that addresses the poor pay and the inequality of treatment compared to directly employed NHS staff at other hospitals in London.” Shane DeGaris, the deputy group chief executive at Barts Health NHS trust, said the trust would be considering future arrangements of the facilities management contract over the next 13 months, and that this could include bringing some services back in-house. He added: “We are hopeful that this matter can be resolved but are working with Serco to put the appropriate measures in place and ensure hospital services are supported if strike action does go ahead.” Taddy McAuley, Serco’s contract director for Barts Health, said the company hoped to work with Unite to avoid the “unnecessary” action. “We are extremely disappointed with the notification of strike action from Unite as we recently increased the pay offer for our employees to a total of 3%, backdated to April 2021,” he said. “This is the same percentage increase as that being received by people directly employed by the NHS. “Serco also recently announced a £100 ex gratia payment for all of our 52,000 frontline employees around the world, including all our colleagues at Barts Health.” Meanwhile, families planning half-term getaways face having their travel plans disrupted by a three-day strike by baggage handlers and aircraft refuellers at Heathrow airport. About 400 Unite members employed by Menzies Aviation will begin their walkout at 00.01am on 11 February, resuming work on 14 February. Unite says the company is refusing to enter into negotiations about a pay rise after firing and rehiring hundreds of workers during the pandemic. Menzies said it was disappointed by the action and hopeful that an amicable solution could be reached at a meeting with Unite scheduled for Monday. It also expressed confidence there would be no disruption to travellers should the strike go ahead.Right, that’s it from me, and from them. The white-ball side fly home, and there is a break before the first of three Tests begins on March 8. The Test squad will be named next month. Thanks for all your messages and sorry to those I didn’t get back to. That was a lot of fun. Good night! Here is the report: Kieron Pollard is pumped. He responds to newspaper criticism: “As I’ve said before, empty vessels make the most noise. Yes it is one series, we have been on the wrong of plenty, but the guys need an opportunity to enjoy themselves for a couple of games. They guys have really worked hard” We see Sir Garry Sobers chatting animatedly to Jason Holder, who towers over him grinning. The man of the series is Jason Holder, who started his final over today with a no-ball and ended up with four in four! West Indies stroll round the ground soaking up the applause -as they should. This doesn’t look like a side that should have lost an ODI series to Ireland ( no disrespect intended to Ireland) - it bubbles with potential. As for England? I don’t think they will be too unhappy, they’ve tried out a few new players and been competitive - if in fits and starts. Adil Rashid has been superb. “ I thought West Indies were the better side today and throughout the series,” says stand-in-captain Moeen Ali - and I think that’s fair enough. The main problem remains the death bowling, as Lawrence Booth says. A fantastic win for West Indies in a game that went down to the wire - until Jason Holder grabbed the match by the scruff of the neck in the final over with four for four! A match that followed a pattern of plenty - poverty and then plenty again. But, unlike West Indies, England didn’t have two players with their eye in together at the last. Four in four and the match! Brilliant from the big man, who bowls Mahmood, inching off the bail, and it takes a couple of seconds before West Indies realise! Hat-trick!!! It’s Rashid’s turn to go for the heave-ho and this time Smith cradles the baby at deep square leg. And again! Billings gets down on one knee to slog-sweep but sends it more high than wide and Walsh is the man again! Another victim of the short boundary! A huge slog into the hands of Walsh just a few yards in from the fence. 19th over: England 161-6 ( Billings 41, Jordan 7) England need 20 off six balls!! Cottrell gets the penultimate over, and he’s clever: he goes full, a quick yorker follows. A full toss thuds into Billings’ pads as he tries to sweep, England take two leg byes but West Indies call for a review for lbw - NOT OUT. The second beamer of the match slips out, and, as with Saqib Mahmood, the free hit is a dud. Briefly: Tanya, One of the results of WFH is that casual wear in the office (i.e. non-ironed) is becoming more acceotable nowadays. Way back in the mid-1990s I recall plenty of Leeds-based bankers and executives rolling up to work without a tie! Strange, but true. The trend accelarated thenceforth and there’s no stopping it now. John Starbuck 18th over: England 152-6 ( Billings 36, Jordan 6) England need 28 off 12 balls It’s the gleaming Smith to try and hold England back with just three overs to go. But Billings is up for the challenge. He clubs six over backward square leg, then just evades the fielder with a top-edged slog-sweep. Then SIX MORE as he goes bigger over midwicket, where Allen amazingly gets his hands to the ball but carries it over. Jordan joins in with a four through square leg. 17th over: England 132-6 ( Billings 21, Jordan 2) England need 48 off 18 balls More spin, and more frustration for England. But Billings gets low and swings him for four through the leg side. 16th over: England 124-6 ( Billings 15, Jordan 1) Brilliant from Hosein, who finishes with 4-30 from his four overs. Billings throws the bat but the oil hasn’t yet percolated to the engine. Charges down the pitch, smears the outside edge and Pooran whips off the bails! 15th over: England 119-5 ( Billings 11, Salt 3) Allen: scampered singles, a no-ball, a free-hit - which is a dot. 14th over: England 114-5 ( Billings 8, Salt 1) Can the new boys bring it home? What a chance for them, but West Indies spinners doing exactly what England’s did and stalling the scoring. “Evening-ish Tanya,” Hello there Tone White! “I’m imagining that it’s the English girls team playing, and feeling very relaxed about the result. Can’t wait for Heather Vince to get her ton. Thanks in advance for sharing the win!” Sorry Tone, I was a touch too slow on that email... A top-edged slog-sweep flies towards the short boundary but it doesn’t have the flight and Allen takes him safely. This time Hosein mimes making a cup of tea! Three for him and the England stutter is in full flow. 13th over: England 111-4 (Vince 55, Billings 6) Clever slow left arm from Allen, Vince and Billings dib and dab and rotate the strike but can’t get him to the rope. “Hi Tanya,Id just like to point out that there is an alternative approach to ironing.When my son began at secondary school he wanted his school clothes ironed. So I bought an iron and ironing board, then explained the process. He went with it - exclusively for school clothes - while becoming skilled enough for county level age group cricket. I’m not sure there was a causal link though.” Nice work Geoff Wignall! Were his creases sharp enough to please a prowling Ted Dexter? I must add that I know that being a lazy slob isn’t possible for people who actually have to leave the house to do their job. 12th over: England 98-4 (Vince 51, Billings 1) Vince’s second IT20 fifty in a career of thwarted elan. He reaches it with a pull low-bodied pull for four and follows up with a cut off the back foot for four more. A flat-footed chip to backward point, and Smith says thanks very much. Hosein celebrates by limping down the wicket. 11th over: England 88-3 (Vince 44, Livingstone 6) Holder steady away, but Livingstone dinks his last ball behind to the rope. “Not sure I can stand the tension. Even stevens at half way, England reliant on two talented perennial under-achievers in Mo &amp; Vince.... Will spend the next hour hiding behind the sofa just like watching Dr Who back in the 70’s....” Only one to trouble you now Charles Sheldrick in Deepest darkest Devon. The first ball after drinks! Mo tonks a slower ball but with the lack of timing that has haunted him all innings. 10th over: England 86-2 (Vince 42, Moeen Ali 14) At the half way stage, it’s anyone’s game. Vince drives Smith through mid-on for a delicate boundary - 94 needed from the next ten. Where’s your money? They take drinks. 9th over: England 76-2 (Vince 36, Moeen Ali 10) Pollard lumbers in with his own brand of more-than-dibbly-dobblies. Moeen sends one delicately to backward point but it is scotched before the rope. Pollard helps England along with a couple of wides. Another email wings through the storm, from Ian Copestake“If Vince’s new glass ceiling is 34 rather than 18 then it could be taken as progress. Hope it smashes it though.” 8th over: England 69-2 (Vince 34, Moeen Ali 7) Middle over penury approaching? Seven squeezed off Shepherd’s over, nice running between the wickets but no boundaries. 7th over: England 62-2 (Vince 32, Moeen Ali 3) Vince sends Pollard’s loosener through the covers. Dreamy. Moeen faces the last four balls but can only pick up the single. But he had a similarly slow start yesterday. “Hello Tanya,” Hello Timothy Sanders. “ I need to iron school uniform tonight, so I’ve been working on some cricket data. Rashid’s bowling figures for the series: 20 overs, 115 runs, 7 wickets. The average return over twenty overs from the rest of the attack is 187 runs and 4.1 wickets.” Thank you for that! But may I advise ditching the iron. It does leave the family permanently creased but as long as you train them young, it’s fine. The iron is always in the cellar if anyone fancies it. 6th over: England 56-2 (Vince 27, Moeen Ali 2) Smith, gleaming with sweat, powers in, and England can’t get him to the rope. My daughter walks in chewing a naan: “that bowler is tanked” At the end of the power play it is even-stevens, West Indies were 58-o . “Following your gair observations about what James Vince can do (gorgeous strokes one minute, nicking off the next) I just hope he doesn’t do another of those things that James Vince does and gets out for an attractive but ultimately frustrating and inconsequential 30...” Tom vd Gucht, James Vince would never do anything like that. 5th over: England 48-2 (Vince 24, Moeen Ali 1) Cottrell bounds in, but Vince is in the mood. Lights a cigar and fires him through backward point and behind square. “Im being dim,” asks Peter in Selsey, “who bowled the final over?” Apologies Peter, it was Chris Jordan. 4th over: England 41-2 (Vince 14, Moeen Ali 1) A bit of a dogs-breakfast behind the stumps and Banton appears to be dropped, the very next he picks Smith off his toe caps and flicks him 90 m into the roof of a temporary tents. Then the wicket, which brings in Moeen Ali who is immediately dropped by Holder after edging an absolute snorter from Smith. Don’t try to pull the ball over Jason Holder’s head! Banton doesn’t make the contact he wants to and the ball flies high and safely over Holder’s shoulder and into the bread basket. 3rd over: England 27-1 (Banton 5, Vince 14) Four dots from Cottrell builds the pressure on Banton but he pulls the fifth past an amusingly bad bit of fielding at mid-on for four. 2nd over: England 27-1 (Banton 5, Vince 14) Gorge-ous from James Vince, driving Holder straight for six and holding the pose just in case you don’t know what James Vince can do. A flash at a wide one flies through where the slips might have been - another fine example of what JAmes Vince can do. Banton sends Holder through fine leg for another boundary and 17 runs come off his first over. 1st over: England 10-1 (Banton 0, Vince 2) Roy clubs Hosein over mid-off first ball, cuts with a dash in front of square before the unlucky dobble from bat to pad to Pooran’s gloves. Roy shakes his head in disbelief as a bottom edge squirts up into the legside and Pooran darts forward, dives, and gathers with both hands. Really tricky to take a call on this one, after the explosive start, West Indies faded through the middle overs before galloping back at the end. My gut feeling is that England can chase this down, whether the wind picking up will make a difference, we’ll have to see. My gut, though , is not famous for its reliability. 20th over: West Indies 179-4 (Pollard 41, Powell 35) Yes they do! Six monstered down the ground by Pollard. Then down on one-kneed and smacked by Powell over midwicket for six more. A wide (nicely taken by Billings) but then it all peters out a little as Jordan pulls things back. Still 180 is a fair target, if not quite what West Indies would have hoped for at the power play. 19th over: West Indies 160-4 (Pollard 31, Powell 28) Easy-does it: as Pollard eyes up Topley and trumpets him into the stands for six first ball. But they can’t reach the rope again, just scampered singles. Fourteen from the over. Do West Indies have a big last one up their sleeve? 18th over: West Indies 146-4 (Pollard 18, Powell 28) The palm trees are a-blowing as West Indies hit their straps, Powell power: two consecutive sixes: one flays over mid-wicket, another is cracked on one-knee over long-off. Jordan looks nonplussed. 17th over: West Indies 131-4 (Pollard 16, Powell 15) A boundary! A palpable boundary! First since the tenth over as Powell muscles a wide one from Topley over the rope. Two more follow, through midwicket, and then an outside edge squirts merrily away. 16th over: West Indies 113-4 (Pollard 11, Powell 2) Mahmood has another go, with conditions now very much in his favour. Unless there is something going on with this pitch, I don’t really understand why West Indies aren’t going for it for it more, but.... yikes, Mahmood bowls a beamer straight for Powell’s head, but he ducks low and quick and it fires into Billings’ gloves. Mahmood apologies immediately. Just eight come from it, and a good comeback after the plenty of the opening over. 15th over: West Indies 105-4 (Pollard 7, Powell 0) Brilliant from Rashid who finishes his spell with 2-17 from his four overs, with 12 dot balls to throw in the mix. “Hey Tanya” Hi Dhemi. “Just thinking of England’s excellent use of spin to slow the run rate. Does anyone have an idea of the highest number of overs bowled by spin in a T20 and how many runs were scored? I’ll try and have a look for you between innings unless any OBOers have time on their hands? Pooran can restrain himself no longer, but Rashid is better, and the ball spins past him and tips off the offstump bail. 14th over: West Indies 103-3 (Pooran 20, Pollard 6) It’s been 27 balls and 21 minutes since the last boundary. What now? Carnage in the final six or more careful accumulation? You’d think they’d have to get a hurry on but Livingstone is making them play him with respect. 13th over: West Indies 99-3 (Pooran 18, Pollard 5) And here we are, as Chris Jordan picks up the ball, but West Indies again struggle to get bat on ball for the full whoopee. A good length from Jordan. “Hello Tanya,” Good evening Andrew Benton. “England need to take the shellac the West Indies meted out and give it the fire and re-polish treatment - as per this chap from one minute in! They can surely do it with Moeen Ali at the helm. Allez! Here’s to more excellent words in the OBO in future!” 12th over: West Indies 95-3 (Pooran 16, Pollard 3) The run-rate continues its downward trajectory as the West Indies can only manage a fistful of singles off the excellent Rashid. The one bright spot for West Indies is that Moeen will have to turn to his pace men at some stage soon. 11th over: West Indies 91-3 (Pooran 14, Pollard 1) So it is Livingstone to start the second set of ten. And Livngstone who gets rid of the dangerous King, whose shot would not please a purist with an itch to scratch. There can’t be many more reassuring figures to stride in than Pollard though, a huge figure topped off with a maroon West Indies sunhat, just like Roger Harper used to wear it. A whoopee too many as King goes for Livingstone but can only sky a one-handed hoik to Jordan on the rope. 10th over: West Indies 85-2 (King 34, Pooran 10) Just the one boundary from Moeen’s third over, as King pulls him with dazzling power. I think they’re pausing for drinks at the half way stage, as we get a gratuitous shot of the ocean. 9th over: West Indies 78-2 (King 29, Pooran 9) Pooran greets Rashid with an enormous straight six, that hovers a little in the air but still flies over the boundary. It is hot out there, baby blue skies, long shadows and summer tunes. Outside my window, it is blowing a hoolie, 8th over: West Indies 69-2 (King 28, Pooran 1) A double for legspin! And a successful first over for Livingstone in the contest. West Indies in danger of not making the most of their best start of the competition here. An outside edge as Shepherd enters the fray full of adrenalin, but his meat and potatoes heave just travels to point where Saqib Mahmood can settle his nerves with a safe catch. 7th over: West Indies 60-0 (King 27, Shepherd 0) Rashid weaves his magic again as Mayers tries another booming shot but his pull doesn’t have the power this time. He got West Indies off to a great start though. Coolly brilliant relay catch - Jason Roy did the donkey work on the boundary, grabbing the ball with both hands above his head then throwing the ball to Salt just before toppling over the boundary. 6th over: West Indies 58-0 (King 25, Mayers 31) This time, Moeen Ali can’t keep them quiet. King lofts his first ball high over long-on, onwards towards the palm trees. King leans back and cuts him for four more, like a man slicing carrots for a stir fry. End of a productive power play. 5th over: West Indies 47-0 (King 18, Mayers 27) Mayers has his eye in! Chris Jordan’s first is torpedoed through midwicket, his third, a touch short, is picked up with one leg and soars over the rope. More singing strokes follow but wary England fielders managed to stop them crossing the rope. 4th over: West Indies 33-0 (King 17, Mayers 14) Moeen, shaven head, decides it is time for spin. His second ball rips hugely, beats King, who has shimmied down the pitch, and surely that’s out.. but no, Billings breaks the stumps but the ball has escaped his gloves: Moeen chews gum emotionlessly. 3rd over: West Indies 31-0 (King 16, Mayers 14) Topley restores some order, but still nine comes from it: a handsome drive from King and then some sensible rotation of the strike. 2nd over: West Indies 22-0 (King 9, Mayers 12) Moeen gives Mahmood a chance to makes amends from that shellacking from Husain in the second game. Ooof, immediately brutal from King, smacked over long on. Another six follows from a one-legged short-armed pull from Mayers, who repeats the shot sublimely, for four more. Nineteen leak from the over. Brilliant batting, assumed they’re trying to hit Saqib out of the attack. 1st over: West Indies 3-0 (King 2, Mayers 0) Topley, man mountain, gobbles up the yards. He’s on the money immediately, West Indies only manage three, one comes as King smashes the ball into Topley’s shin -ouch - on the follow-through. On the field, they take the knee, and Reece Topley has the ball. It looks a bit windy out there, but I’m sure the teams don’t need me to tell them that. BT run a quick interview with Liam Livingstone, still recovering from his Oesophagitis, which google tells me is an inflammation of the lining of the gullet, though they made some kind of bantery reference to it in the studio which I didn’t get so I might not be helping here. The teams are playing on the same pitch they used for the third game - the one when Rovman Powell pingoed the ball all over the place. Mark Butcher doesn’t expect as many runs today, but says it still looks tasty for batting. West Indies XI: Mayers, King, Pooran, Powell, Pollard, Holder, Allen, Shepherd, Smith, Hosien, Cottrell (Two changes: Fabian Allen and Odean Smith replace Darren Bravo and Dominic Drakes) England XI: Roy, Banton, Vince, Moeen Ali, Livingstone, Billings, Salt, Jordan, Rashid, Mahmood, Topley (One change: Saqib Mahmood for Tymal Mills) A team chooses to bat first for the first time this series. Hello! And welcome to the last match in this T20 series of five games. Just to prove the naysayers wrong, those who pondered whether the whole caboodle was an example of excessive and pointless cricket (ahem), the series has built itself up into a tasty crescendo: two wins apiece and down to the wire. To remind you of the results so far: a shellacking - West Indies win by 9 wickets, a seat-of-your-pantsing - England win by one run, a Powelling - West Indies win by 20 runs, and a stroll - England win by 34 runs. England’s stand-in captain Moeen Ali played a dream match in the last game with fifty and a couple of wickets - he’d be very happy to bring the series home for Eoin Morgan (on the bench with a thigh injury). So too would West Indies skipper Kieron Pollard, who came to the series on the back of ODI defeat to Ireland. The weather looks peachy, so play should starts at 8pm GMT (3pm local time). I’ll be back around 7.35 with news of the toos ‘n’ teams. See you then!GWS player Haneen Zreika’s decision not to wear the club’s Pride round jumper and therefore not play in round four of the AFLW has brought rise to much debate around the concept of “inclusion”. For a long time sport and AFLW specifically has elevated conversations about inclusion and diversity, but what does that really mean? Embracing “diversity” necessitates the coexistence of different experiences, beliefs, practices and cultures. The concept of “inclusion” is often described as the ways in which we make our diversity work together. To me, inclusion is respect. Not always agreement, but a functional respect for one another. By all accounts that is what GWS has achieved, and this moment has provided the perfect litmus test. Had the team not cultivated an environment of inclusivity, understanding and respect, Zreika would not have been able to have this very complex conversation with her teammates. Her teammates would not have accepted her difference. They would not have come to a resolution that, perhaps difficult on all sides, was largely workable for the collective. The long term effects will tell us how deep their culture of respect and inclusion goes, but so far, the signs are good. No doubt there are LGBTQ+ identifying staff and players who would have found Zreika’s refusal to wear the Pride jumper hurtful, but they accepted her choice not to. The public’s reaction however has been varied. Some have likened Zreika to Israel Folau and Margaret Court. Zreika’s own words tell us they are vastly different. In a statement released late on Friday afternoon, Zreika called for kindness, saying inclusion was about respecting people’s choices “as long as they don’t advocate for hate and division”. By contrast, Folau and Court have very publicly and purposefully spoken out against LGBTQ+ people. In 2019 Folau posted on social media claiming “hell awaits” gay people and has linked the Australian bushfires of 2019 with the legalisation of same sex marriage and abortion. Similarly Court has spoken out publicly in her role as a Pentecostal minister opposing same-sex marriage and condemning transgender athletes. In 2013, Court wrote a letter to a newspaper taking aim at the birth of Australian tennis player Casey Dellacqua’s child in a same-sex relationship. Zreika’s actions were to opt out of an active, performative allyship, out of respect for her faith, her community and the diverse views amongst them. Perhaps GWS and Zreika’s one misstep was to underestimate the public response to what they presumably thought would be a quiet process of stepping aside, with any hope of avoiding a distraction from the celebrations gone. There is a temptation to reduce this incident to a simplistic narrative of religious extremism versus liberal left politics. However, what we have been presented with is a real life playing out of the complexity of lived experience and intersectionality. Zreika’s very existence in AFLW as the only Muslim woman playing is a disruption on multiple levels, both within her own communities and in the very white, male AFL landscape. To make a 21-year-old woman of colour the lightning rod for yet another conversation about representation and inclusivity is unreasonable and unfair. It seems Zreika’s teammates are willing to hold judgement. Understanding that they cannot comprehend her lived experience, and trusting her explanation, they are ready to move on. Perhaps we as a public need to take their lead. For Fahad Ali, a gay organiser in the Muslim community, the issue is largely clear and deeply personal. “There are legitimate reasons for why Haneen may feel like she cannot participate, and not all of them relate to prejudice… Demanding perfection from the people you tokenise is another way of saying that you don’t want any of us at all.” Still, for many the question lingers: does opting out mean opposition? As someone whose job it is to lead conversations on inclusion, I have a growing unease in which sport in particular frames these conversations. The rise of symbolic and performative allyship has eclipsed what I would call “the real work”. The visibility of marginalised communities is important, no doubt. However sport now asks us to understand inclusion through the prism of themed rounds, performative allyship that is coupled with commercially beneficial outcomes. This moment is showing us the limitations of only understanding respect for one another through one’s public performance of it. This brings rise to another question – how will the AFLW handle true inclusion of others outside its own community? AFLW, perceivably built with inclusion at its core, appears to have an issue when it comes to the inclusion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander athletes, trans athletes and culturally diverse communities. For years AFLW fans and athletes alike have been asking the white male monoculture of Australian sport to open its doors to the rest of the community. Is AFLW, with its beginnings rooted in mostly white, lesbian, metro culture, ready to do the same? If so, on what terms? If the game is to grow, it will come up against new cultures, communities and beliefs. How will the league and its supporters welcome these new and very different people? If GWS is an example, the answer is with dignity, a lack of judgement, and with respect at its core.Hospitals in England could continue to employ unvaccinated NHS healthcare workers beyond the April deadline if not doing so risks leaving them dangerously understaffed, the sector regulator has indicated. The Care Quality Commission (CQC) said it would implement the government diktat for mandatory jabs “fairly and proportionately”, amid fears that it will exacerbate the NHS’s existing staff crisis. It comes amid reports that Sajid Javid is planning to drop the requirement that health and care staff must be vaccinated. The Telegraph reported that the health secretary would meet fellow ministers on Monday to rubber-stamp the decision. The CQC’s comments were welcomed by hospital trusts, comingbefore Thursday’s deadline for all NHS staff in England who have direct contact with patients to have their first dose of a Covid vaccine, in order to complete the course before 1 April, or risk losing their job. About 80,000 frontline NHS workers have still not had a first dose and the NHS already has 93,000 vacancies, including 40,000 for nurses. Ted Baker, CQC’s chief inspector of hospitals, said: “We will work with the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) to ensure that this government legislation is implemented fairly and proportionately when it comes into effect. “New regulations requiring registered healthcare providers to only deploy fully vaccinated staff in patient-facing roles do not supersede other regulatory requirements and hospital trusts may need to make difficult risk-based decisions in order to determine the safest possible approach in different circumstances.” In comments to the Sunday Times, expanding on the CQC’s approach, Baker said: “We fully recognise there are concerns that the introduction of mandatory vaccination rules risks exacerbating existing staff shortages.” Unions, including the Royal College of Nursing and the TUC, have called for mandatory jabs to be delayed, or even scrapped, voicing fears about the impact it will have on staffing levels. The government’s own impact assessment of its policy concluded that as many as 73,000 staff may leave rather than get jabbed, with women, people from ethnic minorities and younger workers among those most likely to quit or be forced out. There have also been demands by Tory backbenchers for the policy to be dropped with Javid’s decision also being based on the fact the omicron variant is less severe than previous ones, according to the Telegraph. There was a mixed reaction to the CQC’s comments. NHS Providers, which represents hospital trusts, welcomed them as reflecting its own concerns. Saffron Cordery, deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, said: “NHS Providers has consistently flagged that there were always two risks to manage here – the risk of Covid cross-infection in healthcare settings and the consequences of losing staff if significant numbers refused to be vaccinated. The CQC is clearly also seeking to act proportionately in balancing these risks as it carries out its role. “Trusts are working hard to increase the number of vaccinated staff and the numbers are rising with growing speed as we approach the deadline for the first vaccination to be completed. “But we know there may be some services at risk if trusts need to redeploy or dismiss all unvaccinated staff when the April deadline is reached, as the current government regulations would require them to do. We still don’t know how serious or widespread this risk will be, but it is one that NHS leaders will clearly need to manage.” But the UK’s largest health union, Unison, warned that the CQC’s comments only muddied the waters and suggested that the policy was unworkable. Sara Gorton, Unison’s head of health, said: “This suggests a confusing element of discretion will now apply over what’s already distracting and unnecessary legislation. Allowing the rules to be set aside in certain cases creates a risk of unfair and potentially discriminatory treatment. If the CQC thinks the mandatory approach is incompatible with safe staffing, then the new law should simply be scrapped.” A DHSC spokesperson said: “Health and social care workers look after the most vulnerable people in society and ensuring staff are vaccinated is the right thing to do to protect patients and those in care. We continue to work closely with trusts to encourage uptake of the vaccine – the vast majority of NHS staff have had the vaccine which is our best defence against Covid-19. As we have done throughout the pandemic, we keep all Covid-19 policies under review.”That’s it from me, Helen Livingstone, for today’s Covid blog. Please join us a little later for a new live feed where we will continue to cover the coronavirus crisis. You can also keep up with the top headlines here. Here is a comprehensive rundown of all the latest Covid developments: Spotify has pledged to add content advisory notices to all podcasts featuring coronavirus. This comes after Neil Young and Joni Mitchell withdrew their music from the streaming platform in protest against Covid misinformation. Harry and Meghan have expressed concerns about misinformation on Spotify, but have made it clear they plan to continue work on their lucrative contracts with the platform. The UK’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said it is the government’s “intention to publish the full report” into alleged lockdown-breaking parties in Downing Street. She also admitted: “It is a bit of a mess that we have the police investigation alongside the Sue Gray report”. Turnout in today’s finely balanced election in Portugal appears to be high despite surging Covid infections. More than a 10th of the country’s population of 10 million are estimated to be isolating with Covid but the government has allowed infected people to cast ballots in person, recommending they visit the polls after 6pm. New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern has tested negative for Covid after she was deemed a close contact of a positive case. The prime minister’s office says Ardern will continue isolating until the end of Tuesday in line with Ministry of Health guidance. The Winter Olympics, which begin in five days in Beijing, have been hit by 34 new infections among athletes and officials. Meanwhile, the city of Beijing has reported 20 new cases – its highest for 18 months – and officials have sealed off residential communities in the city’s northern district. Former British prime minister David Cameron has caught the virus, New Zealand media are reporting. Cameron had been scheduled to open a retreat for the opposition National party in Queenstown this coming week. New cases in South Korea’s have hit a record 17,532 as the highly infectious Omicron variant spreads. The daily count broke the record for the sixth consecutive day, rising from 8,570 on Tuesday. There have been 62,399 new cases of Covid-19 in the UK, according to the latest government figures. This is the lowest number of daily Covid cases since mid-December. Thousands have gathered in Prague to protest against Covid restrictions. They are opposed to harsher restrictions for the unvaccinated, including a ban on eating in restaurants. The prime minister of New Zealand, Jacinda Ardern, has returned a negative Covid-19 test after she was deemed a close contact of a positive case. Ardern went into self-isolation on Saturday after she was exposed to a case during a flight to Auckland from the town of Kerikeri on 22 January. She took a PCR test on Sunday and returned a negative result on Monday morning. Ardern is fully vaccinated and received a booster shot on 17 January. The prime minister’s office says Ardern will continue isolating until the end of Tuesday in line with Ministry of Health guidance. Ardern will chair Tuesday’s cabinet meeting remotely and the deputy prime minister, Grant Robertson, will attend post-cabinet on her behalf, the office said. Good morning, this is Helen Livingstone taking over from my colleague Tom Wall. A quick update from Australia to start with. The country’s two largest states, New South Wales and Victoria, have reported a combined 35 Covid deaths and more than 23,000 cases. The figures come a day after NSW recorded its deadliest day of the pandemic so far, with 52 deaths from the virus reported on Sunday. Media outlets in New Zealand are reporting that former British prime minister David Cameron has Covid. Cameron, say reports, will be unable to open a retreat for the National party in Queenstown this coming week so George Osborne will be taking his place. The country’s 1news is reporting: Former British Prime Minister David Cameron was set to open proceedings; Covid-19 has intervened, however, and after he tested positive, his former chancellor of the exchequer and close political friend George Osborne will give the address instead. Here’s a roundup of developments tonight: Spotify has pledged to add content advisory notices to all podcasts featuring coronavirus. This comes after Neil Young and Joni Mitchell withdrew their music from the streaming platform in protest against Covid misinformation. There have been 62,399 new cases of Covid-19 in the UK, according to the latest government figures. This is the lowest number of daily Covid cases since mid-December. Covid cases have fallen in Italy. The country’s health ministry logged 104,065 cases on Sunday, down from 137,147 the day before. France’s public health agency reported 249,448 new coronavirus cases and 127 new Covid deaths over the last 24 hours. Overall 103,180 people have died in France. Thousands have gathered in Prague to protest against Covid restrictions. They are opposed to harsher restrictions for the unvaccinated, including a ban on eating in restaurants. Spotify has pledged to add content advisory notices to all podcasts that refer to coronavirus after artists including Neil Young and Joni Mitchell withdrew their music from the streaming platform in protest against Covid misinformation. The NME reports that Spotify CEO, Daniel Ek, has issued a statement setting out how his company plans to deal with the crisis, which has seen its share value drop by more than £1.5bn in the wake of Young’s campaign. It states: This advisory will direct listeners to our dedicated Covid-19 Hub, a resource that provides easy access to data-driven facts, up-to-date information as shared by scientists, physicians, academics and public health authorities around the world, as well as links to trusted sources. Young claimed Spotify was allowing its star podcaster Joe Rogan to spread vaccine misinformation to his 11m estimated listeners. Last year, Rogan was criticised by the White House’s chief medical adviser, Anthony Fauci, for suggesting that young, healthy Americans did not need to be vaccinated against Covid. Brazil’s health ministry has reported 134,175 new coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours and 330 deaths due to Covid. Brazil’s ultra-conservative president, Jair Bolsonaro, has presided over a death toll that is now the second-highest in the world (after the US). He has frequently spoken out against lockdowns, masks and vaccinations. Today’s figures push the official death toll in the South American country to 626,854, with 25,348,797 confirmed cases recorded since the pandemic began. Turnout in today’s finely balanced election in Portugal appears to be high despite surging Covid infections, reports Reuters. More than a 10th of Portugal’s 10 million people are estimated to be isolating with Covid but the government has allowed infected people to cast ballots in person, recommending they visit the polls after 6pm. This may have boosted turnout among healthy voters. Almost 46% of those eligible had voted by 4pm, more than the 39% recorded at the same time in the last election. Analysts said total turnout appeared on track to beat 2019’s record low 49% participation. Exit polls suggest Portugal’s ruling Socialists may win. The Socialist Party could have gained 37% to 42.5% of votes cast – well ahead of the main centre-right opposition Social Democrats on 26.7% to 35%. France’s public health agency has reported 249,448 new coronavirus cases and 127 new covid deaths over the last 24 hours. Overall 103,180 people have died in France. Thousands have gathered in Prague today to protest against Covid restrictions, Reuters reports. They are opposed to harsher restrictions for the unvaccinated, including a ban on eating in restaurants. This comes after the Czech Republic recorded its highest daily tally of cases on Wednesday - 54,689. Despite the soaring infections, the center-right government scrapped a decree last week making Covid-19 vaccinations mandatory for key professionals and over-60s to avoid “deepening fissures” in society. The country has reported 37,184 coronavirus deaths since the start of the pandemic, one of the world’s worst rates per capita. An NHS palliative care doctor has advised vaccine sceptic Laurence Fox, who announced earlier today he had tested positive for covid, there are better options than an anti-parasitic treatment mainly used on animals. There has been a slight fall in the number of covid cases reported in Italy, according to Reuters. The country’s health ministry logged 104,065 cases on Sunday, down from 137,147 the day before. Deaths also fell to 235 from 377. There was a small drop in patients hospitalised with covid, with 19,617 being treated, down from 19,636 a day earlier. There were 95 new admissions to intensive care units, down from 118 on Saturday. Italy has experienced the second-highest death toll in Europe (after Britain). Over 146,000 deaths have been registered since February 2020. The country has reported 10.9 million cases to date. The number of people who have received their first jab has risen by 17,652 in the UK, bringing the total to 52,331,601. The latest data - covering vaccinations up to 29 January - shows 48,385,074 second doses have also been delivered, an increase of 37,477. A total of 37,263,317 booster and third doses have been delivered, a day-on-day rise of 52,295. There have been 62,399 new cases of Covid-19 in the UK, according to the latest government figures. But the cases for Scotland will not be added until Monday. A further 85 people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, bringing the total to 155,698. This does not include data from Northern Ireland. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 177,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate The former head of the army, Lord Dannatt, has claimed the partygate saga is harming the UK’s international standing. The general told Times Radio that the UK’s position is weakened ahead of the prime minister’s visit to eastern Europe next week, adding: “everyone will know that he’s a man with a time bomb sitting under him”. Dannatt remarked: We’ve got to sort out the leadership of this country so that we can play our role as a permanent member of the UN Security Council, all the things that the UK stands for, in an unequivocal, clear way with a government of integrity and one that people can respect. Hello. I’m Tom Wall. I’m taking charge of the live blog now. Get in touch if there is anything you think we should be covering. Novak Djokovic has broken his social media silence since being deported from Australia to congratulate Rafa Nadal on winning the Australian Open. Nadal, who is fully vaccinated, won a record-breaking 21st grand slam title by coming back from two sets down to beat Daniil Medvedev. Djokovic was deported before the tournament after Australia cancelled his visa on the basis that his presence in Australia might risk “civil unrest” as he is a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”. Djokovic, who is one behind Nadal with 20 grand slam titles, said his rival’s record was an “amazing achievement”. Qatar’s ministry of health has approved the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine for children aged five to 11. In November, Gulf states Bahrain and Saudi Arabia approved the Pfizer vaccine for emergency use for children in the same age category. Here’s a roundup of the latest developments: Harry and Meghan have expressed concerns about misinformation on Spotify, after some artists removed their content from the platform in protest at it hosting a popular anti-vax podcast. But the couple made it clear they plan to continue work on their lucrative contracts with the platform. Iran has announced that the number of its new cases has almost doubled in the last 24 hours from 11,731 on Saturday to 21,996 on Sunday. Iran’s health ministry also announced a further 44 new Covid deaths. The Netherlands has reported 75,199 new cases of coronavirus. This is a daily record but it comes after 13 days of under-reporting involving 131,000 cases. The Winter Olympics, which begin in five days in Beijing, have been hit by 34 new infections among athletes and officials. Poland’s short track medal hopeful Natalia Maliszewska is among those who tested positive. Meanwhile, the city of Beijing has reported 20 new cases – its highest for 18 months. The UK’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said it is the government’s “intention to publish the full report” into alleged lockdown-breaking parties in Downing Street. She also admitted: “It is a bit of a mess that we have the police investigation alongside the Sue Gray report”. The NHS has announced it will begin offering vaccinations to children aged between five and 11 who are most at risk from the virus. Children in the cohort who were in a clinical risk group or who live with someone who is immunosuppressed would be able to get a first jab, in line with advice issued last month by the Joint Committee on Vaccine and Immunisation. Germany has reported 118,970 new infections, a 39% increase on last week’s figures. It also reported that a further 59 people died after testing positive for the virus. Russia has reported a record 121,228 new daily cases of the virus. The government’s coronavirus taskforce also reported 617 deaths in the last 24 hours. Voting is under way in Portugal in a parliamentary election marred by fears of a low turnout due to record coronavirus infections. The government has allowed those infected to leave isolation and cast ballots in person, recommending that they do so in the last hour before polling stations close at 7pm. New cases in South Korea’s have hit a record 17,532 as the highly infectious Omicron variant spreads. The daily count broke the record for the sixth consecutive day, rising from 8,570 on Tuesday. UK-registered patents and intellectual property rights on vaccines and medicines would immediately be waived in a pandemic under a proposed amendment to the health and social care bill that is backed by the People’s Vaccine Alliance. The amendment, tabled in the House of Lords by the Labour peer Shami Chakrabarti, is expected to be debated this week. It would seek to avoid a future shortfall of vaccines in poorer countries as has occurred during the coronavirus pandemic. Describing the situation as “immoral”, Chakrabarti said: “We are failing because of insufficient sharing of our vaccine supply and not allowing generic vaccine production in the global south.” Read the full story here: The Netherlands has reported 75,199 new cases of coronavirus. This is a daily record but it comes after 13 days of under-reporting involving 131,000 cases. Vietnam has announced a sharp rise in new cases from 17,376 on Saturday to 29,766 on Sunday. The Scottish government has announced 6,185 new cases in Scotland and a further two deaths from the virus. The actor and anti-lockdown campaigner Laurence Fox has announced he has tested positive for coronavirus. Fox, the founder and leader of the Reclaim party, which came sixth in the race to be London’s mayor last year, tweeted this: There’s more on the Spotify row here: “General remarks” about Hong Kong’s coronavirus strategy are not illegal and do not violate the Chinese territory’s national security law, the government has said, according to Reuters. Hong Kong has followed China in sticking to a zero-Covid policy with the economic and psychological tolls rapidly rising, and measures becoming more draconian than those first implemented in 2020. Experts have said that the policy is unsustainable as cases continue to increase due to the highly transmissible Omicron strain. Hong Kong’s policy to achieve “dynamic zero infection” was the most effective way to fight the outbreak and protect public health, the government said in a statement. It came after local legislator Junius Ho said that experts who suggested Hong Kong should live with the virus the way western experts do may have violated its national security law. More than 1 million of Hong Kong’s 7.5 million residents are not vaccinated, exposing them to high chance of infection or even a risk of death, the government said. The city has recorded around 13,600 infections since 2020 and 213 deaths, far lower than other major cities. Despite their concerns about misinformation on Spotify, Harry and Meghan have made it clear that they plan to continue work on their lucrative contracts with the platform. The Archewell statement added: We have continued to express our concerns to Spotify to ensure changes to its platform are made to help address this public health crisis. We look to Spotify to meet this moment and are committed to continuing our work together as it does. Harry and Meghan have waded into the row about Spotify spreading Covid misinformation. A spokesperson for their Archewell foundation told Reuters: Hundreds of millions of people are affected by the serious harms of rampant mis- and disinformation every day. Last April, our co-founders began expressing concerns to our partners at Spotify about the all too real consequences of Covid-19 misinformation on its platform. The interventions comes after the veteran Canadian singer-songwriters Neil Young and Joni Mitchell removed their music from Spotify in protest at the platform hosting a popular anti-vax podcast. Harry and Meghan have signed a series of corporate deals, including to produce and host podcasts for Spotify, as part of their efforts to make a living following their split with Britain’s royal family announced in 2020. Spotify has yet to comment. The Swedish company has previously said it worked to balance “both safety for listeners and freedom for creators” and had removed more than 20,000 podcast episodes related to Covid in accordance with its “detailed content policies”. Young objected to his music being played on the same platform as Joe Rogan’s top-rated podcast “The Joe Rogan Experience”. Rogan has stirred controversy with his views on the pandemic, government mandates and vaccines to control the spread of the coronavirus. Earlier this month, 270 scientists and medical professionals signed a letter urging Spotify to take action against Rogan, accusing him of spreading falsehoods on the podcast. Algeria has reported its first case of the BA.2 subvariant of the Omicron strain of the virus, according Reuters, citing the general director of the Pasteur institute speaking on Ennahar TV. The North African country registered 1,742 new cases and 10 deaths, bringing the total number to 249,310 cases and 6,555 deaths, according to official figures. Last week, the health ministry in Denmark said the BA.2 variant was more contagious than original strain of Omicron. Iran has announced that the number of its new cases has almost doubled in the last 24 hours from 11,731 on Saturday to 21,996 on Sunday. Iran is the grip of a fourth wave of the virus as the highly infectious Omicron variant take hold. Iran’s health ministry also announced a further 44 new Covid deaths. Officials in Beijing have sealed off residential communities in the city’s northern district after two new Covid cases were found, AP reports. Residents in the Anzhenli neighbourhood in Chaoyang district were sealed off on Saturday, and will not be allowed to leave their compound. Beijing is on high alert as it prepares to host the Olympic Games opening on Friday. While the cases are low compared with other countries in the region, China has double down on its “zero-tolerance” policy, which includes breaking the chain of transmission as soon as it is found. The city is also setting up 19 points in the area to test residents every day until Friday, officials said at a briefing on the pandemic, according to state-backed Beijing News. Here’s a roundup of the latest developments: The Winter Olympics, which begin in five days in Beijing, have been hit by 34 new infections among athletes and officials. Poland’s short track medal hopeful Natalia Maliszewska is among those who tested positive. Meanwhile, the city of Beijing has reported 20 new cases – its highest for 18 months. The UK’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has said it is the government’s “intention to publish the full report” into alleged lockdown breaking parties in Downing Street. She also admitted: “It is a bit of a mess that we have the police investigation alongside the Sue Gray report”. The NHS has announced it will begin offering vaccinations to children aged between five and 11 who are most at risk from the virus. Children in the cohort who were in a clinical risk group or who live with someone who is immunosuppressed would be able to get a first jab, in line with advice issued last month by the Joint Committee on Vaccine and Immunisation. Germany has reported 118,970 new infections, a 39% increase on last week’s figures. It also reported that a further 59 people died after testing positive for the virus. Russia has reported a record 121,228 new daily cases of the virus. The government’s coronavirus taskforce also reported 617 deaths in the last 24 hours. Voting in under way in Portugal in a parliamentary election marred by fears of a low turnout due to record coronavirus infections. The government has allowed those infected to leave isolation and cast ballots in person, recommending that they do so in the last hour before polling stations close at 7pm. New cases in South Korea’s have hit a record 17,532 as the highly infectious Omicron variant spreads. The daily count broke the record for the sixth consecutive day, rising from 8,570 on Tuesday. The UK’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has stopped short of the government’s previous commitment to publish the full report into alleged lockdown breaking parties. Speaking to the BBC’s Sunday Morning show, she said: “It is our intention to publish the full report.” She also admitted: “It is a bit of a mess that we have the police investigation alongside the Sue Gray report”. Asked if Boris Johnson should resign if it emerges he lied to parliament, Truss said: “I’m not going to answer hypothetical questions. The future of the prime minister is assured.” New cases in South Korea’s have hit a record 17,532 as the highly infectious Omicron variant spreads, the Yonap news agency reports. The country reported 17,532 new infections, including 17,303 local cases, raising the total caseload to 828,637, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency said. The daily count broke the record for the sixth consecutive day, spiking from 8,570 on Tuesday. Authorities had earlier said Saturday’s tally reached 17,542 but corrected the figure to 17,526, citing erroneous reporting. Polling has begun in Portugal in a parliamentary election marred by fears of a low turnout due to record coronavirus infections, Reuters reports. At the University of Lisbon, staff outnumbered mostly elderly voters, with signs on the walls asking people to wear a mask, observe social distancing and to use their own pen. Some even wore gloves for extra protection. “I have been vaccinated, and I haven’t had Covid yet … But I felt very safe,” said Maria Odete, 73, adding that the election race appeared too close to produce a stable government capable of bringing positive change. The government has allowed those infected to leave isolation and cast ballots in person, recommending that they do so in the last hour before polling stations close at 7pm. More than a tenth of Portugal’s 10 million people are estimated to be isolating because of Covid. As in many European countries, infections have spiked lately, stoked by the Omicron variant, although widespread vaccination has kept deaths and hospitalisations lower than in earlier waves. The election is wide open as the centre-left ruling Socialists have lost much of their lead in opinion polls to the main opposition party, the centre-right Social Democrats, and neither is likely to win a stable majority. Low turnout could make projections unreliable, analysts say. Abstention was already record at 51% in the 2019 general election before the pandemic. Ed Davey has accused the Metropolitan police of “undermining” the public’s trust over the Sue Gray report into Downing Street lockdown parties. Speaking on the BBC’s Sunday Morning show, the leader of the Liberal Democrats said: I have huge respect for rank-and-file police officers who put their lives on the line to keep us safe. For them to do their job, the public have to have trust and confidence in them. But the way the Met has handled this, I think, is undermining that. Labour’s Lisa Nandy said Gray’s report should be published “in full” this week. She told the programme: If (Boris Johnson) won’t put an end to this circus and this stasis in government … then that report has to come out in full so that the people can judge for themselves. Taiwan’s vice president, William Lai, used his final day in the US to repeat an accusation that China blocked the island from obtaining vaccines last year, Reuters reports. Last May, the Taiwanese president Tsai Ing-wen accused China of blocking a deal with Germany’s BioNTech SE for vaccines, after Beijing offered the shots to the island via a Chinese company just as Taiwan was dealing with a rise in domestic infections. Beijing has denied trying to stop Taiwan getting vaccines, and also offered Chinese-developed shots which the island rejected, citing safety concerns. China claims Taiwan as its own territory. Less than two weeks after Tsai’s comments, Senator Tammy Duckworth, visiting Taipei with two other US lawmakers, said the US would donate vaccine doses to Taiwan. Speaking to the Illinois Democrat during a stopover in San Francisco while on the way back to Taiwan from Honduras, Lai offered his thanks. Lai said he was “especially grateful to her last year when Taiwan was unable to obtain vaccines due to the China factor”, Taiwan’s presidential office said, citing the de facto US ambassador to Washington Hsiao Bi-khim, who is accompanying Lai. In Beijing, China’s foreign ministry said Lai’s accusation was “total fiction”, calling it a “malicious slandering and smearing of the true face of the mainland”. Taiwan eventually began receiving the BioNTech vaccines, jointly developed with Pfizer, in September. Thailand has reported a further 8,444 new Covid cases and 12 deaths from the virus. Cambodia has reported a further 57 cases. Beijing recorded its highest number of new Covid-19 cases for a year and a half on Sunday, as the Chinese capital gears up to host the Winter Olympics, AFP reports. China will hold the Games in a strict “closed-loop” bubble as part of its zero-Covid strategy of targeted lockdowns, border restrictions and lengthy quarantines. The approach has helped the world’s second-largest economy keep new infections far lower than many other countries, but it is battling local outbreaks in several cities as well as in the Olympic bubble. The upcoming lunar new year – China’s biggest national holiday – presents a further challenge as millions of people return to their hometowns and mingle with family and friends. Beijing’s tally of 20 new cases on Sunday was the city’s highest since June 2020, according to the National Health Commission (NHC). City authorities have locked down some housing compounds, while officials in Fengtai district – where most of Sunday’s infections were detected – have begun testing about 2 million people for the virus. The Olympics bubble separates everyone involved in the Games from the wider Chinese population to curb the risk of infections leaking out. The estimated 60,000 people inside the bubble are subject to daily testing. On Sunday, organisers reported 34 new cases related to the Games, bringing the total to more than 200 since the bubble was sealed on 4 January. Republican state lawmakers across the US have proposed – and in some cases passed – legislation they say keeps the government from interfering with doctors who want to prescribe ivermectin and hydroxychloroquine to help prevent and treat Covid-19. But those treatments have not proven effective at preventing or treating Covid and infectious disease experts see the bills as examples of rightwing lawmakers politicising medicine – a trend that is increasing as the pandemic drags on in America into its third year amid an increasingly fraught political atmosphere. And so it goes with the latest suspect Covid-19 treatment that has become about more than just a drug, but rather about whether to trust established public health organisations or doctors who stray from their guidelines, and podcast and cable news hosts. Read the full story here: Russia reported a record 121,228 new daily cases of the virus. This is up from Saturday’s total of 113,122. The government coronavirus taskforce also reported 617 deaths in the last 24 hours. In the UK, attempts by the National Crime Agency (NCA) to investigate fraudulent Covid handouts were resisted by the Treasury, according to the Sunday Telegraph. It quotes a source saying: The Treasury effectively said, ‘butt out of this’”. Another source said they believed that the move was designed to prevent embarrassment about the scale of fraud involving public funds. The story follows the resignation of Lord Agnew over the government’s decision to write off £4.3bn in fraudulent Covid loans. Germany’s Robert Koch Institute has reported 118,970 new infections, a 39% increase on last week’s figures. It also reported that a further 59 people died after testing positive for the virus. Welcome to a Sunday edition of our coronavirus live blog. The Winter Olympics in Beijing have been hit by 34 new infections among athletes and officials. Poland’s short track medal hopeful Natalia Maliszewska is among those who tested positive. Of the total infections, 23 were among new airport arrivals, while 11 were people already in the “closed loop” bubble that separates event personnel from the public in an effort to curb the spread of infections. Maliszewska is the eighth Polish athlete to have tested positive and has gone into isolation, the Polish Olympic Committee said on Sunday. She joins infected fellow speedskaters Natalia Czerwonka, Magdalena Czyszczoń and Marek Kania in isolation. Beijing Games organisers have warned of more cases in coming days as the Chinese capital enforces stringent measures, restricting movement and contact of any Games participant with the local population. Meanwhile, in the UK, the NHS has announced it will begin offering vaccinations to children aged between five and 11 who are most at risk from the virus. Britain has been slower than some other countries in offering the shots to five- to 11-year-olds, and is not planning to vaccinate the age group more broadly unlike countries such as the US and Israel. NHS England said children in the cohort who were in a clinical risk group or who live with someone who is immunosuppressed would be able to get a first jab, in line with advice issued last month by the Joint Committee on Vaccine and Immunisation.The Chinese government is finding new ways to intimidate foreign journalists, their Chinese colleagues and their sources, and harassment has reached such a high level that at least six have left the country, according to a key report. The methods include online trolling, physical assaults, hacking and visa denials, as well as what appears to be official encouragement of lawsuits or threats of legal action against journalists, “typically filed by sources long after they have explicitly agreed to be interviewed”. The report, compiled by the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of China (FCCC), said: “The FCCC highlights this development with alarm, as foreigners involved in civil or criminal lawsuits and court proceedings in China can be banned from leaving the country, based on past precedent.” Under the rule of Xi Jinping, China has grown increasingly authoritarian, with worsening crackdowns on press freedom and harassment of foreign media and their staff. Cheng Lei, an Australian journalist for the state broadcaster China Global Television Network, and Haze Fan, a Chinese journalist for Bloomberg, remain in jail after more than a year. In the report, published on Monday, the FCCC compiled the results of its annual member survey. It found high rates of reported incidents of harassment and intimidation, and said the heightened dangers had prompted many foreign journalists and outlets to develop emergency exit plans. The former BBC correspondent John Sudworth was forced to leave China with his wife, Yvonne Murray, who is a foreign correspondent for RTÉ, and their children after significant harassment and intimidation, and threats of legal action over his investigative reporting. “As we made our hasty exit, the plainclothes police tailing us and our young children to the airport were final proof of the dangers we faced and of China’s deep intolerance for independent journalism,” he said. The FCCC said at least eight other foreign correspondents had been threatened with legal action or sued by government entities or sources, “detract[ing] from their time reporting and plunging them into great personal risk”. The FCCC found that 62% of respondents reported being obstructed at least once by police or other officials, and 47% by unidentified individuals. It said 12% were “manhandled or subjected to other forms of physical force” while reporting. During the floods in Henan province last summer, several western journalists were physically confronted by people angry at their attempts to report on the disaster and investigate official cover-ups that were later confirmed by China’s central government. Almost a quarter of respondents said they were targeted for their reporting in online smear campaigns, with trolling disproportionately targeting female journalists of east Asian descent, and the Chinese employees of foreign outlets, including sexual innuendo and “alarming threats of physical violence”. “After a state-linked blog published numerous exposés criticising my reporting from a half year ago as ‘illegal’, hundreds of Chinese social media accounts began posting my picture along with comments like ‘beat her to death’ and describing sexual acts,” said the National Public Radio correspondent Emily Feng. The attacks were sometimes directly encouraged or instigated by the state or state-backed entities, the report said, while government officials and ambassadors regularly wrote public diatribes against western reporters. The FCCC said the attacks demonstrated an “emboldened Chinese government willing to go to great lengths to discredit foreign journalists and their work”. However, it noted that “none of this has stopped foreign journalists from doing their job, nor major global news organisations from going after the stories that matter”. Many outlets have had to find ways to report from outside China, with dozens of journalists still barred after their expulsion in 2020 and 2021, which was the “single biggest blow to international reporting in China”, said Steven Lee Myers, the New York Times’s expelled Beijing bureau chief, who is now based in Seoul. Jonathan Cheng, the Beijing bureau chief for the Wall Street Journal, said: “It has tested our resourcefulness, and there are some things we simply are unable to do from afar, much of it related to bringing our readers outside [of] China’s biggest cities.” China reporters are now based in Taipei, Singapore, Sydney and London, covering the country remotely or awaiting visa approvals. Late last year, China and the US agreed to ease visa restrictions on journalists from each other’s countries but few have been processed. In the FCCC survey, 46% of respondents said their China bureaux were understaffed because they had not been able to bring in enough journalists. The survey also found that Chinese authorities and officials were still using Covid-19 measures and border restrictions to delay visa approvals, stifle reporting trips, deny access to some locations and decline interview requests. More than half of respondents said they had been told to leave a place or had been denied access for health and safety reasons even though they presented no risk. Hong Kong’s stringent border rules had also added to pressure on foreign journalists already reporting increased difficulty under the national security law and crackdown on the press.Inflation in Aotearoa has hit a three-decade high, and New Zealand households are facing an increase in food, petrol and housing costs. It’s showing no sign of slowing – inflation hit 5.9% at the end of 2021, and ANZ, New Zealand’s biggest bank, expects it to continue rising in 2022. We’d like to hear from readers in New Zealand about whether you’ve noticed increasing prices, and how you’re managing financially in this climate: have certain essentials become unaffordable recently? What are they? Are rising prices affecting the way you shop, or your cooking and budgeting? Where have you noticed changes the most? Are you pushing for more pay from your employer, or trying other strategies to cope with the pressure of rising living costs? What are your concerns for the year ahead? Share your thoughts and experiences You can get in touch by using the encrypted form below. One of our journalists may be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Barnaby Joyce has sought to downplay Senator Sam McMahon’s resignation from the Country Liberals, arguing she is still a member of the government and can sit in the Nationals party room as an independent. McMahon confirmed her resignation in a statement on Monday, explaining she no longer has “the confidence of or in the CLP” – leaving the Northern Territory-based party without federal representation and at risk of losing party status. McMahon fell out with the CLP over a tumultuous preselection battle she lost to the deputy mayor of Alice Springs, Jacinta Price, in mid-2021. Since then, McMahon has been a thorn in the government’s side, threatening to vote against its legislation unless it granted consideration of her bill to restore territories’ rights to legislate on euthanasia and crossing the floor to vote in favour of a One Nation bill banning vaccine mandates. McMahon said she had quit the CLP on Friday and informed the CLP president and the Nationals, but did not explain if she would continue to sit in the Nationals’ party room. “This has not been an easy decision and I have wrestled with it in recent times,” she said in a statement. “It brings to an end a 30-year association. “There are a number of unresolved issues beyond the preselection. “These issues include formal complaints lodged with the management committee that have not garnered a response let alone an acknowledgment.” Earlier in January, McMahon confirmed she has had numerous approaches from minor parties, including the Liberal Democrats, to defect from the government but remained vague about her plans. On Monday, McMahon said her intentions for the next parliamentary sitting, from 2 February, and the 2022 election “will become clearer” but added “I currently don’t have any plans for my future, political or otherwise”. “I intend to vigorously pursue my private senator’s bill, Ensuring Northern Territory Rights, when parliament returns and continue working hard for the Territory.” Joyce played down the defection, telling Sky News that McMahon “remains part of the government and that’s very, very important”. “My leadership team – myself, Kay Hull, president of the Nationals, Jamie [DeBrenni], president of the CLP in the Northern Territory, [are] also in conversations with Sam – we’ve discussed this issue. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Sam will remain as a member of the government in the Nationals room and probably as an independent, I’d say.” Joyce said the defection comes “very close to the end of parliament before we go to an election”. “I don’t think this is a dramatic issue,” he said. The Morrison government already faces strife in the Senate where One Nation and Liberal senators Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic are refusing to vote for government legislation over its handling of vaccine mandates, state border restrictions and the vaccine indemnity scheme. If McMahon continues as a member of the government despite quitting the CLP, the biggest impact of her resignation will be a threat to the CLP maintaining its party registration. In order to remain registered, parties must either have representation in the federal parliament or be able to prove they have 1,500 members. CLP officials have suggested the party could reach the 1,500 threshold by counting interstate members, but it is unclear whether formal changes to branch affiliation can be effected in time for the Australian Electoral Commission to count these members in a potential audit. Parties remain registered while the AEC conducts an audit, but loss of registration would mean the CLP party name and logo does not appear on the ballot paper. Price and a running mate could run as a group with an above-the-line box for voters to tick, and could still receive public funding, but would have to do so without the party name on the ballot. The Liberal Democrats have brought a high court challenge to invalidate a law allowing the Liberal Party of Australia to block use of the word “Liberal” in its party name. Loss of party status for the CLP combined with a Liberal Democrat court win allowing use of its party name on the ballot could spell trouble for the Coalition in the NT, where McMahon secured 37% of the vote at the 2019 election.Goodbye for now That’s it for our coverage of the NFC Championship. We’ll have plenty of Super Bowl coverage over the next two weeks, but for now, that’s a wrap! Wherever you are, thanks for following along with us! Here’s our NFC Championship game report: Make the line I will put the Vegas line as Bengals -1.5. What’s the early line? Let’s look.... Wow - Vegas has the Rams -3.5! I am looking forward to putting a few donuts on Cincy. I don’t usually gamble, but it looks like I do now! Even more reason to look forward to Super Bowl 56. Who will win the Super Bowl? I can tell you with a high degree of confidence that Joe Burrow and the Bengals will wipe SoFi’s turf with the Rams. That is especially so after seeing what Cincy did today, and throughout these playoffs. Knocking off the Chiefs, on the road, in a comeback victory will prove to be just the appetizer for the main meal, coming in two weeks time. that is a team of destiny, playing at a high level and rising. So Rams fans should soak it up today, because the dream ends in a fortnight. The Rams have it! Confetti flies at SoFi as Terry Bradshaw presents the George S Halas trophy to Rams owner Stan Kroenke, who moved the team from St Louis, built himself a new stadium, a new neighborhood and now has another Super Bowl appearance. I’d say it’s going reasonably well for the billionaire, wouldn’t you? Sean McVay says he is so grateful for the players, and he should be, because he coached poorly. A happy Matthew Stafford, for whom the move from Detroit paid off handsomely, delivers a series of light sports cliches to the remaining crowd befor FOX TV in the US takes us to a commercial break. Postgame So Matthew Stafford is heading to the Super Bowl, with minimal help from his coach Sean McVay, whose team won in spite of him, and a lot of help from Jaquiski Tartt, the Niners safety who had a chance to possibly seal this game with an interception that he let slip through his fingers. The Rams will play in their second Super Bowl in four seasons, and for the second consecutive year, the a team will play in their home stadium. That after 54 years of it not happening. Oh, and then there’s this: The Howard pick seals a wild, and at one point unlikely win for the Rams! They will play at home v the Cincinnati Bengals in Super Bowl LVI (56)! Jennings has a catch for a loss - it’s 3rd &amp; 13. Now Jimmy G is back to pass - Donald comes with pressure, Goroppolo tosses it away, Hasty gets a hand on it and Howard makes the pick! That should do it for LA! What a play! 49ers 17-20 Rams, 1:42 4th quarter Here we go! G throws and it’s batted down by Gaines, who has had a really strong game today. It’s 2nd &amp; 10. So SF does what they need to do: hold LA to a field goal and give themselves some time. It cost them two timeouts, but that’s what they’re there for. 49ers 17-17 Rams, 1:49 4th quarter Stafford finds Kupp for eight yards and the Niners call timeout. Here comes Gay for a 29-yard attempt. 49ers 17-17 Rams, 1:55 4th quarter Bosa sacks Stafford and Ebukam was so close to knocking the ball free from Stafford. Timeut SF, ball on the 20 and it’s 3rd &amp; 18. 49ers 17-17 Rams, 2:00 4th quarter We just flew down to the two-minute warning. And despite some awful coaching by McVay, the Rams are in control right now, just 13 yards from a touchdown lead. It’s 2nd &amp; 11. The Niners need to try and hold LA to a field goal while protecting some of that clock. Tricky. 49ers 17-17 Rams, 2:32 4th quarter Stafford, upright in the pocket, hanging in and he finds Kupp! He catches and he runs, all the way down to the Niners 12! That’s a 25-yard gain over the middle by Kupp. 49ers 17-17 Rams, 3:40 4th quarter Stafford hits Beckham on a hook route for seven. It’s 3rd &amp; 3... 49ers 17-17 Rams, 4:40 4th quarter Now it’s LA’s turn to try and take control. They begin with a three yard run by Akers, and follow with a six-yard catch by Jefferson on the sideline. On 3rd &amp; short, it’s Blanton, again! This time it’s a key six-yard grab for a first down! The Rams are at thee Niners 42, and the clock is ticking. 49ers 17-17 Rams, 6:26 4th quarter So does Just Enough Jimmy have just enough to get the Niners to the Super Bowl? We’ll soon find out. Here he’s hit as he throws, incomplete, over the middle at Kittle. Now there’s a delay of game penalty on San Francisco, thanks to the Rams cheering section, who are showing up right now. Its’s 2nd &amp; 15, G is running around to his right and throwing wildly to his right and it’s nearly picked off! So a long 3rd &amp; 15 coming up. G has Aiyuk, short, and he drops it! Good defense by LA on this possession and they will get the ball back. Punt and fair catch: the Rams will start at their 39. Pass to Michel in the backfield and he’s wrapped up by Warner! What a terrible call by McVay! More bad from McVay! What is going on? Here’s Gay - it’s a 40-yard attempt, and it’s good! 49ers 17-14 Rams, 7:50 4th quarter On 2nd &amp; 10, Stafford finds Beckham on the far sideline - gain of seven, setting up a big 3rd &amp; 3. 49ers 17-14 Rams, 8:19 4th quarter Here’s Kupp - he’s down to the 25 after a 16-yard gain! Somehow, here come the Rams! 49ers 17-14 Rams, 8:50 4th quarter Stafford throws a deep ball right into the hands of safety Jaquiski Tartt - but he somehow drops it! That is crazy! That could have been the game on a terrible throw by Stafford. Now Stafford hits Beckham, and then Ward hits Beckham, illegally! That’s a 30-yard catch and a 15-yard penalty! So we go from a sure interception to a 45-yard pickup by LA, thrown a life vest by SF here in the fourth. 49ers 17-14 Rams, 9:55 4th quarter The ruling on the field stands, and McVay loses his final timeout and they are out of challenges. Man that is absolutely terrible coaching by McVay. And now SF are going to go for it! Or at least their offense is on the field! Jimmy G is under center at the Rams 45, and there he will stay. It’s a delay of game, and now the punting unit will come on. Good idea from SF. Kupp calls for a fair catch at the 15. 49ers 17-14 Rams, 10:01 4th quarter Juszczyk, running up the middle, is stuffed! The Rams deny SF a first down in a huge spot! The ball came out and the Rams recovered, but the 4th &amp; 2 punt was about to commence. McVay is going to challenge! This better work, or this will become a coaching nightmare for McVay. 49ers 17-14 Rams, 10:40 4th quarter Now Garoppolo has Samuel on his right side - he turns and runs for another first down. This is looking quite competent. Now Mitchell steamrolls for nine, over everybody, and SF are moving briskly across midfield. But now Mitchell takes a handoff and is hit for a loss. So this becomes a very important 3rd &amp; 2 play. 49ers 17-14 Rams, 12:51 4th quarter Samuel takes the kickoff but can only get to the 14. A lot of Rams players jumping around looking excited. Momentum shift? Let’s see. On first down, Jimmy J gets time and hits Mitchell - big gain of 21 to start this drive! The Blanton show continues with another reception of nine over the middle. He now has more touches this game than all this season! So now it’s 3rd &amp; 1 at the 11. Huge down right here. Stafford is in the shotgun - he’s gonna throw, and find Cooper Kupp, who is in the end zone: touchdown! The Rams come right back! 49ers 17-7 Rams, end of 3rd quarter Blanton takes a toss from Stafford and he has room! The last of LA’s TE’s has a gain of 20, to the SF 20. And the quarter ends...they’re just flying by. To the 4th! 49ers 17-7 Rams, 0:19 3rd quarter So lots of time left, but I have to say, as far as football goes, these quarters have been moving along quite briskly. Stafford hits Kupp, and then Al-Shaair gets down for unsportsmanlike conduct after the play, but I saw nothing and don’t understand that at all. So the Rams are already at midfield when Kupp is hit again, this time Stafford finds him down the far sideline - a gain of 11. The ball is at the SF 40 and LA can’t get the play off! They call their second time out and that’s just a mess. They have just one left. Jimmy G has time and now has Kittle wide open for the touchdown! Jimmy “Just Enough” does it again! Niners in command at SoFi! 49ers 10-7 Rams, 2:47 3rd quarter Now it’s 3rd &amp; 10. Garoppolo in the shotgun, has time and has Jennings over the middle! He’s stood up, but keeps fighting and leans over the first down mark! Huge play right there by the third string wideout! Niners are in the red zone! 49ers 10-7 Rams, 3:34 3rd quarter Samuel catches a screen on the near side and breaks free for a first down at LA’s 26. That’s a big 14-yard gain for Samuel! 49ers 10-7 Rams, 5:39 3rd quarter Aiyuk over the middle for a first down reception! SF to the Rams’ 39! 49ers 10-7 Rams, 6:39 3rd quarter On 2nd &amp; 10, Samuel runs for five, setting up a big third down. The Rams’ head coach Sean McVay challenged the spot, which was really dumb. They lost the challenge, and thus, lost a timeout. Remember that. The Rams are short and SF takes over at their 43! That’s potentially a huge moment right there in this game. 49ers 10-7 Rams, 7:53 3rd quarter A Stafford sneak - he looks short but it’s down to the spot of course. Let’s see. 49ers 10-7 Rams, 8:03 3rd quarter On 3rd &amp; 1, Stafford is back to throw...nobody available and he throws it away. Now the Rams will go for it! 49ers 10-7 Rams, 9:01 3rd quarter Great move by Beckham to break free from Mosley for a first down catch on the sideline. And again - this time Beckham is in the middle of the field. That’s 39 yards to Beckham on consecutive plays. The Rams are at the Niners 43. Meanwhile, Higbee will not return for LA - that’s a blow to their embattled TE unit. 49ers 10-7 Rams, 10:45 3rd quarter it’s a handoff to Kupp and Mosely creeps up from the corner position and puts a hit on the Rams wideout. It doesn’t put him down, but sends him backwards a few feet: it’s another example of just how physical this Niners defense can be. Williams is down for the Niners - timeout on the field. It’s 2nd &amp; 9 from the Rams nine. 49ers 10-7 Rams, 10:49 3rd quarter On 3rd &amp; 9, Goroppolo’s throw is tipped by Gaines (which makes up for his earlier penalty) and it’s incomplete. The Rams hold and force a punt: they’ll take over on their own 11. 49ers 10-7 Rams, 10:59 3rd quarter FOX TV in the US has a great shot of Gould chipping field goals right over the Rams before the start of the second half. So Gould, quite a mouthy kicker, gets into it with Ramsey, again. Meanwhile, Aiyuk draws an illegal contact penalty and that’s another 49ers first down by penalty. Then Mitchell has a first down completion on the far side for the Niners third first down of this drive. Somehow they’re across midfield, by, you guessed it, doing mostly nothing. 49ers 10-7 Rams, 13:48 3rd quarter Jimmy G runs to his right and then throws across his body, nearly into the hands of Ramsey, who is on the wrong team. That was bananas. What was he doing? Now it’s 3rd &amp; 4, but we have a flag - it’s a neutral zone infraction on Gaines, handing a first down to SF. That was easy. Stats It’s been a physical game so far and the Rams have more of everything, except points. LA have out gained SF 199 to 120 yards. Stafford is 14/24 for 130 yards with a TD and INT. Jimmy G is 8/12 for 137. And we’re back...SF has the ball to start the second half. Email Will Wiles wants to talk about the Deeebo Samuel hit. The contrast between the contact laws in NFL and rugby are clear for all to see in that hit. Hitting a player that hard in the air would result in a red card in rugby union to protect player safety yet its also true that the NFL has been far more successful in adopting safer concussion protocols than union (although many players suffered before they did). The stop start nature of NFL does mean heavy contacts aren’t made worse by continuous exertion immediately afterwards even if the contacts themselves can be ferocious. I’m just glad the guy is still alive. Gould connects for his 21st consecutive post-season field goal, and the half ends with the Niners taking the lead. And this is classic Jimmy G/Niners football - they don’t do much of anything and they have the lead. That’s some trick. Jalen Ramsey talks some crap to Gould on the way out, which is interesting. Halftime. 49ers 7-7 Rams, 0:02 2nd quarter Jimmy G, in trouble, steps up in the pocket and scrambles for a few yards. SF timeout, their last. It’s 3rd &amp; 6 - here comes the FG unit, a 38-yard attempt for Gould. 49ers 7-7 Rams, 0:20 2nd quarter Jimmy G, in the pocket, a few steps to his right, and a little pass to Hasty for a few yards. He follows that with a pass to the Rams 25 to Aiyuk. Garoppolo spikes the ball to stop the clock. 49ers 7-7 Rams, 0:51 2nd quarter Deebo looks to be ok, and what’s more, Kittle has a first down catch over the middle! So that’s a strong turn of events. SF use their second timeout - they’re at the LA 43. 49ers 7-7 Rams, 1:01 2nd quarter Samuel on the ground, runs right for two yards. Taking his time, Jimmy G huddles, heads into the shotgun and passes incomplete to Samuel who is DESTROYED running over the middle. Wow! That was a shot, totally clean, from Mitchell! And Samuel is down on his back. His ability to continue is crucial for the Niners attack, of course. A lot of breath holding right now for SF fans. Injury timeout. 49ers 7-7 Rams, 1:50 2nd quarter Stafford is in the shotgun - he’s going deep down the far sideline looking for Beckham, incomplete. Stafford was hit and he’s a little limpy. Now Matt Gay is on trying to kick a 54-yard field goal but he’s way WAY right. And short as well. San Francisco, who have had the ball for just 7:51 of this half, will take over at their own 44 and all of their timeouts. 49ers 7-7 Rams, 2:00 2nd quarter Akers has a short run for the first down. Now Stafford is back to pass, with time, and Kupp is open over the middle. He drops it! Wow. Nobody around and he flat out just missed it. Stafford is back looking for Kupp on the near side, and this time he’s got it, setting up a 3rd &amp; 1. Michel has a first time as LA crosses the SF 40. That’s six straight third down conversions for the Rams. Now Stafford has Skowronek who is WIDE open in the end zone but he drops it! Some big drops on this drive, wouldn’t you say? Two plays later, it’s the two minute warning. When we return...3rd &amp; 8 at the Niners 36. 49ers 7-7 Rams, 4:13 2nd quarter So a 18-play TD drive is followed by a four play TD drive. Rams start at their 23. Akers is back and runs for a yard. Now Stafford faces pressure from Kevin Givens and his pass towards Kupp is well short. Its 3rd &amp; 9, and the Niners crowd is making noise. Stafford, in traffic, fires and finds Beckham over the middle for a first down! That’s a huge play right there stopping a potential three and out. Next play - Akers runs for nine and the Rams are on the move near midfield. OK, so what will Jimmy J and company do to respond to that lengthy drive? He’s in the shotgun on 2nd &amp; 8 and has Aiyuk on the far sideline! He was heading to the end zone but his momentum took him out of bounds. Instead it’s a 31-yard gain to the LA 42, which is a decent consolation prize. A false start penalty and a three yard run by Mitchell follow. It’s 2nd &amp; 12. Now G hits Samuel on a wideout screen and he’s making them miss, and he’s still on his feet, and he is in the end zone! Wow! What a run by Samuel who just showed you why he does everything you can do on offense except throw his own catches! It’s a 44-yard TD reception and we are tied! Kupp runs a route to the corner of the end zone and makes a huge TD catch on third and long! The Rams have the lead, much to the chagrin of this Niners crowd. So this drive that began all the way back on the three yard line, ends in pay dirt for LA after 18 plays, all Rams season bests according to FOX TV. 49ers 0-0 Rams, 9:15 2nd quarter Stafford is sacked! It’s Bosa who takes down Stafford for a loss of five! It’s 2nd &amp; 15 - Michel runs for a yard or so, setting up a 3rd and super long. 49ers 0-0 Rams, 10:52 2nd quarter Stafford hits Kupp on the 13 yard line of SF. The catch on the far sideline has LA in the red zone! 49ers 0-0 Rams, 10:59 2nd quarter Akers is in the locker-room being checked out says FOX TV in the US. He’s questionable and so is Higbee. So they’re falling fast for LA. Meanwhile reserve TE Kendall Blanton for 13 yards and a first down. Two plays later, Stafford hits Kupp for seven. Greenlaw is down for San Francisco and we have an injury timeout. Rams are at the 28 and it’s 3rd &amp; 6. 49ers 0-0 Rams, 12:51 2nd quarter Toss to Akers as the second quarter begins - he’s patient, runs to his right, and eventually finds six yards. Now Stafford hits Beckham quickly and he runs for a first down. So some slow moving possession here for LA, who are on their own 40. On 2nd &amp; 10, Stafford throws the ball into the ground for an incomplete pass, so the Niners running into the end zone matters not. It’s 3rd &amp; long. Stafford has nobody but he does have his legs! There goes the Rams QB, finding space and a first down! And the Rams are across midfield! 49ers 0-0 Rams, end of 1st quarter OK, here we go. Stafford hands it to Michel who has enough for the first down after a gain of three up the middle. LA are at their own 30, and that’s how this mostly quiet quarter ends. 49ers 0-0 Rams, 0:34 1st quarter On 2nd &amp; 6, Stafford tosses to Akers who runs right for four yards. It’s 3rd &amp; 2. Stafford in the shotgun and there’s a whistle. Time out LA. 49ers 0-0 Rams, 2:00 1st quarter Tyler Higbee is limping on the sideline after Akers runs for no gain. Yikes. Now Michel trots for eight yards. I So it’s 3rd &amp; 2 - Stafford fires to the left sideline looking for Jefferson, incomplete. But Jefferson is gonna get done for interference, which is the right call. First down Rams at the 20. 49ers 0-0 Rams, 3:19 1st quarter The Niners drive stalls: Jimmy throws on his back foot, right into an Aiyuk sandwich and the ball falls harmlessly to the turf, luckily for SF. The Rams will start deep in their own territory after a great punt parks the pill at the three! Agro! Warner hits Stafford as he was leaving the play and so the QB had two reasons to be angry after that interception. This division rivalry could get chippy! Meanwhile, back-to-back completions for Jimmy G, first to Aiyuk and then to Mitchell, have SF across midfield. Jimmy Ward picks off a deflection off the hand of Williams who breaks up a third down Stafford pass intended for Kupp in the end zone! So a ten play drive ends in a key turnover as the Niners take over at the 23. 49ers 0-0 Rams, 7:42 1st quarter Akers is turning his wheels and has room: he’s inside the SF 20! A 14-yard run down to the eight! 49ers 0-0 Rams, 9:42 1st quarter Cooper Kupp has the first, first down of this game - a 17-yard catch on the near hash. And there’s more - Stafford is rolling to his right, throwing and finding Higbee for another first down throw for 13. The Rams are really rolling - Beckham has yet another first down after a bullet throw by the QB into Jr’s hands. It’s a 10-yard gain to the Niners 22! 49ers 0-0 Rams, 11:41 1st quarter Akers, right up the gut for three yards starts the Rams second drive. Then play-action and Stafford faces pressure and throws it away. It’s another 3rd &amp; 7 coming up. 49ers 0-0 Rams, 12:25 1st quarter Samuel runs right and runs nowhere for no gain. And then he has the ball again, finding more room, three yards this time. So now it’s 3rd &amp; 7 - Kittle is totally open but Jimmy G is way way off in his throw. So two bad throws from the QB’s cost their team first downs, and it’s a pair of three and outs here in the first quarter. A 44 yard punt follows from Wishnowsky to the Rams 33. Fair catch, and an early bathroom break for me. Uh oh. Gotta chill pout on that water. Finally - we have an NFC Championship game, and it’s underway - that following Michael Buffer’s rumble announcement, which is, well, very interesting. Anyway, the Niners win the toss and differ, the kickoff goes into the endzone, and Beckham makes a catch on the near side for a gain of three to get us going. Then on 3rd &amp; 3, Beckham is open but Stafford’s throw is off, behind the wideout. Hekker punts to SF, Benjamin takes it to the 20, and Jimmy G is on. National Anthem It’s Grammy Award winning singer songwriter, Brandy, who takes the mic and delivers the US national anthem at SoFi Stadium, moments before kickoff. It’s a bit of an LA version - a few bells and whistles, which were handled well. I’ll give it a 7.75/10. Good work Brandy! Can we get this going now please? Prediction time I am really on the fence on this one, but if you’re going to make me make a prediction, I say the Rams put it all together completely blow the Niners out of the water, 31-17. Now that wouldn’t be a whole lot of fun to blog, so hopefully I am totally wrong. Jimmy G... Jeez - this kind of makes me feel bad for live blogging in nasty shorts and a ripped up t-shirt. Just don’t tell anyone. Bengals v ???? So we’re about to find out if the Niners will face Cincy for the third time in Super Bowl history, or, if we’ll have the first time matchup of CIN v LAR. We are also about to find out if Kelly Stafford’s plan to buy up many many very expensive tickets and give them away to Rams fans helps keep Niners fans out of SoFi Stadium. There’s at least one lucky Rams recipient out there... Joe Burrow and his huge stones are heading to LA for Super Bowl 56 in two weeks time after an incredible overtime win on the road in KC. Wow! I am so glad we don’t have to se the Chiefs again! Thank you! the OBJ factor Tabloid regular Odell Beckham Jr. has been through a lot during his embattled NFL career, a list that including major injuries, and of course, plenty of personal strife and controversy. Yet Beckham has always insisted that the negative narrative surrounding the wideout is all wrong. And maybe he’s right. Here’s what Cooper Kupp said about Beckham recently. He’s a huge asset to our receiver room, so we’re really happy to have him. And this from Jalen Ramsey: Having him as a teammate is great, honestly. He’s like the offensive version of myself. He’s very talented, has a whole lot of skill set, but just his competitive nature, his will to and want to be great and then, he’s kind of misunderstood, too. He’s really a good teammate and people kind of don’t have that message out about him. No question, OBJ, signed for just $1.25 seems to be having a good time in LA. And maybe that’s because there’s zero chance of him being the no1 target for Matthew Stafford with Cooper Kupp around. Against Arizona in week 19, he threw a 40-yard TD pass, and has six touchdown catches since joining LA. Being in a support role seems to suit Beckham, who has finally found a winning situation in LA. It will be interesting to see if he prefers to stick with what’s working well come this offseason. Meanwhile, we’re in OT over in the AFC Championship, and the Chiefs won the toss. Again. But the Bengals defense has a lot more life in it than the Bills did last week at this stage. How will it end? Great Red Whip That’s Deebo. Deebo Samuel. And the all-pro wideout has been clocking OT running the ball more and more for the 49ers - 10 times in each of the last two playoff games v Dallas and Green Bay, both season highs. No question, it’s working, but it does come at a physical cost to the Niners all-everything. Deebo was beat up last week in Wisconsin, but Shanahan’s answer to increased contact is to work him out less during the week, not work him less on game day. Jimmy G needs his biggest weapon in tip top shape: will Shanahan press his luck in LA? Stay tuned. We’re getting closer to kickoff. Stick with us! What are you doing here? Listen, I appreciate it and all, but you should be with Hunter following the epic AFC Championship game. See you soon! Howdy folks, and welcome to our coverage of the NFC championship, which in this case is kind of an extension of the NFC West championship. It’s the San Francisco 49ers, on the road in the cushy conditions of a state of the art soon to be Super Bowl facility, against an embattled, support challenged home team: the Los Angeles Rams. Indeed, the Rams - better quarterback, more talent, better divisional finish, home game - are in something of a strange position. LA seem to fit neatly into the “nobody likes us” category, despite all the advantages listed above, including that January home game you play all season to earn. Or even worse, perhaps it’s the “nobody cares about us” slot they sit in (gulp). Such is the life of a Los Angeles based NFL team: fancy address, few fans. There was a reason the city was a void of the nations most popular league for so long: they’re just not that into it. Or maybe LA, a city of considerable diaspora, are just into others, like the 49ers for example: this weeks visiting home team. Even worse for the Rams, San Francisco beat them twice in the regular season, most recently, 27-24 in this very same venue just a few weeks ago, extending their formidable winning streak to six against the SoCal franchise. So yes, there’s a lot of negative story lines out there when it comes to these Rams. And not all of it is fair of course: these Rams are actually an excellent team, and are actually favored to win today. And if they do win, they’ll be in their second Super Bowl in four seasons. Plenty of franchises would sign up for that (I can think of two right here in New York). This is the team of QB Matthew Stafford, wide receiver Cooper Kupp, defensive tackle Aaron Donald, and cornerback Jalen Ramsey. Even Matt Gay, whose clutch kick put them into the NFC title game is a Pro Bowler. So this team has Supeer Bowl caliber weaponry - they just have few fans and can’t beat the Niners. Which is a bit problematic. That’s because the Niners strikingly handsome quarterback Jimmy Garropolo, ok/fine to good, only sometimes very good, is further proof that it is possible for a franchise to get into big games without the Mahomes’ and Rodgers’ of the world, and actually win them. (Brad Johnson and Trent Dilfer also helped). The mortal Jimmy G does excels beyond his natural talent level, in part because he can rely on the dynamic cast he’s surrounded with - five pro-bowlers, seven alternates, including wideout Deebo Samuel and tight end George Kittle. They are well coached by head coach Kyle Shanahan, and have the mettle to win on the road, in the cold and snow against a team with three more wins and a Rodgers. That means there’s no fear for these 49ers in the controlled, considerably friendlier atmosphere where these two teams will play today. How will it end? Well, that’s what we’re here to find out. We’ll have a bit more pre-game fodder before kickoff and get to your thoughts, providing you snd them in. Seriously, hit me with anything - I’m here for you. Email me with your thoughts or tweet @LengelDavid and I’ll put your name in the paper (your mom will be so proud). Back soon with more: stick with us! David will be here shortly. In the meantime, here’s a quick preview of today’s game: What the 49ers need to do to win: They need to find a way to get the best out of their quarterbacks. Plural. The 49ers beat the Packers last weekend in spite of their signal-caller, not because of him. Jimmy Garoppolo looked determined to throw his second interception of the day late in Saturday’s game and it was telling that the season-changing play against the Green Bay Packers was a blocked punt returned for a touchdown. Garoppolo will start but don’t be surprised if the team runs a few plays for rookie Trey Lance in key spots, as they did occasionally throughout the season, particularly when the in-game situation calls for a more mobile quarterback. What the Rams need to do to win: Exploit the quarterback mismatch. Matthew Stafford is coming off a two-touchdown performance with 366 passing yards in the divisional round game against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, where he comfortably outplayed Tom Brady. This time around, the starting QB on the other side is Brady’s former understudy. This is exactly why the Rams made the move to trade Jared Goff to the Detroit Lions for Stafford in the first place: with Goff this one would be a coin flip, but with their new big-armed QB, they’re favorites on merit. Player to watch: Cooper Kupp, wide receiver, Los Angeles Rams. He’s not the most famous receiver on the roster – that would probably be Odell Beckham Jr (who is currently playing for fairy dust) – but Kupp is definitely the Rams’ No 1 receiving option. During the regular season, he led the league in yards after the catch: 848 in total, ranking him above Deebo Samuel, his more versatile counterpoint on the opposing team. Prediction: Rams over 49ers. This one promises to be a much more competitive matchup than the AFC title game and an influx of Niners fans may ensure that the Rams do not even have much of a home-field advantage in LA. Ultimately, though, the 49ers needed the Packers to commit some heinous special teams blunders in order to squeak out a 13-10 victory, and it doesn’t feel like the Rams will be quite as accommodating.One of Queensland’s largest independent schools has sent families enrolment contracts that include asking them to sign a statement that states “homosexual acts” are immoral, listing them along with bestiality, incest and paedophilia as “offensive to God”. The “statement of faith” required for enrolment at Citipointe Christian College also includes statements that imply transgender students will be recognised only by their “biological sex” at the school – that students should identify “with the gender that God bestowed”. Citipointe is widely considered Brisbane’s equivalent of the Sydney megachurch Hillsong. Initially the “Christian Outreach Centre”, the church has satellite ministries in Nashville, Auckland and central Bulgaria. Like Hillsong, it has its own Christian music operation, Citipointe Worship. The school, which occupies part of Citipointe’s extensive campus in the Brisbane suburb of Carindale, claims on its website to be “one of Queensland’s largest independent schools, with a student population of over 1720”. A petition demanding the school recall the enrolment contracts, which parents must sign, had more than 30,000 signatures on Monday morning. One parent said they had expressed concern with the school and been told that the contract was compulsory for enrolment. A parent at a neighbouring school said she had written to her principal asking for a boycott of inter-school sport against Citipointe. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The “statement of faith” section in the Citipointe college enrolment contracts is an excerpt from the constitution of the Christian Outreach Centre. It states that: “We believe that God intends sexual intimacy to occur only between a man and a woman who are married to each other”. “We believe that any form of sexual immorality (including but not limited to: adultery, fornication, homosexual acts, bisexual acts, bestiality, incest, paedophilia and pornography) is sinful and offensive to God and is destructive to human relationships and society. “We believe that God created human beings as male or female.” The contract also states that “I/we agree that, where distinctions are made between male and female (inclusive of, but not limited to, for example, uniforms, presentation, terminology, use of facilities and amenities, participation in sporting events and accommodation) such distinctions will be applied on the basis of the individual’s biological sex.” The office of the school principal, pastor Brian Mulheran, said he was not available to answer questions on Monday. Mulheran – who in 2012 claimed he was totally cured from a long-term debilitating sickness by the prayer of a healing pastor – said in a statement that the school does not judge students on their sexuality or gender identity and a decision about their enrolment would not be made on that basis. “We have always held these Christian beliefs and we have tried to be fair and transparent to everyone in our community by making them clear in the enrolment contract,” Mulheran said. “We are seeking to maintain our Christian ethos and to give parents and students the right to make an informed choice about whether they can support and embrace our approach to Christian education. “We believe each individual is created in the image of God, with dignity and worth equal to every other person. We unequivocally love and respect all people regardless of their lifestyle and choices, even if those choices are different to our beliefs and practice.”Leah Swift, an 18-year-old college student in West Virginia, bought her first Squishmallow in October 2020. Less than two years later, she has amassed 350 of the cute, cuddly toys, which overflow from the shelves of her small bedroom. Swift regularly posts videos about her vast collection on TikTok, where she’s garnered nearly 400,000 followers and 11m likes. “It’s gotten to the point where people will stop me on campus and ask if I am the Squishmallow girl from TikTok,” she said. “It’s crazy. When I started making these videos, I never thought it would be this big of a deal.” Squishmallows, a line of whimsical and rounded stuffed creatures launched by the toy company Kellytoy in 2017, have boomed in popularity in recent years. Much like Beanie Babies in the 1990s, the toys have sparked a fanatical following of Squishmallow “hunters” who flock to stores in search of new and rare models. But the craze has also been beset by controversy, as rising demand fuels a pricey black market for Squishmallow resales. Resellers report making as much as six figures a year buying up and flipping the toys, which critics say is stripping shelves bare for genuine collectors. Now, Squishmallow influencers like Swift have found themselves pulled into a debate over the etiquette of buying and reselling the toys. Swift bought her first Squishmallow, a strawberry-shaped toy named Scarlet, for just $5. The same model now goes for as much as $25 on resale sites like Depop and Mercari. Swift estimates she could resell her collection for about $3,000 total – but would not dream of it. “I am against reselling Squishmallows for any more than their retail value,” she said. “There are people who get into the space for all the wrong reasons, and it is having a very negative impact on the community.” When a user named Juliana Lynn posted a video in December 2021 claiming to have made $100,000 in the last year from resales, her page was flooded with negative comments from people who say resales drive up prices and undermine true hobbyists. “This disgusts me. People like you ruin it for kids/people that genuinely enjoy them,” one comment said. “You’re a shelf clearing price gouger,” another read. “Just so you know the people in the Squish community despise ppl like you.” Lynn did not respond to requests for comment but defended herself on her own page, calling it a “side hustle” and nothing more. “I don’t do this for attention,” she wrote. “I do it for fun and extra cash.” Despite the debate over reselling, the trend shows no sign of slowing down. Kellytoy sold 50m Squishmallows between February 2020 and October 2021, according to the toy trade publication the Toy Book – bringing the total number sold to over 100m since their launch. Largely fueled by social media, platforms like Instagram, Reddit and TikTok now host Squishmallow communities comprising thousands of users. But the meteoric rise has prompted some to consider quitting the scene altogether. Melanie Schroeder, a California-based college student, started collecting in August 2020 and now has 400 toys, but she says the price gouging has overshadowed the hobby’s originally playful nature. “Unfortunately a lot of people are no longer collecting because they are so tired of resellers clearing shelves and price gouging,” she said. “It takes a lot of the fun out of it.” While Schroeder is personally against resale, she has found other ways to cash in on her new hobby, having signed up for TikTok’s creator fund after her Squishmallow TikTok account blew up in recent months, amassing more than 400,000 likes. Influencers on the platform can make as much as $50 per video depending on its view count. Schroeder attributes the huge rise in Squishmallow popularity to upheaval brought on by the Covid-19 pandemic and its emotional impact – particularly among young people. “For me personally, if I am sad, I go Squish hunting,” she said. “They’re so squishy and cuddly and cute and have brought so much comfort and joy to people through the last couple of years.” • The headline of this article was amended on 31 January 2022 to remove a term not in accordance with Guardian style.For nearly two millennia, the Little Theatre of Epidavros lay underground. Its engraved seats, concentric and tiered, belonged to a world of roots; in this case the roots of an olive grove owned by Christos Zafiris, a local farmer. “They say that had it not been for pigs digging at the soil, we might never have known of its existence,” says Prof Vassilis Lambrinoudakis. “Until the appearance of the stones in 1970, the theatre was a secret hidden under the earth for 18 centuries.” The classical archaeologist, renowned for his work at Athens University, has spent more than four decades ensuring the chance find would not go to waste. Excavations have not disappointed. Inscriptions discovered at the site, on the slopes of a peninsula overlooking the sea, have shed light on the history of those who may have commissioned the theatre. Evidence of multiple phases of construction, starting in the mid-fourth century BC, have further illuminated the ancient city of Epidavros that once surrounded the architectural gem. For those who flock to the resurrected theatre’s festival every July, the venue, roughly 95 miles south-west of Athens, rivals its slightly younger but much more famous sister, the 12,000-seat ancient playhouse barely 10 miles away long regarded as Greece’s best theatre acoustically and aesthetically. “It’s among our top 10 20th century finds,” says Lambrinoudakis, a sprightly octogenarian pointing to the Little Theatre’s upper tiers. “More than any other remnant of the past, ancient theatres speak to us. They contain a message of life that modern society has a thirst to share. It is our duty to bring them alive.” In a country as culturally rich as Greece, ancient arenas, like other antiquities, are no stranger to abandonment and decay. Overstretched budgets, an unwieldy bureaucracy and public oversight have all been blamed for ruins falling victim to the ravages of neglect and time. But officials are now on a mission to revive the monuments. And, with the aid of private sponsorship and EU funds, headway is being made. South of little Epidavros, restoration work on the 17,000-seat ancient theatre of Sparta was launched last year. In Larissa, reconstruction of central Greece’s biggest open-air ancient theatre is on course to be completed. As excavations have progressed, authorities have reported thousands of inscriptions and hundreds of sculptures being unearthed. Farther north, in Epirus, one of Europe’s poorest regions, plans are afoot to make five ancient Greek theatres the centrepiece of a 214-mile cultural route taking in 2,500 years of history. The EU will provide 80% of the €24m the project is slated to cost. “The attitude towards ancient theatres has changed,” says Stavros Benos, a socialist former culture minister and the force behind Diazoma, an NGO set up to promote the monuments’ enhancement. “In recent years, works have been conducted on around 40 theatres. They’ve received a breath of fresh life.” Benos has long campaigned for the ancient relics to be regarded not as museum pieces, “or dead things”, but “living organisms” that should be integrated into everyday life. If placed at the centre of cultural heritage trails and archaeological parks, the theatres will, he believes, help raise Greece’s cultural profile while improving tourism. The NGO has mapped 140 ancient arenas across Greece. Twenty-five are in operation, hosting performances and other events; another 20 are under renovation. Established as a citizens’ movement in 2008, a year before the onset of Greece’s debilitating debt crisis, Diazoma derives its support from private donations and members encouraged to contribute to “piggy banks” by adopting sites. The model has been phenomenally successful. Philanthropic foundations in Greece and abroad have weighed in; so, too, have private companies, allowing the organisation to bankroll the engineering and other studies necessary for the culture ministry to file EU funding requests. “Theatres are unique,” says Benos, who was appointed by the centre-right government last year to oversee the resuscitation of the fire-ravaged island of Evia on account of his holistic approach to regeneration. “From antiquity, they are the only monuments to have had the same use. Because of their harmony, their architectural beauty and their relationship to the natural environment, people have a particular fondness for them. It’s why they’re so symbolic.” Indicative of the country’s archaeological abundance, Epidavros’ little theatre is one of six ancient arenas in Argolida in the eastern Peloponnese. Of the three still in use, the splendid 20,000-seat theatre of ancient Argos is the biggest. Hewn out of the rock of a foothill within view of the modern town, the Hellenistic third-century BC monument was opened to the public after years of restoration work in 2004. Plays and other performances are now held at the venue, with audiences sitting in the lower tiers – better preserved as they, too, were covered by earth – although the full theatre has 89 rows of seats. “But when you open up an ancient site, there are always constant worries,” says Alcestis Papadimitriou, the culture ministry official who heads the region’s antiquities department. “You worry about people’s safety and you worry about the monument being damaged.” The German-trained archaeologist does not believe that antiquities should necessarily be opened. Rather, she says, they are there to force viewers “to remember history, to remind them of the past”. Yet on hot summer nights, she also accepts there is nothing better than being entertained in an ancient Greek theatre. “When the lights go out, you forget about the stifling heat and how uncomfortable you might be and you’re taken back in time,” she says, marvelling at the ancient site. “You’re there, sitting where the ancients would have sat, and there is nothing more magical.” At Epidavros’ Little Theatre, the work is far from over. There are two more tiers to reconstruct, limestone steps to consolidate, and retaining walls to rehabilitate either side of the arena. Prof Lambrinoudakis has no idea how much time his team will need. What he does know is that after so long underground, the site still has secrets to reveal. “It will take as long as it takes,” he smiles. “A few more years of research and work is nothing compared to the 24 centuries that this theatre has existed, in this corner of Greece.”J Michelle Childs, a South Carolina judge among contenders to be nominated to the supreme court by Joe Biden, has received strong support from an unlikely source: Lindsey Graham, a Republican senator and leading ally of Donald Trump. “I can’t think of a better person for President Biden to consider for the supreme court than Michelle Childs,” Graham, a member of the Senate judiciary committee that will consider Biden’s pick, told CBS’s Face the Nation on Sunday. “She has wide support in our state. She’s considered to be a fair-minded, highly gifted jurist. She’s one of the most decent people I’ve ever met.” Biden must nominate a justice to succeed Stephen Breyer, the 83-year-old liberal who announced his retirement last week. The nomination will not change the balance of a court on which conservatives outnumber liberals 6-3 but Biden has vowed to install the first Black female justice. On Friday, the Mississippi Republican senator Roger Wicker criticised Biden, saying he would nominate a justice because of her race at a time when “the supreme court is … hearing cases about this sort of affirmative racial discrimination while adding someone who is the beneficiary of this sort of quota”. Wicker attracted rebuke, particularly because presidents have chosen by measures other than experience before. Ronald Reagan vowed to put a woman on the court for the first time. Donald Trump promised to replace Ruth Bader Ginsburg with a woman. Both made good on their pledge. Also on Sunday, Susan Collins of Maine, a moderate Republican Democrats might hope would support Biden’s pick, told ABC’s This Week: “The way that the president has handled this nomination has been clumsy at best. It adds to the further perception that the court is a political institution like Congress when it is not supposed to be.” Most observers would counter that the court most certainly is a political institution, and only politicians – and justices – like to pretend otherwise. Collins also sought to split hairs, saying Reagan said he would like to appoint a woman “as one of his supreme court justices”. In fact, during his 1980 campaign against Jimmy Carter, Reagan said “one of the first supreme court vacancies in my administration will be filled by the most qualified woman I can possibly find”. On Sunday, the CBS host Margaret Brennan said: “Nikki Haley of South Carolina also tweeted the president should not have a race or gender litmus test. President Reagan promised to nominate a woman, Sandra Day O’Connor. So why is this different?” Graham said: “Well, it’s not different to me. Put me in the camp of making sure the court and other institutions look like America … affirmative action is picking somebody not as well qualified, for past wrongs. Michelle Childs is incredibly qualified. There’s no affirmative action component if you pick her. “President Reagan said running for office that he wanted to put the first female on the court. Whether you like it or not, Joe Biden said, ‘I’m going to pick an African American woman to serve on the supreme court.’ I believe there are plenty of qualified African American women, conservative and liberal, that could go on to the court. So I don’t see Michelle Childs as an act of affirmative action. “… In the history of our country, we’ve only had five women serve and two African American men, so let’s make the court more like America. Qualifications have to be the biggest consideration. And as to Michelle Childs, I think she’s qualified.” Graham also said he supported Childs as a product of the public University of South Carolina, “somebody who’s not at Harvard or Yale”. “She’s highly qualified,” he repeated. “She’s a good character. And we’ll see how she does if she’s nominated. But I cannot say anything bad about Michelle Childs. She is an awesome person.” Graham’s enthusiasm might have surprised both Wicker, who said he thought Biden’s pick would not get a single Republican vote, and observers of Graham’s long-term loyalty to Trump. Such fealty came through strongly when Graham defended Brett Kavanaugh, Trump’s second court pick, through a brutal confirmation fight which has prompted Republicans including Wicker to hint at revenge to come. Graham told CBS any Biden nominee “will not be treated like Judge Kavanaugh. But I think I made it pretty clear I’m a big admirer of Judge Childs”. His admiration may also have startled backers of Ketanji Brown Jackson, a Washington DC judge who many think has a strong chance. James Clyburn, the South Carolina congressman whose endorsement both secured Biden’s promise to install a Black woman and boosted him to the Democratic nomination, is a known Childs supporter. The House Democratic whip told CBS on Sunday he spoke to Biden about Childs “several months ago”. The nomination of any Black woman, Clyburn said, would send a message “to every little child growing up under moderate circumstances, needing the entire community to help raise [her], getting scholarships to go up to school because she couldn’t afford to go otherwise, going to public schools because you didn’t get an offer from one of the big private schools”. That message, he said, would be: “You’ve got just as much of a chance to benefit from the greatness of this country as everybody else … That’s the kind of conversation I had with [Joe] Biden way back when he was running for president.”The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, says the state government has “always known” people would die as a result of loosening Covid restrictions, after documents surfaced suggesting the government was warned Omicron could lead to a spike in hospitalisations. On Monday the Guardian revealed that health officials in NSW warned vaccines “may be less effective” against the variant and could lead to an increase in hospitalisations, just days before premier Perrottet announced restrictions would be removed. The advice, contained in a briefing written by NSW Health’s Covid critical intelligence unit, was published on 10 December, five days before the government scrapped an indoor mask mandate and density limits on venues amid surging Omicron infections. When asked about the document on Monday, Perrottet said the government had “always known” hospitalisations, case numbers and deaths would rise as a result of the decision to reopen the economy. “We’ve always known, and that’s the hard reality facing all governments,” he said. “You’ll always find as we open up society there’ll be an increase in hospitalisations and ICU. That’s the difficult decisions governments face day in, day out. “We can’t eliminate the virus. There is no country in the world that has been able to eliminate the virus.” A spokesperson for Perrottet did not respond directly to questions about whether the briefing note was included in NSW Health advice given to the premier prior to easing restrictions on 15 December. But the premier on Monday defended the decision to ease restrictions as necessary to live with the virus. “We’ve spoken for a long time about learning to live with the virus [and] I know this is difficult and I know this takes some getting accustomed to as we move through but we’ve always said we’ll tailor our settings for the circumstances we find ourselves in,” he said. “We’ve always said that as we open up hospitalisations and ICUs will increase, that is the reality of living in a pandemic.” On 15 December the government announced masks would no longer be mandatory at most locations indoors, scrapped the use of QR code check-ins for low-risk venues and dropped density limits. It was later forced to reverse that decision on 23 December as cases spiked in the face of the Omicron variant. But the briefing note of 10 December forewarned that the then-emerging variant was likely to lead to an increase in infections, warning vaccines “may be less effective” and pointing to an increased risk of reinfection.North Korea has released images it claims show the test-firing this weekend of its biggest missile for several years, as it attempts to use launches of weapons capable of reaching US territories to pressure the Biden administration into restarting nuclear talks. The state-run KCNA news agency said on Monday the country had launched an intermediate-range Hwasong-12 missile capable of reaching the US Pacific territory of Guam. The missile was the most powerful the regime has tested since late 2017. Sunday’s launch – the seventh this month – appears to be part of a push by the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un, to secure sanctions relief and international recognition of its status as a legitimate nuclear power. After a series of launches involving short-range missiles, some observers believe the regime could be gearing up for tests of nuclear weapons or intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) capable of striking parts of the US mainland. Under Joe Biden, Washington has offered talks “without preconditions” but dismissed North Korean demands that it offer sanctions relief and other concessions as a prelude to negotiations. There are no signs that Biden, who this month approved the first North Korean sanctions of his presidency, is considering a return to the direct diplomacy that led to three meetings between Kim and Donald Trump. Kim has been present at previous launches but did not witness Sunday’s test. The US said it shared concerns that North Korea’s escalating missile tests could be precursors to resumed tests of nuclear weapons and ICBMs, a senior US official said on Sunday. “They are looking to take actions, which we believe are fundamentally destabilising, as a way to increase pressure,” the official told a briefing in Washington. “I think that there probably is a component that is also to validate the systems that they’ve developed and further refine them.” KCNA published two sets of photos of Sunday’s test – one capturing the missile rising from its launcher near the country’s border with China, the other showing images from space it said were taken by a camera installed on the missile’s warhead. The images’ authenticity has not been independently verified. It added that the missile had been fired on a lofted trajectory “in considerations of the safety of neighbouring countries”. An assessment by the South Korean and Japanese militaries estimated it flew about 800 km (497 miles) and reached a maximum altitude of 2,000 km (1,242 miles) before landing in the sea between the Korean peninsula and Japan. By demonstrating a Hwasong-12, North Korea has sent the US its strongest message so far this year. When fired at a standard trajectory, the nuclear-capable ground-to-ground weapon is theoretically capable of reaching anywhere in Japan, as well as Guam and the far western tip of Alaska’s Aleutian Islands chain. In 2017 the regime test-fired a Hwasong-15 ICBM, which some experts said proved it had acquired the ability to strike the US mainland. Observers believe the North could halt missile tests while the winter Olympics are being held in China – its most important ally and biggest aid donor – but warned that that it could launch more powerful weapons after the Beijing Games end later this month.The West Dipton Burn cleaves a deep, snaking ravine through the land south of Hexham. One of several streams that feed into the Devil’s Water – a tributary of the Tyne – its precipitous sides are thickly wooded. It is to this woodland area that we are heading. To reach it via the valley bottom is difficult. The cliffs close in the higher up you go, and crossing the many fords is only possible when the water level is low. So we enter the woods from the top end, using a path that runs along the upper rim and hugs the drystone wall. Emerald hummocks of moss cushion the thruffs – the through stones that bind the wall. Down below, the sheltered dene is starting to wake up: the chink-chink of chaffinches, the busy trills of blue tits, the squeaky sawing of great tits. After the airy openness of silver birches, the wood gradually becomes denser with dark shiny-leaved hollies, coppiced hazels and sessile oaks. Storm Arwen has left its mark: across the path a sycamore has torn down the wall with its muddy flailing root ball; huge limbs of oaks have fallen; a birch bracketed with polypore fungus lies tumbled in a heap. From below comes the sound of the burn, and somewhere on the southern wall of the gorge is the well-hidden Queen’s Cave. The story tells of Queen Margaret of Anjou, wife of King Henry VI, being sheltered there by an outlaw after the brief but bloody Battle of Hexham in 1464 and the defeat of the Lancastrian army. Margaret was in fact nowhere near at the time, but the Victorian historical writer Agnes Strickland wrote imaginatively: “Taking the prince in his arms, [the outlaw] led the queen to his own retreat, a cave in Hexham forest, where the royal fugitives were refreshed.” No sun penetrates the shadowy ravine. We stick to the upper path, where light filters through the red trunks of Scots pines and fires the peeling bark of birches like alabaster. A frantic squabble of jays screech overhead and a wren twitches its way through emerging leaves of honeysuckle. The wren, Troglodytes troglodytes, the cave dweller, will soon be looking for its own secret place in the wood. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryMore than 30 years since the Fitzgerald Inquiry exposed widespread graft and misconduct in Queensland, the state has again turned to Tony Fitzgerald to run an inquiry into its under-fire corruption watchdog, the Crime and Corruption Commission. In the past week, Annastacia Palaszczuk’s government has come under increasing pressure to agree to an inquiry as accusations emerged of an “integrity crisis” caused by a series of apparently unrelated events – the resignation of the Queensland integrity commissioner amid concerns about interference with her office; the resignation of CCC chair Alan MacSporran; and criticism by the former state archivist about political interference. The LNP opposition had called for “Fitzgerald 2.0”. A commission of inquiry into the CCC had been a recommendation of its parliamentary oversight body, after hearings into the CCC’s handling of abandoned charges against eight Logan councillors found it had breached its duty to remain independent and impartial. Some in the local government sector have subsequently claimed the CCC is “out of control” and should be shorn of powers. The premier said on Monday that cabinet had agreed to an inquiry into the CCC and had turned to the one person, above all others, who could bring the process serious credibility. Fitzgerald, 80, will chair the inquiry alongside retired supreme court judge Alan Wilson. Palaszczuk said she admired Fitzgerald for the way his 1980s inquiry, which exposed corruption during the latter years of National party government, had shaped modern Queensland. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The former premier, Joh Bjelke-Petersen, resigned amid Fitzgerald’s initial inquiry. Three former National party ministers and the police commissioner, Terry Lewis, were jailed as a result. Lewis was also stripped of his knighthood. More than 30 years on, the inquiry is still the major touchstone on corruption issues. “It is clear a review of the CCC is needed,” Palaszczuk said. “Who better than Tony Fitzgerald to conduct it?” “No one can argue about Tony Fitzgerald’s independence. To do its job, the public must have absolute confidence in the CCC and this commission of inquiry.” Among the matters that Fitzgerald and Wilson will investigate is the role of seconded police officers to the CCC; something that had been of concern prior to more recent events. Opposition leader David Crisafulli said the inquiry should be more wide-ranging than simply the CCC. “Queenslanders are smarter than this and won’t have the wool pulled over their eyes,” he said. “Anything short of a full royal commission into the widespread systemic integrity issues ripping through the Queensland Government is a cop out.” “Attempts to hose down the CCC bin fire completely ignores the integrity inferno burning through the heart of the government. The state government’s integrity crisis is so much bigger than the announcement we have seen today.”One minute, it’s a shish kebab. The next, it’s a washing machine. A second later, it’s a casserole. Speaking to Yvonne Farrell and Shelley McNamara about their new building, the metaphors come tumbling out in a passionate torrent. The two Irish architects, whose practice Grafton won worldwide recognition in 2020 when it won the prestigious Pritzker prize, can’t contain their excitement about their £145m facility for the London School of Economics, partly because they haven’t had a chance to visit it yet. “The pandemic has really made us understand the meaning of longing,” says Farrell. “Site visits on FaceTime just aren’t the same.” The longing is over for students and academics, though, who return to face-to-face teaching this term, in a place that truly brings home the benefits of meeting in the real world. The new Marshall Building, which looks out over Lincoln’s Inn Fields like a gleaming white palazzo, houses some of the finest spaces that any London university has to offer. The project is the latest addition to the LSE’s impressive stable of recent commissions, shoehorned into a five-acre tangle of alleyways behind Aldwych in central London. There is the twisted redbrick ziggurat of the student centre, designed by fellow Dublin duo O’Donnell + Tuomey in 2014, which boasts a helter-skelter of alluring nooks and crannies. Then came the glacial slab of the Centre Building in 2018, by Richard Rogers’ firm RSHP, a hi-tech silo of open-plan floors linked by meandering stairs. And, for a final prime site nearby, there is yet another international competition under way, this time for £120m. But the Marshall Building is first time the LSE has had the chance to present a public face to Lincoln’s Inn Fields, the largest public square in London and one of its oldest, having been laid out in the 1630s. And what an entrance it is. Channelled through a cleft in the Portland stone facade, you arrive inside an expansive hall, where gigantic concrete trees, the kind that might support a flyover, branch out in big brawny wedges. One punches through a hole in the ceiling, continuing its structural journey to the floors above, while a broad spiral staircase licks down in an elegant curl, enticing you up. If you start to feel woozy from all this heroic concrete gymnastics, it might also be because the floor itself is sloping. This is a practical solution to the one-metre level difference across the site, avoiding the need for steps, but it also adds to the sense of being irresistibly drawn into the great hall, conceived as a covered public piazza. Anyone can wander in off the street and sip a coffee beneath the leaping beams. The terrazzo-paved square will be used for graduation ceremonies and can be transformed into an atmospheric banqueting hall. There is a good reason for the infrastructural muscle – and it’s not just the architects’ love of Brazilian brutalism. Below the ground floor lies a vast sports hall, along with a gym, squash courts, dance studio and music rooms, repurposing a pre-existing triple-height basement, left over from the former 1960s Imperial Cancer Research Fund labs that occupied the site. The sports hall required a column-free expanse, which would usually necessitate hefty beams or a massive truss to transfer the weight of the nine storeys above on to the existing basement retaining walls. Working with engineers, AKT II, the team came up with a clever solution, conceiving the transfer structure as a space that could be inhabited. And so the concrete tree-studded great hall was born, with the great wedge-shaped beams tapering towards the centre where they support the column grid above. Inspiration also came from an unlikely source nearby: the 17th-century Lincoln’s Inn Chapel. The building is raised up on great stone vaults that fan out, creating an open ground floor below massive masonry ribs. “We loved the idea of going upstairs to this other world,” says McNamara, “from a public space below.” In their building, the spiral stair sweeps up to the two teaching floors, where Harvard-style horseshoe lecture theatres and classrooms are arranged around the edges in curved timber-clad pods, each enjoying daylight and a view out. The space in between is given over to informal seating – shaped, Farrell says, by “tidal lines of students and professors bumping into one another”. It is the kind of place you might want to actually sit and work, rather than just another anonymous corridor filing you from one seminar to the next. Little terraces, cut into the facade, allow a gulp of fresh air and a view of the square between classes. The departments of accounting, finance and management are stacked above, connected by a light-well (the “shish kebab”) supported by another branching tree. Researchers’ offices are arranged along corridors that radiate from the centre like a sundial, with meeting rooms located at the “social fulcrum” of the stairs, in the hope of sparking encounters. “Architects always think that open studios are the best way to work,” says McNamara. “But researchers are like monks. They like to retreat into a cell where they are completely private, then come out and have the contrast in the more public spaces.” Farrell rhapsodises a day in the life of this “vortex of thinking”, where an academic might pop downstairs from their office for a game of squash, or come down for a coffee, only to be lured into a music recital, the sounds of Rachmaninov inspiring a breakthrough in their systemic risk modelling. “It’s about convening in a casserole of delight,” she says. “Not silent corridors with ‘Shh!’ signs everywhere.” The noise of this lively casserole shouldn’t travel too far upstairs, thanks to carpeted floors and absorbent materials hidden in walls. The sheer volume of concrete on show will raise environmental eyebrows, but Grafton insists it can be sustainable. “People say we are just brutalists from Dublin throwing concrete all over the place,” says McNamara, citing the reaction in some quarters when their building for Kingston University won the Stirling prize last year. “It’s cement that’s the dirty word, not concrete, and we’ve worked hard to replace as much of the cement content as possible.” Gerry O’Brien of AKT II says their embodied carbon assessment of the whole building came out at 650kg of CO2 equivalent per square metre. This works out at almost 12,000 tonnes, which sounds enormous but comes in under RIBA’s new 2030 targets (despite the building having been designed in 2016, when targets were much looser). While the inside revels in its sheer concrete muscle, with interiors worthy of the Brazilian architect Paulo Mendes da Rocha, the exterior is more deferential to the tastes of Westminster planners. To fit in with its decorous neighbours, the Lincoln’s Inn Fields elevation takes a classical tripartite form, with a solid stone plinth at the lower storeys and two successive layers of white concrete fins, neatly angled in different directions. “We were concerned that north-facing facades can be very hostile, cold and dreary,” says McNamara. “We wanted to capture as much light as possible from the sides, to animate this facade and draw reflected daylight inside.” It’s a worthy intention, but the result feels a bit stiff, as if the chiselled forms behind have been masked with a prissy veil. Things get more interesting around the back, where the blocky mass of the building is cut and prised open in different directions, responding to the jumbled streetscape, with terraces and ledges. For Julian Robinson, the LSE’s director of estates, a major victory was convincing the council to pedestrianise one of these streets, on to which a long stone bench now fronts, and where large windows can be fully opened in summer. A curious little building remains clinging to the corner, like a pebble at the foot of a glacier. This is The Old Curiosity Shop, a Victorian fake named to lure Dickens tourists. The LSE bought it during construction and might open it as a Dickensian tea shop. The thing that helped to summon this great concrete iceberg into being can be found at its very summit. Occupying the penthouse belvedere, with its own panoramic terrace, is the Marshall Institute, a research centre for philanthropy and social entrepreneurship named after Sir Paul Marshall, boss of the £40bn hedge fund Marshall Wace. A prominent donor to the Brexit campaign, and backer of GB News, Marshall contributed £10m to found the institute in 2015, along with £20m towards the building, providing a further £50m last year. “It’s really our showcase floor,” says Robinson. “High net worth individuals will be brought up here to look out across the city where they’ve made their money – and hopefully be persuaded to part with some of it.” The spell cast by Grafton’s architecture, as light bounces between the crisp concrete blades, casting a golden glow across this rooftop eyrie, might well make them cough up.Rishi Sunak is being urged by a leading centre-right thinktank to limit the impact of April’s controversial £12bn increase in national insurance contributions by shifting the burden of tax from work to wealth. Highlighting disquiet in Tory ranks over the looming national insurance rise, a report from Bright Blue has called for higher taxes on capital, inheritance and rents as a way of making the system fairer. The thinktank, set up to promote liberal conservatism, also said people who worked on after they reach the state pension age should pay national insurance rather than being exempt. The report said Sunak’s new health and social care levy – designed to raise money to clear NHS backlogs and increase spending on care – was “surprising” for a Conservative government to bring in and the priority should be to make it less burdensome for employers. “It cannot be abolished but it can be made much fairer. Any detrimental impact on workers and employers can be mitigated,” the report added. Sunak and Boris Johnson have insisted in a joint Sunday Times article that the national insurance increase will go ahead in April as planned. But the Labour party, a significant number of Tory MPs and business groups have all expressed strong opposition to what they see as a tax on jobs. The Institute of Directors has warned the 1.25% increase – payable by both employers and employees – will drive up the UK’s already soaring inflation rate by adding to costs. Bright Blue said the Treasury should not pass up the opportunity to recalibrate the tax system so that it better rewarded work and recognised the impact wealth and inheritance was having on life outcomes. Sunak could mitigate the impact of the NI increase and reform the tax system by a series of measures, including: Broadening the health and social care levy to apply to pensioner and rental income. Ending the exemption from paying national insurance contributions for those working on beyond the state pension age, currently 66. Narrowing the gap between the headline rate of capital gains tax and Income tax by creating two main rates for all capital gains of 18% at the basic rate and 28% at the higher rate. Replacing inheritance tax with a lifetime receipts tax, which would have a starting lifetime allowance of £125,700. Ryan Shorthouse, Bright Blue’s chief executive and a co-author of the report, said: “A centre-right government that is committed to levelling up the UK should rebalance the tax system from income associated with work and effort and on to income associated with privilege and luck.” The report was commissioned by Bright Blue’s cross-party tax commission, which includes the Labour MP Margaret Hodge, the former chair of the House of Commons public accounts committee, and the former Conservative universities minister David Willetts. Hodge said: “The government’s new levy on national insurance contributions is one of the least equitable options for raising the necessary resources. While I would advocate for even more radical reform, these new recommendations will rightly open up debate on how we could fairly taxing income from wealth as well as work.” Willetts said the government needed to get the right balance between different forms of taxation. “We may be taxing earnings too heavily relative to assets, whose value has surged.”The typical delay between an offence of rape and the completion of the resulting criminal case rose to 1,000 days in 2021 for the first time, figures have revealed. The Ministry of Justice said the median time between offence and completion in rape cases was 1,020 days, or over two and a half years, in the first nine months of 2021, up by more than a quarter from the previous year. The data, published in response to parliamentary questions from the shadow attorney general, Emily Thornberry, also showed that 576 rape cases had been waiting for more than a year to come to court as of the end of September 2021, well over double the average of the previous five years. It come just days after Home Office data revealed sharp drops in prosecution and conviction rates for rape, with only 1.3% of cases now being prosecuted. Thornberry said the delays were “sickening and unacceptable”. “These figures show that waits of more than 1,000 days have become the norm for survivors of rape. Every day of delay puts trials at risk, threatening to rob survivors of the justice they deserve, and prolonging the trauma they are made to endure,” she said. “Any government with an ounce of compassion would set about fixing these record delays as a priority, not letting them grow worse by the year.” Extreme delays in a number of rape cases made the overall average delay even longer, with the mean time between offence and completion standing at 2,767 days in the first nine months of 2021 – more than seven and a half years – close to the record of 2,910 reached in 2019. Jo Sidhu QC, chair of the Criminal Bar Association, said: “Five years or more for a complainant to finally see a trial conclude is rapidly becoming the norm not the exception as these serious cases go to the back of a queue in a system starved of criminal barristers. “The painful irony for rape victims is last year half the number of rape complaints were prosecuted than seven years ago, but they took on average twice as long to conclude.” Criminal Bar Association analysis showed there were over 6,400 outstanding sexual offence trials as of 30 September 2021, a 125% rise in three years. “Rape trials are only going to get longer unless government puts the resources in place to ensure we have enough prosecutors and defenders to tackle the backlogs,” Sidhu said. In October, Boris Johnson said there were “delays taking place at every stage in the process” in cases such as rape and domestic violence, and cited complexities in gathering evidence as one of the reasons. Admitting that rape victims in Britain were being badly served, he promised to “stop at nothing to make sure we get more rapists behind bars”. Labour has said it would end delays by increasing the number of rape and serious sexual assault offence (Rasso) units in the Crown Prosecution Service and rolling out new Nightingale courts to guarantee an additional 33,000 sitting days. A government spokesperson said: “We are overhauling our entire response to rape and boosting funding for support services to £185m. We are also recruiting 20,000 police officers, introducing new justice scorecards and increasing court capacity so victims get the justice they deserve quicker.”Before meeting Labi Siffre, I am intrigued by the varied reactions I get when mentioning his name. Many people I speak to have never heard of him. Some remember his 80s anthem Something Inside So Strong. Others are dimly aware of a solo career before that. And then there are those whose eyes light up – those who, like me, regard him as one of the key figures in British pop history, and wonder why he’s not celebrated as such. “Labi Siffre’s fingerprints have been on popular music for many decades now,” wrote the electronic musician Matthew Herbert in 2012. “But his actual voice is rarely heard.” Why is that? During the first half of the 1970s, Siffre released six solo albums, operating effortlessly across folk, soul, reggae and funk, while poetically addressing the political (his songs have tackled war veterans, homelessness and religion) and the personal (if there is a more perfect articulation of domestic bliss than his 75-second song Till Forever, I have yet to hear it). It’s not like his career went under the radar – Siffre scored three Top 40 hits, with Crying Laughing Loving Lying reaching No 11. And it’s not like he’s had no cultural impact since: Madness did the definitive cover of his song It Must Be Love, while artists including Kanye West, Jay-Z and Primal Scream have sampled his music. The inordinately catchy riff used on Eminem’s My Name Is was his. Rod Stewart and Kelis are among those who have recorded his music. Yet his name still registers lightly. Some of his songs don’t even have their lyrics available to view online. In the decade since I discovered Siffre’s 70s catalogue, I’ve read stories about how being an openly gay, black folk singer held him back, and how he was dropped for refusing to stay in the closet. Being wary of the press, Siffre tends to avoid interviews. So I was thrilled to be granted an audience at his home and studio in north-east Spain, via Zoom, so I could get the full story. Bespectacled and looking remarkably youthful for a 76-year-old – Siffre could easily be mistaken for an academic rather than a musician – his words are chosen carefully, and his answers extend occasionally into emphatic monologues. But he has a poet’s way with language. “I was remarkably naive,” says Siffre when I ask what the music industry was like in the late 60s. “I went in believing that the music business would be run by – who else? – musicians. But you don’t blame a rattlesnake for biting you. A rattlesnake is a rattlesnake, and you’re stupid to wander around in sandals and no socks in a rattlesnake-infested area.” Born in 1945 to a Nigerian father and mixed-race mother who refused to “pass” as white, Claudius Afolabi Siffre was raised in west London. He says he had already worked out his life plans at an early age. By 11 he knew he had to “find someone and make them love me for the rest of our lives”; by 13 he had resolved, thanks to one of his four brothers’ impressive record collection, to become a musician. Both of these things were under way before he was 20. Siffre wrote his first song aged 18 and, a year later in 1964, met Peter John Carver Lloyd; they remained together for 48 years, entering a civil partnership in 2005, until Lloyd’s death in 2013. After playing jazz guitar for several years, Siffre brought his self-titled debut album out in 1970. By his third album – Crying Laughing Loving Lying – Siffre’s lyrics were no longer written as if for the opposite sex. “It occurred to me that I couldn’t do that any more,” he says. His songs are not soapboxes. Yet often they express romantic contentment in such a simple and relatable way – shared jumpers, waiting for telephone calls – that just having a black, gay singer perform them must have felt like a political statement. “The most important thing in your life is what happens at home,” says Siffre. “Many people don’t understand this. It is head and shoulders above everything else. And from the moment Peter and I met, I never took [that love] for granted.” Siffre found the music industry stifling. He trusted his management, but he says their attitude was often: “Can you bring me something that I’ve already heard, that has already been a hit?” Unsurprisingly, that meant a muted reaction to the album he’s most proud of, For the Children, which tackled mankind’s predilection for self-destruction. “My manager at the time said: ‘Every word on the album is true, but people don’t want to hear that.’ I thought to myself, I should leave these people – they don’t understand what I’m doing. But I knew I could trust them, so I stayed. And they did at least try and understand what I was doing, they did make an effort. Because I’m not easy … I’m not easy, even for myself!” Songs on that album such as Prayer and Let’s Pretend had a strident atheist message. Was it brave to question religion at that time? “I don’t think I was being brave at all,” he says. “I’m not a brave person. Pissed off? Yes! I’ve never taken kindly to being bullied.” Listening to For the Children again in recent years, Siffre says he cried, not just for himself but also for humanity. “It occurred to me: ‘I wish I hadn’t been right’,” he says. The album was not a commercial success, but Siffre says it’s nonsense that he was dropped because of his sexuality. “Nobody would have dared say that to me.” It is perhaps surprising that Siffre was so comfortable being out. His father was “born in 1900, an upper-middle-class Nigerian man with patriarchal views. He’d warned me about homosexuals in graphic terms when I was 12 and I remember thinking: ‘You’re eight years too late!’” But then Siffre introduced Lloyd to his family. “And it was my father who just accepted it without a blink. There’s this rubbish about homosexuality being un-African. Bullshit!” Siffre’s prolific spell ended with 1975’s Happy. But there was to be a renaissance. Siffre remembers the night in 1984 he left a pub and headed to his music room. He had recently watched a documentary on apartheid in South Africa, where white soldiers fired at black civilians, but the song he was about to write had a more personal meaning too. “I sat down, played a C chord, threw my head back and sang the first two lines of Something Inside So Strong. I realised I was writing about my life as a gay man and I found myself crying.” That song reached No 4 in the charts when it was finally released in 1987, and was subsequently covered by Kenny Rogers (and, let’s not forget, Barry from EastEnders during the 2014 World Indoor Bowls Championship). It became an anti-apartheid anthem. Siffre performed it in Trafalgar Square for Nelson Mandela’s birthday – after being told that he was not the kind of artist who would “fit in” at the bigger Wembley concert. “My manager was outraged. Incandescent with rage. And I was on the sofa finding it hysterically funny. That didn’t surprise me at all.” There was also a 90s/00s revival for Siffre. He didn’t know much about sampling when Eminem’s people got in touch to request the riff from I Got The … (Beck had been planning to use it for his post-Odelay comeback single before Eminem beat him to it). At first he turned them down. “I got pissed off with the ‘faggots’ and ‘hoes’ [in Eminem’s lyrics]. Because it’s just lazy, cowardly writing. It wasn’t the language that bothered me. I pointed out that my first poetry collection was called Nigger. What I cared about was attacking the oppressed rather than the culprits. Now, some will say, in the context of that song, that’s not exactly what was happening. However, that was my first reaction to it.” Siffre signed off on the sample when they sent him a censored “clean” version, not realising that he was also allowing its use on the alternative versions. But having grown up with modern jazz and the Great American Songbook, he is at least content with his songs being reinterpreted. “That’s what musicians are supposed to do,” he says. Besides, he was never in doubt of his music’s longevity. “I was brought up to have low self-esteem,” he says. “I grew up being told by society that as a homosexual I was a bad, wicked, evil person. However, at the same time, I’m someone who is very much aware of my own genius.” He bursts out laughing at this. “That’s a joke! It’s a joke! But by my first album I knew I was writing good-quality work. And when things have not been as popular as I thought they should have been, I always felt that, eventually, they would be recognised as a good song. Because a good song never dies.” Given his music’s lifespan, does he not feel that his artistic reputation should be stronger? “I would say I’m not very good at selling myself,” he admits. “I grew up believing that real men, whatever real men are, don’t boast. Nowadays, everybody boasts. People will actually come up to you and tell you that they’re compassionate! But I don’t look at it like I was held back or that I should have been a superstar. Although it’s difficult for people to believe, being rich and famous never occurred to me in my plan. I realised by the time of my first album that I was not in the mainstream. So all I actually wanted was for my work to be useful. And For the Children made me realise that, well, the reason why you’re on the outside is because you’re actually trying to be useful.” Perhaps one reason Siffre seems content with his standing is that music always came second to the great love of his life, which is love itself: not just Peter but also a “third husband”, Rudolf “Ruud” Cornelis Arnoldus van Baardwijk, who joined the pair in the mid-90s. The three of them shared an idyllic-sounding life – for some time – in a house halfway up a mountain in south Wales. “I went looking for love,” he says. “But it was only when I met Ruud and we became three that I stopped looking entirely. For nearly 16 years the three of us lived together in a menage a trois. And I realised I’d made the family that I’d been trying to make for the whole of my life.” He continues: “I had the perfect life. And then, in the space of two years, six months and 28 days, they both died.” The exactness of this number is striking. “I’ve always taken love very seriously,” he says softly. “Not just what it is, but how disastrous it would be to be without it.” Siffre spent a long time as Peter’s carer before he died. A stroke in 1998 had left him paralysed down the left side of his body. “I was a little annoyed to find that some people expected me to continue with my ‘brilliant’ career,” says Siffre. “I couldn’t understand how they could possibly think that that’s what I would do. Not out of any noble feelings. We had to be together. Simple as that. And that’s what it was for 14 years. Nothing noble about it at all.” To have two partners die in such a short space of time must have been a horrendous amount of grief to deal with, I say. He pauses. “That’s something I’m still …” Then he trails off. “That’s something that I’m still ... I don’t know what the word is.” Processing? “No, it’s not a matter of processing. Suffering from? I can only say it quite inadequately. Yes, it is very difficult.” I wonder if today’s world is better positioned to appreciate Labi Siffre, both as a masterly musician and a trailblazer for black and gay people. Last year, when Pride was cancelled due to the pandemic, he quietly released a reworked version of his song (Love Is Love Is Love) Why Isn’t Love Enough? An hour-long BBC documentary about his life is expected to air in early 2022 and there are even rumours of a new album too, although he’s a little coy about that. “I am working on … yes, a project … that’s true,” he smiles. It would be a splendid thing indeed if, in the future, more eyes would start to light up at the mention of this magnificent songwriter’s name. imagine … Labi Siffre: This Is My Song will air on BBC One and BBC iPlayer on Monday 14 February, 10.35pmThe coming weeks are decisive for the Conservatives – not just because of the frustrating wait for Sue Gray’s report on Downing Street parties. As we head towards a spring of tax hikes and soaring prices, the prime minister and chancellor will come to a major crossroads in the cost of living crisis. The truth is it couldn’t be a worse time for a government to be paralysed by its own drama. For months, inflation has spiralled out of control. The cost of a weekly food shop is up. Gas and electricity bills are skyrocketing. Everyone is noticing the difference. The government’s answer? Painfully whacking up national insurance contributions for working people and businesses. To know how to fix this, you have to look at why we’re here. It’s partly down to disruption and extra red tape from the government’s patchwork Brexit deal, one that’s left businesses, workers and consumers facing shortages, delays and higher prices. But it’s not just over the last year that Tory failures have taken hold. It’s over the last decade. Their incompetence and inability to plan over the last 11 years for shocks such as the global gas crisis have left us uniquely exposed, a reason many other countries are faring better than us. It’s why last week the International Monetary Fund (IMF) forecast that the UK will grow at half the rate as the advanced economy average over this parliament. The Conservative failure to regulate the energy market, their decision to close gas storage, their achingly slow progress on renewables, nuclear and insulating homes has left bills mounting to unbelievable levels. There is much that could give immediate relief from this – measures Labour has called for over many months. By cutting VAT on home energy bills and spreading some of the costs from suppliers gone bust, you can save most households across the country £200 off their bills. With the Resolution Foundation saying that the average household will feel a hit of £1,200 in April, many will benefit from that. But as fuel poverty rises, lower earners and pensioners will be hit especially hard. That’s why Labour would target extra support to those who need it most, giving those households an extra £400 – that’s £600 off bills in total – enough to cancel out the total expected energy price rise in April. We’d pay for all this with a one-off windfall tax on the profits of North Sea oil and gas producers, who have made a fortune this year, as well as using higher than expected VAT receipts and North Sea oil and gas receipts to keep bills low. The government could provide that relief now. They could start insulating more homes and build more sustainable and secure energy supplies as Labour will do. But distraction and deceit seem worth far more of their time. They don’t have an answer to the cost of living crisis, because they are the cost of living crisis. If you don’t grow the economy as they haven’t, you get trapped in a cycle of high taxes to pay for public services weakened by 10 years of austerity. Not only Labour, but now Tory MPs aplenty and cabinet ministers themselves are calling on Rishi Sunak and Boris Johnson to abandon the damaging national insurance rise. But the Conservatives are now a high tax party, because they have become a low growth party. To add insult to injury, at the very same moment the chancellor is knocking on working people’s doors for more, he’s casually writing off £4.3bn of taxpayer cash lost to fraudsters and organised criminals. There’s no map for economic recovery, no looking beyond the end of another Tory leadership race. To get out of this crisis, and to create a stronger economy, we must plan for the future. We’ve got to grasp the possibility of industry and innovation simmering across the UK, meet our potential and seize hold of tomorrow. Instead, we’re faced with a government out of ideas and out of energy, too worn out by its own games to do the hard work when it matters. Labour wants to tackle the cost of living crisis so people’s everyday economies thrive. We want to stop waste because we respect taxpayers and we respect our public services. That’s why the next Labour government will grab hold of the opportunities and tackle our challenges, to grow our economy, make it stronger and spread prosperity across the UK. Rachel Reeves is a Labour MP and shadow chancellor of the exchequerIn the next week Great Britain’s energy regulator will announce the steepest rise ever in its energy price cap, effectively saddling millions of households with an annual energy bill of close to £2,000. The blow to household finances follows almost six months of record high energy market prices because of the global gas crisis. Despite the deepening gloom facing bill payers, ministers are yet to agree a package of measures to prevent a national energy crisis. After a fourfold surge in energy market prices across Europe, households will pay an average of 54% more for energy this year than in 2020, according to Bank of America. The bank warned that the biggest increases would be felt by Italy and the UK. While European governments have moved to protect households from the full brunt of the global energy crisis, the UK government has remained silent. The UK’s failure to act comes despite desperate calls from groups representing vulnerable households, small businesses and economists, which fear that record high energy bills threaten to unlock economy-wide inflation and a cost of living crisis. Great Britain In Great Britain the next energy price increase is scheduled to be announced on 7 February, and households will be hoping that new support measures can be agreed before it takes effect from 1 April. Potential measures include cutting the 5% rate of VAT on energy bills, or moving the policy costs levied on energy bills to general taxation. More radical ideas include setting up a “stabilisation mechanism” to give top-up payments to energy suppliers depending on the market price. The Labour party has thrown its weight behind a plan to subsidise bills by introducing a windfall tax on the profits made by North Sea oil and gas producers during the crisis. The Treasury is expected to remain tight-lipped on whether households can expect a reprieve until its spring statement in late March. But elsewhere in Europe, multibillion-euro deals are already offering households the reassurance that bill payers in Great Britain are hoping for. The Netherlands The Netherlands, like the UK, is highly reliant on gas for electricity generation and home heating. Unlike the UK, its government took action within weeks of energy markets reaching record highs to provide a multibillion-euro package of measures to protect households and small businesses. The Dutch cabinet agreed in October to cut energy taxes in order to save households an average of €400 (£332.79) a year. In addition, some €150m is being set aside to boost home insulation. A further €500m will be used to compensate small firms in the form of lower energy taxes. The measures, which will cost a total of €3.2bn, took effect from 1 January and will run for a year. France The French government also wasted no time in agreeing a package of measures to soften the blow of rising energy bills, after an increase in fuel duty in 2018 triggered widespread outcry over the cost of living and led to protests by the gilets jaunes (yellow vests). The French government has already cut some electricity taxes to help slow the rise in home energy bills at an estimated cost to the state of €8bn. It will also use its powers to squeeze the state-owned electricity company EDF to lower the cost of electricity by charging well below the market rate for the electricity it generates. EDF warned its investors that it would take an estimated €8.4bn (£7bn) financial hit from the plan. Germany In Germany, the government plans to lower energy bills by reducing the cost of supporting renewable energy projects. From this year, the German government will cut a green surcharge that appears on home energy bills from 6.5 cents per kilowatt-hour to 3.7 cents. The government plans to cover the outstanding levies by using €3.3bn collected by the treasury via carbon taxes. The state has also offered a €130m package of one-time grants to low-income households, which will be paid over the summer when households receive their bills from energy suppliers. Spain Spain’s government was one of the first to take action to protect households against a sharp rise in energy bills. It agreed last September to remove taxes from home energy bills until May, which would instead be paid by enforcing a windfall tax on utilities that were poised to profit from soaring energy market prices. The windfall tax is expected to raise about €2bn to soften the blow on households, and prevent Spain’s gas producers and electricity generators from raking in “unacceptable” profits during the crisis. The policy was seized upon by the UK Labour party as a model that could be applied to North Sea oil and gas producers. Italy Italian households pay some of the highest energy bills in Europe and can expect one of the steepest increases in energy bills because of the global gas crisis. In response, the Italian government has set out a plan to protect households against the rise in gas prices. This includes cutting tax on gas for all consumers and reducing charges that finance subsidies for renewable energy, in addition to extra grants for low-income families. Overall, state support for struggling households is expected to reach €8.5bn through March this year. Sweden In Sweden, the government has set aside 6 billion kronor (£473m) to soften the impact of soaring electricity markets on home energy bills. Earlier this month, it announced plans for winter-bill subsidies of up to 6,000 kronor from December to February to about 1.8 million households whose power consumption tops 2,000 kilowatt-hours a month. Norway Norway’s government set out a series of measures to help bill payers totalling more than 8 billion kroner (£664m) in December, mainly consisting of direct subsidies for households. Earlier this month, the Norwegian government promised to tackle the “socially unjust” effect of soaring energy bills by covering 80% of electricity costs when the market price for electricity is above 70 Norwegian øre (6p) per kilowatt-hour from January to March. Denmark The Danish government remains in talks to decide how much support it can offer towards household bills. So far it has set aside 100 million kroner (£11.1m) to top up an existing scheme that aims to help vulnerable households. But the government is preparing to take action to help households most exposed to the global gas crisis: those who rely on gas heating or gas-fuelled district heating networks. Approximately 800,000 households could receive a tax-free cheque from the government to help pay their energy bills. The exact amount has not yet been agreed by Denmark’s parliament.This week’s challenge is a longstanding rite of passage for amateur astronomers. It is also a quick and easy way to gauge the quality of a night’s observing conditions whenever the constellation of Taurus, the bull, is visible. It involves counting the number of stars in the Pleiades. One of only a handful of star clusters visible to the naked eye, the Pleiades is particularly special because we can resolve some of the stars that makes it up. Another name for the cluster is the seven sisters – but that doesn’t necessarily mean that you can see seven stars. The chart shows the Pleiades’ location, above the shoulder of Taurus, with Alcyone the brightest star in the cluster. Even a casual observer should be able to see five stars from a reasonably dark site. It takes a little effort and patience to see more. On good nights, when conditions are clear and the air is still, up to five more members of the central cluster can be glimpsed. Advanced observers can also find online charts to start hunting the fainter, outlying members of the cluster. But for most, seeing between five and 10 is good.Tilting menus towards plant-based meals significantly cuts the amount of meat eaten, according to new research. The experiments in work and university cafeterias showed making it easier to choose meat-free food can be effective and could be a more acceptable approach than other proposals, such as taxing meat or banning it on certain days. Meat production is an important driver of the climate crisis and red meat in particular is linked to heart disease and other illnesses. Substantial falls in meat consumption are needed in rich nations to curb global heating and ill health. The new research, published in the International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, involved three separate experiments, including the first scientific online study of plant-based menu choices. This used a representative sample of 2,200 UK adults and found that when three of four meal options were meat-based, 12% chose the plant-based option. But when three of four meal options were vegetarian, 48% chose the vegetarian meal. The effect was the same whether the participants were female or male, rich or poor. A similar result was found in an Oxford University cafeteria, which had chosen to switch from a mostly meat-based menu to one that was mostly plant-based. No change was seen in other university cafes during the study, although meat consumption is falling in the UK, by 17% in the last decade. The third experiment was in workplace cafeterias, including warehouses and factories. Sales data showed a 5% swing to plant-based meals in 10 sites, although the analysis was more complicated as the menus varied between the sites. “There is an urgent need to promote more sustainable consumption to protect planetary [and human] health,” said Rachel Pechey, at the University of Oxford, who led the study. “Changing the availability of meat-free options may be a promising intervention. People have quite a strong reaction to any policies targeting meat, and everyone always hates taxes.” “We don’t want to be telling anyone what to do,” she said. “But we know that how our environment is shaped helps influence our decisions, so it can make more sustainable choices an easier choice for people.” Tim Lord, at the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change, said changes at the level suggested by the study could – if replicated across society – deliver the 20% cut in meat-eating that the UK’s Climate Change Committee says is needed by 2035. “By foregrounding the low-carbon choice it is possible to drive significant change while allowing those who want to select a higher carbon option the ability to do so,” he said. “It also illustrates a broader point about behaviour change and net zero, namely that making it easy for consumers is crucial. This is as true of home decarbonisation as it is of diet – at present, getting a heat pump is a lot harder than getting a gas boiler.” In October, the government published a study on how behaviour change can reduce meat eating and flying but withdrew it within a few hours, saying “we have no plans whatsoever to dictate consumer behaviour”. Other studies have found that simple environmental messages on menus can double plant-based choices, as can placing these options higher up menus and describing them in ways that highlight their flavour, rather than the lack of meat. Pechey and her colleagues are now examining the impact of labelling the green footprint of meals on menus. Pechey said: “There are strong social and cultural norms around meat-eating, and people do tend to over-choose the meat options. If you’ve just got one vegetarian option on your menu, that could be perceived as the dish choice just for the vegetarians. But if you start having more options, it might start giving the idea that these options are in demand and things that other people choose.” A government-commissioned food strategy published in 2021 called for big cuts in meat consumption, while a powerful coalition of the UK’s health professions called in 2020 for a climate tax on food with a heavy environmental impact by 2025, unless the industry had taken voluntary action on the impact of its products.Gareth Southgate is hoping to help lead what could be the UK’s biggest ever appreciation party during the Queen’s jubilee celebrations. The England manager – alongside celebrities including Ross Kemp, Gary Lineker and Levi Roots – is aiming to encourage millions of people to take part in neighbourhood parties across the country in June celebrating community spirit and the Queen on what they have dubbed National Thank You Day. It would need to surpass the 10 million party-goers who marked the Queen’s first 25 years on the throne in 1977 and similar numbers who celebrated the marriage of Charles and Diana in 1981 to stand a chance of entering the record books. The plan is backed by hundreds of organisations including the NHS, the Football Association, the Scouts, and the Church of England. Celebrity backers, also including Prue Leith, Alan Titchmarsh and Lorraine Kelly, will be raising the event’s profile in the runup to Sunday 5 June, the final day of the Queen’s official jubilee celebrations. Kemp, who made his name on the BBC soap EastEnders, said the day was an opportunity to thank each other as well as the Queen. “It’s our chance to say a great big thank you to the Queen for 70 years of service, but also to each other – the people in our own lives – families, streets and communities, who we rely on every day,” he said. “The people whose support we couldn’t do without.” He urged people to get together on the day in unprecedented numbers. “Make sure everyone is invited – rope in the neighbours, ask people from the next street over, get the local band to play.” Peter Stewart, executive director of the Eden Project and the Big Jubilee Lunch, said the day would bring people together. “There are more reasons than ever to get together this year and we’re really excited to be bringing the spirit of the jubilee into every neighbourhood with the Big Jubilee Lunch this June,” he said. National Thank You Day, which started last year, is organised by a coalition, ranging from grassroots community groups to some of the UK’s best-known institutions. It is supported by the national lottery community fund.The Bank of England is poised to raise interest rates on Thursday amid growing concern over the pressure on households from high inflation in Britain’s cost of living crisis. City economists widely expect the central bank to increase its key rate from 0.25% to 0.5% in response to inflation hitting levels not seen for almost 30 years, with financial markets suggesting a 90% chance of an increase in borrowing costs. With pressure mounting on households from soaring energy bills and the rising cost of a weekly shop, several leading analysts expect that the Bank’s nine-member monetary policy committee (MPC) will vote unanimously for a rise in rates. It comes after the official inflation rate reached 5.4% in December, the highest level since March 1992, driven by soaring gas and electricity prices and the higher cost of food, clothes and footwear. The Bank has warned that inflation could peak at close to 6% by April, three times the 2% target rate set by the government. However, with the economy under pressure since the emergence of the Omicron variant of coronavirus, an increase in borrowing costs is likely to compound difficulties facing businesses in the hardest-hit sectors. Martin Beck, the chief economic adviser to the EY Item Club, said the Bank’s rate setters would place concerns about high inflation above the impact of Covid-19 on businesses and consumers. It comes after the Bank unexpectedly raised rates in December despite fears over the initial spread of the Omicron wave. “The MPC’s decision to raise bank rate in December regardless indicates that it placed less weight on the virus. And recent developments are likely to reinforce this stance. Covid-19 infections peaked at the start of the January and have been on a declining trend since,” Beck said. Although visits to high streets and spending in pubs and restaurants fell sharply in the run-up to Christmas, economic activity has increased in recent weeks as consumers gradually return to socialising and working in town and city centres. The government dropped all plan B restrictions in England last week, while analysts said the impact of the Omicron variant on the UK economy appeared to have been relatively modest. Steffan Ball, the chief UK economist at Goldman Sachs, said the MPC would probably vote 9-0 to raise borrowing costs on Thursday, and could lift interest rates to as high as 1.25% by November this year. “We now expect the Bank of England to hike in back-to-back meetings through May, in order to demonstrate to markets and businesses that the MPC is serious about the inflation target,” he said.An NHS doctor killed his partner’s father and almost caused the deaths of her and her mother by giving them a poison that is popular among murderers, a London court has ruled. He poisoned the trio with thallium then tried to cover his tracks, did not deploy his medical knowledge to help his partner and lied about what happened, the judge found. The ruling has been handed down by Mr Justice Williams in the family court at the end of a case between the doctor and his now former partner over the arrangements for the care of their child. The case is highly unusual legally because the medic has been found to have committed the killing in a civil court, on the balance of probabilities of the evidence, rather than in a criminal court, in which a jury has to be sure beyond all reasonable doubt. “It is truly horrifying that any doctor who has signed the Hippocratic oath would be responsible for killing someone else and attempting to kill other people,” said Simon Bruce, a senior family law specialist solicitor who was part of the woman’s legal team.” While most cases that come before the family court involve injuries, harassment and domestic abuse, Bruce added, “the killing of the child’s grandfather, and the attempted killing of the mother and grandmother, are off the scale of unusualness”. The Guardian is unable to disclose the doctor’s name because in the judgment the judge ordered that his identity, the mother of his child and their son had to remain anonymous. However, Williams said in his judgment that the poisoner was a Bulgarian-born doctor who had moved to the UK in the late 2000s. The medic had a relationship with the woman, a bookkeeper and fellow Bulgarian who had been granted British citizenship, and their child was born in 2010. The court found that he added thallium to a pot of coffee when he, his then partner, their then one-year-old child and her parents were on holiday in Bulgaria in September 2012. His partner and her parents drank from the pot while the doctor had instant coffee instead. The child’s grandfather died two days later. The two women became seriously ill but survived. The doctor and his partner separated soon afterwards. The Bulgarian police have made inquiries into the poisoning and interviewed the medic, and the Metropolitan police have also been notified. But he has not been charged with any criminal offence. “The circumstances around my father’s death and the thought of how he had suffered from the effects of the poison in his last hours will haunt me forever. No one could possible imagine the excruciating pain my mother and I felt as a result of the poisoning in the first six weeks after we had been poisoned,” the woman told the Guardian. “Every day I suffer tremendously bearing the thought that I brought a murderer to my parents’ house and that my dad died as a direct result of this. What I have been through is a nightmare.” The doctor began legal action in 2018 in an attempt to gain access to his son after he and his partner separated. She argued that he should not have contact because he had poisoned her parents and herself. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the US say that thallium, a heavy metal, “is tasteless and odourless and has been used by murderers as a difficult to detect poison”. After a five-day hearing last year, Williams ruled in favour of the mother. He found that on the balance of probabilities her claim that he had poisoned her and her parents was correct. During the hearing the doctor’s former partner told how he insisted they leave Bulgaria for Britain when the debilitating effects of the poisoning were starting to appear. She said that once back in the UK, he did little to help her get medical help, despite her hair falling out and her suffering sudden weight loss. It was later determined that the woman, her mother and her father had all been poisoned. In what the judge said was a ruse to evade detection for what he had done, the doctor told fellow medics seeking to identify the source of her sickness that she may be suffering from Guillain-Barré syndrome, a rare and serious nerve condition. In his judgment Williams several times noted that the doctor had told lies in the different accounts he had given of events surrounding the poisoning. His evidence during the hearing was “rather fractured” and at time “felt like a construct” and he was “insincere” when answering questions, the judge noted. “Overall, I found him to be a quite unsatisfactory witness,” he added. He also noted: “The father as a qualified medical doctor would have had the intellectual capacity to determine the amounts of thallium that would be required to deliver a sufficient dose to kill an individual without delivering such a significant dose as to make it obvious to the consumer of the drink that it had been contaminated.” “At a time when the mother was frantic and had come to believe that she was poisoned, his failure to do anything of substance on the medical front is almost inexplicable save by prior knowledge of the causes,” he added. The doctor is not currently working. The Guardian sought his response to the court judgment. A statement issued by Delphine Philip Law, his solicitors, said: “He vehemently denies the mother’s allegations that he poisoned her or her parents. He stated that the court took inadequate account of the fact that there was no direct evidence to corroborate [his former partner’s] allegations.”Janet Jackson 9pm, Sky Documentaries “When you have the Jackson surname, there’s a certain microscope that they want to use.” The youngest Jackson sibling, Janet, is correct, but she now tells her own story in this four-part documentary. Hearing one of the most successful recording artists in the world explain her complicated relationship with her abusive father is, at times, frustrating (another female cultural icon whose life was dictated by men), but it contextualises events in her life, from being denied college dreams to forging her independence with albums Control and Rhythm Nation 1814. Oh, and then there’s Nipplegate to discuss. Recorded over five years, it’s a compelling watch. Hollie Richardson The Responder 9pm, BBC One How do you solve a problem like a big bag of drugs? For police response officer Chris Carson (Martin Freeman), doing the right thing and handing it in isn’t as easy as it sounds – especially when creepy Carl (Ian Hart) makes an offer he might not be able to refuse. The penultimate episode airs tomorrow, and the finale follows on Wednesday. HR The Great Cookbook Challenge With Jamie Oliver 8pm, Channel 4 The winners of cookery competitions tend to then write books; this new contest simplifies the process by making its hopefuls pitch a book from the outset, with publication by Penguin as the grand prize. Week one requires the making of a single dish that summarises each would-be food bible’s concept. Jack Seale The Nilsen Files 9pm, BBC Two This three-part series makes a point of shifting the focus from serial killer Dennis Nilsen on to his victims. Part two casts a critical eye over his Old Bailey trial in 1983, where a last-minute plea change required the prosecution to find witnesses who had previously survived dangerous encounters with Nilsen. Could he have been caught earlier? Graeme Virtue Race and Medical Experiments: What’s the Truth? 10pm, Channel 4 How has a long history of mistrust of medical science affected the vaccine uptake among Black communities? In this chilling but vital documentary, Seyi Rhodes investigates by revisiting the Tuskegee syphilis study in Alabama (Black men were just observed rather than treated), and the horrifying case of gynaecologist J Marion Sims, who repeatedly performed surgery on Black women to “perfect” his work. HR Euphoria 10.05pm, Sky Atlantic Another week, another disastrous party for the Euphoria teens. Thanks to a guest appearance from Nate, Cassie drinks her feelings at Maddy’s birthday. Not to be outdone, Cal goes on a bender of his own. Thankfully all the melodrama is offset by quieter moments, particularly in Jules and Elliot’s blossoming friendship. Henry Wong Film choice Lady Macbeth (William Oldroyd, 2016), 11.50pm, BBC Two Florence Pugh first showed what a major talent she is in William Oldroyd’s dark 2016 drama, set in the north-east of England in the 19th century. She stars as the wilful young Katherine, married off to the son of a mine owner, whose feelings of neglect and humiliation push her into an affair with groomsman Sebastian (Cosmo Jarvis) – which nothing will stop her from enjoying. Interesting racial subtexts (a Black maid is rendered literally voiceless) add depth to a passionate, potent work. Simon WardellThe highly transmissible Omicron variant of the Sars-CoV-2 virus – the most common form of which is known as BA.1 – now accounts for nearly all of the coronavirus infections globally. Though Covid cases have already peaked in some countries, scientists are now tracking a rise in cases caused by a close cousin of Omicron known as BA.2, which is starting to outcompete BA.1 in parts of Europe and Asia. The following is what we know so far about the new subvariant. ‘Stealth’ subvariant Globally, BA.1 accounted for 98.8% of sequenced cases submitted to the public virus tracking database GISAID as of 25 January. But several countries are reporting recent increases in BA.2, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). In addition to BA.1 and BA.2, the WHO lists two other subvariants under the Omicron umbrella: BA.1.1.529 and BA.3. All are closely related genetically, but each features mutations that could alter how they behave. Trevor Bedford, a computational virologist at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Centre in the US, has been tracking the evolution of Sars-CoV-2. On Friday he wrote on Twitter that BA.2 represents roughly 82% of cases in Denmark, 9% in the UK and 8% in the US. He based his analysis on sequencing data from the GISAID database and case counts from the Our World in Data project at the University of Oxford in the UK. The BA.1 version of Omicron has been somewhat easier to track than prior variants. That is because BA.1 is missing one of three target genes used in a common PCR test. Cases showing this pattern were assumed by default to be caused by BA.1. BA.2, sometimes known as a “stealth” subvariant, does not have the same missing target gene. Instead, scientists are monitoring it the same way they have prior variants, including Delta, by tracking the number of virus genomes submitted to public databases such as GISAID. As with other variants, an infection with BA.2 can be detected by coronavirus home tests kits, though they cannot indicate which variant is responsible, experts say. More transmissible? Some early reports indicate that BA.2 may be even more infectious than the already extremely contagious BA.1, but there is no evidence so far that it is more likely to evade vaccine protection. Danish health officials estimate that BA.2 may be 1.5 times more transmissible than BA.1, based on preliminary data, though it likely does not cause more severe disease. In England, a preliminary analysis of contact tracing from 27 December through to 11 January by the UK Health Security Agency suggests that household transmission is higher among contacts of people infected with BA.2 (13.4%) compared with other Omicron cases (10.3%). The agency found no evidence of a difference in vaccine effectiveness. A critical question was whether people who were infected in the BA.1 wave would be protected from BA.2, said Dr Egon Ozer, an infectious disease expert at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago. That had been a concern in Denmark, where some places that saw high case counts of BA.1 infections were reporting rising cases of BA.2, he said. If prior BA.1 infection did not protect against BA.2, “this could be sort of a two-humped camel kind of wave”, Ozer said. “It’s too early to know if that will happen.” The good news, he said, was that vaccines and boosters still “keep people out of the hospital and keep people from dying”. Where is BA.2 most prominent? Prof Seshadri Vasan, a Covid-19 vaccine researcher from Australia’s Science Agency, the CSIRO, said analysis of GISAID showed that as of 27 January, 10,811 BA.2 sequences had been reported from around the world including Australia (22 sequences), but 90% of the sequences were from three countries: Denmark (8,357), India (711) and the UK (607). “So far, evidence from our colleagues in Denmark show that while it could spread faster, there is no evidence of increased severity,” he said. “Therefore it is important to keep calm and continue existing measures such as getting ourselves the vaccinated, including the booster dose, and following social distancing, masks and local guidelines.”Spotify is adding a message that will direct listeners to correct Covid-19 information as controversy over misinformation shared on Joe Rogan’s podcast continues to grow, with the streamer losing billions in market value and more musicians withdrawing their music. On Sunday, the CEO of Spotify, Daniel Ek, released an official statement setting out the streaming platform’s plan to tackle misinformation. New content advisories will direct listeners of any podcast that discusses coronavirus to a dedicated website that “provides easy access to data-driven facts, up-to-date information as shared by scientists, physicians, academics and public health authorities around the world, as well as links to trusted sources”. Spotify’s rules for its creators have also been made public for the first time, with users told they cannot publish “content that promotes dangerous false or dangerous deceptive medical information that may cause offline harm or poses a direct threat to public health”. Examples include calling Covid “a hoax or not real” or “encouraging people to purposely get infected with Covid-19 in order to build immunity to it”. Users who break the rule could see their content removed from the platform and repeat offenders could be suspended or banned. “You’ve had a lot of questions over the last few days about our platform policies and the lines we have drawn between what is acceptable and what is not. We have had rules in place for many years but admittedly, we haven’t been transparent around the policies that guide our content more broadly,” Ek’s statement said. Ek wrote that the content advisories will roll out “around the world in the coming days.” “To our knowledge, this content advisory is the first of its kind by a major podcast platform,” he added. Rogan, a comedian and host of The Joe Rogan Experience, has sparked controversy for repeatedly spreading misinformation about Covid on his show, including the conspiracy theory that hospitals are financially incentivised to record Covid as cause of death. He has also promoted the use of ivermectin, an anti-parasitic treatment used mainly on animals, to treat Covid symptoms. It has not been proved to be effective at preventing or treating Covid. Last week, musician Neil Young asked his management to remove his music from Spotify, citing misinformation on Rogan’s podcast: “I am doing this because Spotify is spreading false information about vaccines – potentially causing death to those who believe the disinformation being spread by them … They can have Rogan or Young. Not both.” After removing his music, Spotify said it regretted “Neil’s decision … but hope to welcome him back soon”. Their shares dropped 6% over two days, then recovered slightly – before musician Joni Mitchell announced she would also remove her music from the platform. “Irresponsible people are spreading lies that are costing people their lives,” Mitchell wrote. “I stand in solidarity with Neil Young and the global scientific and medical communities on this issue.” Prince Harry and Meghan Markle, who signed a multi-year podcast partnership with Spotify for their company, Archewell Audio, said in a statement that they had expressed concerns about misinformation to Spotify last year. “We have continued to express our concerns to Spotify to ensure changes to its platform are made to help address this public health crisis. We look to Spotify to meet this moment and are committed to continuing our work together as it does,” a spokesperson for the couple said. As of Sunday, Spotify had lost more than US$2bn (£1.5bn) in market value and removed more than 20,000 episodes of podcasts that were related to Covid-19, in accordance with its “detailed content policies”. Calls on social media for people to cancel their Spotify subscriptions have intensified over the last week. The company has not disclosed how many users have left, but a message from its customer support team to subscribers said they were “getting a lot of contacts so may be slow to respond”. Spotify acquired Rogan’s show in 2020, in a deal worth more than $100m. The Joe Rogan Experience is now Spotify’s most popular podcast and one of the biggest in the world.Top story: Hikes expected from Thursday onwards Hello, Warren Murray here bearing tidings of Monday. The Bank of England is poised to raise interest rates this Thursday amid growing concern over high inflation and Britain’s cost of living crisis. Economists expect an increase from 0.25% to 0.5%. Official inflation reached 5.4% in December, the highest level since March 1992. The Bank has warned it could peak at close to 6% by April, three times the 2% target rate set by the government. Steffan Ball from Goldman Sachs said the Bank’s monetary policy committee might increase interest rates to as high as 1.25% by November this year. “We now expect the Bank of England to hike in back-to-back meetings through May.” An increase in borrowing costs is likely to complicate businesses’ recovery from Covid. Economic activity has increased in recent weeks as consumers gradually return to socialising and working in town and city centres, and plan B restrictions in England were dropped. There are concerns that young people who lost their jobs during the pandemic in the UK have returned to less secure work, often in gig economy roles. * * * Johnson barrels along – Westminster begins the week awaiting the Sue Gray report on No 10 parties, alongside which police inquiries continue. A beleaguered Boris Johnson will try to regain control of the agenda – today he is due to announce plans for a “Brexit freedoms” bill to make it easier to rip up EU regulations and protections. The prime minister is expected to visit Ukraine with the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, early this week, and the levelling-up white paper is scheduled for publication on Wednesday. Whitehall sources said they also expected developments this week on help for families struggling with the cost of energy bills. Dominic Cummings told NYMag on Sunday that it was his “duty to get rid” of Johnson as prime minister, describing it as “sort of like fixing the drains”. * * * Doctor was fatal poisoner, court finds – An NHS doctor killed his partner’s father and almost caused the deaths of her and her mother by giving them coffee containing the heavy metal poison thallium, the family court has ruled. Mr Justice Williams made the finding in a case between the doctor and his now ex-partner over care arrangements for their child. The case is highly unusual legally because the medic has been found to have committed the killing in a civil court, on the balance of probabilities of the evidence, rather than in a criminal court, in which a jury has to be sure beyond all reasonable doubt. The judge ordered the parties’ identities be kept anonymous but said the poisoner was a Bulgarian-born doctor who moved to the UK in the late 2000s. The doctor is not currently working and has not been criminally charged. A statement issued by Delphine Philip Law, his solicitors, said he “vehemently denies” the poisonings and “he stated that the court took inadequate account of the fact that there was no direct evidence to corroborate [his former partner’s] allegations”. * * * Vaccine waiver for NHS staff? – Hospitals in England could continue to employ unvaccinated NHS healthcare workers beyond the April deadline if not doing so risks leaving them dangerously understaffed, the sector regulator, the CQC, has indicated. Sajid Javid is planning to drop the requirement that health and care staff must be vaccinated, the Telegraph has reported. Spotify has said it will direct listeners to accurate Covid-19 information as uproar over the misinformation shared on Joe Rogan’s podcast continued to grow, with the streamer losing billions in market value and more musicians withdrawing their music. * * * ‘Rape trials will only get longer’ – The typical delay between a rape offence and the end of the resulting criminal case rose to 1,000 days in 2021 for the first time, figures show. The data also shows 576 rape cases waiting more than a year to come to court by the end of September 2021, well over double the average of the previous five years. Labour says the situation is getting worse every year. Jo Sidhu QC, chair of the Criminal Bar Association, said: “Rape trials are only going to get longer unless government puts the resources in place to ensure we have enough prosecutors and defenders to tackle the backlogs.” A spokesperson said the government was “overhauling our entire response to rape”, including boosting funding for support services to £185m, recruiting more police, introducing new justice scorecards and increasing court capacity “so victims get the justice they deserve quicker”. * * * Southgate invests in Thank You Day – Gareth Southgate is hoping to help lead what could be the UK’s biggest ever appreciation party during the Queen’s jubilee celebrations. The England manager – alongside celebrities including Ross Kemp, Gary Lineker and Levi Roots – is aiming to encourage millions of people to take part in neighbourhood parties in June celebrating community spirit and the Queen on what they have dubbed National Thank You Day. Ten million partygoers marked the Queen’s first 25 years on the throne in 1977 and similar numbers celebrated the marriage of Charles and Diana in 1981. Celebrity backers, also including Prue Leith, Alan Titchmarsh and Lorraine Kelly, will be raising the event’s profile in the run-up to Sunday 5 June, the final day of the Queen’s official jubilee celebrations. Today in Focus podcast: Who will answer for Grenfell? As the Grenfell inquiry heads towards its concluding stages, politicians will be called to account for their part in the deadly fire. Our social affairs correspondent Robert Booth has been watching on throughout. Lunchtime read: The cost of living, abroad In the next week, Great Britain’s energy regulator will announce the steepest rise ever in its energy price cap, effectively saddling millions of households with an annual energy bill of close to £2,000. While the UK government has remained silent, European governments have moved to protect households from the full brunt of the global energy crisis. Sport Rafael Nadal described his Australian Open triumph as his greatest comeback after he recovered from two sets down against Daniil Medvedev to win a record-breaking 21st grand slam title. West Indies won the T20 international series 3-2 as England failed to chase down 179 in game five, after Jason Holder saw off the tourists with the final four wickets in as many balls. England’s Six Nations plans have suffered fresh disruption with the Harlequins centre Joe Marchant having returned a positive Covid test. Tom Pidcock made becoming the first Briton to win the men’s elite UCI cyclo-cross world title look easy as he broke away for a comfortable victory in Fayetteville, Arkansas. Rayo Vallecano has defended its decision to hire disgraced coach Carlos Santiso to take charge of its women’s team, despite being aware of a leaked recording in which he encourages his staff to find a girl to gang-rape to help team bonding. A man in his 20s has been arrested on suspicion of rape and assault, police have said, after Manchester United suspended the footballer Mason Greenwood. And the Los Angeles Rams rallied from a 10-point deficit in the fourth quarter in a narrow 20-17 victory over the San Francisco 49ers to book a spot in next month’s Super Bowl against the Cincinnati Bengals, who will play for the NFL title for the first time in 33 years after beating the Kansas City Chiefs 27-24. Business Asian stocks have followed Wall Street higher today – benchmarks in Tokyo and Hong Kong advanced while Sydney declined. Markets in mainland China, South Korea and Taiwan were closed with the arrival of the lunar new year. Hong Kong and south-east Asia are due to close later in the week. Futures trading suggests the FTSE could open 40 to 50 points higher. The pound is worth $1.341 and €1.201 at time of writing. The papers Leading the front page of our Guardian newspaper today: “Johnson tries to take back control amid party outrage”. Also on the cover: “Thousands still have no power as new storm hits”. It comes in the wake of Storm Malik, as northern parts of the UK brace for winds of up to 90mph with the arrival of Storm Corrie. Boris Johnson wants to get out of the gate running (from partygate) this week and there are those ready to help. “Boris: we will go faster on Brexit freedoms”, says the Mail, while the Express has “Boris vows to ‘unleash benefits of Brexit’”. The i pricks the balloon: “PM’s policy blitz fightback not enough to silence critics”. The Metro says “PM facing a tax mutiny” after Rishi Sunak and the PM said the rise in national insurance contributions would not be cancelled. The Times leads on “Burglars go unpunished as just 5% of cases solved” while the Telegraph has a good scoop: “U-turn on mandatory jabs for NHS workers”. And with interest rates expected to rise, the top story in the Financial Times is “Head of £1.3tn wealth fund warns inflation will sap returns for years”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.The New Zealand government has defended its strict quarantine system known as MIQ after a pregnant New Zealand journalist said she had to turn to the Taliban for help after her requests to get back to her own country were rejected. Charlotte Bellis discovered she was pregnant a short time after gaining international attention in 2021 for questioning Taliban leaders about their treatment of women and girls. She is due to give birth in May. She resigned from Al Jazeera in November and had no choice but to leave Qatar, where sex outside marriage is illegal. She and her partner, Jim Huylebroek, moved to his native Belgium. But she could not stay long, she wrote in a column published in the New Zealand Herald on Saturday, because she was not a resident. She said the only other place the couple had visas to live was Afghanistan. She said she had sent 59 documents to New Zealand authorities in Afghanistan but they rejected her application for an emergency return. New Zealand’s Covid-19 response minister, Chris Hipkins, said on Monday there were places in MIQ for people with special circumstances. “No one’s saying there is not,” he said. “I understand she wanted to return on a specific date and that officials reached out to her for more information shortly after looking at her application. The emergency allocation criteria includes a requirement to travel to New Zealand within the next 14 days. Ms Bellis indicated she did not intend to travel until the end of February and has been encouraged by MIQ to consider moving her plans forward. “I understand officials have also since invited her to apply for another emergency category. I encourage her to take these offers seriously. “I also understand she was offered New Zealand consular assistance twice since she returned to Afghanistan in early December.” The emergency allocation criteria included pregnancy, he said. “This includes for medical treatment if a mother is overseas and cannot get the required treatment where they are, and allowing people to urgently return to New Zealand to provide critical care for a dependent, such as their spouse or partner who is pregnant.” Speaking to RNZ on Monday morning, Bellis said she signed up for an MIQ spot via the medical treatment pathway because it was how pregnant women were told to apply. She was then asked to reapply under a category designed for New Zealanders in a location or a situation where there was a serious risk to their safety, she said. “What does that say to women, does that mean there is no pathway for pregnant women? We signed up to the right one, the medical treatment is the correct one.” She told RNZ the authorities had all the information but their application was met with “clauses and technicalities and confusion”. “First it was ‘we denied you because it’s more than 14 days’. Then it was ‘you don’t meet a threshold for medical stuff’, now it’s something else. Why so many excuses and clauses? You have all the information.” New Zealand has managed to keep the spread of the virus to a minimum during the pandemic and has reported just 52 Covid deaths among its population of 5 million. But the requirement that even returning citizens spend 10 days isolating in quarantine hotels run by the military has led to a backlog of thousands of people vying for spots. Hipkins said the border framework had served New Zealand “exceptionally well” at keeping those within the country safe and preventing health services from becoming swamped. The government has signalled there will be changes at the border soon.Waddesdon Manor, Buckinghamshire The chateau-style manor house is closed until spring, but the Victorian gardens are open every day with their aviary, grotto and outdoor cafes. Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild created the gardens when he began building Waddesdon Manor in 1874. The grounds are now a galanthophile’s paradise featuring 120,000 snowdrops. By March, the daffodil valley will be a lake of yellow; three-quarters of a million daffodil bulbs have been planted across the estate. Blue scillas and golden aconites are already budding under tall, bare trees. Plenty of evergreens too, including fan palms around the parterre and miles of neatly-clipped hedges. The grounds are open Wednesday-Sunday from 2 February, £13.20/£6.60 for adults/children, free for NT, RHS, Historic Houses and Art Fund members, waddesdon.org.uk Mottisfont Abbey, Hampshire The jasmine-scented Winter Garden at Mottisfont flames with scarlet dogwood stems and bright pink cyclamen; the low sun shines through the loose, papery bark of Chinese red birches and makes it gleam like amber. A February stream of blue Glory of the Snow under the pollarded lime trees echoes the trout-filled River Test nearby, where swans glide past glades of naturalised snowdrops. Waves of early spring flowers, including masses of different narcissi, start blooming from March. Living at Mottisfont from 1934, Maud Russell’s eclectic circle of friends included Ian Fleming, Rex Whistler and Russian emigre artist Boris Anrep. Anrep, whose work includes the mosaic floors of London’s National Gallery, created the mosaic angel with Maud’s face near the entrance to the house under a tangle of wisteria. It’s a well-signed 1¼ miles’ walk across fields from Mottisfont &amp; Dunbridge station to the abbey, past nesting rooks, an orchard and a 12th-century church. Open daily, £16 adults, £8 children, free for National Trust members, nationaltrust.org.uk Ardkinglas Woodland Garden, Argyll Home to one of Britain’s tallest trees, a 64m silver fir, the arboretum at Ardkinglas has red squirrels in the garden all year round, views across misty Loch Fyne from the bank at the top of the garden and walks across the wider estate. This is the area where some of recent BBC drama A Very British Scandal was filmed, and Inveraray Castle is just across the water. Spidery yellow witch hazel blooms from January, followed by the first pale purple rhododendron flowers and the earliest primroses on south-facing banks above the ruined, mossy walls of the old mill. By March, the garden is full of birdsong, rhododendron blossom and the honey-apricot smell of osmanthus, an evergreen Chinese shrub with delicate white flowers. Ardkinglas have recently renovated their garden paths to take out steep steps. You can warm up by a fire at the nearby Cairndow Stagecoach Inn with a choice of more than 40 whiskies, Loch Fyne scallops, or haggis, neeps and tatties. Garden open year round, dawn to dusk. £5/£2 for adults/children (50% off until end of February) ardkinglas.com Myddelton House, London This Enfield gem in the suburbs north of London has a rocky little valley at the far end, which is covered in snowdrops each winter, and a sloping meadow nearby that becomes a sea of spring daffs. Botanist EA Bowles lived at Myddelton House all his life and was a great collector of plants, including dozens of crocuses and a corkscrew hazel. He also salvaged architectural features like the old Enfield market cross, which stands in the middle of the rose garden, and two lead sculptures of ostriches. The gardens are 15 minutes’ walk from Turkey Street station and a short stroll along Bull’s Cross from Forty Hall, another great place for a winter walk and cuppa. Open daily, free, visitleevalley.org.uk RHS Harlow Carr, Harrogate, North Yorkshire There’s a faint smell of violets from the miniature thickets of dwarf irises, which flower from late January to early March at Harlow Carr, and a subtle fragrance of vanilla from the flowering sweet box. Hellebores hang their green and lilac heads under slender crimson stems of Siberian dogwood along the winter walk. Nearby the lake steams gently in pale sunshine and two wicker hares are boxing on the lawn. Walking from Harrogate railway station, you can stroll through Valley Gardens, a pretty winter park in its own right. For a hot drink and a cherry-stuffed fat rascal, there’s a branch of Bettys tea rooms at the gardens. Open daily, £8.95/£4.75 for car-free adults/children (£12.95/£6.55 with a car), free for RHS members, rhs.org.uk Newstead Abbey, Nottinghamshire The poet Byron lived from 1808 to 1814 at Newstead Abbey, once home to 12th-century monks. With snowdrops in the woods, peacocks wandering past lakes and waterfalls, ruined archways and topiary, the grounds are dramatic. The heather is already blooming among the bright green harts’ tongues in the fernery; there are stepping stones and cascades in the Japanese garden. Interesting trees are everywhere: a gnarled weeping birch or moss-rooted beech and, particularly good for winter, the grounds are full of flourishing evergreens: conical box trees, tunnels of yew, an ancient lakeside cedar, miles of rhododendrons (already budding abundantly) and variegated hollies in the little Italian garden behind the abbey. Nearby, Byron’s epitaph for his beloved dog Boatswain is carved under an urn. Gardens open daily, £6 per car or £2 for walkers and cyclists, newsteadabbey.org.uk Powis Castle Gardens, Powys From Welshpool’s bunting-strung High Street, you can walk up through the steep landscaped park, with herds of antlered deer, to arrive at the red, gritstone walls of Powis Castle. First built on a high, rocky outcrop in the 13th century, the castle now has celebrated terraced gardens with views that stretch as far as the Shropshire hills. Urn-topped balustrades and dancing shepherdesses line the walkways; an Ozymandian stone foot stands in the wooded wilderness with views through bare trees back up to the castle terraces, patrolled by jewel-bright peacocks. In the Edwardian formal garden, there are century-old lichen-covered apple trees between box-hedge arches and topiaried yew. Garden and cafe are open daily until 18 February, £10/£5 for adults/children, nationaltrust.org.uk Dawyck Botanic Garden, Borders A leafy regional offshoot of Edinburgh’s Royal Botanic Garden, Dawyck was the UK’s first carbon-neutral botanic garden, with the fast-flowing burn powering hydroelectricity. February snowdrops form a ghostly mist over the gently-sloping banks. Dawyck’s geographically-themed areas, among wooded hills, showcase a global collection of plants: there are Chinese dawn redwoods, Serbian spruce trees, Korean arborvitae and Chilean plum yews. There’s also a trail of rare Scottish plants, including the woolly willow that was threatened by overgrazing. The cafe does seasonal soups and scones plus sweets like triple-chocolate orange brownies. International fungi researchers are drawn to Dawyck’s wild, ferny Cryptogamic Sanctuary, an area of semi-native woodland sporting hundreds of species of mushroom among mosses, lichens and liverworts. Open daily from 1 February, £7.20 adults/free for under 16s, rbge.org.uk Audley End, Essex This English Heritage flagship stately in rural north Essex has interiors by neoclassical architect Robert Adam (several of which feature as locations in The Crown) and big, picnic-ready grounds by Capability Brown. Water birds wander up from the widened River Cam and you can buy duck food in the shop. An organic walled garden with a vine house, evergreen shrubberies, cloud-form topiary and snowdrops under the linden walk all add to the winter interest. The tearoom’s changing menu offers dishes like chickpea and aubergine dhal; there’s Saffron Walden ice cream too, made just down the lane. Open weekends and February half term, then Wednesday to Sunday, free for English Heritage members, £19/£11.40 for adults/children, english-heritage.org.uk Winkworth Arboretum, Surrey The National Trust’s only arboretum is already a profusion of colour in early spring. Extraordinarily tall trees of pink camellias tower over the flowering paths in February and March, and glades of daffs and primroses brighten the steep muddy walkways down to a reed-fringed lake. Bus 42 from Godalming stops outside the gates and the café is open until 3pm to warm up after a woodland walk. Open daily, free for NT members, £11/£5.50 for adults/children, nationaltrust.org.ukQ I need advice on extending the lease on my flat. I have owned the flat for sometime and am ashamed to say I have done nothing about the lease as I didn’t realise it was a problem until I started looking for a new mortgage. I share the freehold with the lady who owns the flat upstairs. Does this make it any easier? I have no idea how to go about this and all I hear is how it is going to be incredibly expensive. Please help. RS A All you hear about the lease extension process being incredibly expensive is not necessarily true. If all the other freeholder owners – or, in your case, the other co-freeholder – agree to your proposed lease extension, according to Niki Adkins, an associate and leasehold specialist at Frettens solicitors, the only expenses involved are legal costs and Land Registry fees. “As you would effectively be granting a lease extension to yourself as freeholder,” Adkins says, “there would usually be no premium (price) payable for the extension.” So yes, if you can get the agreement of the lady upstairs to extend your lease, it does make it easier and simpler. If she won’t agree, you can still extend your lease but the process is more complicated and you could end up having to pay a premium for the extension in the same way as you would if your were just a leaseholder (so not a part-freeholder as well) wanting to extend a lease. For more information on doing that and when you are able to, go to the Leasehold Advisory Service. As well as getting the agreement of the lady upstairs, you should also get your lender’s agreement but this is very unlikely to be a problem as a lease extension will improve the value of the property, which is the bank or building society’s security. If everybody is happy, what usually happens, Adkins says, is everyone agrees to “a freeholder’s lease to be extended to 999 years with the ground rent – if any – officially being reduced to a peppercorn rate”, ie nil. • Want expert help finding your new mortgage? Use our new online tool to search thousands of deals from more than 80 lenders with the Guardian Mortgage Service, powered by L&amp;C. • This article was amended on 31 January 2022. An earlier version misspelled the company name Frettens as “Frettons”.A booming online industry specialising in fake passports with official visas and travel stamps is offering people with links to Islamic State the opportunity to leave Syria and travel onwards to the UK, EU, Canada and the US, a Guardian investigation has found. One such network, run by an Uzbek with extremist links living in Turkey, is now selling high-quality fake passports for up to $15,000 (£11,132) purporting to be from various countries. In at least 10 cases the Guardian is aware of, people who illegally crossed the Syrian border into Turkey have used his products to depart through Istanbul airport. Sellers claim the EU is the most popular destination but say in at least two cases people were able to travel from Istanbul to Mexico on fake Russian passports and, from there, illegally over the border into the US. Niger and Mauritania are also popular destinations, as are Ukraine and Afghanistan. The Uzbek’s business is doing so well he recently opened a new channel on the encrypted messaging app Telegram with the official-sounding name “Istanbul Global Consulting”. The growing trade suggests that dangerous extremists could be slipping under the radar of security services around the world, escaping justice for past crimes and potentially able to continue terrorist activity in countries other than Syria. “I do not ask about which group someone is with. I am willing to work with anyone,” the Uzbek said in a message chat with the Guardian, which posed as an interested client. “It is not my job to see who is bad and who is not. The security services should deal with it.” Western security officials warned in 2015 that IS had managed to obtain significant equipment such as blank passport books and printers to make Syrian and Iraqi passports, which it used to disguise operatives among the more than 1 million people who fled to Europe during the peak of the refugee crisis. IS claimed several attacks around the continent shortly after, including the November 2015 attack on the Bataclan theatre in Paris and the Manchester Arena bombing in 2017. Since then, European border agencies have invested in technology and personnel training to better identify forged passports. In 2020, Tajikistan totally overhauled its consular staff in Istanbul and document system in an attempt to stamp out the use of fake Tajik passports. But in response, sellers of fake passports have also upped their game, using a wider variety of nationalities for prospective clients. The Uzbek sent several videos of his wares, including crisp new French, Belgian, Bulgarian and Russian passports that appear to feature authentic security watermarks and holograms. When placed under a black light, two Russian passports contain UV-sensitive materials designed to stop passport forgery, and a Belgian passport placed on a scanner similar to those used in airports appears to read correctly, with the holder’s details appearing on the monitor. According to document sellers, it is impossible to fake a working biometric chip, but at many border crossings officials checking passports simply ignore those that don’t work, waving the passport holder through. “There is a particular seller in Turkey who provides IS members with very high level [ie, well forged] documents,” using interlocutors who speak Russian, Arabic and other languages to cater for different clients, said a source at the US Department of Homeland Security. “We are aware of IS members using these fake passports to cross to Europe, and European security is not successful in arresting them all.” While the document sellers’ most popular service is providing documents for foreign fighters in Syria associated with IS and other armed groups to travel to Europe, the group has also identified new areas to expand. On a Telegram chat for people in al-Hawl, a camp in north-east Syria home to about 60,000 women and children with links to IS, one of the Uzbek’s online marketers, a foreign woman detained in another camp nearby, has posted: “If you need fake documents from Russia, Central Asia, Turkey, Europe, DM me.” The fall of Afghanistan to the Taliban had also created a new client base of Afghan refugees in Turkey, the Uzbek said. Although his services are too expensive for most displaced Afghans, he says his clients use the fake passports to board flights to western countries, and then claim asylum once they land. While low-ranked IS fighters usually barely have money to buy one passport, high-level members who want to completely drop off the grid usually buy several documents from different countries, and use them to move around frequently, changing passport for every new flight or transfer, said a Russian passport seller. A Russian national who fought for IS until 2015 said: “I had only a couple of hundred dollars when I came from Syria so I bought the cheapest passport – a really poor-quality Tajik passport. It did not work and I was arrested in the airport in Istanbul. “Then my family back home collected enough money to buy a better-quality one. So I got a real Russian passport, but with my photo on it, and was able to get to Ukraine with it. It is a really good one – I was once stopped by police in Ukraine and they took it but returned it to me a week later saying everything is good. Unfortunately this passport is expiring now so I am currently trying to get money to buy a new one.” To make sure a person disappears completely, for $500 the Uzbek seller can even offer a Turkish death certificate that can be sent to their home country’s consulate. “Unless you are Abu Bakr Baghdadi [The IS leader, killed in 2019] no one would go to the morgue to check if you really died. They would just accept that document and enter it into the system,” he said. There are several passport options, depending on the clients’ ethnicity, languages they speak, where they want to go, and how much they have to spend. The cheapest documents with which to get to Europe are Russian, Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan passports, which cost about $5,000, or $6,000 as part of a Schengen visa package. Other popular and slightly more expensive options are Ukrainian and Moldovan papers, which allow visa-free travel to the EU. The most expensive option is an EU passport, which will set a client back $8,000, usually requested by westerners and Arabs who speak some French and can pass for French or Belgian. Typically, an EU citizen arrives in Turkey on his or her own passport, sells it to the Uzbek and his colleagues for about €2,500, then the passport photo is changed to that of a client. The original owner of the passport then claims it has been lost and applies for a replacement at his or her consulate in Istanbul. The passports are printed in their countries of origin and taken to the country where the client is waiting, where they receive official border entry stamps, which helps cement the legitimacy of the document. “The passport itself relatively doesn’t cost anything. What does cost is the stamps,” said the Russian seller. “The majority of the money goes into bribes for stamps.” “In the past the quality of passports on the market was bad so there was a limited number of countries one could travel to from Syria,” he said. “Now those passports are of such good quality that if you have enough money, you could go absolutely anywhere.”A new, cheaper alternative to the AirPods Pro is here – and it is also from Apple. The Beats Fit Pro have many of the same features but cost £40 less, are more workout-friendly than their cousins and work with Android, too. Priced at £199 ($199.99/A$299.95) they offer the same noise-cancelling as the AirPods Pro and features such as spatial audio virtual surround sound. The Fit Pro essentially add a flexible silicone stabiliser “wing” to the top of last year’s Studio Buds. Once you twist the wing into the top of your ear they stay put even with the most vigorous of exercise, or you can wear them without the wing tucked in for more sedate listening. The top of the earbud protrudes a little from your ear and has a single multi-purpose “b” button which you press once, twice, thrice or press and hold to skip tracks, change sound modes or adjust the volume. The music pauses when you remove an earbud too. The earbuds clip magnetically into a flip-top case for charging and storage, which is like a mini version of the giant Powerbeats Pro case. It is a bit bigger than the best on the market but still just about fits in the money pocket of a pair of jeans. The earbuds last up to six hours of playback with noise-cancelling active between charges, which is two hours short of the best rivals but at least an hour longer than the Studio Buds and AirPods Pro. Specifications Connectivity: Bluetooth 5.0, SBC, AAC, H1 chip Battery life: six hours ANC playback (24 hours with case) Water resistance: IPX4 (splash resistant) Earbud dimensions: 30x 24 x 19mm Earbud weight: 5.6g each Charging case dimensions: 62 x 62 x 28.5mm Charging case weight: 55.1g Case charging: USB-C Great sound and noise cancelling The Fit Pro sound really good, particularly for fitness-focused earbuds. They have a well-balanced and fully rounded sound that suits a variety of genres. They can produce deep notes with a thump when needed but the bass is kept from overriding the good treble and high notes. Vocals are excellent, instrument separation is good and they handle complex tracks well. They sound similar to Apple’s AirPods Pro, and slightly better than the Studio Buds, but can’t quite match the very best-sounding earbuds from Sony. It is a similar story for the noise-cancelling. The Fit Pro match the efficacy of the AirPods Pro, successfully reducing low rumbles, cars and fans, while struggling with higher-pitched noise such as the tapping of fingers on a keyboard. The ambient awareness mode is one of the more natural-sounding of those available, good for listening out for announcements or a quick conversation. Spatial audio In addition to standard stereo sound, the Fit Pro have Apple’s spatial audio virtual surround sound technology, thanks to their H1 chip. It makes the audio sound as if it is coming from a collection of speakers around you rather than directed straight down your ear canal, giving it a greater atmosphere. When used with Apple devices, the earbuds track the movement of your head and adjust the sound so that it is always centred on the screen in front of you. It works particularly well for movies and TV shows with a Dolby sound track but also works with music, too. It’s all very clever. Unlike Apple’s AirPods, the Fit Pro support some elements of spatial audio on Android, but not the head tracking and other advanced features. Apple and Android The same story exists for other features on Apple versus Android. The Fit Pro support the same instant pairing, seamless switching between devices, instant “Hey Siri” access to the voice assistant, battery status notifications and audio sharing with Apple gear as the AirPods. They are standard Bluetooth 5.0 earbuds and will connect just fine to most devices, including Windows PCs. But unlike Apple’s other earbuds, the Beats support some of the more advanced features on Android including instant pairing, battery status, customisable controls, firmware updates and the ear tip fit test using the Beats app. Observations If you use a mix of Apple and Android gear, the Beats app on Android will not be able to “find” the earbuds unless you turn off Bluetooth on nearby iPhones or iPads. Call quality was really good for such compact earbuds: my voice sounded clear and natural with only a little background noise leaking through in loud environments. Sustainability Apple expects the batteries to last more than 500 full charge cycles while maintaining at least 80% of their original capacity but they are not replaceable. While some minor bits of the earbuds are repairable, they scored a zero out of 10 on iFixit’s repairability scale. Apple offers a “battery service” for £76.44 or replacements costing £96.44 each. The earbuds and case are made from recycled plastic and rare earth elements but Apple does not publish environmental impact reports for accessories such as headphones. The company offers trade-in and free recycling schemes, including for non-Apple products. Price The Beats Fit Pro cost £199 ($199.99/A$299.95). For comparison, the AirPods Pro cost £239, the AirPods 3 cost £169, the Beats Studio Buds cost £130, the Jabra Elite 7 Pro cost £199 and the Samsung Galaxy Buds 2 cost £99. Verdict The Beats Fit Pro offer a slice of the earbud magic found in Apple’s AirPods Pro in a sportier, cheaper form. They sound good, have effective noise-cancelling and solid battery life. The spatial audio virtual surround sound system is really great with Apple gear and some of the smart features are available on Android, too. They are small and don’t have stalks. The wing design keeps them locked in place but can take some fiddling to get comfortable. The charging case is a bit larger than I would like but still pocketable. They are bettered on sound, noise-cancelling and battery life by the very best. And, unfortunately, the battery cannot be replaced, ultimately making them disposable and losing a star. But if you want a set of all-purpose earbuds for iPhone or Android that can silence the commute, do justice to movies on your phone and stay put when it’s time to pound the pavement, there aren’t many better than the Beats Fit Pro. Pros: great sound and noise-cancelling, decent battery and case, great connectivity, good controls, advanced features with Apple devices including spatial audio, some special features with Android, rock-solid fit for exercise or commute, decent call quality Cons: can be a fiddle to get comfortable, charging case larger than rivals, no wireless charging, only IPX4 sweat resistance, cannot be repaired, expensive.After Barry Harris retired, he was “hanging around the house, slipping into the daytime telly routine”. His wife, a midwife, must have felt troubled by that, because she told him: “Just find something to do! Volunteer or something.” Harris had spent 40 years as a graphic designer, working his way up from a paste-up artist after graduating from art school till he retired as a freelance in the packaging sector. All that time he lived in Warrington, Cheshire, where the couple’s four children were born. It’s a long time in one place and one profession, and perhaps why, when pushed to act, he popped into a local job agency. “I just asked: ‘What have you got?’ And they said: ‘Can you drive?’” He delivered bathrooms and then solar panels, before getting a job at the food retailer Greencore, delivering sandwiches and groceries, “travelling from A to B and meeting the customers”. He was 62. “It was refreshing because it was completely different.” There are about 40 routes out of the depot. “We go all the way up to Carlisle, across to Yorkshire, Anglesey and down to Stoke-on-Trent.” But Harris’s favourite is the 200-mile round trip to the Lake District. “It’s unbelievable, the scenery up there,” he says. “The freedom of it all.” Of course, there are deliveries to make, but the only responsibility is “going from A to B to C”, whereas family life with four children “was a rollercoaster”. Sometimes, when he sits behind the wheel of his van, radio on, countryside rolling past the window, he remembers his first ever long drive, in his first car. He was 20. He bought a Morris Minor on a Thursday and set off for Cornwall at two o’clock the next morning. “We just decided to go, a gang of us. I wasn’t married. No kids. No responsibilities.” It took about eight hours, switching drivers, the world opening up around them till they reached Newquay at 10pm that evening. “We didn’t have a care in the world,” he says. He gets similar feelings from this job. “It’s just widening your horizon. Getting up and going out.” Driving has turned the everyday “into an adventure”. There’s the banter in the office where Harris, promoted to team leader, is “20 or 30 years older than the majority” of his colleagues. “I give as good as I’m given,” he says. There’s always different music on: “My era was early 70s, and their interests are 80s, 90s and 00s. There is always something to talk about.” Switching to this very different occupation has made Harris feel ready to try new things. He started saxophone lessons a few years ago, and now gigs with a band; he is 20 years older than his bandmates too. It’s another first. “Maybe I should have done things earlier and not confined myself to one area, but it’s done now,” he says. At grammar school in East Ham, east London, where he grew up before moving to Warrington at 16, Harris was academic, and passed eight O-levels. East Ham was “a melting pot of different cultures. We were all in the same boat. Being Jamaican was part of that,” he says. His father had come to England from Jamaica in the late 1940s but “he never talked about Jamaica”. Or “Maybe he did talk about Jamaica, but being a youngster it washed over me.” As his father was dying in 2012, he started to talk about how “they kept farmyard animals in the garden, walking so many miles to school, things like that”. His father’s side of the family “all came to pay their respects” from Jamaica; it was the first time Harris had met them. Either way, he has never been to Jamaica. But maybe as part of his recent “opening up”, he will. He lets out a big sigh. “Could be like finding my roots.” Does he think he will get there? “Could be next year.” All that is needed is, he says, to say: “Let’s do it. Let’s go.” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?A sweeping new bill with powerful bipartisan support in the US Senate would establish an inquiry into the country’s Covid-19 response similar to the 9/11 Commission, among other provisions aimed at preventing the next pandemic. The new Covid commission would inform the US response to future outbreaks as well as the current impact of the disease. The bill will be co-sponsored by Senator Patty Murray of Washington and Senator Richard Burr of North Carolina, who plan to mark it up in committee in coming weeks. “The pain of this pandemic is unforgettable, and we have a responsibility to make sure its lessons are unforgettable, too,” Murray said. The legislation, called the Prevent Pandemics Act, would lay the groundwork to enshrine new powers in federal health agencies. It would also require Senate confirmation to appoint the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and it would better outline the duties of the assistant secretary for preparedness and response, a position Burr created in a 2006 law on pandemic preparedness. Murray, chair of the Senate health committee, first raised the idea of a Covid commission in March 2020. “Because even back then it was clear: we have to learn from this pandemic to make sure we are never in this situation again,” she said on Thursday. In November 2021, another bipartisan group of senators – Dianne Feinstein of California, Roger Marshall of Kansas, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Joni Ernst of Iowa – also introduced a bill to establish a Covid commission. This wider bill represents months of work across the aisle between Murray and Burr, the committee’s Republican ranking member. An independent taskforce would “conduct a comprehensive review of the federal Covid-19 response, fully account for consequential gaps and breakdowns in our response, and issue recommendations to correct them”, Murray said. In November 2019, the US was ranked first of 195 countries for pandemic preparedness in a report co-produced by the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security – but it has consistently had one of the worst responses to the actual Covid-19 pandemic, said John Farmer Jr, the senior counsel for the 9/11 Commission and director of the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University. “And there’s very little apparent effort to figure out exactly why it was so ineffective and what we can do in the future,” he said. Farmer was among those calling for an inquiry early in the pandemic, he said, “because it was clear that the United States’ response was almost completely ineffective in containing the pandemic and preventing future variants from emerging”. The US response involved “basically 50 governors going 50 different ways, and no one effectively containing the virus”, Farmer said. That happened in part because the president doesn’t have the authority under current law to establish temporary public health measures, even during a pandemic. Legislation such as the proposed bill could lay the groundwork for changing these laws, though such changes would be likely to face sharp scrutiny in a highly divided Congress. The 9/11 Commission was created by Congress soon after the September 11 terrorist attacks. It was independent and non-partisan, staffed with officials who had investigative power, funding and time to create an authoritative report. “Good reports are important because they create the historical record, and they can also inform how we respond to the crisis to avoid it happening again,” said Alan Rozenshtein, associate professor at the University of Minnesota Law School. Another reason to create a Covid commission would be to garner high-profile support from all branches of government, which could bolster public trust in institutions, Rozenshtein said. “Those are the benefits – if you can pull it off,” he said. Rozenshtein doesn’t believe it’s possible to create a report on Covid that accomplishes what the 9/11 Commission did, however. “It will be very rigorous and professional and it will produce an excellent report – but because that will be attacked the whole way through by Trump and his enablers in the Republican party, that report will not then have anything like the impact of the 9/11 Commission.” A Covid commission would surely face bipartisan scrutiny even if it finds bipartisan support, Rozenshtein and Farmer said. “I think any sitting administration is going to feel vulnerable to the conclusions of such a commission,” Farmer said. “This is such a calamitous response that I’m not sure that either administration is really going to want a close look at what went wrong.” At the same time, he added, “the public interest has to outweigh that kind of partisan consideration. “We failed, as a society and as a world, to contain Covid, and we really need to look at more effective ways to handle future pandemics – or we could be in worse shape the next time,” Farmer said.Download for free Many websites offer ebooks and audiobooks at no cost. Project Gutenberg lists more than 67,000 out-of-copyright titles which can be read online or downloaded in a wide range of formats. Similarly, Librivox offers more than 16,000 audiobooks of old titles, read and recorded by volunteers all over the world. BookBub (bookbub.com) has free and discounted downloads of some recently published books, particularly in categories like romance and thrillers, with regular email alerts about cheap titles in genres you’re interested in. Borrow virtually Ebooks, audiobooks and comics can be borrowed for up to 14 days from the Internet Archive’s vast collection – you need to join OpenLibrary.org for free, and download an encrypted file. Many of the titles available are recently published books from 1,100 libraries all over the world. If only one copy of the book you want is available, it can only be borrowed for an hour and must be read on a web book reader interface. It is auto-renewed for another hour if you are still reading it. Your local library may also lend copies of ebooks, comics and audiobooks via your library card and an app, such as OverDrive, Libby or BorrowBox. You can then read your choice on a smartphone, tablet or a compatible e-reader like a Kobo, Nook, PocketBook or Tolino – Kindles are not supported. The books will disappear from your “shelf” in the app on the day they are due back, so you don’t have to worry about late fees. Become an influencer Websites such as Netgalley.com and edelweiss.plus offer “readers of influence”, such as book reviewers and bloggers, free access to review ebooks and audiobooks before they are published. These are sometimes referred to in the industry as “advanced reading copies” or ARCs. It’s up to the publisher to approve your request, which it will do based on your biography and your profile on sites like LinkedIn, Twitter and Goodreads. “Bookstagrammers” and “booktubers” – influencers who post on Instagram and YouTube – are often able to access free books from publishers via these websites. If you’re prepared to review books on websites such as Amazon or Goodreads, Booksirens lets you request review copies directly from authors, publicists, as well as publishers. You may also have luck contacting publishers directly or authors who use the hashtag #ARCreaderswanted or #arcreaders on Twitter or Instagram. Visit your local library Almost 800 libraries have closed in Britain since the government began its austerity drive in 2010. If you want your local library to stay open, use it. Many allow members to borrow 10 to 20 books and audiobooks free of charge. Seek out secondhand Buying used is better for the environment and, often, your wallet. If you buy from a charity shop, you are also supporting a good cause. One of the greatest pleasures of browsing in charity shops is that you never know what you might find. But if you’re looking for a specific book, the Oxfam website sells thousands at bargain prices. For example, at the time of writing, a quick search for bestselling children’s author Jacqueline Wilson revealed 26 books for sale, with some newly released titles for just £1.49 (70% off the RRP). There are also some excellent bargains in “used books” on Betterworldbooks.com. It donates a book to someone in need for every one sold. Another option is to hunt down a title via bookcrossing.com. This lists free books that have been released “in the wild” for a stranger to find: search to see whether there’s one listed near you. If you do find it, log on to the website and report it’s been “caught”. Swap with a stranger More than 16,000 books are available on bookswap.co.uk. “There are lots of newly published books and books you can’t find anywhere else,” says Triin Vihur, a bookstagrammer (@wordchild) who works part-time as the site’s social media manager. You first need to list the books you are prepared to send to other users. You then get credits for posting them with a prepaid label (so it costs you nothing) and you can use these credits to request books from a different user. If that user agrees to send you their book, you must hand over your credit and pay £3.85 in postage and swapping fees £2.66 postage and a £1.19 swapping fee to receive the book. If you have lots of books you want to get rid of, swapping can be fun – and cost efficient. “Often, I find it cheaper to get books on bookswap.co.uk than other secondhand platforms,” says Vihur. She recommends requesting more than one book at a time from the same user, as you only pay one postage fee no matter how many are in each package. The carbon footprint of a book swap is lower, and she likes knowing that books she no longer wants are going to someone who is really keen to read them. It’s a very different experience from buying a secondhand book from an online seller, she says: “It gives a lot of joy.” Support the independents Many independent bookshops have struggled to stay afloat during the pandemic and 31 have closed, according to the Booksellers Association. If you don’t have time to physically set foot in the doors, consider supporting them online via bookshop.org. This website will handle your sale and give any independent bookshop you nominate a 30% commission on the RRP of the book you buy. “The beauty of it is that the bookshop doesn’t have to touch the order. The book does not come off its shelves, it comes straight from our wholesale partner and is shipped directly to your home,” says UK managing director Nicole Vanderbilt. “The bookshop has none of the costs, hassle and time of packing your order and posting it. So, in addition to giving them an incremental income, we give them a lot of their time back to focus on the part of the job that they love, and are uniquely good at.” She says most books the site sells have 7% off the RRP and shipping is free if you spend over £40. “We try to give as much value as we can to the bookshop, who often don’t discount, while still making the prospect of buying online from us attractive, instead of from a place like Amazon,” she says. Second-class shipping – where you get your book in two to three days – is £2.99, irrespective of the size of your order, and first class, which takes one day, is £4.10. The site has generated more than £2m for independent bookshops since November 2020 with about 500 participating.It has been a long and painful month in the Florida legislature for opponents of the state’s Trumpist governor Ron DeSantis and his loyal band of rightwing Republicans. A slew of bills has advanced attacking everything from diversity rights, abortion protections and free speech in schools, in addition to a proposal that would legally shield white people from feeling “discomfort” over the state’s racist past. And last Wednesday, an anti-masker physician, hand picked by the governor and apathetic about the value of Covid-19 vaccines, was backed unanimously by a Republican senate panel as the next surgeon-general following a walk-out by Democratic politicians frustrated by Joseph Ladapo’s evasiveness. To hear DeSantis tell it, the “freedom state” of Florida is merely following the will of a populist citizenry in defying the perceived tyranny of the federal government, determined to protect liberty in the face of a deadly pandemic that has claimed more than 64,000 of their fellow residents, and standing up against the “indoctrination” of children. Yet as the possible 2024 presidential candidate presses ahead with turning Florida into what critics see as his own conservative fiefdom – a de facto Trumpistan of the south with an “Orwellian-sounding” election police force – DeSantis is finding opposition beginning to harden. More of the state’s 21 million people, which elected him in 2018 by barely 32,000 votes, appears displeased at the creeping authoritarianism and is keen to show DeSantis – who will be seeking re-election in November – that Florida is not the solidly red state he believes it to be. Those voices come from parents, doctors, LBGTQ+ activists, proponents of voting rights and others who will be affected if many of the Republican bills, as expected, become law. “People do not like the authoritarian nature of this governor and the way that he has weaponized fear between his constituents to try to curry favor with his base,” said Brandon Wolf, development manager and spokesperson for Equality Florida. “And I think you’re going to see that show up at the polls. I know people get concerned that maybe Florida is gone forever. But let me tell you we fully intend to mobilize and show up for our communities in the election cycle.” Wolf pointed to several areas where he said DeSantis’s moves were gaining little traction. “Florida is a beautifully diverse state. I live in downtown Orlando, which has folks from all walks of life, different races, ethnicities, religions, sexual orientations, gender identities. We all live in this wonderful tapestry that is central Florida,” he said. “I can tell you that the things that concern people here are not the conversations that are happening in Tallahassee. That rent went up 29% in 2021, that Florida is leading the country in increases in housing prices, people are concerned the governor has essentially made Covid-19 a political battleground. “Yet the legislature is singularly focused on legislating as if they won by a margin of 99 to one in 2018, as if they have a total mandate by which they can control people’s lives. It’s disgraceful and disappointing.” The issues that Republicans see as a priority for Florida are red meat to DeSantis’s conservative base. They include the 15-week abortion ban bill, which received a chaotic hearing on Thursday, and moves to give parents more say over classroom curriculum and control of school libraries. In Polk county this week, education officials went from school to school pulling 16 books flagged by a conservative parents’ group as inappropriate, including Khaled Hosseini’s 2003 bestseller The Kite Runner. They include bills to strengthen the governor’s fierce anti-immigrant stance by locking out from state or local government business any company involved in the transportation of undocumented migrants. And two healthcare bills have been introduced in the Republican-dominated Florida legislature that opponents say further vilifies and isolates the LBGTQ community. One, touted as the vulnerable child protection act, would criminalize professionals who provide gender-affirming medical care to minors; the other would allow any medical professional the right to refuse treatment or procedures including gender affirming surgery or abortions on moral grounds. “It doesn’t deny their right to access that procedure, but also protects the individual who has a conscience reason they don’t want to perform it,” the bill’s sponsor, Republican state senator Dennis Baxley, told the Sun-Sentinel. The proposal that has caused perhaps the most outrage is the parental rights in education bill, the so-called Don’t Say Gay bill that would prohibit elementary schools from discussing sexuality and gender identity other than in an unspecified “age or developmentally appropriate” settings, and would allow parents to sue. “It’s going to effectively erase LBGTQ students and families and LBGTQ history by banning classroom discussion,” said Carlos Guillermo Smith, a Democratic state representative who opposed the measure vigorously in the legislature. “If a fourth-grader wants to come into the classroom, they’ve written an essay about their two dads, they want to present that essay to the class to talk about who they are or who their family is, the school is going to shut it down?” Wolf, meanwhile, sees a straight line from the flurry of reactionary legislative action to DeSantis’s own political ambitions. “These bills don’t live in silos. It’s easy if you look from the outside to see this scattershot of legislation and see them as individualized, that an abortion ban may not be tied to the Don’t Say Gay bill, which may not be tied to the license to discriminate in healthcare bill,” he said. “But the truth is they are all connected. And the thing that connects them is the concerted attempt by Governor Ron DeSantis and his allies to push themselves to the right of Donald Trump and set DeSantis up to run for president in 2024. “In Florida you are free, but only free to do and say as you are told.” Lauren Book, a state senator representing parts of Broward, Florida’s bluest county, led a walkout of Democratic colleagues at this week’s confirmation hearing for the polarizing Ladapo as Florida’s surgeon general, after he repeatedly refused to say if vaccines were effective in the fight against Covid-19. His views appear to echo those of DeSantis, who has feuded often and loudly with the Biden administration over the pandemic, and banned mask and vaccine mandates in Florida. “21 million Floridians deserve more than a mouthpiece for the governor, than talking sound bites that sound good and suit a narrative,” Book told CNN. Her criticism was echoed by a group of prominent Florida physicians, who accused DeSantis and Ladapo of “espousing policies contrary to the evidence”. Jabari Hosey, president of the education advocacy group Families for Safe Schools, said that the actions of DeSantis and Republican allies, particularly in banning Covid safety measures, do not match the wishes of the majority of parents and guardians of Florida’s 2.7 million school-age children. “He’s representing a small, loud group of parents,” he said. “We feel omitted and it’s kind of a punch to the gut when he’s selecting small, far-right groups of folks that kind of determine his legislative decision making. “Creating these bills like Don’t Say Gay is a dog whistle, and also a suppression tactic, a way to force us not to talk about these things and therefore not accept them. It’s scary for us, parents who don’t agree with this, and we just really believe we are the majority and we want to move forward, not backwards.”The last song I streamed Herbie Hancock, Watermelon Man. My brother runs a gospel choir, he’s a jazzer. A lot of my musical education came from him. When I was listening to Shaddap You Face, he’d be listening to Buddy Rich, John Coltrane, the cool ones. He got me totally into Herbie Hancock. The first single I ever bought The one, the legendary BoRap: Bohemian Rhapsody. I had to go halves with my sister Coky. In 1975 I was seven and she was 12, and we each saved up 15p for it. We were obsessed. It got played so much, I’m amazed that the grooves on the record were still able to hold a needle. I think I’ve still got it somewhere. The song I inexplicably know every lyric to “What’s-a matter you? Hey! Gotta no respect? What-a you t’ink you do, why you look-a so sad?” It’s Shaddap You Face, by Joe Dolce. An absolute ruddy classic, a sort of comedy song from 1980. I hated it and loved it. It was No 1. My dad started singing it. He found it ludicrous and, being Polish, I think he responded to the fact that it was a comedy song about somebody who wasn’t English. The song that is my karaoke go-to My go-to would be I Love Rock’n’Roll by Joan Jett. I tend to be good with bloke parts, but I find it really suits my vocal range. If I’m doing karaoke, I want it to be pretty outstanding. If you are an absolutely incorrigible showoff like I am, it’s got to be a crowdpleaser with a good strong chorus. The best song to play at a party I did this outrageous Zoom disco for my sister’s birthday last year. I mixed up some 90s dance anthems with old favourites: your Sister Sledge, your Chic. But the song that went down best, I think, was Flawless by the Ones. I put that on, and suddenly everybody was leaping in their little squares. The song I want played at my funeral The entirety of the musical Jesus Christ Superstar, live. Live! It has to be a full musical cast, ideally in costume. It’s my favourite ever musical, and there’s some good religious messages in there. I think a funeral should contain some thoughtful, slightly more spiritual angles. The song I can no longer listen to My girls have got really good musical taste now, but I have a slightly involuntary twitch whenever I hear a song from High School Musical. There’s some great tunes, don’t get me wrong, but when you’ve listened to them upwards of 70,000 times … The song that is my actual favourite I’d try to pretend it was Skepta, or something really cool, but it’s Minnie Riperton – Les Fleurs. Absolute banger! I was delighted when Kae Tempest played it on 6 Music the other day. It’s kind of bombastic and dramatic, there’s a big, boldly drawn story going on. I think it shows that I’m a massive showoff, with a deep desire to do more musical theatre. Mel Giedroyc: Unforgivable returns for a second series on Dave from 8 February.You sometimes hear it said, usually by those looking in from outside, that the literary world is a cosy, circle-jerking kind of place. Oh, if only they knew! Like any human zone where access to power is to be had, the book world is rife with cut-throat careerists, mafia-like cliques, group hierarchies, herd opinions, playground politics, backstabbing, arse-licking and all the other shades in venality’s rainbow. Indeed, it offers up so plump and unguarded a throat, it’s a surprise more blade-wielding satirists don’t lunge in and slit it right open. Going by her latest novel, the Argentine Pola Oloixarac is a writer whose default mode of interpreting the world is cynicism. While this carries some obvious limitations, it positions her well to dissect her industry’s pretensions and poke fun at its pieties. The success of Oloixarac’s first novel, Savage Theories, propelled her into the arena of world literature with its international festivals, prize committees, calculated postures and erotic intrigues. Her third novel, nimbly translated by Adam Morris, trains its satiric sights on this rarefied milieu. When we first meet Mona’s titular protagonist, she is numbing herself with Valium and alcohol on a transatlantic flight from California, ignoring creepily insistent messages on her phone and fixing to masturbate in her window seat as she approaches her destination of Stockholm. Her purpose there is to attend an award ceremony for the prestigious Basske-Wortz prize, for which she has been nominated. A Peruvian whose debut novel won her the esteem of the Latin American left and inflated a literary reputation she secretly suspects is fraudulent, Mona has been trying to follow up with a ‘“terrifying, brilliant, and dangerous” second work, but “now the book was starting to eat her alive”. As she hobnobs in Sweden with her Arabic, Asian, Israeli and European counterparts, Mona reflects wryly on exoticism in both the cultural stock exchange of global literature and American academia (she has a scholarship at Stanford University). She arrived in the US “at a time when being a ‘woman of colour’… began to confer a chic sort of cultural capital”. On her application form, she listed her ethnicity as “Hispanic” and “Indigenous”, then added “Inca” for good measure, well aware that liberal America’s identity fetishism “offered her the opportunity to advance her career merely by being herself”. There is plenty of this kind of spiky scepticism in the first half of this short, enjoyable and flawed novel. Provocations abound. When each of the prize-nominated authors is invited to give a speech, an Iranian egomaniac named Abdollah Farid devotes his to stripping the figure of the Muslim immigrant of its sentimental ruse, gleefully declaring that it is in fact Europeans who will have to learn to assimilate to Middle Eastern ways: ‘There are millions of us already living here, and millions more on the way… nobody will ever be able to stop it!’ The wind-up merchant Mona goes one further, deciding that the Islamification of the continent is a fait accompli, because no one will be able to convince its women not to keep flooding Europe — “that pregnant slut” — with hot Middle Eastern men. Mona is driven more by her sex drive than by artistic idealism and her stay at the prize meeting is punctuated by pornographic fantasies and Skype sex. She seems to grow concerned about the consequences of her caustic outlook, suggesting in a pre-coital dialogue that “‘it’s important… to treat each other well. Love each other… You don’t want to be the Mark David Chapman of your generation’s foetal avant-garde.” To which her handsome Nordic interlocutor adds: “I like where you’re going with this. Otherwise literary culture is nothing but a bunch of snipers scattered all over the world, each on their own rooftop, lining up their enemies in crosshairs of arguments and posturing…” Insofar as she sticks to such lit-world theorising and piss-taking, Oloixarac is on steady ground. Unfortunately, having set the narrative’s wheels in motion, she has no viable plan to guide the vehicle home. The novel’s credibility collapses in the final third. A lazy appeal to Nordic mythology for unearned profundity rings jarringly false, while a gesture towards an exploration of male on female violence never follows through. Grasping for gravitas by appeal to secondhand signifiers and conscious symbolism, Oloixarac overburdens a novel that might more effectively have kept its focus on the egos and libidos of the literary set. In doing so, she falls face first into a condition with which she would be swift to diagnose her characters: pretentiousness. It’s a shame that Mona is not both more fleshed out and tightly focused. In a literary culture swamped by clenched, worthy fiction and the writer as activist, her satirist’s misanthropy and taste for provocation are a tonic. Rob Doyle’s most recent book is Autobibliography • Mona by Pola Oloixarac, translated by Adam Morris, is published by Serpent’s Tale (£12.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyCan you please explain the rules for sending gifts to Europe post-Brexit, because every time I send one to my son in Germany he ends up having to pay charges to take delivery. All the goods I have sent are well under the €45 (£37) that seems to be the threshold for paying VAT. But he always ends up having to collect the package from a depot and paying between €6 and €10. I have been using Royal Mail and printing my own labels and the CN22 customs declaration form. The most recent fee of €9 was for a paperback book, only worth £10. How do I prevent these bills? GH, Sheffield I have received a lot of similar emails, mostly from people who sent Christmas gifts to recipients who ended up having to pay a fee before the carrier would release their item. It’s another post-Brexit disaster area, that even the Royal Mail struggles to explain. The situation is confusing as VAT is now payable on non-gifts arriving in the EU from the UK. In contrast, as I understand it, gifts valued below €45 are not subject to VAT or duties, and therefore there is no reason for extra fees. Royal Mail confirmed that your son has been wrongly charged and has refunded you for the December parcel, and another sent last week. It told you that the “gift” tick box on the CN22 customs form is being “misinterpreted” by EU carriers and it is addressing this with a “redesigned” form due at the end of the month. In the meantime, readers may want to “take back control” and hold off sending items to Europe. It may be better to buy online and have the item delivered from within the EU until this is resolved. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsCould there be gold in them streaming hills? Scrolling through your preferred film service in search of something new but also good can make you feel like a crotchety wild west varmint panning through dreck in search of hidden treasure. It’s pleasing, then, that the sci-fi mining tale Prospect – a modest but gorgeously realised story of survival on a far-flung frontier – is a streaming gem where the characters are driven by the pursuit of gleaming gems. On a remote alien forest moon where the mote-filled atmosphere is so hazardous it requires pressure suits and air filters to navigate, a stressed single father (Jay Duplass) drags his young daughter Cee (Sophie Thatcher) out on a high-risk prospecting expedition. After a hard landing in their cramped space-pod, the pair have a limited window to sniff out valuable organic gems. After three “cycles”, the interstellar gantry that dropped them off will be headed home. If they miss their lift they will be stranded in this lush wilderness with only a musket-like dart gun for protection. The gems are coddled in gloopy alien egg sacs but harvesting them is a nerve-jangling procedure requiring a steady scalpel hand: the dig sites are combustible and slicing a sac incorrectly causes the treasure to fizzle and spoil. The fact that the jittery dad seems to favour stimulant-infused chewing gum to push himself further does not fill you with confidence. Cee – who we first meet in a headphone-wearing reverie scribbling cryptic pictograms like a typically disaffected teen – seems sceptical about the whole thing even before her father reveals they are seeking a mythical bonanza nicknamed the Queen’s Lair. That is when Pedro Pascal moseys into frame as the rascally Ezra, and if there was any doubt that this was an old-fashioned western transposed to a sci-fi milieu, his highfalutin Deadwood cadences and languid low cunning snap everything into focus. Before long, it is just Ezra and Cee trying to survive “in the green”, having forged a tentative alliance based on survival. “A good partnership is only made so by candid discourse,” advises Ezra in one of his many folksy proclamations, but while they are literally tethered together for life support their alliance is a rickety one, especially when the verdant jungle might not be as uninhabited as first thought. If their slim chance of escape rests on trusting each other, there are a lot of confrontations and negotiations – as well as some teeth-sucking scenes of amateur field surgery – to get through first. The prickly human motivations of this pared-back story contrast with the woozy setting, a trippy but tangible alien forest that evokes the phantasmagoric mulch-land of Alex Garland’s Annihilation (another sci-fi marvel released in 2018). Prospect’s evocative effects work – including a throwaway shot of caterpillar made strikingly alien by some subtle CGI – is all of a piece with its frugal but evocative production design. Everything in Cee’s shabby space pod seems to have been created with a real-world purpose in mind. If you are the sort of person who pauses Alien to marvel at the design and iconography of the Nostromo’s various control panels there is similarly a ton to unpack here. The term “world-building” is sometimes used pejoratively to knock blockbuster movies that seem more interested in setting up potential sequels or spin-offs than telling their story. Prospect creates its own perfectly realised sci-fi snowglobe that manages to be aesthetically intriguing while never pulling too much focus from its life-or-death situation. The world seems real, and therefore so do the stakes. What makes Prospect really sing is the fractious chemistry between Cee and Ezra, the mismatched odd couple who slowly begin to appreciate each other’s hidden talents. Who knows if Jon Favreau or any of the other creative talent behind The Mandalorian saw Prospect on initial release and were struck by Pascal’s ability to communicate emotion even via two-way radio transmission in a bulky helmet. In any case, it now looks like a warm-up for his bounty-hunting breakout. His co-star Thatcher also recently joined the Star Wars universe as a cybernetic street punk in The Book of Boba Fett (although she has much more to do in the buzzy survivalist series Yellowjackets, where she plays the teen version of Juliette Lewis’s Natalie). That these two performers have gone on to higher-profile projects is unsurprising but it is unclear what Christopher Caldwell and Zeek Earl, Prospect’s writers/directors, are working on next. Whatever it is, I will greedily seek it out. Prospect is available on Hulu in the US and Prime Video in the UKVictoria’s chief health officer is yet to provide advice to the state government on whether a third Covid-19 vaccine dose should be mandated, despite the premier flagging the change. Daniel Andrews has for some time called for national cabinet to change the definition of “fully vaccinated” to mean three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, rather than two. “I’ll follow the advice of experts and I think we’re very close to a situation where the relevant federal authorities will determine that three doses is what’s considered fully protected. As for fourth and fifth, let’s wait and see how this goes,” he told reporters on Sunday. “There has already been some mandating done for third doses and there will be more. Whether that’s popular or not, that’s not my concern. Politics doesn’t work against this virus, you’ve got to make difficult decisions, and then push forward from there.” But speaking at the first public hearing of Victorian state parliament’s pandemic declaration accountability and oversight committee on Monday, the state’s chief health officer, Brett Sutton said he and the premier had not discussed revising existing mandates. “I haven’t been requested to provide advice on broader vaccine mandates at this stage,” Professor Sutton said. “When and if I get a request from the (health) minister for advice on those potential measures, I’ll be very happy to assess the epidemiological situation of that time and to provide my recommendations on how that might change, if at all.” Asked by Liberal MP Georgie Crozier if the premier was “making these decisions without your input”, Sutton replied: “I don’t believe there have been any decisions made”. On 10 January, acting chief health officer Ben Cowie’s advice was that a mandate for third doses was not yet required. “I have considered a consistent one-size-fits-all approach to vaccination mandates for all workforces and even for the general community but, at this time, I do not consider this to be a proportionate response,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Victorians are voluntarily accessing booster doses at high numbers.” As of Monday, 38.9% of Victorians aged over 18 have had three vaccine doses. Sutton said authorities will have to consider introducing further booster shots if there is evidence of waning immunity about six to 12 months after the third dose. “It may well be the case of a booster at an annual interval or something akin to that the same way that we’re challenged with flu virus and the need for an annual booster for everyone,” he said. The new cross-party parliamentary committee was set up when the state’s new pandemic-specific legislation came into effect late last year. Under the laws, the responsibility for declaring a pandemic and imposing public health restrictions has been transferred from the chief health officer to the premier and health minister respectively. As well as reviewing pandemic orders, the committee can recommend changes and refer matters to Victorian ombudsman Deborah Glass for investigation. Sutton told the committee the health minister must seek his advice before issuing new restrictions but does not necessarily need to follow it. He said the decision to increase crowds for the Australian Open finals from 65% capacity to 80% was made by health minister Martin Foley alone. “I had a request for a public health view and I provided no recommendation for or against. I said that it was primarily a matter of social licence and social considerations as a really significant public event,” Sutton said. The public health team was also not involved in the decision to grant world mens no 1 tennis player Novak Djokovic a medical exemption to play, he said. Sutton is also confident the state has reached the peak of Covid-19 cases and hospitalisations. “I think that peak will look bumpy, it will have up and down days but it won’t significantly increase from the position we are in right now,” he said. However, he has no plans “at this point in time” to change current recommendations to work from home. “Children (are) returning to school today … and we do expect transmission to occur as a result,” he said. “The recommendation to work from home will help counteract that because kids going back to school are going to slow the decrease in case numbers that we might otherwise see.” Victoria recorded 10,053 new Covid-19 infections and eight deaths on Monday, while there are 889 people in hospital battling the virus. The committee intends to hold further public hearings throughout the year.The strange disappearance of a Northern Territory man who went missing from the tiny town of Larrimah in 2017 will be re-examined, with an inquest into his suspected death to resume later this year. Patrick “Paddy” Moriarty, 70, has not been seen since the night he left the pub in Larrimah – which has a population of 11 people – and set off for home on his quad bike with his kelpie. On Monday, the NT coroner’s office confirmed the inquest into his suspected death would resume in April, almost four years after the coroner, Greg Cavanagh, adjourned the case indefinitely – reportedly because he had spoken to almost everyone he could from the town. Moriarty had feuded with other locals in the remote town south of Katherine before he vanished. The nature of his disappearance captivated audiences with the case the subject of a documentary, a podcast series and a book. NT police said last year they suspected Moriarty had been murdered and announced a $250,000 reward for information. “The investigation remains focused on establishing what happened to Paddy, where he might be and who is responsible,” Det Sgt Matthew Allen, who was leading the investigation, said in a statement at the time. “We continue to follow up information from the public and a number of people have been eliminated from our inquiries. Somebody knows what happened. A 70-year-old man and his dog don’t just disappear from a tiny outback town. Police believe Paddy has been murdered.” The reward was for information leading to the location of Moriarty’s body and the conviction of the person or people responsible for his death, Allen said. “The case will only be closed when it is solved. Even if you don’t think you have any useful information, the smallest clue might be just what we need to resolve this case.”When the pandemic first hit the world, Zimbabwean stone sculptor David Ngwerume took his hammer and chisel and started work on the first of a collection of Covid-inspired pieces. Almost two years and 14 sculptures later, one has made its way to China after being selected for the ninth Beijing International Art Biennale, an exhibition showcasing work from thousands of artists from more than 100 countries. The piece, Unto the Third Wave, depicts a woman receiving a vaccine for Covid-19 from a pair of suspended hands. Ngwerume created it in June last year, just before a third wave of the pandemic hit the country. “When I heard a third wave was coming, I called it Unto the Third Wave. I was encouraging people – let’s get vaccinated, let’s get ready for everything that is coming, and for variants,” he says. Omicron has prevented Ngwerume, who also has his own law practice, from accompanying his sculpture to China, but at home in Harare, he remains determined to continue adding to his Covid collection. His ambition is to produce and exhibit 25 to 30 sculptures. Ngwerume started sculpting while still at school in Musana, north-east of Harare, under the tutelage of sculptor Cosmos Muchenje. He loved the idea of sculptures being widely visible and thinks they can better portray a message than a painting that has to remain indoors. Stone sculpting has a long tradition in Zimbabwe and Ngwerume collects different materials from quarries and mines around the country. It was his father who inspired him to practise law and do art at the same time. Ngwerume was academically gifted and it was always his ambition to pursue a profession. “My father used to encourage me to do both,” he says. “He told me: ‘You cannot be a good artist without academic qualifications, you will end up failing to grasp how the world is moving’.” Now Ngwerume makes sculptures from his home studio. The idea for the Covid collection was born in the early stages of the pandemic, when Ngwerume found himself thinking about what people were experiencing and how to reflect that through his art. “Covid-19 was facing people in all parts of the world. It is a humanitarian catastrophe and nonselective between rich and poor, black and white, Muslims and Christians … it was cutting through everything that divides humanity,” he says. “I felt inspired [and thought about] what role I should play to bring awareness, to inspire the world. How can we fight this pandemic together and how can we see ourselves through?” Ngwerume’s first sculpture from his self-financed collection is a figure of a woman wearing a mask. After vaccines were created, he did a sculpture called Arms – a half-torso with a pair of suspended arms holding an injection. He explains: “The reason why it’s a half is because I didn’t want it to be perceived as a gender. I wanted it to resonate with everybody.” He’s also created a sculpture called Hygiene, which shows two hands washing. “My ambition was to move with the world, play my part and pass messages into the world,” says Ngwerume. His work has attracted international attention, beyond the Beijing biennale, and has been featured in various media outlets. “There was no artist doing something like that and it was speaking to the times,” he says. Ngwerume’s ultimate dream is to see his work exhibited around the world, including at the World Health Organization’s headquarters in Geneva. “Coming from a small country in Africa, I’m unnoticed and unrecognised and I wonder if that will happen,” he says. “Maybe it will just be a wish. I’m not going to stop what I’m doing even if I end up exhibiting at my house and even if the galleries will not look at me.” He adds: “I will keep going, my spirit keeps soaring.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:That’s where we will leave the live blog for today. Here’s some of what made the news: There were 91,289 vaccine doses administered in Australia on Sunday, with 49.6m administered in total. More than 95% of people aged 16 and over have had at least one dose, and 93.3% are double vaccinated. A total of 7.7m adults have received more than two doses, with 65,620 being administered on Sunday. There were 33,869 new cases reported on Monday: 13,026 in NSW, 10,053 in Victoria, 7462 in Queensland, 1,505 in South Australia, 537 in the ACT, 504 in Tasmania, 760 in the Northern Territory and 22 in Western Australia. The death toll is 3,760, up 44 on the previous day: NSW 1,393 (+27), Victoria 1,996 (+ eight), Queensland 199 (+ three), South Australia 117 (+ six), ACT 26, NT two, Tasmania 18 and WA nine. Federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg has said the government’s slump in Newspoll (44-56) sends a message that people are still doing it tough during Covid-19, while NSW treasurer Matt Kean says small business will be very disappointed that the federal government declined to partly fund a support package for small businesses. The prime minister of New Zealand, Jacinda Ardern, returned a negative Covid-19 test after she was deemed a close contact of a positive case. Country Liberals senator, Sam McMahon, confirmed she resigned from the party on Friday. Queensland has announced that Tony Fitzgerald will lead a six-month inquiry into the state’s corruption body. The HMAS Adelaide, currently assisting with recovery operations in Tonga, has suffered a power outage, however Defence says back-up power is on for critical systems and it has not disrupted the recovery effort. We will be back with you again tomorrow. Aged care workers will receive two pre-election bonus payments worth up to $800, as the government seeks to claw back public support for its troubled pandemic response. Ahead of a major speech at the National Press Club on Tuesday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, has announced that the bonus will be paid to more than 230,000 aged care workers in government-subsidised home care and to residential aged care staff providing “direct care, food or cleaning services”. The first payment will be made this month, and the second in early May. The latest date the election can be held is 21 May. Administrative Appeals Tribunal president Justice David Thomas has resigned from the role, AAP reports. Thomas was appointed president of the tribunal and a judge of the federal court of Australia in June 2017. He will remain as a judge of the federal court. Attorney general Michaelia Cash said Thomas, who has been on leave, had provided strong leadership at the tribunal. Federal court judges Susan Kenny and Berna Collier will act as AAT president. The tribunal has not been without controversy in recent years, with claims Coalition-appointed members had been paid hundreds of thousands of dollars despite failing case finalisation benchmarks. There have also been concerns about conflicts of interest not properly being disclosed. The AAT provides independent merits review of a wide range of administrative decisions made by the federal government. The Department of Defence has confirmed the ABC’s reporting that HMAS Adelaide, currently assisting the recovery efforts in Tonga, suffered a power outage. Defence said back-up power has been activated to restore essential systems. The department has disputed reports that refrigeration and sanitation systems were down, and says food supplies have also not been adversely affected. It said the HMAS Adelaide is not under tow, and air-conditioning is operational in most areas of the ship. Defence said that the outage did not affect Australia’s ability to support requests for assistance from the Tongan government, and civilian specialists are en route to conduct an assessment. My colleague and live blogging extraordinaire Amy Remeikis appeared on The Project last week and, as she put it, her “rage bubbled to the surface” as she took the Australian’s Peter van Onselen to task about his much-criticised opinion piece slamming former Australian of the Year, Grace Tame for not smiling in a photo op with the PM. Remeikis told PVO the column was “devastating to so many people”. The clip went viral, and now PVO has had some time to reflect. According to the New Daily, in a podcast, Critical Line Item with Tom Ravlic, PVO says while his opinion hasn’t changed, if he had his time again, he wouldn’t have written the column: I think it was probably unnecessary for me to bother to write the opinion piece. To say all of those things. I can just think it. They didn’t change my mind. I’m still very firm, personally, of the view that [Tame’s actions were] uncalled for, if I could put it that way. And inappropriate, and she shouldn’t have done it. That’s different I should say to saying that on reflection I wouldn’t have written the opinion piece because I didn’t like the blow back that I got, I don’t care about that. That’s not a reason I wouldn’t write it on reflection. Seeing how strongly people feel about it doesn’t change my view. But it probably has changed my view on whether it needed to be written. Tasmania has over-reported coronavirus cases by more than 1,300 because of data errors, as well as infections being counted twice, AAP reports. The island state’s cumulative tally will be corrected and shifted downwards by 1,333, about 4% of its overall number of recorded cases, in Tuesday’s figures. Premier Peter Gutwein said the miscalculations were due to a system error, plus “some double counting” that occurred when rapid antigen positive test results began to be included in daily numbers. “We actually had some people that were logging in twice with both a PCR result and rapid antigen test result,” he told reporters on Monday. “It doesn’t change our understanding of transmission in Tasmania.” The health department says duplications occurred from 15 December to 23 January. “[The errors] didn’t affect any of our referring on of individuals for appropriate medical care,” deputy public health director Julie Graham said. “The main result was some people did get extra messaging related to being cases and related to being released from isolation. I do apologise for this.” Graham said the wrong numbers didn’t impact any public health decisions. “It didn’t have any effect on what we call our ‘epi curve’, whether our cases are increasing, decreasing or plateauing,” she said. Tasmania reopened to mainland hot spots on 15 December and has recorded five Covid-19 deaths since. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, says 4 million people in Australia are now eligible to receive their booster shot, and there are 18m doses waiting to be used. NSW police have confirmed a man and child have died after being washed off rocks while fishing at Little Bay Beach, Little Bay. The statement: A man and child have died after being pulled from the water in Sydney’s eastern suburbs this afternoon. Just after 3pm (Monday 31 January 2022), emergency services were called to Little Bay Beach, Little Bay, following reports a man and a boy had been washed off rocks while fishing. The man – believed to be in his 40s – was pulled from the water by Surf Lifesavers and a nine-year-old boy was winched from the water by the Westpac Rescue Helicopter. Paramedics performed CPR; however, both died at the scene. They are yet to be formally identified. A crime scene has been established by officers from Eastern Beaches Police Area Command and an investigation commenced into the circumstances surrounding the incident. A report will be prepared for the information of the coroner. AAP reports Australians stashed more money in the bank at the beginning of the Omicron outbreak and federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg hopes it will be used to revitalise the nation’s economy. A sharp rise in household deposits of 1.7% ($20.7bn) occurred in December, APRA figures published Monday show, as the number of Australians sick with the latest coronavirus variant reached record levels. The increase in deposits came as people shied away from going out in fear of catching the virus and reduced their spending, consumer surveys have shown. NAB economist Taylor Nugent said deposits increased at the same time as previous virus outbreaks. Asked on Melbourne radio about the increased savings, Frydenberg said this was due to a number of factors. He credited the government’s tax cuts and income support, as well as people’s reduced travel, for the greater savings. Frydenberg claimed people would use their savings to help businesses struggling from the Omicron wave. “There is that money there that will be spent and will generate economic activity and of course jobs,” he said. The increased deposits have not stopped people taking advantage of low interest rates, however. Credit growth for December rose 0.8% on the previous month, Reserve Bank data showed. This was only a little down on the upwardly revised figure of 1% for November. The Australian electoral commissioner, Tom Rogers says on ABC News that due to the pandemic, this upcoming federal election will be the most expensive ever, and could cost up to $400m, up from about $300m in 2019. Part of that additional cost will be due to more staff, and more equipment. He said, for example, the last election used 100,000 pencils, and now there will be 4.5m. There will also be 34,000 litres of hand sanitiser. Early voting has also been reduced to just two weeks before election day, and in combination with the social distancing and other Covid-19 measures, Rogers predicts there will be some delays when people go to vote, but the Australian Electoral Commission is doing its best to reduce the wait times. He says based on recent byelections, the AEC is expecting an increase in postal voting, and this could mean it could take slightly longer to determine the outcome in close seats. Rogers says he has met with Australia Post twice, and they’re working to receive the postal votes quickly so they can process them. By law, the AEC needs to wait 13 days after polling for postal votes to come in. Marles would not say whether Labor would support a royal commission into the pandemic response, but said once we get through the pandemic, then it will be time to consider it. He said for now the focus is on getting to the other side, and supporting people getting tests and vaccines. The ABC is reporting that the HMAS Adelaide, one of the navy’s largest vessels, a landing helicopter dock, has experienced power failures on its humanitarian aid mission to Tonga. The article quotes an email reportedly sent by HMAS Adelaide’s commander Captain Stuart Watters: Marine Technical Department have worked throughout the past few days to restore power and get us operational again.” “We are still experiencing issues with external communications and wanted to let you know that everyone onboard is safe. “We want to thank the technical team for their hard work in hot and difficult conditions which is enabling us to complete our task and restore services and communications. Guardian Australia has contacted the defence department for comment. Marles says Labor leader Anthony Albanese has been doing an incredible job leading the party: He has been very strategic in the way he has gone about it and has been very focused on one thing and that is election day and making sure that we are ready for that day which we expect to occur in April or May this year and that has been a focus. Whatever is in opinion polls will be there - we get that they feed a lot of the media cycle - but for us in terms of what we are doing, the one thing we are focused on is the election day and making sure that we are ready for it and we are confident about that. We are confident that we will put an alternative to the Australian people that we want so we think we are in a close fight but we think we feel that we will be able to give Australians the choice that they want. Asked to refute the government’s claims that Labor’s policy to offer free rapid antigen tests to people in Australia would cost $10bn, Marles says the government was doing back of the envelope costing, but wouldn’t say how much it would cost - saying the real issue is the lack of supply is causing massive disruption across the country. The consistent message you are getting from everywhere is an inability to get all the personnel that people need in their businesses working. And we are seeing in some places a quarter, half of people not being able to work in any given business. You just need to go to the supermarket to see the impact on supply chains that is having. For the first time in my lifetime I am seeing shelves in my supermarket empty without the commodities you would expect to buy there. Labor’s deputy leader Richard Marles is now on ABC News and is also asked about Newspoll and whether Labor’s lead accords with his anecdotal evidence. Marles says Labor politicians and supporters feel like they live in a “post-poll world” after the events of the 2019 election, and it is a “close contest”. He says the prime minister, Scott Morrison, is a “very crafty and capable politician”: We know that he is going to bring a lot to bed during the election campaign and our focus quite genuinely is on trying to make sure that we are developing the policies, the propositions for the Australian people so they have a choice at the next election which we think they badly want and we are going to be working very hard each and every day and we’re not going to be particular focus on whatever the news is in the polls between now and then. Tehan is asked why the commonwealth wouldn’t fund the latest business support in NSW with the NSW government. He points to the pandemic leave support, and investment tax measures as federal support for business, but shrugs it off as states making decisions about “individual needs”. The questions then turn to his portfolio, and when there will be a full re-opening to international travellers. He says he hopes it is sooner rather than later, and repeats comments from the PM that it’ll hopefully be around April for Easter. “We will take the advice from the medical authorities as we seek to expand on those markets,” he said. And finally on why Australia is joining a trade dispute between Europe and China, Tehan says it is a principled stand. We have always taken a very principled stand in addressing current trade disputes that we face with China, taking those trade disputes to the WTO where we think we have a strong case to do so. Eventually the European Union have sought consultations with China regarding trade disputes that they have currently got ... and that is also impacting exports from European Union countries as well, and we think that we have a real interest in this dispute that the EU and Lithuania are taking against China. Once again, a very principled stand in addressing the issues that we are confronting with our relationship with China. Trade and tourism minister Dan Tehan is on ABC News, and is asked about the “mood of the nation” ahead of the election, and whether the government has lost a lot of paint according to Newspoll. Tehan says the government has been dealing with the pandemic, and the current thinking is about having a clear plan coming out of the pandemic: When the time comes, we will be able to step back and put a very strong case to how Australia, as a nation has been able to deal with this pandemic, compared to countries right across the world. There has been difficulties and there continues to be difficulties but, when the time comes we will be able to present a case for not only how we have gone about dealing with the pandemic but what our plan is as we come out of the pandemic, to make sure Australia set up for the next five to 10 years. Will incumbency be a liability for the government now? Tehan says no. The election will be decided by whoever presents the best plan. He seems to indicate the federal government will contrast itself with the states. In the end will be what the contest will be at the next election. You have to remember the next election will be a contest. At the moment the Australian people, obviously, are looking at how they have been governed at the state and territory level, how they have been governed at the national level, and how governments at those two levels are dealing with the pandemic. Obviously, when asked they are making choices. The next federal election will be about the Coalition government, our record and what our plan is versus Anthony Albanese, his record, through what he has during the pandemic, which hasn’t been a lot, and his plan going forward. Once we get on that real contest I think we will see a very different mood in the electorate. Back at the anti-vaccine protests outside Parliament House, some demonstrators have left in the face of a severe thunderstorm which is setting in over Canberra. A large number of police have arrived, and appear to be preparing to move the protesters on. A still-large group of protesters have taken shelter under a covered area at the front of Parliament House; some bearing merchandise and flags bearing the logos of Donald Trump, the United Australia Party and the Melbourne Freedom Rally. Police are still forming a line between the protesters and the doors of Parliament House, and have gradually started shepherding demonstrators away from the front of the building. Some of the protesters were convinced that Anthony Albanese is in Parliament House and have been demanding he come out. His office says that Albanese – who has been in Melbourne for the last few days – is definitely not in Canberra. Healthcare workers have been protesting outside AGL’s Melbourne office today, calling on the energy company to close its coal-fired power stations and move to renewable energy by 2030. AGL is Australia’s largest corporate greenhouse gas polluter and the Age reported on Saturday the company’s remaining coal-fired power stations in Victoria are likely to close earlier than expected. The protest was organised by the activist organisation Healthy Futures which focuses on the health effects of the climate crisis and the air pollution caused by fossil fuels. Dr Simon Judkins, an emergency physician at Echuca Health says the health effects of the climate crisis are becoming more visible: As an emergency physician, the health impacts of the climate crisis hit home during the Black Summer bushfires treating patients suffering from the effects of smoke inhalation, or huddling in distress amidst the charred landscape surrounding them, while just this month we saw the Flying Doctor Service unable to take off due to extreme heat in Western Australia. South Australia has reported another 1,505 Covid-19 infections amid ongoing concerns for the state’s indigenous communities, AAP reports. Premier Steven Marshall said six more people had died, taking the state’s toll since the start of the pandemic to 117. He said 281 people were in hospital with the coronavirus including 25 in intensive care and four on ventilators. The new cases on Monday took the total number of active infections to 19,847 with the seven-day average falling to 1,849. Marshall said a meeting of the state’s Covid Response Committee had focused on providing support for Indigenous communities with Aboriginal people over-represented among the state’s total virus cases. There are currently more than 1,000 positive cases among Indigenous communities with 29 people in hospital and three in ICU. Cases on the APY lands in the state’s north had stabilised but concern remained for communities on the west coast, the premier said: We are seeing those numbers increase but we are seeing a massive response and we are learning more and more about the most appropriate way to respond to this particularly vulnerable community. Vaccination rates among SA’s remote areas are considered good, but more resources are being sent to assist in specific regions. The continued fall in virus cases came as SA’s school year began for some students. From Monday, children of essential workers and others considered vulnerable returned to schools across the state. They will be followed on Wednesday by students in reception and years 1, 7, 8 and 12 with other years learning online until February 14. Officials are still working to roll out rapid antigen tests to schools along with air purifiers, which will provided to some older sites and those with specific issues, including schools in Port Pirie where the local industry impacts on air quality. WA has recorded 22 new cases of Covid-19 in the state, with 12 of those locally-acquired, and the rest either from people coming from interstate or overseas who have been put into quarantine. I feel like we were doomed to this sort of response after Newspoll and the Australian Open men’s final within hours of each other. A large anti-vaccine protest on the front lawns outside Canberra’s Parliament House has seen hundreds of people mass outside the front doors of the building, demanding all politicians be “sacked”. Protesters are currently singing, drumming and playing musical instruments. Police have assembled lines in front of the glass Parliament House doors, to stop protesters reaching the entrance to the building. The demonstration has been building for several hours, with participants claiming to have come from all around the country. The protest – which had been supported online by Coalition politicians George Christensen and Gerard Rennick, and which originally was set to feature a speech from Craig Kelly – was inspired by a truck drivers’ protest in Canada over the weekend, with supporters encouraging “convoys” of trucks and cars to assemble in Canberra. There were traffic jams and delays in the streets around Parliament House earlier on Monday, as protesters arrived. Police had initially blocked roads around the building, but more than a dozen trucks and cars managed to drive up onto grass opposite Old Parliament House. A group of speakers, including members of prominent anti-vaccine groups, gave speeches raising debunked medical claims around vaccines, as well as claims relating to the Qanon conspiracy theory. Protesters have variously held a minute’s silence, played the Last Post, and sung Amazing Grace. “I’m surprised we haven’t been surrounded with police yet,” one man said on a live stream video, posted to Facebook by an anti-vaccine group. Another man said he was surprised there were not more officers. More than 98.6% of Canberra’s population aged over 12 has received at least two doses of Covid vaccine. Protesters are demanding politicians come out of the building to address the crowd. Federal parliament is not sitting this week, generally meaning there would be very few or no politicians in Parliament House. Palaszczuk was asked about whether cabinet discussed if Australian Open champion and Queenslander Ash Barty should get a statue in her home state. The premier said she thinks it would be great but she will speak to Barty about it: We’ll talk to Ash about what she wants. I’m just so proud of her. Everyone in cabinet is, and I don’t think there was a cabinet minister that didn’t watch the match. The new Fitzgerald inquiry into the Crime and Corruption Commission in Queensland has had $5m allocated for the six-month review, premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says. Looks like it may be easing off. There’s another protest outside parliament today. My colleague Josh Butler will have more on the protest soon. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says Tony Fitzgerald, the man whose landmark inquiry into police corruption in Queensland in 1989, will head up an inquiry into the Crime and Corruption Commission, following a parliamentary committee review late last year. The committee’s recommendations to government have all been accepted by the state cabinet, and Palaszczuk said Fitzgerald is the best person to lead the review into the CCC, given he was the architect of the CCC following the Fitzgerald inquiry. The inquiry will last for six months and will look at its investigation and charging functions and the role of seconding police officers to the CCC, among other things. Queensland health minister Yvette D’ath says the state government has reviewed the suspension of elective surgery until the start of March and decided to keep the suspension in place as planned. She said: It’s a day-by-day, week-by-week proposition. We are not through the wave as far as across the state. You know, we’re still seeing some higher numbers in the north. And we want to make sure that we’re through that wave before we look at pulling back any of those beds that we’ve secured in the private hospital sector. And as we said, we had suspended elective surgery until the start of March. And I said we’d review that at the end of January. There will be no change to that suspension at this time. So we will still suspend that elective surgery until the start of March. The Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says there were 7,462 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, with three deaths. There were 2,849 positive rapid antigen tests, and 15,586 total PCR tests. Queensland’s vaccination rate now sits at 91.98% having at least one dose, and 89.53% fully vaccinated. 55.17% of the eligible Queensland population have had their booster shot. For 5-11 year olds, 33.37% are fully vaccinated. In 12-15 year olds, it sits at 67.29% double dosed, with health minister Yvette D’ath noting the vaccination rate has slowed, and urging vaccinations to continue as this cohort returns to school. The three deaths are a person in their 60s, one in their 80s, and one in their 90s. Two had two doses of vaccines and one had three, but the chief health officer said not to look at one day’s data, but to look at the trend. There are 744 people in hospital being treated for Covid-19, that includes 46 patients in hospital and in intensive care. Melbourne Airport’s long-held plans for a third runway are being released to the public, AAP reports. The plans for the 3000m north-south runway will be released Monday and made available for consultation until May 16. The $1.9bn project is expected to increase the airport’s capacity by about 40%, with around 136,500 more take-offs and landings each year. Planning maps show noise from the extra flights will be heard in Melbourne’s north and west, and the airport has developed an online tool that will calculate the impact on residents at different times of day. Melbourne Airport chief executive Lyell Strambi told reporters on Monday some suburbs may experience less noise. “There is no doubt that additional activity does bring more noise to the surroundings, but it really depends on where you live,” he said. Melbourne Airport says the extra runway will make it easier for flights to depart and arrive on time, and prevent shutdowns in high winds. It’s also expected to attract new international airlines to Tullamarine, which will lead to more direct flights to international cities. Passenger numbers at Tullamarine reached 37m in 2019, and are forecast to reach 83m by 2046. There are still fewer flights than usual due to Covid-19, with activity on the weekend at half the usual levels. “I think Covid has been obviously a huge impact on the travel industry here and abroad and we are still in the throes of recovering from it,” Strambi said. But he said the existing two runways were nearing capacity before the pandemic, with their cross-shaped runway configuration causing congestion and delays at peak times. The ultimate scheme for the airport, conceived in its initial planning 60 years ago, is to build four runways in a hashtag configuration. It’s estimated the new runway will create 37,000 jobs for the state and add $4.6bn to GDP by 2046. During construction, it will create jobs for about 650 people over the four- to five-year build. Building work could start as early as 2023 with planes taking off from the runway in 2027 at the earliest. The runway plans are yet to be approved by the federal government. Turning back to the Victorian parliamentary hearing on the pandemic powers. Liberal MP Kim Wells is questioning Sutton. He asks if Sutton knows who was on the panel that gave Novak Djokovic a medical exemption to compete in the Australian Open. (This was before his visa was cancelled twice by authorities.) Sutton says he doesn’t. He goes on: It is of no relevance to me whatsoever in my role as chief health officer or in the making of pandemic orders as to how that panel is constituted. Wells asks Sutton if he or an acting chief officer gave advice on the medical exemption. Sutton says they didn’t. Children and young people need more support to deal with the impacts of Covid-19, new research reveals. A survey of 1,500 parents and more than 1,000 children by Save the Children Australia found the past two years have placed intense pressure on learning, social connections, mental health and wellbeing, with disadvantaged students most affected. AAP reports: Children in Victoria and NSW who have experienced extended lockdowns have been hit hardest when it comes to the impacts on learning and development as well as mental health and well being. The research found more than half of parents surveyed were worried about the long-term effects of the pandemic on their children. Only 17% of parents surveyed believe governments have done enough, and more than 80% think the federal government has a responsibility to support children’s recovery from the pandemic. Getting kids back into sport and initiating mental health programs were highest on the list of support measures parents want from the government. Save the Children Australia is calling on the government to to deliver a comprehensive national Covid recovery plan for children and young people. Executive director Matt Gardiner says the government must listen to young people. “Their experience is unique and their recovery - physically, mentally and socially - is critical,” he said in a statement. “We cannot afford for students to disengage further from school. This would create a disastrous ripple effect for children, communities and the economy.” Children and young people will also have the chance to share their pandemic experiences as part of a national government survey. The survey for people aged nine to 17 - and their parents, carers and grandparents - asks for stories about how Covid-19 has affected them and how they are coping. National Children’s Commissioner Anne Hollonds says children and parents sharing their experiences will help governments improve support services. “The surveys will consider the social, emotional, educational, and other impacts children and young people have experienced over the past two years,” she said. In addition to the children’s survey, parents, grandparents and carers are being invited to complete a second survey, to capture their experiences and perspectives about the pandemic’s impact on children and their families. Lifeline 13 11 14 Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800 (for people aged 5 to 25) With that I’ll pass over to Josh Taylor, who will expertly guide you through the afternoon. Here is an update on the saga of the former WeChat account of prime minister Scott Morrison. Story via AAP: The prime minister’s office has confirmed WeChat’s parent company Tencent has reached out after months of snubbing. The office had repeatedly tried to contact the company since July 2021 – including the CEO – after Scott Morrison lost control of his account. A Tencent executive reached out to the office on January 24 after the story went public. “The prime minister’s office is now in direct discussions with the company about the matter and looks forward to a resolution,” a spokesperson for the prime minister said. Liberal senator James Paterson, who chairs parliament’s intelligence and security committee, said the blocking of Mr Morrison’s account was sanctioned by the Chinese government and amounted to foreign interference. “What the Chinese government has done by shutting down an Australian account is foreign interference of Australian democracy in an election year,” he told 2GB. The office didn’t confirm whether any referrals to intelligence agencies were made when access to the account was lost. The team over at AAP have just filed this update on the flood situation in South Australia: The Australian Defence Force has begun flying relief food supplies to Coober Pedy, in South Australia’s north, after heavy rains cut road and rail links to the region. Four RAAF flights will leave Adelaide on Monday with two more scheduled on Tuesday carrying 20 tonnes of groceries and other essentials. More could be sent depending on the prevailing conditions and the needs of locals. Brigadier Graham Goodwin said the force was ready to help out in any way it could. “Our principal duty here is to assist the local community of Coober Pedy and the outlying areas, giving them surety and certainty of their food supplies,” he said. With train tracks washed away in parts and roads underwater, including the Stuart Highway, the inland drenching has also disrupted food and other supplies to both the Northern Territory and Western Australia. More rains are forecast across SA’s north this week, with up to 100 millimetres possible in some parts. On Monday, the Bureau of Meteorology issued a severe weather warning for the region, saying dangerous and life-threatening flash flooding was possible. It said the intense rainfall was the result of a trough extending from a low-pressure system embedded over northern WA. State Emergency Service Deputy Chief Officer Liz Connell said locals should be prepared for more severe conditions and should keep clear of floodwaters. She also urged travellers to delay any travel plans to the area with many roads still closed. “We are expecting more rain over the next 72 hours and are expecting that will create more challenges in getting vehicles through and getting supplies to that community,” she said. “It will be good in the long run for pastoralists in the area, but we just need to get through this initial damage.” Ms Connell said current estimates suggested regular rail freight routes would be re-established between February 14 and 17, but that timeline could be reassessed depending on how much rain fell this week. She said damage reports for roads across SA north continued to be hampered by high water levels making full assessments impossible at this stage. A 14-day major emergency was declared in South Australia on Friday, allowing the state’s Police Commissioner Grant Stevens to direct the movement of freight, ensure food security and co-ordinate relief efforts. The Victorian chief health officer, Prof Brett Sutton, is giving evidence before a parliamentary committee. Asked if Covid-19 hospitalisations and intensive care admissions have peaked, Sutton replies: I think it’s unlikely to go above 1,500 hospitalisations and I think it’s probably already peaked He said there may be “up and down days” but hospitalisations “won’t significantly increase from the position we’re in right now”. Back to the pandemic hearing in Victoria, where chief health officer Brett Sutton is being questioned by Liberal MP Georgie Crozier. She asks him if he provided advice to the government to increase the crowds for the Australian Open finals from 65% capacity to 80%. Sutton: I had a request for a public health view and I provided no recommendation for or against. I said that it was primarily a matter of social licence and social considerations. He says the pandemic legislation that passed parliament last year gave the health minister the opportunity to make decisions based on “broader considerations”. Crozier also asked if the government had sought his advice on mandating third vaccine doses. He replied that they hadn’t. Sutton: When and if I get a request from the minister for advice on those potential measures, I’ll be very happy to assess the epidemiological actuation of that time and to provide my recommendations. Asked about the role of QR code check-ins, given contact tracing is no longer happening, Sutton said their role was under review by the public health time. Sutton: I’ve asked the team to complete it [the review] by mid-February. It’s already informing those settings that appear to be at higher risk, where QR codes really should continue. The QR code system has also supported the vaccines certification process, so that’s another element that we need to consider with the use of QR codes and the Service Victoria app. Here is a story we did last week about the way QR code check-ins are being used during the Omicron wave. An update from the parliamentary committee where the Victorian chief health officer Brett Sutton is giving evidence. He also reportedly said earlier that it was not his decision to stop IVF in Victoria because of the Omicron wave, but that he was consulted on it. I mean, “Lithuanian foreign minister” would be a fair way down my list of must-see public speakers, but this looks like it could be pretty engaging. Ok then. This is worth your time over lunch: sport and AFLW have elevated conversations about inclusion and diversity, but what does that really mean? A seven-day lock-in has begun for residents in the remote community of Galiwin’ku on Elcho Island in the Northern Territory amid a spike in Covid-19 cases. The lock-in, which allows locals to move around but not leave the island, will continue until 5 February and comes after the end of a more restrictive lockdown in the area. It comes after coronavirus cases in the area grew to 319 since 10 January, with 285 of those still considered active infections. The full story on the outbreak is here: Thank you for another stellar turn Matilda. With that, I shall hand you over to the always incredible Nino Bucci who will bring you all the news updates for the next little while. Over at the Victorian Covid press conference, the deputy premier, James Merlino, is on back to school challenges: I think the biggest challenge will be in relation to staff absences and we’re seeing that across the board ... [in] any industry, we can see the impact of the Omicron variant, primary close contacts, those who are positive – we are going to have staffing challenges. That’s why it was so important to establish a pool - a job opportunity pool of retired teachers ... we’ve got 350 former teachers and 30 former principals who are ready and able to support schools if they face some challenges in relation to staffing. Jumping back to the public pandemic hearing in Victoria and Liberal MP Kim Wells raises a point of order before Sutton begins his presentation to the committee. He seems to be taking issue with the fact Sutton is appearing via video link. Wells: Can he see that these hearings have been held in a Covid safe way and that is that we are socially distant and we have our masks on. Can we just get confirmation that he can see that? Sutton: Yes, looks pretty Covid safe to me. Wells: Why aren’t you in the room with us? And why are you doing it via Zoom? If we’re following all the Covid safe plans I don’t understand. You’re very keen to stand next to the premier giving press conferences but when it comes to a public hearing, you’re not here. Labor’s Harriet Shing raises her own point of order. She says there is no requirement for Sutton to be present. Lots of yelling ensues. Chair Suzzanna Sheed says she already ruled that it was okay for Sutton to appear via video link and that they’re wasting time. Sutton begins his presentation. Tasmania has also released their Covid-19 numbers, recording no deaths but clocking up an additional 504 new Covid-19 cases overnight. There are now 16 Covid positive people in hospital in the state, down from 20 yesterday, with one person in the ICU. The former primer minister (and long time Murdoch critic), Kevin Rudd, has weighed into The Australian pie chart controversy. Victoria’s newly established Pandemic Declaration Accountability and Oversight Committee is holding its first public hearing this afternoon, with chief health officer Brett Sutton and the health department deputy secretary Nicole Brady its first witnesses. The committee was established when the state’s new pandemic laws came into effect late last year and is chaired by Suzanna Sheed, an independent MP, and deputy chaired by Jeff Bourman from the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers. It also has four Labor members and three Coalition. The committee has the power to recommend changes to pandemic orders and refer any matters to Victorian ombudsman Deborah Glass for investigation. They have two hours today to question Sutton and Brady. The Bureau of Meteorology is warning that there is a chance of flash flood flooding across NSW, Victoria and inland South Australia. Damaging winds and hail could also be on the agenda for the day. Stay safe everyone. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded another 537 new Covid-19 cases in the latest reporting period. There were no deaths, and 62 Covid-positive people are now in hospital, including two in the ICU and one person requiring a ventilator. A heads up for my beautiful South Australian readers: Here is Merlino on Victoria’s Covid hospitalisations: 873 people are in hospital – that’s down from yesterday’s 889 and the seven-day average of 963. 102 people are in ICU - that’s down from 111 yesterday. 33 are on a ventilator, down from 35. Sadly, we are reporting eight people with Covid have passed away. James Merlino: 38.9% of Victorians 18 and over have had three doses - up from 38.1% yesterday. More than 2 million Victorians have had a third dose but that means roughly 2.2 million are eligible for their third dose and have not yet had it. This is really critically important ... There are currently more than 250,000 bookings available for people 12 and above at state sites over the next 30 days. Merlino also touched on the on five-to-11-year-old vaccination rollout: 44% of that age group that have had one dose – up from 42% yesterday. And remember this age group only became eligible three weeks ago so this is a huge effort. James Merlino: All of the 51,000 air purifiers are out at schools as we promised. More than six million rapid antigen tests will be delivered by today, as we promised. So, all the rapid antigen tests that schools need to conduct that surveillance testing are available in schools for the next couple of weeks and then we’ll continue with the delivery of rapid antigen test kits for the next couple of weeks – we provide that supply for that four-week period. The deputy premier and education minister for Victoria, James Merlino, is holding a press conference to speak about the beginning of the school year today: It’s a special day today – back to school, day one, term one. This week more than one million students return to school including 77,500 prep students for their very first day of school. We made a commitment that we’d get students back to school, day one term one and that’s exactly what is happening. A new Covid sub-variant circulating in Australia is not yet causing concern among medical experts according the deputy chief medical officer, reports Maeve Bannister from AAP. Prof Michael Kidd says although the Omicron sub-variant – known as BA.2, or colloquially as the “son of Omicron” – appears to have a higher “growth advantage” than the original variant, it is not yet known whether it is more severe. He also says it is too early to tell if there is any impact on the vaccine effectiveness against the sub-variant. We are not picking up anything that is causing concern at the moment. The sub-variant was first detected in southern Africa and is quickly becoming the dominant strain in a number of countries. It was first detected in Australia in December last year in a Queensland patient. I have no reason for actually sharing this on the blog, I just think it’s really funny and we could all use a laugh on a Monday morning. Of course the big talk of the town today is the NSW Liberals going to war with their federal big brother over the latest round of business support payments. Here is what the state treasurer Matt Kean has to say about that this morning: This government is absolutely focused on reducing the cost of living for families right across New South Wales ... Yesterday, I wrote to treasurer Frydenberg and officially told him that the risk to the New South Wales economy was a 4% contraction if case numbers go up over the next quarter. This is such a huge burden that will be borne by our small and medium businesses and they need the commonwealth government’s help now more than ever. The New South Wales government is stepping up to the plate. We want to ensure that small businesses in New South Wales, particularly those who have been hardest hit – retailers, tourism, hospitality, restaurants, cafes – are able to keep trading so we can ensure that we see our economy bounce back stronger on the other side. The New South Wales government is doing its bit and we continue to call on the commonwealth to stand by small businesses, don’t step aside from small business. Of course with kids all around NSW prepping to go back to school today the education minister Sarah Mitchell is at the press conference today talking about this new $500 after school care scheme. This is a really exciting day for many families across New South Wales with the announcement of this new $500 per child before and after school care voucher. We know a lot of working families, and particularly our essential workers, rely really heavily on these before and after school and vacation services and this is about helping with that affordability, helping with household budgets, knowing you can apply for this voucher through Service NSW at the end of February and get that $500 credit that you can then give to your provider and have that come off the cost of your early childhood education cost when it comes to before and after school care. For parents and families, it will be a really simple process ... we’ve set the service up well. Okay, enough with the politics, here is the chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant with the Covid numbers for the day. In terms of the number of cases in hospital, we have 2,779 people in hospital, including 185 people in ICU of whom 67 are ventilated. There were 13,026 positive test results including 5,664 positive rapid antigen tests and 7,362 positive PCR tests. Sadly today we’re reporting the deaths of 27 people with Covid, 17 men and 10 women, and I extend my condolences to the family for their loss. Of the 27 people died, five were in their 60s, six were in their 70s, 10 were in their 80s and six were in their 90s. Eight people had received three doses of the vaccine, 16 people had received two doses and three were not vaccinated. And of the four who died under the age of 65, three were men and one was a woman. Three had received two doses of the vaccine and one person was unvaccinated. All four had significant underlying health conditions. Oh wow, the NSW government is really making the most out of the federal government refusing to match their latest round of business funding, with the premier stating that “over the last two years but our success in this state has been putting businesses and people before the budget and will continue to do that”. Which like... Yeah. Perrottet: We’ve always said we want to make sure that parents come first in the state, we know cost of living is a challenge for many, many families. And this support today we believe will make a real difference. We spoke about ... the importance of greater support for childcare, greater support for early childhood education, and we have ideas around that in terms of taking greater responsibilities here in NSW. We believe that is the best approach going forward. But for the levers that we do have, we do everything that we can as a state to help mums and dads right across NSW. And I believe these payments through his vouchers will provide that important support for those moms and dads across the state who use before and after school care to help balance work and family life. It will also provide important support for the industry. We know that before and after school care, just like childcare, just like early child education has also gone through a difficult time over the last two years and providing this extra support for parents will support providers as well. That’s going to happen through Service NSW, like the Dine &amp; Discover vouchers apparently. More details in a bit. OK, let’s jump across to NSW where the premier is announcing a $500 voucher to all primary school parents for before and after school care. Dominic Perrottet: Today, we are making an important announcement for mums and dads, parents right across the state. We are providing $500 vouchers for before and after school care. We know that for parents this pandemic has been incredibly tough, balancing homeschooling with work, and we want to do whatever we can to improve the daily juggle. So this announcement today, this $500 voucher, will put downward pressure on family budgets but importantly, help mums and dads balance work and family life. We know it’s been a challenge. We know in a modern environment, getting up and going to work, getting the kids to school, doing those things can become enormously challenging and difficult. NSW Health has released some additional information about the 27 people who died over the latest reporting period: Sadly, NSW Health is today reporting the deaths of 27 people with Covid-19; 17 men and 10 women. Of the 27 people who died; five were in their 60s, six were in their 70s, 10 were in their 80s and six were in their 90s. Older age is a significant risk factor for serious illness and death for Covid-19, particularly when combined with significant underlying health conditions. Eight people who died had received three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, 16 people had received two doses and three people were not vaccinated. Of the four people who died who were aged under 65, three were men and one was a woman. Three people had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine and one person was unvaccinated. All four people had significant underlying health conditions. Six of the 27 people were from southern Sydney, six people were from south western Sydney, two people were from northern Sydney, two people were from Sydney’s Inner West, two people were from the Central Coast, two people were from Wollongong, two people were from Maitland, two people were from the Riverina region, one person was from the Northern Beaches, one person was from the Northern Rivers region and one person was from the Tweed Heads region. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. This brings the total number of Covid-19 related deaths in NSW since the beginning of the pandemic to 1,394. Thank god SOMEONE is taking a stand! Good on ya Micky and Liz! The Country Liberals senator, Sam McMahon, has confirmed in a statement that she resigned from the party on Friday. McMahon said: This has not been an easy decision and I have wrestled with it in recent times. It brings to an end a 30-year association. I feel I no longer have the confidence of or in the CLP. There are a number of unresolved issues beyond the pre-selection. These issues include formal complaints lodged with the management committee that have not garnered a response let alone an acknowledgement. My intentions regarding the next election will become clearer as the date draws closer. Speculation regarding the next parliamentary sittings in a week’s time, will also become clearer. I currently don’t have any plans for my future, political or otherwise. I intend to vigorously pursue my private Senator’s bill ‘Ensuring Northern Territory Rights’ when parliament returns and continue working hard for the Territory. Last week, we reported that McMahon had been approached by the Liberal Democrats to defect to the cross-bench and run for the minor party at the next election after losing preselection to Jacinta Price. McMahon seems to be ruling nothing out with this mysterious statement promising things will become clearer but she also has no plans for the future. Keep ‘em guessing. The prime minister of New Zealand, Jacinda Ardern, has returned a negative Covid-19 test after she was deemed a close contact of a positive case. Ardern went into self-isolation on Saturday after she was exposed to a case during a flight to Auckland from the town of Kerikeri on 22 January. She took a PCR test on Sunday and returned a negative result on Monday morning. Ardern is fully vaccinated and received a booster shot on 17 January. The prime minister’s office says Ardern will continue isolating until the end of Tuesday in line with ministry of health guidance. Ardern will chair Tuesday’s cabinet meeting remotely and the deputy prime minister, Grant Robertson, will attend post-cabinet on her behalf, the office said. An independent schools body in Queensland is concerned entire boarding schools could be ordered into quarantine as Covid-19 close contacts under the state’s back-to-school plan, reports AAP’s Marty Silk. Under the state government’s plan, face masks will be mandatory for all high school students and staff, and provided and strongly recommended for students in years three-to-six, when classes return on 7 February. Schools must ensure adequate ventilation by opening classroom windows and doors, relocating classes outdoors or providing mechanical ventilation. The chief executive of Independent Schools Queensland, Christopher Mountford, backs the plan but has called for more details about quarantine and isolation rules, particularly for boarding schools. So if you think about a boarding facility with ... lots of students living together – the way that the close contact rules would work at the moment, we might see whole boarding school facilities considered close contacts, and you might see some students therefore quarantine for a long period of time... The state government is very much aware of this issue, and they’re working through at the moment to find some more reasonable and practical solutions for boarding schools to ensure we don’t see those boarding students in quarantine for an unnecessary period of time. For the first four weeks of term, the government will also provide rapid antigen tests to schools while students and staff will have priority access to tests at Queensland Health clinics. Mountford said schools, particularly boarding facilities, expect the RATs to be delivered this week so they are at schools and ready to roll out from 7 February. The state will also provide RATs to staff entering remote communities and all school camps, excursions, assemblies, and large gatherings will be suspended. Mountford also said it was possible that some schools may still have to close due to Covid-19 outbreaks in coming months. He said the pandemic remains unpredictable and staff shortages could lead to temporary shutdowns, more likely at a local level. That would be of last resort, it would be something that everyone would be working very hard to avoid ... But we do need to realise, I think, that over the next few months it’s going to be a challenging period for schools, It’s not going to be easy and smooth, and some of those things might come up. Albanese: The industry minister said some 18 months ago that we’d be making mRNA vaccines within 9-12 months and we still don’t have it. This government’s failure on the big grand slam of failures during this pandemic of tracing, testing, quarantine facilities and vaccinations is there for all to see. And the pattern of behaviour is that the government is complacent. The government sits back and says, ‘She’ll be right, mate!’ And doesn’t put in place the mechanisms and the planning that would ensure that economic restrictions weren’t ramped up because of the consequences for people’s health. Labor woke up to some good news with the latest Newspoll placing them comfortably ahead of their Coalition rivals. Why don’t we listen in to the opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, who has been out and about at a RAT production site for his mini-victory lap. We need to act right now and that means, at the moment, to ramp up the purchase of rapid antigen tests overseas, but also right now we could be backing Australian businesses to make these products here. What we’ve seen is an Australian Government that has just refused to engage. We saw the first orders from the Australian Government for a rapid antigen test placed in January – this month. It’s extraordinary that three years into the pandemic, in spite of the fact that Scott Morrison some five months ago, as well as Greg Hunt, were saying that this would be an important part of the process of dealing with Covid. We saw no action from this government. And that’s why businesses like this one and businesses across this sector are just incredibly frustrated because they could have been making things right here just like we could have been right now, making mRNA vaccines here. If you were wondering when we will be hearing from the Victorian authorities, wonder no more. The answer is 11am AEDT. It seems that Hunt is on a damage control mission this morning, trying to drive home that the federal government have been supporting the aged care sector throughout the pandemic (after some in the sector came out to say the opposite). At the commonwealth level we have already delivered over 9.2m rapid antigen tests directly, of which 7.6m have gone to aged care, continuously and consistently since August of last year. The pharmacies programs, the concessional rapid antigen test program – I’m pleased to be able to report what we have seen is over 2,800 pharmacies deliver over 2.4m rapid antigen tests, well over double of what we had expected by this stage to over 563,000 pensioners and concession card holders. Over double of what we expected, again. They are getting strong supplies. It will vary from pharmacy to pharmacy and strong take-up but there is more capacity for those that are looking, please contact Find a Pharmacy. Hunt: Another very important thing is that we have seen a consistent decrease in cases, hospitalisations and ICU. When we look at the last 10 days, it is a decrease in hospitalisations around the country for people with Covid of 487 and people with Covid in ICU is down 50 over that period to 367 as of yesterday. Today’s figures will be updated and a decrease on those who are ventilated by 12, down to 133. Well within the capacity in the system. The challenge here in Australia has been workforce but the results are significantly below even the best-case projections that we saw back in early December and mid-December and that has been shown both through the states and more generally at the national level. That is important. Hunt has started the press conference encouraging Australians to get their booster vaccine dose, now that the eligibility requirements have officially changed from four months since someone’s second dose to three. We know that there are approximately 18m doses available and we have the capacity to inoculate everybody who is eligible and we would encourage people to come forward. The simple message is if ... you are eligible and you haven’t come forward for a first or second dose or your booster, now is the time, please don’t wait. We encourage everything to come forward and an extra 4.2 million people are eligible for boosters as of today, moving from a four-month eligibility to a three-month nationwide eligibility since the second dose. OK, let’s jump over to Greg Hunt now who is live now in Canberra. Dozens of nurses, doctors and other healthcare workers will protest outside AGL’s Melbourne headquarters calling for the energy giant to replace coal with renewable energy by 2030, reports AAP. The action kicks off at 11am on Monday and will feature a mock medical ward to demonstrate the health impacts of air pollution and climate change. Protesters will deliver an open letter signed by 25 health organisations and 600 healthcare workers, calling for AGL to commit to the World Health Organisation’s recommendation. Australian Federation of Medical Women president Magdalena Simonis said: As frontline healthcare workers, we’ve seen the deadly impacts of Covid-19 but we’ve also seen the health impacts of climate change as heatwaves and bushfires continue to get more frequent and more severe ... As Australia’s biggest climate polluter, AGL must put people’s health first and commit to replacing coal with renewable energy this decade if we are to avoid the worst impacts of the climate crisis. Echuca emergency physician Simon Judkins said without rapid action to replace coal “our already stretched health system will struggle to provide the high-quality care that we all need deserve”. AAP has contacted AGL for a response. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, says she looks forward to welcoming the US secretary of state and the foreign ministers of Japan and India to Australia next month. The foreign ministers of the “Quad” diplomatic grouping are due to meet in Melbourne in mid-February. The foreign ministers of Australia, Japan, India and the US have previously met in the Quad format in New York (2019), Tokyo (2020) and virtually (2021). The first leader-level summits of the Quad were also held last year, as the four countries seek to coordinate their responses to the rise of China. Payne told the Australian newspaper: We are a vital network of liberal democracies cooperating to give our region strategic choices, with a focus on practical steps to build the resilience and sovereignty of all states. This is a further demonstration of the Morrison government’s efforts to actively shape and influence our region and world by deepening partnerships at a time of strategic competition, threats to liberal international order and increasing uncertainty. Australia has distributed 18m doses of Covid-19 vaccine to neighbouring countries but is being urged to dedicate money and resources to Covax – the global vaccination mechanism – so that the world’s least-inoculated countries can access vaccines. Australia’s “vaccine diplomacy”, focusing on bilateral donations to the Pacific and south-east Asia has come at the expense of commitments to the global Covax facility, to which it has committed zero doses and only $130m. The Delta variant emerged from highly unvaccinated India, and Omicron from Africa, which has the world’s lowest vaccination rates. With major new variants detected, on average, every four months, there are concerns that persistently laggard vaccination rates in the developing world will allow new variants to keep emerging, sparking new global waves and prolonging the pandemic. You can read the full report below: Looks like we will be hearing from the health minister Greg Hunt in about 35 minutes. OK, let’s chat about hospitalisation numbers. In NSW the overall hospital number is up by 116, now sitting at 2,779. There are now 185 people in the ICU which is an increase of three. Victoria has actually seen a small drop with 873 in hospital, down 16 from Sunday. ICU numbers are also down, by nine this time, now sitting at 102. Of course, the state also recorded eight deaths in the latest reporting period so, tragically, this likely accounts for some of this decrease. Australia’s sovereign wealth fund, the Future Fund, has invested more than $90m in weapons manufacturer Raytheon Technologies, whose laser-guided bomb was allegedly used in an airstrike on a detention centre in Yemen this month killing nearly 100 civilians. Documents released under freedom of information laws show the Future Fund, which invests on behalf of the Australian government, had $91.22m invested in Raytheon as of December last year. Amnesty International claims that a laser-guided bomb was used in an attack by the Saudi-led coalition on a detention centre in Sa’adah in north-west Yemen on 21 January that killed at least 91 people and injured 200 more. It was described by the UN as “the worst civilian-casualty incident in the last three years in Yemen”. You can read the full report from Ben Doherty and Ben Butler below: A member of Australia’s Winter Olympics team who received a positive PCR test on arrival ahead of the Beijing 2022 Games, has now tested negative, reports AAP. The unnamed person, who went into isolation after the airport test, underwent a second test in Beijing, which has come back negative. The team member, believed to be an athlete, will now undergo a final test today (AEDT), which if again negative, will allow the member to return to their usual routine. The positive news come a day after alpine skier Madi Hoffman was ruled out of the Games after suffering a serious knee injury. Hoffman, 21, has vowed to fight back after the heartbreak of being ruled out due to an ACL injury incurred when competing in the US just days out from the Games. Hoffman won’t be replaced in the Australian team, which now drops to 43 athletes. Australian team chef de mission Geoff Lipshut said from Beijing: Madi had been having a fantastic season and earned her Olympic selection. She is a great alpine talent and this isn’t the end of her Olympic story... I know this is a devastating moment for any young athlete, but Madi has the strength and support network to come back from this ahead of Milan Cortina 2026. Hoffman shared her disappointing news online, but vowed to be back on the slopes soon. I guess this is how my cookie crumbles … I tore my ACL racing the Utah Invitational after getting named to the Olympic team. The universe just gave me a pretty big kick in the gut but alas, ski racing I will see you soon. US coalmining giant Peabody Energy has repeatedly submitted incorrect greenhouse gas emissions reports to the Australian government, prompting questions about the reliability of national climate data based on company assessments. The Clean Energy Regulator found Peabody had a history of filing inaccurate reports required under the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act due to calculation errors, poor record-keeping and inconsistent data collection and analysis. The mistakes were in both directions, leading to significant under- and over-reporting of emissions from the underground Wambo coalmine in New South Wales. The total error was large – when added up, out by more than 51% of the total emissions from the site – but the under- and over-reporting largely cancelled each other out. It meant the submitted total was 5.4% lower than what it should have been. You can read the full report below: The Coalition has recorded its worst result in the Newspoll since the September 2018 leadership spill that saw Scott Morrison become prime minister. The Coalition recorded a primary vote of 34% in the poll (down two points) to Labor’s 41% (up three). The Greens attracted 11% of the vote, One Nation 3%, and other independents and minor parties 11%. On a two-party-preferred basis Labor leads 56% to 44%, which points to a decisive victory if an election were held today and is a massive deterioration in the government vote from the previous poll in December (which Labor led 53-47). Morrison’s net satisfaction has dropped by 11 points to negative 19, his lowest since the 2020 summer bushfire crisis. Anthony Albanese’s approval is 43% (up four points), together with a two-point decline in disapproval he has reached net zero. Morrison has a narrow lead as preferred prime minister, 43% to 41%, although the incumbent traditionally leads this measure and the result is another substantial deterioration in support for Morrison. Labor now leads the Coalition on the question of which party is best to tackle Covid (33% to 32%), and has improved on a range of other policy measures. Of course this poll is only a snapshot and there is plenty of time for the Coalition to recover before a May poll, but it seems Australians did not have the hot vaxxed summer Morrison hoped would put them in a better frame of mind about the direction of the country. Josh Frydenberg has confirmed that Scott Morrison’s position as prime minister is safe ahead of the upcoming federal election. Rowland: Is Scott Morrison the best person to lead the Coalition to the election? Frydenberg: Yes, he is. He will be the first prime minister since John Howard to serve a full term and to go to an election. And Australians know that he’s working hard every day to deliver the best health and economic outcomes. Now, of course, he’s been subject to some pretty hard personal attacks and obviously that – that’s taken its toll, but I know he is very resilient and I know he’s also very focused to work hard for the Australian people. Rowland: I asked that question, the Liberal party has a pretty brutal history about dispatching leaders who aren’t worked for them, so his job is safe, is what you’re saying? Frydenberg: Yes, I am. Josh Frydenberg isn’t done with his media rounds this morning and is being questioned over those worrying Newspoll results on ABC News Breakfast now. Host Michael Rowland: You have only got four months until the election and voters have been hearing your message certainly on the economy for weeks now, but they’re still, according to this poll, they’re not buying what you’re selling. That’s a worry, isn’t it? Frydenberg: Well, as you just said, you know, polls will come and go and we know that there is still a number of months to the next election and the Australian people will make their decision then and there after what will be, no doubt, a hard-fought campaign. But many political obituaries were written ahead of the 2019 election and many false prophecies were made by those in the media, dare I say it, and our political opponents and they turned out to be wrong. So no one should get ahead of themselves. We know what needs to be done, we have an economic plan that we’re rolling out and some of those numbers where we see people going into work, 1.7 million more Australians in work today than when compared when the Coalition came to government including 1 million more women is something to celebrate, something not to be complacent about either. Health officials in New South Wales warned vaccines “may be less effective” against the Omicron variant and could lead to an increase in hospitalisations, just days before premier Dominic Perrottet announced Covid-19 restrictions would be scrapped. On 10 December, NSW Health’s Covid-19 critical intelligence unit published a briefing note on what was then the emerging Omicron variant, which had been discovered in South Africa in late November. Based on emerging data at the time, the unit warned of early evidence suggesting that vaccines could be less effective against the strain, and of “enhanced transmissibility” which suggested Omicron had a “substantial growth advantage over Delta”. It also flagged preliminary evidence suggesting “an increased risk of reinfection” from the variant, and pointed to increased hospitalisation rates in the Gauteng province of South Africa. You can read the full report below: The Liberal NSW treasurer Matt Kean really isn’t pulling punches against his federal counterpart this morning, stating he doesn’t “have much hair left to pull out” out of frustration. Kean: We’re not saying splash money willy nilly across the economy. This is a very targeted package to those parts of the economy that need the most help because we want to get them through to the other side. So they can continue employing people, continue serving customers and continue to grow our economy. And as I said, it’s not just the NSW economy that will benefit from this investment that the NSW government is making. It’s the national economy. So I don’t have much hair left to pull out, because I’m struggling to understand why the Commonwealth government doesn’t want to support the national economy by investing in the small businesses that will drive it. Speaking of the fairly miffed NSW government, here is the state treasurer Matt Kean on ABC radio to chat about the federal Coalition’s refusal to match the latest round of state business support payments. Kean: I think [the people of NSW] would be very disappointed. What we’re seeing is small businesses doing it particularly tough at this time. I mean, you just need to walk down the main street of any suburb across the state; and particularly some parts of the economy, restaurants and tourism operators, those personal services industry in the personal services industry [ such as] hairdressers and beauty salons are doing it particularly tough. And they need not only their state government stepping up to help them but they also need the national government stepping in to help them ... There’s no question that we need to transition to a world where business and government can learn to live with this, however, we need to have the systems and processes set up to deal with it. What we’re seeing because of the Omicron wave is new challenges around labour shortages around consumer confidence, that haven’t been factored in. I mean, we welcome the commonwealth support of the $60bn [across the pandemic], but let’s not forget that Ash Barty didn’t win the Australian Open saying “I don’t need to try the final because I’ve had a good semi.” You have to address each of the challenges as they come along. And I think a lot of small businesses across the country would say that they’re doing it tougher than before Omicron ... I don’t think now is the right time for austerity. Now’s the time to make sure that we protect the fabric of the economies that we can bounce back on the other side. The federal government has declined to match the latest round of NSW business support payment, much to the annoyance of the NSW government. ABC radio presenter Patricia Karvelas has asked treasurer Josh Frydenberg if this “is this a signal to all other states and territories that there is no more commonwealth support that they must stand on their own two feet”. Now, we will continue to provide economic support through various initiatives that we have in place but I do want to move away from those emergency settings, which saw a record amount of spending at a time when the economy really needed it. So for example the cash flow boost from the job keeper program which the Reserve Bank said saved over 700,000 jobs and underpinned the economy at the very worst of the time. But we do need to move back to normalise settings, and so therefore off those emergency support payments. Karvelas: You say there is a message in this Newspoll and it’s been a summer of frustration for many people over the lack of rapid antigen tests, the food shortages in supermarkets, the high death toll from Omicron; a lot of this can be [chalked up] to poor planning by your government. Why would voters give you another chance at the election in May? Frydenberg: Look at the key numbers in response to this pandemic where we are now with our vaccination rates at over 95% single dose and more than 93% double dose. The rollout of the booster program that has already gone to more than two-thirds of the people who are eligible. Schools are now are reopening, more than 4 million students over the next two weeks going back to school in a Covid-safe way. One of the lowest mortality rates anywhere in the world, indeed, in populations in the United States, the death toll ... has been more than 24 times what we’ve seen in Australia, and the United Kingdom 21 times. And then of course the economic recovery. In the United States there are more than 3 million fewer people in work today than they were at the start of the pandemic. In Australia, there is more than 250,000 more people who are working today than at the start of the pandemic. So yes, there are challenges. Yes, people are doing it tough. We’re not through it. We haven’t locked in the recovery. But if you look at the key statistics, vaccination rates, mortality rates and the unemployment rate there is a positive there. There is a there is reason to be positive at the year ahead. There’s been bad news for the Coalition this morning, with the latest Newspoll showing them slump eight points behind Labor ahead of the federal election. On ABC radio this morning host Patricia Karvelas asked the treasurer Josh Frydenberg if “the government has blown it?” Frydenberg: Well, the answer to that will be determined on election day, and as you know, that’s the single poll that counts. And before the 2019 election, there were many in the media, indeed, many political pundits who had called it for the Labor party and then were proven to be wrong. Ultimately, the Australian people make that decision and there’s a long way to go between now and election day. That being said, there is a message in this Newspoll that is that Australians continue to do it tough through Covid. The pandemic has gone on for some two years, Omicron disrupted many people’s summer plans holiday plans and there is that frustration out there. So we’ll continue to work hard for the public both on the health front and the economic front. Good morning everyone, Matilda Boseley here ready to kick off the week with a morning full of news. Both Victoria and NSW have confirmed cases of a new Omicron subvariant, described as “son of Omicron”, leading Victoria’s Covid commander Jeroen Weimar to urge double-vaccinated Victorians not to consider themselves fully immunised. He said on Saturday: We’re adjusting our thinking that to be complete from a vaccine point of view … we now need to have three doses. On Sunday NSW confirmed they also had four “son of Omicron” cases, with chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant stating there was “likely to be more”. This is a sublineage, a sort of breakaway from the Omicron variant. We know that it is circulating in countries and we have seen it grow significantly. Unfortunately, the regular virus is still wreaking havoc as well, with infections once again ripping through aged care. Chant revealed yesterday that 31 of the 52 people who died from Covid in NSW were aged care residents, only two of whom had received the booster jab. While speaking to the ABC, Aged and Community Services Australia chief executive officer Paul Sadler placed the blame on the federal government. We know that the booster program was really important to give an added layer of protection for older people ... The federal government has failed to reach all aged care services both across NSW and the country by its own deadline at the end of January. In slightly cheerier news public school students in Victoria and Catholic school students in NSW head back to school today (NSW public school students will join the cohort tomorrow). Parents in NSW will reportedly also get a $500 voucher for each primary school child to help with before and after school care costs. We should be confirmation of that when the premier stands up later today. OK, with all of that in mind, why don’t we jump right into the day!It’s two years since the UK left the European Union, slightly more than one since it exited the single market and customs union. Yet, as one prominent Brexit supporter has pointed out, no one seems to have starved to death. A low bar, admittedly, but one takes what one can in these pandemic-ravaged times. However, while we may still have food on the shelves, Brexit has already begun to act as a drag on the UK economy. It seems clear this will persist, though it’s less clear as to what implications this will have for the ongoing Brexit debate. Think back to the febrile atmosphere of the referendum and its aftermath. There was plenty of loose talk on all sides. Claims such as the £350m on the bus or George Osborne’s warning of the need for an emergency budget in the event of a vote to leave were generally overblown. And remainer rhetoric provided an opening for Brexiters. In response to 2017 warnings about a Brexit “cliff edge”, a spokesperson for the Welsh Conservative leader Andrew RT Davies remarked acidly that “according to project fear we should be holed up in a post-apocalyptic wasteland in threadbare clothes eating tinned food by now”. Yet Brexit was already beginning to bite. Well before the date of departure, work by John Springford at the Centre for European Reform showed that UK GDP was lagging behind its expected level. By September 2021, he had concluded that UK goods trade was 11.2%, or £8.5bn, lower than it would have been had the UK stayed in the EU’s single market and customs union. Indeed, one reason the much-vaunted “cliff edge” failed to materialise is that we have been slithering down it for a while, and consequently have less far to fall. And this is starting to hit home. Ian Mulheirn at the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change has made the point that recent tax rises – £29bn of extra taxes are pencilled in to be introduced by the government by 2025 – would not have been necessary had the UK remained in the EU. Brexit is forecast to have a net cost to the public finances of around £30bn a year. So why aren’t we talking more about this? Well, for a number of reasons, but first and foremost the pandemic. Covid has drowned out everything else and has been an easy scapegoat for all economic disruption. It has also meant that much economic activity that would have been – and will be – affected by Brexit (think of service providers travelling to the EU to sell their wares) has been paused. So, what is still to come? Trade will become more difficult: it is only in July that the British government will finally institute the remainder of the checks necessitated under the terms of its trade deal with the EU. And over the longer term, the OBR has estimated the aggregate impact on UK GDP to be 4%. Our estimates at the UK in a Changing Europe are slightly higher, at between 5.8% (under a liberal migration policy scenario) and 7% (under a more restrictive regime). What, then, of claims that Brexit provides us with opportunities to recoup these losses via trade deals and more effective domestic regulation? The former seems hopelessly optimistic, given not only the impact of geography on trade but also the limited nature of the deal so far signed with Australia. While there are indeed possibilities for the UK to regulate more effectively than the EU, particularly in emergent areas of economic activity such as robotics or AI, these gains have yet to be secured, and as things stand it is impossible to see how they could compensate for the scale of the negative impact generated by falling trade with the EU. Brexit, of course, has shaped far more than our economy. It has also been central to a political realignment that eventually saw Boris Johnson elected at the head of an 80-seat majority, with his leave-voting coalition including large numbers of traditional Labour voters. Yet there have been recent signs that this coalition may not be as robust as it first appeared. More than half of people now think Brexit has had a negative impact on the supply of food and goods, while 51% think it has adversely affected the cost of living, including more than a third of leave voters. Overall, 57% of Britons think the government is doing a bad job of handling Brexit. Just under half say the same on handling the economy – the worst rating for a government since 2013. Indeed, for the first time, Johnson is thought to be doing a bad job among leave voters. After he won the “Brexit election” in December 2019, 74% of leave voters said Johnson was doing a good job. As the pandemic hit, in April 2020, that rose to 86%. Now, that number of leave voters who have a positive view of the prime minister has fallen to 36%. Brexit, then, may not be the electoral catnip it once was. As its effects persist, and particularly as Covid recedes, it is at least conceivable that more and more people come to link the decision to leave the EU with the economic problems confronting them at home. And while, as the Financial Times’ Peter Foster put it, “It’s angina, not a heart attack”, living with angina long term can be an unpleasant experience. This is far from implying an appetite to reopen the process, still less to think in terms of rejoining. But it does speak to the unpredictability of Brexit’s political effects. Anand Menon is director of the UK in a Changing Europe and professor of European politics and foreign affairs at King’s College LondonHalt a deep-rooted, damaging slide Forget any long-term vision, structural changes or philosophy for now; this is a salvage operation first and foremost. Six years of mismanagement, woeful recruitment and illogical decision-making by Farhad Moshiri have taken Everton to the precipice of relegation. The club has not suffered a relegation in 71 years but a team assembled at exorbitant cost are destined for the Championship on current form. Everton collected 10 points from the opening four games before injuries struck Richarlison and Dominic Calvert-Lewin and Rafael Benítez’s divisive reign started to unravel. They have added nine points from the past 16 matches and are the worst-performing team in the Premier League over that extended period. The two main strikers have returned, albeit rustily in Calvert-Lewin’s case after four months out, but to an error-prone team without confidence, without a clear strategy and with the confusion sown by playing for seven managers in less than six years (caretakers included) reflected in individual performances. Four points above the relegation zone, Everton face a critical test away at Newcastle in their next league game and have Manchester City, Tottenham, West Ham, Manchester United, Liverpool, Chelsea, Leicester and Arsenal still to play. Frank Lampard needs to instil belief and an effective gameplan immediately. Deal with dysfunction at the top and Goodison toxicity Evertonians are in open, understandable revolt over how Moshiri and the board have not only spurned an opportunity to close the gap on the Premier League elite but driven a wedge between themselves and a team, and managers, that most cannot identify with. The club’s latest farcical managerial search showed what a soap opera Everton have become. The chairman, Bill Kenwright, is understood to have led the initial move for Roberto Martínez, the first manager Moshiri sacked at Everton and who received a payout of more than £10m after a legal dispute. The Royal Belgian Football Association unsurprisingly rejected Everton’s proposal for Martínez to job-share in a World Cup year and the plan quickly floundered. Moshiri, and his business associate Alisher Usmanov, took the lead again and favoured Vítor Pereira, a coach with no Premier League experience who had been overlooked for the Everton manager’s job twice before. The hostile reaction of fans to his candidacy prompted Pereira to pitch his credentials on a live television interview, to widespread astonishment and concern. The move for Pereira, the continued influence of the agent Kia Joorabchian and Moshiri’s recent open letter to supporters – in which he made no acknowledgement of any mistakes on his part and lavishly praised a board also culpable for Everton’s chaotic decline – deepened the fear that the billionaire is blind to the failings that have turned Everton into one of the Premier League’s most dysfunctional clubs. One manager cannot correct their fundamental problems but Lampard will require the strength to ignore interference from above while restoring hope to a disgruntled fanbase. It is a considerable task, but a semblance of unity is needed for the primary objective of avoiding relegation. Get Goodison onside and the old place can act as a spur, not a hindrance, to any Everton player. Improve defensive organisation and concentration Duncan Ferguson was “on the floor” after the first game of his second spell as caretaker manager ended in defeat by Aston Villa, but he did oversee improvement in several areas compared with performances under Benítez. Everton had more shots, faced fewer attempts on goal and won more possession against Villa compared with the average under Benítez but lost because of a recurring issue: poor defending at a set piece. Emiliano Buendía’s decisive header was the 10th goal Everton have conceded from a set piece this season, on this occasion as a consequence of Richarlison switching off at the near post. There have been six individual errors leading to goals this term, equalling the amount for the entirety of last season under Carlo Ancelotti. There has not been a settled central defensive partnership all season, largely down to Yerry Mina’s injury problems, the most creative defensive outlet, Lucas Digne, fell out with Benítez and was sold to Villa days before the manager was sacked, and the January recruits Vitalii Mykolenko and Nathan Patterson, signed for an initial total of £29m after long-term interest, did not make Ferguson’s squad. Benítez was the latest Everton manager to question the players’ character – though privately, in his case – with impressive performances on the training ground regularly disappearing on a matchday. Find an answer to the tricky question of balance Everton’s main assets, and best hope of dragging themselves out of danger, are in attack with Richarlison and Calvert-Lewin, although both have endured injury-hit campaigns and are yet to lift the side since their returns. Demarai Gray, Andros Townsend and Anthony Gordon, two Benítez signings who have impressed and the homegrown talent he introduced regularly to the team, have been Everton’s brightest out-field performers. Behind them, however, Allan and Abdoulaye Doucouré have struggled as a partnership and been frequently overrun. A switch to a three-man midfield with André Gomes would allow Everton to control possession better and reduce their vulnerability to counterattacks – in theory, at least – but that would entail sacrificing a forward. The dilemma has been overtaken by events, however. Doucouré is out for at least a month with a groin problem and his fellow central midfielders Tom Davies and Fabian Delph are also sidelined until March. Benítez had targeted a central midfielder for January. He was loaned the winger Anwar El Ghazi instead. Fortunately for Everton in regards to that area of the pitch, it appears Lampard has persuaded Donny van de Beek to join from Manchester United on a season-long loan deal. Oh, and … As well as staving off relegation and winning over an angry crowd, there is the significant matter of working without a director of football, head of recruitment, manager of scouting, head of sports science and rehabilitation coach. The previous incumbents all left in the past two months.Florian Zeller has made a speciality of disorienting his audiences. Last year, the skilfully blurred timeline of The Father, based on his own Alzheimer’s-inspired play, landed him an Oscar for best adapted screenplay, along with a best actor award for Anthony Hopkins. Yet the French playwright and director’s new work, The Forest, about to have its world premiere at Hampstead theatre in London, may be his most disconcerting yet. “I tried to create a maze,” Zeller says over Zoom from his home in Paris. On stage, scenes repeat themselves with micro-variations: different actors may or may not be playing the same person. “The goal wasn’t to lose people in this forest. It was to put them in a confusing situation and let them piece it together.” For such a labyrinthine storyteller, Zeller appears to conduct his career with unerring clarity. He has been described as a hit machine: from The Father, which put him on the international map after much success at home, to The Son, now being turned into a film starring Hugh Jackman and Laura Dern, nearly everything he has written in the past decade has turned into gold. When I ask Jonathan Kent, who is directing The Forest and helmed Zeller’s The Height of the Storm in 2018, to describe the 42-year-old, the first adjective he offers is “certain”, before adding: “He has a sort of intellectual certainty about what he wants, or what he feels his work needs.” Oscar winner or not, Zeller is one of the most courteous people I have interviewed. He apologises for not meeting in person (he experienced life-threatening asthma attacks as a child, which may have contributed to his Covid cautiousness). He pauses to consider each question before crafting careful answers. The central character in The Forest is a well-to-do man who has had an affair and loses his bearings as his life threatens to unravel. “The subject of the play is anxiety,” Zeller says. “I think it develops in the brain in a circular, obsessional way and creates the illusion of hell. It’s the story of a man who falls apart before us.” Was he writing from experience? A pause. “Yes, I know what it is. And guilt, too.” Zeller started working on The Forest years ago but didn’t find the structure he was looking for until he picked it up again in 2020, in the wake of France’s first lockdown. The play’s working title was Trains Across the Plains, a lyric from a beloved, enigmatic French song by Alain Bashung, At Night I Lie. Red herrings abound. “They’re two people who are lying about their feelings,” Kent says of the unfaithful central character and his wife when I visit rehearsals and see Gina McKee and Paul McGann refine one version of a scene that recurs several times with different dialogue. “Just make it more awkward,” Kent advised McKee, who tried different ways to suggest that the wife wasn’t nearly as oblivious as she might initially appear. Watching them at work, it is obvious how much Zeller conveys in very few words. His lines, translated by his frequent collaborator Christopher Hampton, are concise, often anodyne, yet pointed. (The line “Seemed rather important”, about a phone call, managed to sound at once concerned and passive aggressive.) “When I did The Height of the Storm, [for] the first week or so the actors felt constrained,” Kent says. “Then when they bought into it, they found that if you observe the rigour of it, it gives you total freedom.” While reality is slippery in many of Zeller’s plays, The Forest takes it a step further. “It’s a strange combination of surrealism and Pinter-like austerity,” Kent says. “He deals in metaphysics, which is not particularly an Anglo-Saxon pursuit.” As in The Father’s screen version, Zeller was inspired by David Lynch: the fragmented nature of the play is meant to reflect the “deep duality” of its central character. “I’ve always been fascinated by people who are capable of maintaining that duality without guilt or anxiety causing it to collapse,” he says. He mentions a former French minister, Jérôme Cahuzac, who denied point blank that he had had a secret offshore bank account before being convicted of fraud and money laundering in 2016. It could apply to many people in public life these days, I point out. From politics to sexual harassment cases, outright admissions of guilt are now vanishingly rare. “Yes. There is something like madness in the ability to not acknowledge reality,” Zeller says. He quotes from a song by Michel Houellebecq (yes, the French novelist once released an album): “We need to attain a clarified heart.” He adds: “I think we hold ourselves upright in life when we manage that clarified heart, when we know what we want and who we are.” Zeller appears to have achieved it. He was raised mostly by his mother while his father worked in Germany as an engineer, and he achieved fame early in France with a series of youthful novels, winning the prestigious Interallié prize aged 25. His pivot to the stage came when he was asked to adapt the libretto of a rare opera, Zoltán Kodály’s Háry János, in 2002. The collective nature of theatre appealed to him and he turned out to be inordinately good at it, achieving a rare level of international popularity for a French playwright, with multiple West End and Broadway hits. He is guarded about his personal life, but in 2010, he married the French actor Marine Delterme (best friend to the former first lady Carla Bruni), who recently called him “the noblest soul I have ever met”. Zeller has a son and a stepson with Delterme. His play The Son, which portrays a teenager’s mental breakdown, was partly inspired by Zeller’s own experience as a father. Zeller is currently editing the film adaptation of The Son, which he shot mainly in London last year. He has thoughtful praise for all of the cast members, from Jackman – “extraordinary, generous and brave” – to Dern, whose “quality of being” he describes in very French terms. And he added a role for Hopkins, as a difficult grandfather who was merely mentioned in the play. Did he name the character Anthony again, as he did to convince Hopkins to play The Father’s title character? “Yes,” Zeller admits sheepishly. “We experienced something so intense with The Father and what happened next, that I wanted to extend it. I have a lot of tenderness and affection for him.” The Father’s awards run “made things easier” when it came to financing his second film, he says. “When the Oscars happened, my first thought wasn’t that it would open the door to blockbusters. It was that I would be able to do The Son, despite the difficult subject matter.” I ask jokingly if Marvel films may still be in his future. “No,” he says quickly, before looking worried: “But I’m not judging.” Zeller has yet to take a holiday since last year’s Oscars. He will soon, he says. “I’m not very good at holidays. What I’m really passionate about is work. Some people have fixed hours to write but I have the opposite problem: I try to schedule moments when I won’t work.” The mostly virtual 2021 awards campaign means Zeller was at least able to be home. “Of course I would have preferred to travel, but it’s no big deal,” he says. Zeller is very close to his sons. The values he has attempted to model for them, he says, are “kindness, benevolence and respect – but they seem like rather obvious things to me.” I ask him about his younger son’s interest in film-making. For the first time in our conversation, Zeller looks taken aback. “How do you know that?” he says. Your wife mentioned it in a recent interview, I tell him. Fleetingly, he lets his guard down. “Yes, he has a passion for Lego, and he makes little stop-motion films. He is someone who needs to create parallel worlds, to find a sort of refuge in them.” Might it be a family trait? “We always compensate for things when we create,” Zeller says with a smile, before returning to his own world-making. The Forest is at Hampstead theatre, London, 5 February-12 March.The truth is that after 200 or so years of curling no one understands why the stone curls. Really. The laws of physics suggest the stone’s path should bend in the opposite direction to its rotation, so if you spin a stone to the right, it would travel to the left, and vice versa. In fact it does the exact opposite. Researchers have come up with three competing theories why, but no one knows which is right. “Yeah, it hurts my head to even think about how it does it, so I generally don’t,” says Bruce Mouat. “I just accept that it does.” It is one of the few things about the sport Mouat hasn’t turned his mind to. You’re going to see a lot of Mouat in the next couple of weeks. He is competing in the men’s event and the mixed doubles in Beijing, the latter of which starts on Wednesday, and his teams are among the favourites for both. It means he’s going to be competing for 16 days in a row, “which is obviously going to be quite intense”, and, if they play out as he hopes, that his life may be about to change in ways he doesn’t yet understand. These are Mouat’s first Games but he remembers the public’s fleeting obsession with Eve Muirhead’s team, who won bronze in 2014, and David Murdoch’s, who won silver the same year. He was too young to recall Rhona Martin’s gold in 2002, “but since then I’ve watched it a hundred times since.” Mouat is talented, affable and articulate. It’s easy to imagine how the public might fall for the 27-year-old and his team, if they go on a run to the final. Martin is a hero of his, he says, “not just because of what she has done in her curling career, but because is such a great, down-to-earth person on top of that, she never let the success she had consume her. She’s very inspiring.” He is too. Mouat is gay, and talks eloquently about how his decision to come out to his teammates has shaped his life and his sporting career. “It was in 2014,” he says, “I was really starting to travel, going to Switzerland, Norway, all these amazing places, but there was always this lingering thing in the background that I wasn’t able to be honest with my team. We were all teenage boys so obviously we were talking about girls and those kinds of things teenage boys do, and I was very aware of how self-conscious I was being, and how much I was trying to hide away and not show that I was different to them.” He came out to his parents that April, and told them he really wanted to let his teammates know too. “They weren’t sure, because they were very protective of me.” Mouat ended up talking to a sports psychologist about it. “That really simplified my thoughts,” he says. “I realised that it really didn’t matter what my sexuality was, what mattered to me was being a good curler and a good teammate, and being able to be honest with them was very important to me. So that was the reasoning.” The team were some of the first people he came out to. “I felt like if I’m going to be honest with anyone, it might as well be them. And honestly from that moment on there was almost like an instantaneous switch. It relieved me of that pressure to agree, or feel a certain way, I was able to be open and honest with all of them. It was definitely a very freeing moment. Looking back now I’m just so happy it did happen, and I almost wish I had done it sooner, because who knows what I might have achieved way back when I was 18 years old.” Mouat shouldn’t worry, he has achieved plenty as it is. In 2017 he became the youngest men’s skip ever to win a grand slam event, but he really kicked on last year. Mouat and his rink, Hammy McMillan, Bobby Lammie and Grant Hardie, have been on a run that won them silver at the world championships, as well as a hat-trick of grand slam titles. In between all that, he and Jen Dodds won the world championship in the mixed doubles. His form has drawn a lot of attention in the small world of his sport, where there’s been a lot of talk about what he’s doing, and in particular his use of data analytics. In a Guardian article last year, Mouat’s approach was linked to Moneyball, something the man himself is a little baffled by. “I’m not really sure why we’ve been deemed as the team that does it most, because I’m pretty sure a lot of the other countries are doing it as well,” he says. Data analysis started to come into the sport in 2010 but really took off in 2018 when the Swedish women’s team, who beat Muirhead’s GB rink in the semi-finals, spoke about how much they used it. Mouat’s generation have taken it on further. “The funding that we’ve got through the Lottery and UK Sport and on top of that we’ve now got video analysis people working, and they have almost changed our view on the game,” he says. Curling is a strategic game. “That’s why I got hooked on it,” Mouat says. “We’re literally trying to think of everything two steps ahead of the opponent.” It’s not enough just to know the tactics any more. Analysis helps them “understand what’s the percentage chances of winning the game if you make a certain shot in a certain situation at the end of the game, or to spot trends in the way the opposition play, so we can focus on forcing them into those situations that they don’t want to be in.” For all the talk about it, Mouat says strategy is “only 20% of the game” and the data analysis is really just about the last little “one or two per cent” of that part of it. Mouat actually puts more of his success on the lockdowns, which allowed his team to put together a long run of structured training without worrying about travelling back and forth around the world for competitions. Of course the restrictions had a bad side, too – they meant his father, who had been saving up for the trip for the last four years, won’t be able to travel to Beijing to watch him compete. “He was gutted about it,” Mouat says, “So I’m going to try and bring back a few collectors pins for him. And maybe something a bit more flashy too, like a medal.”Small businesses have rejected claims by the federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, that a “war chest” of private savings means they no longer need financial support, as the NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, increased pressure on the commonwealth for more funding. On Monday Kean ratcheted up attacks on his federal counterpart for not matching the NSW government’s latest $1bn support package, accusing them of leaving small business behind. “Ash Barty didn’t win the [Australian] Open saying ‘I don’t need to try in the final because I had a good semi’,” he told the ABC. “You have to address each of the challenges as they come along.” Frydenberg earlier argued that federal emergency support should now taper off, and that $245bn in household savings and $179bn in business savings would support the Australia’s economic recovery. “We will continue to provide economic support through various initiatives that we have in place but I do want to move away from those emergency settings,” he said. “We do need to move back to normalised settings, and so therefore off those emergency support payments.” But the Council of Small Businesses Australia (COSBA) chief executive, Alexi Boyd, said most small businesses did not have significant cash reserves, and there was no sign that money was flowing from household savings accounts. “On the ground, it’s not really happening,” Boyd said. “A lot of [small businesses] are treading water when it comes to just being able to make ends meet, just being able to pay wages. “There’s talk about there being a lot of cash available in the economy, but for small businesses, they’re not able to make decisions about what the rest of the year looks like because they haven’t had a normal month to base those decisions on. “You only need to go down to the high street and see how many businesses are trading with limited hours because of the worker shortages.” The owner of Sydney’s Jim Jam Music, Kylie Clift, said she was at “breaking point” after two years of uncertainty. She had remained positive until the Omicron wave but she is struggling to see how she will make it through without losing staff due to severe cashflow issues. “It will take me two to three years to recover financially and also just grow those student numbers back up again,” she said. “I’ve been running my business for 16 years … I’m having to kind of go back to the things that I was doing at the beginning to try to drum up business.” She said the situation is so dire she has been feeling like a burden to her husband and kids after being forced to take out loans to cover rising costs. “I know that it’s not my fault, but at the same time it’s really hard for me to get my head around that,” she said. “I feel as if I’m letting them down.” Clift welcomed the state government plan but said more needed to be done by the federal government given the impact of Omicron over the summer. The Australia Institute chief economist, Richard Denniss, criticised Frydenberg’s reasons for not continuing support payments. “He’s literally outsourced fiscal stimulus to high-income Australians,” Denniss said. “He’s hoping that families will go out and spend the government stimulus but lots of them are simply saving up for an overseas holiday in a year or two.” The scaled-down jobsaver-style NSW payment revealed on Sunday aims to support businesses with a turnover of less than $50m that have experienced a 40% drop in turnover in January due to the Omicron wave. It will be capped at half of what was offered during the Delta outbreak last year. Speaking alongside the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, on Monday morning, Kean said he expected a response from Frydenberg after writing to him warning the state’s economy could shrink by 4% if cases rise. “This is such a huge burden that will be borne by our small and medium businesses and they need the commonwealth government’s help now more than ever,” he said. “We want to ensure that small businesses in NSW, particularly those who have been hardest hit – retailers, tourism, hospitality, restaurants, cafes – are able to keep trading.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Asked if he backed his treasurer’s public row with his federal counterpart, Perrottet said supported Kean fighting every day “for NSW to get further funding”. “When I was treasurer, that’s exactly the approach I took.”There were two Australian Opens in 2022. One played out at Melbourne airport, in a refugee detention hotel and on the front of activists’ T-shirts. The other took place on tennis courts, and it is by virtue of the latter’s quality that the former will not dominate the collective memory. This tournament has been with little doubt one of the more extraordinary grand slams to date. Craig Tiley on Monday declared the 2022 Australian Open as “the best sporting event in the history of our game”. Setting aside for one moment – if that is even possible – the remarkable Rafael Nadal, the local playing contingent quenched the public’s thirst for home success. Ash Barty shone, the Special Ks showboated and Dylan Alcott again showed us all what we can aspire to be. Australia has much to be thankful for. Tiley has much to be thankful for. He too will be feeling grateful, that his happy slam ended happily even though Novak Djokovic is exiled and we still don’t know where Peng Shuai is. The Tennis Australia chief executive and tournament director has pulled off a Nadal-esque comeback. He watched on as Barty broke a 44-year drought and Alcott was named Australian of the Year. As Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis made doubles sexy again and Alex de Minaur surged into the fourth round of the men’s singles. In one dramatic, euphoric fortnight, Australia’s tennis players helped heal after a cursed couple of years overshadowed by a life-altering pandemic. Part of the combined beauty was the individual variety therein. Barty’s story is one of understated brilliance and relatability. Throughout her early career, the indefinite break from tennis and then rise to world No 1, the 25-year-old has taken her supporters along for the ride. When she arrived at Melbourne Park she was in imposing form. She started and finished her campaign in much the same way. Her problem-solving in the latter stages of her final confirmed she will be one of the greats of this game for some time to come, and the rousing response to Evonne Goolagong Cawley’s surprise appearance once again underpinned her importance as an Indigenous athlete. Barty’s final smashed television records, drawing 4.26 million viewers, while 4.5 million watched the trophy presentation with Goolagong Cawley. This says a lot about the widespread support for Barty but it also provides context to just how many jumped on the Kyrgios and Kokkinakis bandwagon. The pair’s all-Australian men’s doubles final against Matt Ebden and Max Purcell, staged straight after Barty’s final on Saturday, attracted a peak audience of 3.15 million. It is the highest-rating Australian Open men’s doubles match of all time. The Special Ks proved pugnacity can be popular, albeit controversial. Kyrgios, ever the entertainer – even unwittingly – was still racking up the ratings on his Instagram page on Monday, lashing the media for what he saw as a misrepresentation of his post-final comment that “obviously Ash is a hell of a player, but I think the ratings speak for themselves”. He also responded to Purcell’s position that the Special K spectacle may have turned overseas viewers “off tennis a little bit”, calling him a “donut” and adding he “would rather watch paint dry than your S&amp;V [serve and volley] game style”. It is all rather infantile, but therein lies the insatiable hook. Alcott needed none of this to make his impact. A final slam – and a home one at that – before retiring as one of the great Paralympians would have been enough to arrest the national consciousness. Then he went to Canberra and was named Grace Tame’s successor, and used his new platform to call for guaranteed funding of the National Disability Insurance Scheme and free access to rapid antigen tests for people with disability. Tiley said it was “going to be hard to top it off”. “It is hard to think this happened and everything else that happened and everything else that happened in between,” told the Nine Network on Monday. “An amazing two weeks … we would never dreamed we would end up like we did today. “We hoped. It was a long shot. Rafa came in hoping to play one match. Ash playing at home, always a tremendous amount of pressure. At the very beginning on the first day, I said if there was a situation where it would end up being a dream event at the end, it would be the one we just had. Maybe we are still waking up from that dream.”Christian Eriksen has made an emotional return to football with Brentford after the trauma of the Euro 2020 finals last summer when, in his words, he “died for five minutes” on the pitch. The Denmark midfielder suffered a cardiac arrest during his team’s opening game of the tournament against Finland in Copenhagen on 12 June and received life-saving treatment from medics. Eriksen was shielded by a protective cordon from his teammates as he lay stricken and the images broadcast around the world were deeply upsetting. His partner, Sabrina Kvist Jensen, with whom he has two children, was comforted by the Denmark captain, Simon Kjær, and the goalkeeper, Kasper Schmeichel. Eriksen said in an interview with the Danish TV channel DR1 at the start of January that he remembered the whole ordeal apart from those minutes when he was unconscious and “in heaven”. He thought he had broken his back when he came to and said he was ready to retire as soon as he realised he had been technically dead. The 29-year-old’s fightback has been one of football’s feelgood stories. He was fitted with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator device (ICD), which is connected to the heart by wires and sends an electrical pulse to correct irregular rhythms. Eriksen was released in mid-December by Internazionale because the rules in Italy do not allow players with an ICD to compete. But he has worked to recover his fitness, spending some time training on his own at his old club Odense, and he was seen practising alone at Chiasso in Switzerland. Another former club, Ajax, said last Tuesday that he had started to work with their reserves, Jong Ajax. Eriksen has been motivated by the dream of returning to the highest level and playing for Denmark at the World Cup finals in Qatar at the end of the year. He has taken another step towards it by signing for Brentford until the end of the season. If things go well, he could be offered a deal for the following season. It represents what his agent, Martin Schoots, has called a homecoming because Eriksen spent six and a half years playing in London with Tottenham after signing for them in August 2013. The Brentford director of football, Phil Giles, said that his club had “undertaken significant due diligence to ensure that Christian is in the best possible shape to return to competitive football”. Eriksen is not in contention to make his Brentford debut in Saturday’s FA Cup tie at Everton because he has had to delay his arrival in London to comply with Covid entry rules. He was vaccinated only recently and must allow 14 days to elapse in order to avoid having to quarantine for 10 days in the UK. “Christian will travel to west London in the coming days and will not train with Brentford this week,” the club said. Eriksen will not be the first footballer to have played with a defibrillator. Daley Blind, the Ajax and Netherlands defender, was fitted with a pacemaker after complaining of dizziness during a game in December 2019. He collapsed in a friendly in August 2020 but has generally enjoyed a safe return. Fabrice Muamba was playing for Bolton against Spurs in March 2012 when he collapsed and his heart stopped beating for 78 minutes. He made a full recovery, although he was unable to return to the professional game. Eriksen has said he has complete confidence in the ICD – and his partner and family are supporting his decision to resume his career. “If Sabrina had said: ‘I don’t want you to play any more,’ it would be a very different situation,” he said. “We have a trauma from 12 June but since then we have found our bearings so that Sabrina is OK with me going to the gym for a few hours and to the practice field. She trusts that when I go, I always come back.” Eriksen joins a host of his countrymen at Brentford, where there are nine Danish players on the books. The manager, Thomas Frank, is also Danish, as is his assistant, Brian Riemer. Frank worked with Eriksen in the national youth team setup. “He is fit but we will need to get him match fit,” Frank said.The Cincinnati Bengals are going to the Super Bowl. Repeat: The Cincinnati Bengals are going to the Super Bowl. One more time, so it truly sets in: The Cincinnati Bengals, two years after sinking to the league’s basement, are 60 minutes away from winning it all. It was fitting that on the weekend in which Tom Brady’s retirement was teased, Joe Burrow shone. Brady was the spiritual heir to his hero Joe Montana. In Burrow, the league has a quarterback who neatly completes the circle; another player with a backstory that would be rejected as corny were it fiction. Another instant franchise changer. Another player who raises his game in the biggest moments. In Burrow, the NFL has found its new Joe Cool. Time and again, no matter how iffy the play-call, no matter how poor the protection, no matter how many resources a defense allocates to the Bengals’ No 1 receiver Ja’Marr Chase, Burrow finds a way. He slips and slides. He bobs and weaves. Burrow is not a supreme athlete but he does just enough to keep the chains moving, to avoid pressure, to extend plays and drives, to give his team a chance to score points when the other parts of the offense do click. He is the ultimate problem solver. Unflappable. Unwavering. Call it what you want. As the intensity rises, Burrow finds a way to produce. Only two quarterbacks have led teams to college football’s FBS National Championship and a Super Bowl title: Montana and Joe Namath. In two weeks, Burrow can become the third. Sunday’s game will be principally remembered for Burrow’s excellence. But this was as much a Chiefs loss as a Bengals win. Throughout the first half, the Chiefs were at their unstoppable best on offense. The run-game was rolling. Mahomes was dancing. Everything was clicking. On defense, they contained Burrow, Chase and Joe Mixon, cutting the supply line from the quarterback to his most dangerous receiver and swamping the Bengals’ run-game with bodies at the line of scrimmage. And then it flipped. A dodgy call from the Chiefs’ coaching staff to end the half saw the Chiefs go for a touchdown when a field goal would have pushed their half-time lead from 11 to 14 points. In the second half, they flat-lined. There was a complacence to their play: “Pffft, we’ll figure it out.” The game took a similar pattern to the Week 17 matchup, which the Bengals won. The Bengals adjusted on defense, backing everybody up, baiting the Chiefs to continue to run the ball, and forcing Mahomes to make the same choice over and over again: Should I push the ball downfield into danger or play it safe and pass short? Mahomes chose the latter – or was caught in two minds – and the offense bogged down. His timing was shaken. The Bengals pass-rush started to generate a smidge of pressure in crucial spots. But for most of the half, they ditched the notion of pressure altogether, freeing up Mahomes to indulge his own worst instincts. He held onto the ball… and held onto the ball… and held on some more. The Chiefs’ offense devolved into a freelancing mess. The usual crispness was gone. Over the course of the second half, Mahomes completed just nine of 19 passes for 55 yards, throwing no touchdowns. Then, disaster for the Chiefs: Turnovers. For all the Chiefs’ explosiveness on offense, the secret to their success is that they do not hand the opposition chances. Mahomes had thrown just a single interception in his entire playoff career heading into Sunday. Against the Bengals, he tossed two in the second half: One to swing the game, setting up Burrow and the Cincy offense in scoring range; one in overtime to give the Bengals a shot to walk off. It was the worst half of Mahomes’ young career. He was tentative in the pocket, taking too long to make decisions – and moving into pressure, where there were escape hatches elsewhere. Burrow and the Bengals took advantage. It was Burrow’s ability to move and extend plays that proved the difference when the two sides met a month ago, and it was the same on Sunday. He picked up four first downs on four rushing attempts, scrambling away from pressure to extend drives. Burrow was bogged down by his own team’s dodgy play-calling, but when his number was called on third and long, he delivered each and every time. Burrow’s legend – the coats, the walk, the cigars, the championships – was born in Ohio and burgeoned during his extraordinary college career in Louisiana. In 2019, the Bengals bottomed out, handing them the first overall pick and a chance to bring Burrow home when he was drafted in April 2020. He joined the worst team in the league, and transformed the franchise – its record, its aura, all of it – in 21 short months. “I’m tired of the underdog narrative. We’ve got good players, good coaches,” Burrow said before the game. The Bengals, and Burrow, are underdogs no more. Stat of the week The Rams overcame the largest deficit in the fourth quarter of a championship game (10 points) to beat the Niners, 20-17. It was a strange game in LA, one in which the play clock often felt more like a suggestion than a law, and with two coaching staffs seemingly hellbent on undermining their own efforts with sloppy game-management. Two of the league’s top offensive minds looked frazzled in the fourth quarter. Sean McVay burned all of his timeouts and challenges with 10 minutes to play. Kyle Shanahan’s offense turned into a pumpkin when his team needed it most. The Niners’ possessed the ball three times after taking that 10-point lead in the fourth quarter. The result: 12 plays, 26 yards, just four minutes rolling off the clock. Brutal. It wasn’t quite 28-3 or the Niners’ collapse against the Chiefs in Super Bowl LIV, but it exists in the same orbit – part of the mounting evidence that when things get tight late in the game, so does the Niners’ head coach. The Rams collection of stars will now move on to the Super Bowl, proof positive that the team’s policy to go all-in on this season, shipping out a stack of future assets to acquire Jalen Ramsey, Matthew Stafford, and Von Miller over the past two seasons, was ultimately worth it – even if they needed a helping hand (or two) at the end. In San Francisco, they will be left to wonder what might have been had Shanahan better navigated the late-game situation or had Jaquiski Tartt caught a routine pop-up fly. MVP of the week Cooper Kupp, wide receiver, LA Rams. Who else? No amount of wonky clock management or puzzling game management calls from Sean McVay could stop Kupp from doing what he does best: getting open deep behind a defense. Kupp brought some sizzle to an otherwise stilted Rams offense late in the game. He finished with 11 catches for 142 yards and two touchdowns, including the touchdown grab that sparked the Rams’ comeback and a crucial catch and run that set up what proved to be the game-winning field goal. Video of the week A delightful moment of half-time comedy in Kansas City. CBS pays billions of dollars to the NFL for broadcast rights. Given that NBC has the rotation for the Super Bowl this year, the AFC Championship represented CBS’s Game of the Year. And in that big spot: The network’s halftime show was drowned out by a concert blaring out in Arrowhead. It felt like a small win for TV viewers. For too long networks have shoved TV sets on the field for … what reason? Does any fan ever say “Oh, look, they’re really at the game!” Does it add anything to the broadcast other than, perhaps, some postgame activity – something that could be replicated by, I don’t know, leaving a studio and walking down to the field at the game’s conclusion. On-field analysis in a raucous stadium environment adds nothing for viewers. It’s time to ditch the practice. Quote of the week “This story is total conjecture. Tommy has not made a final decision one way or the other and anybody else that says that he has is absolutely wrong” – Tom Brady Sr on his son’s potential retirement. Tom Brady’s future has officially become a will-he-won’t-he saga. ESPN reported on Saturday that Brady’s 22nd season will be his last. Current and former teammates congratulated the game’s unanimous GOAT. His own company wished him the best in the future. But Brady has yet to inform the Buccaneers, according to reports. His father told reporters that the quarterback is yet to make a decision. Either Brady is playing a form of 4D chess, looking to exact some sort of press-based revenge on ESPN for the company’s reporting during Deflategate, or, Brady, ever the content creator, is keen to control his retirement narrative himself. Most likely, Brady will announce his retirement after the Super Bowl and will file the official paperwork once the new league season kicks in and he has received the final portion of his signing bonus with the Bucs.Downing Street appears likely to drop its policy of dismissing frontline NHS and care staff in England who refuse Covid vaccinations, a minister has strongly indicated, after nursing and care organisations called for this to happen. A decision would be made “in the course of the next few days”, according to Simon Clarke, the chief secretary to the Treasury. He said the lower severity of the Omicron variant of Covid did “open a space” for the policy to be reversed. The apparent imminent U-turn came as the Royal College of Nursing argued that both the change in severity from Omicron and the number of NHS vacancies meant the mandatory vaccination policy should be dropped. The National Care Association said it would also welcome a change of policy, while warning that many unvaccinated care staff had already lost their jobs in the run-up to the 1 April deadline. Speaking in a TV clip on a visit to Essex, Boris Johnson also indicated a likely change, saying Sajid Javid, the health secretary, “is saying a bit more later on about how you might deal with different variants of coronavirus because they have different implications when it comes to transmission”. The Guardian reported this month that an internal document drawn up by the Department of Health and Social Care said the growing evidence on the Omicron variant cast doubts over the new law’s “rationality” and “proportionality”. Asked about reports of a change to the policy, Clarke told Sky News that ministers had hoped to find “the right balance between having the maximum impact for measures that support public safety in the face of the virus, but also have the minimum impact in terms of our wider freedoms as a society”. He added: “And it’s in that context that a decision was made last autumn to make sure we went ahead with the mandatory vaccination policy, and that was because, obviously, we had the Delta variant, which was extremely dangerous, and was taking a huge toll on our society, and we had to make sure that people going into hospital, very vulnerable people, whether they had Covid or another condition which required treatment, weren’t going to be faced with an increased risk of infection on the wards. “We continue to monitor that situation very, very closely. What we know about Omicron is that it is much, much more transmissible but less severe – any decision that is taken this week will reflect that reality. “I can’t pre-judge the decision that is going to be made but obviously we do recognise those realities, and that does open a space where we can look at this again.” Asked when health and care staff would know, Clarke said: “There will be a decision made in the course of the next few days, and that [the lower severity of Omicron] opens the window for us to look at it.” Patricia Marquis, the director for England for the Royal College of Nursing, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “We would say that Covid is still a serious disease and would absolutely urge all nursing staff to get vaccinated but the situation has changed in that Omicron is serious for those who are unvaccinated but actually overall as a country things have improved. “But the most important issue for us right now is the fact that there are so many nursing vacancies already, it makes no sense to risk losing thousands of registered nurses and healthcare support workers from both health and also what’s been lost from social care.” Nadra Ahmed, the chair of the National Care Association, told BBC Breakfast the sector had lost about 40,000 staff, and she was “saddened for all the people who may have lost their jobs needlessly” as a result of the vaccination policy.Queensland’s human rights commissioner says schools cannot use contracts to avoid their responsibilities under anti-discrimination law, after one of the state’s largest religious schools sent families enrolment agreements that imply transgender students will only be recognised by their “biological sex”. The “statement of faith” required for enrolment at Citipointe Christian College lists “homosexual acts” alongside bestiality, incest and paedophilia as “immoral” and “offensive to God”. It also includes statements that each person should identify “with the gender that God bestowed”. The Queensland human rights commissioner, Scott McDougall, released a statement on Wednesday after media reports about Citipointe’s enrolment contract. “Schools cannot contract out of their duties under discrimination laws by asking parents or students to agree to discriminatory terms,” McDougall said. He said the Queensland Anti-Discrimination Act does not permit religious schools to refuse enrolment based on gender identity or sexuality, or discriminate against existing students. “Expelling, disciplining or otherwise treating a student unfavourably because of these characteristics is unlawful discrimination in Queensland. “A school policy that requires a trans or gender diverse young person to be treated as their sex assigned at birth, or that requires a young person to hide or deny their sexuality, is likely to amount to unlawful discrimination.” There are some concerns the Citipointe contract was a provocation ahead of likely debate in federal parliament about a proposed religious discrimination bill. Matilda Alexander, president of the LGBTI Legal Service, said Queensland anti-discrimination laws were stronger than federal ones. “This demonstrates what schools are likely to do after that law is passed – a licence to discriminate against very vulnerable young people and their families who just need access to education, they just need support,” Alexander said. Alexander encouraged anyone who believed the contracts discriminated against them to contact the LGBTI Legal Service for free legal advice. Citipointe is widely considered Brisbane’s equivalent of the Sydney megachurch Hillsong. Initially the Christian Outreach Centre, the church has satellite ministries in Nashville, Auckland and central Bulgaria. Like Hillsong, it has its own Christian music operation, Citipointe Worship. The school, which occupies part of Citipointe’s extensive campus in the Brisbane suburb of Carindale, claims on its website to be “one of Queensland’s largest independent schools, with a student population of over 1720”. Petition demands contracts be recalled A petition demanding the school recall the enrolment contracts, which parents must sign, had more than 50,000 signatures on Monday morning. The “statement of faith” section in the Citipointe college enrolment contracts is an excerpt from the constitution of the Christian Outreach Centre. It states that: “We believe that God intends sexual intimacy to occur only between a man and a woman who are married to each other. “We believe that any form of sexual immorality (including but not limited to: adultery, fornication, homosexual acts, bisexual acts, bestiality, incest, paedophilia and pornography) is sinful and offensive to God and is destructive to human relationships and society. “We believe that God created human beings as male or female.” The contract also states that “I/we agree that, where distinctions are made between male and female (inclusive of, but not limited to, for example, uniforms, presentation, terminology, use of facilities and amenities, participation in sporting events and accommodation) such distinctions will be applied on the basis of the individual’s biological sex.” The office of the school principal, pastor Brian Mulheran, said he was not available to answer questions on Monday. Mulheran – who in 2012 claimed he was totally cured from a long-term debilitating sickness by the prayer of a healing pastor – said in a statement that the school does not judge students on their sexuality or gender identity and a decision about their enrolment would not be made on that basis. “We have always held these Christian beliefs and we have tried to be fair and transparent to everyone in our community by making them clear in the enrolment contract,” Mulheran said. “We are seeking to maintain our Christian ethos and to give parents and students the right to make an informed choice about whether they can support and embrace our approach to Christian education. “We believe each individual is created in the image of God, with dignity and worth equal to every other person. We unequivocally love and respect all people regardless of their lifestyle and choices, even if those choices are different to our beliefs and practice.” McDougall said all students and their families should feel that they belong in their school community. “The commission appreciates that most educators in Queensland actively work to support and include LGBTIQ+ students, understanding that student wellbeing and academic performance suffers when a student is not accepted for who they are at school. “A sense of belonging is conducive to an environment in which students feel confident to participate, and which enables them to reach their full potential.”Australia’s most senior defence official was poised to inform the Morrison government of “good progress” on the now-dumped French submarine project, after receiving advice that the proposed next phase of work was “affordable and acceptable”. Documents obtained by Guardian Australia under freedom of information laws reveal Australia’s defence leadership received positive advice about the project, just weeks before it was scrapped in favour of the Aukus pact with the US and the UK. The defence department secretary, Greg Moriarty, promised in an email to colleagues on 30 August to “ensure that the good progress to date is part of the advice we take to government” and said it would also be expressed in a meeting between Australian and French ministers the same day. The Australian government’s announcement two weeks later that it was turning to the US and the UK for help to acquire at least eight nuclear-powered submarines sparked a serious diplomatic rift with France, which complained it had been “stabbed in the back” and “betrayed”. The newly released paper trail shows Gregory Sammut, the general manager of submarines at the defence department, told his superiors that France’s Naval Group had made an updated offer for the next phase of work on 23 August. “Notwithstanding the due diligence we are exercising in reviewing the offer, it is affordable and acceptable, and compliant with contractual terms and conditions, and the statement of work,” Sammut wrote on 27 August. Sammut also said “a sound integrated master schedule” had been established, with the first of the conventional diesel-electric Attack-class submarines forecast to be delivered “within the window August 2033 to February 2035”. Prime minister, Scott Morrison, said in September the first of the nuclear-powered submarines should be in the water by about 2040 - although all of the key details are still subject to an 18-month joint study with the US and the UK. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While some of Sammut’s 27 August email was redacted on the basis that it would reveal a cabinet deliberation or decision, it ends with a comment that Naval Group had worked “collaboratively with Defence since then to achieve substantial progress, and there are no extreme program strategic risks”. His email was addressed to Moriarty, the defence secretary, who had helped oversee a parallel review into Australia’s submarine capability needs, and the message was copied to others including the chief of navy, Vice-Admiral Michael Noonan. Moriarty replied on 31 August to thank Sammut “for this comprehensive update” and to acknowledge “that this has not been an easy period for any of you”. Moriarty wrote that the fact the department had “a high confidence” schedule, a “credible” cost estimate, and an “affordable” offer for the next stage reflected well on the team’s leadership and its good working relationship with Naval Group. “I will ensure that the good progress to date is part of the advice we take to Government, and you will hear that message repeated in the 2+2 with France and in other engagements,” Moriarty told Sammut. This 2+2 meeting between the French and Australian defence and foreign ministers would later be at the heart of French accusations they were blindsided by the ultimate decision to scrap the project in favour of the Aukus pact. The documents released by the defence department on Monday also show Sammut briefed a key Defence panel – known as the Naval Shipbuilding Coordination Group – about progress at least twice in August 2021. Notes prepared for the meeting on 10 August say that Naval Group had been “formally advised that Government will need to consider the revised offer for the next phase before Defence is permitted to fund that work under contract”. According to notes prepared for a meeting of the same panel on 31 August, Defence’s work to establish “a sound integrated master schedule, a credible program cost estimate and an affordable and acceptable offer for the next phase of work” had been completed “with the collaborative support of Naval Group”. There is a table listing a number of “current risks and challenges” as either “medium” or “high” – but the specifics are redacted on the cabinet confidentiality clause. Sammut’s email to defence leadership on 27 August estimates the updated total cost of the French submarine program as $46.4bn in 2016 constant dollars – a way of describing the cost that assumes a dollar has the same buying power over time. He wrote that this figure “remains within the original acquisition cost estimate of $50 billion in 2016 constant dollars announced at the outset of the Attack class submarine program in April 2016”. Defence officials have said the total estimated cost of the French submarine program was $88bn in “out-turned dollars” – another measure that takes into account inflation and foreign exchange rate variations. This larger “out-turned” figure has been more widely quoted in media reporting. Moriarty told Senate estimates in October the public discussion about the French submarines had been “largely inaccurate” and “there was no cost blowout”. He said the project had been terminated “because our requirements have changed, not because of the poor performance” by either Naval Group or the combat system contractor Lockheed Martin Australia. Previously released documents show the defence department wrote to Naval Group a week before the contract was cancelled, acknowledging the successful completion of at least one requirement for moving to the next stage. Hours before the announcement, the department cautioned Naval Group that its achievement of a key contractual milestone did “not provide any authorisation to continue work”. The diplomatic rift over the matter deepened in November when the French president, Emmanuel Macron, directly accused Morrison of lying to him.Political journalist and commentator Peter van Onselen has conceded his column criticising Grace Tame for being “rude” to the prime minister “probably” didn’t need to be written. In a podcast interview, Van Onselen said he didn’t resile from his view but said expressing his disapproval of the outgoing Australian of the Year’s actions made him the story and “as bad as Grace Tame”. Last week photos and video of Tame, an advocate for survivors of sexual assault, went viral after her frosty arrival at a function at the Lodge. She refused to smile alongside Scott Morrison during a staged photo-op. Van Onselen wrote in the Australian newspaper that Tame had been “ungracious, rude and childish” suggesting if her disdain for Morrison was such that she “can’t even muster basic and common courtesy, then just don’t go”. Guardian Australia’s Amy Remeikis and Van Onselen’s co-host Carrie Bickmore confronted him about the column on The Project. Van Onselen has told the Critical Line Item podcast that he did not resile from his view of Tame’s behaviour because: “I do think it was rude, I do think it was impolite, [and] unnecessary.” Van Onselen claimed the “silent majority” of people agreed with him but the “loudest people don’t”. “They didn’t change my mind. I’m still very firm, personally, of the view that [Tame’s actions were] uncalled for … and inappropriate and she shouldn’t have done it,” he said. “However, on reflection, I also think it was also probably unnecessary for me to bother to write the opinion piece – I can just think it.” Van Onselen insisted that he did not regret the column because of blowback. “Seeing how strongly people feel about it doesn’t change my view, but it probably has changed my view on whether it needed to be written. “What’s the point in saying it? In a sense me, on my side of the ledger, deciding to write about it, became me being – people won’t like this – as bad as Grace Tame choosing to act the way she acted, which I’m critical of.” Remeikis had said the column was “devastating to so many people”. “Women constantly have to come out and talk about their trauma, talk about their position, talk about not being taken seriously … we’re constantly being told how we should act, who we should think about and who perhaps should be seen in our place,” she said. Bickmore also criticised Van Onselen for writing Tame acted “as a child”, noting that Tame had been unable to be a child as a teenager when she “was preyed upon by a man and lost part of herself in that”. Van Onselen said the incident demonstrated the “problem” of the “blurred line” between being a journalist and commentator. Van Onselen then defended comments he made on Insiders in March 2021 that “on the macro level” he was pleased women were coming forward to complain of sexual abuse to get justice but “at the micro level … if it’s someone you know and they claim they’re innocent, boy, it’s a difficult issue”. Van Onselen told the podcast his comments were an “outright truism” but accepted the “wording and timing” could have been better. “Yes, on reflection that’s something I could have done differently,” he said. Van Onselen then paraphrased himself that while on the “big-picture level people want improvements” on gender issues “but it’s an obvious truism at a personal level, ie the micro” that it’s difficult if a friend says they didn’t do something they are accused of. “That’s just a truism.”Transfer deadline day is essentially the last day of term for the Rumour Mill, but instead of bringing in our favourite VHS videos and avoiding any work, we’re dialling today’s speculation up to potentially irresponsible levels before the window slams shut tonight. The name of Álvaro Morata, the Spain international who is currently on loan at Juventus from Atlético Madrid, has emerged as a potential goal-getting option for Arsenal. The Gunners coach Miguel Molina reportedly got on the blower to Morata over the weekend to try and convince him to sign. Arsenal have not completely given up hope of taking Alexander Isak from Real Sociedad, but the Spanish club remain fixated on the 22-year-old’s £75m release clause. Mikel Arteta is also being linked with a late move for Everton’s Dominic Calvert-Lewin. It seems unlikely the Merseyside club would part with a key player but as Arteta has told us, the world’s best definitely do want to join Arsenal. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, meanwhile, is still having a chat with crisis club Barcelona about leaving north London. Ruben Loftus-Cheek of Chelsea, Dele Alli of Tottenham and Idrissa Gueye of Paris Saint-Germain are all targets for the new Everton gaffer Frank Lampard. Lampard is an admirer of Loftus-Cheek following his tenure at Stamford Bridge while Alli has failed to win over Antonio Conte at Tottenham. Gueye, who left Everton in 2019, progressed to the last four of the Africa Cup of Nations with Senegal last night. Manchester United, Arsenal, Tottenham and Aston Villa are all in the hunt for Brighton’s Yves Bissouma, but the Seagulls will demand north of £30m, in fact more like £35m, for the dynamic central midfielder. The feature about Phil Jones ageing like a fine wine at Bordeaux would have written itself, but unfortunately the Manchester United defender’s potential loan deal to Ligue 1 has fallen through. Reports state the French club were not prepared to guarantee him the game time he wanted. Eddie Howe wants to further bolster his Newcastle squad in the battle against relegation from the Premier League, and Aston Villa’s Matt Targett is on his radar. The Magpies had looked at Bayer Leverkusen’s Mitchel Bakker and Rogério of Sassuolo but are now firmly targeting Targett. Heading further north, Rangers are close to signing Lechia Gdansk right-back Mateusz Zukowski. The 20-year-old is out of contract at the end of the season and has been stalling on signing a new deal in Poland so the fee won’t be much. The Gers have also reportedly fought off a host of European rivals, including Arsenal, to sign Romanian teenager Kevin Ciubotaru. Dejan Kulusevski flew to London last night to complete his move to Tottenham. Much is being made of the fact the Juventus attacker told reporters: “I had a very good time, I hope to return one day,” of his time at the Bianconeri. Mind you, he was asked if he had a message for Juventus fans by a dedicated Juventus reporter, so he was hardly going to say: “I hope you get relegated.” The Sweden international will have a medical today and is due to join on an 18-month loan with a mandatory purchase for about €40m, plus add-ons. And finally: West Ham are close to signing the Marseille defender Duje Caleta-Car, are being linked with Liverpool forward Divock Origi, having already had two offers for Leeds’s Kalvin Phillips rejected. Fax machines at the ready, people.“We have to stop this right now,” Xavi Hernández said. The day he took over as Barcelona manager Xavi had insisted that “in his right position, worked on well, Ousmane Dembélé could be the best in the world” and that extending the Frenchman’s contract was a “priority”. Sitting alongside him, a little giddy at the opening of a new era, was Joan Laporta. The Barça president, who had declared Dembélé “better than [Kylian] Mbappé” a week earlier, flashed a knowing smile. “Understood,” he said, and everybody laughed. More than two months later, no progress has been made. Months of negotiations achieved nothing except mutual accusations. Dembélé could already talk to other clubs and although Xavi had wanted him to stay, there was no deal, the gap between offer and demand too great. Barcelona concluded he didn’t really want to stay and that it was time to cut their losses. Xavi handed him an ultimatum: “renew your contract with us or go now.” Or, you know, don’t. It is 12 days since the Barcelona manager told Dembélé to leave and 11 since he left him out of the squad, warning that he would not play again. It is also 11 days since the director of football, Mateu Alemany, concluded that Dembélé didn’t want to stay and should go. “Before 31 January,” Alemany said. That, you might have noticed, is on Monday but Dembélé is still at Barcelona, if not on the pitch, the central figure in both this window and the club’s immediate future. Unless talks with Paris Saint-Germain that started on Sunday reach a positive conclusion, deadline day will almost certainly end with Dembélé at the club. The day after delivering his ultimatum, Xavi followed through on the threat, guided more by the club than his own inclinations, and left Dembélé out – a decision repeated four days later. That morning, Alemany made the club’s position public: Dembélé “is not committed to our future” and must leave. Instead, Dembélé released a statement expressing his determination to resist and revealing he felt mistreated. The players’ union warned that leaving a footballer in the stands in a bid to force a new deal was “illegal”. After “four years” of “endlessly reading things” without defending himself, of “gossip” and “shameful lies…aimed only at hurting me”, Dembélé had had enough. He wouldn’t accept people talking for him or agent Moussa Sissoko, or questioning his commitment. And he certainly wasn’t going to be forced into any decision. “I am not a man who cheats and still less a man in the habit of giving in to blackmail,” he warned. “From today, it’s over.” His time at Barcelona is over too. If the statement theoretically left a door open by insisting that, contrary to what the club said, “there are negotiations”, words like blackmail are not easy to retreat from. The question is when it ends and how. The deadline the club set – midnight on Monday – is one they cannot enforce. Xavi had known that: “Dembélé is the one holding the frying pan by the handle.” That weekend Dembélé didn’t turn up to training, claiming gastroenteritis – the exact reason Xavi once said was the footballer’s go-to excuse. There have been talks between Sissoko and Xavi which hinted at a rapprochement. There has been public theatre too, a certain silliness to it all, not least when Sissoko’s phone rang as he passed TV cameras which caught “Leonardo, PSG” on his screen. Towards the end of his statement, Dembélé declared: “Surely love is a kind of blackmail”. The man who Lionel Messi had said “can’t speak” had not only spoken for the first time, but turned all philosophical on them. Exactly what he meant is unclear, which was oddly appropriate: a lot of this doesn’t make much sense. The club that wanted him to stay has told him to leave. The man who seemingly wants to leave, is determined to stay. The man who assured his manager he intended to continue, isn’t. The club’s decision not to play him hurts them more than the player. Dembélé has never been as important as he is right now, and that’s a strange kind of important. The blunt, uncomfortable, sad conclusion is that he has rarely been important at all; the absurdity of all this is that he doesn’t matter this much, or shouldn’t. Calling him better than Mbappé doesn’t help to convince him to accept a lower salary and when Laporta said it, mostly people just laughed. Dembélé could be the best player in the world, Xavi had said. Could be, not is. This is his fifth season. There have been glimpses of a superior talent but his presence has been fleeting, almost incidental. A transfer fee of €140m, 12 injuries, a third of league games started, 31 goals. Choose a standout moment, and many fans would recall that miss against Liverpool. There is a cruelty in players like Dembélé standing accused of suffering more injuries than anyone else. But the truth is he never really felt part of things at Barcelona. This year he might have done. He had affection, a manager keen to work with him, and departures made him the differential talent. He had a team that actually needed him. A club that needed him, too – even if it was to leave. And that’s the key. Trapped by his salary and his potential, Dembélé is simultaneously a symbol of the crisis that engulfs Barcelona and their potential way out of it, a problem inherited from their past and a hope for their future, Dembélé has become the player who conditions everything. This is all of their futures, not just his. An agreement on a contract extension would have secured a player the coach called “fundamental” and spread his salary and amortisations over a longer period to allow for other players to arrive too. It didn’t happen, so they gave up on that and tried to make him go, seeking a sale or at least a saving that would permit short-term manoeuvrability, signings lined up in anticipation. But Dembélé won’t be “blackmailed” into staying or going and now here they are, one day left, still waiting on him. It is a familiar feeling, going back five years now but at least it is coming to a finish. The best-case scenario sees them secure a last-minute exit. If not, he stays and waits until the summer, disappearing from the field, a forgotten man once again. Unless they change their minds once the window actually closes, backing down from a threat no longer of any value and choosing to use an asset they could do with, Ousmane Dembélé will never play for them again, his total stopped at 129 often forgettable games. Instead, he will sit there, alone, watching them play without him, his Barcelona career sadly ending much the way it went.In 1959, transatlantic travel was still a niche privilege, not least for a young, single, working-class woman. Shirley Collins owed her ticket to New York on the SS United States to her romance with the American folklorist Alan Lomax, whom she had met in London a couple of years previously. She was an ambitious 21-year-old folk singer from Sussex, he a celebrated song collector and musician 20 years her senior. Lomax had been in Europe for several years, effectively in exile from the anti-communist witch-hunt that had blacklisted musicians such as Pete Seeger, alongside Hollywood stars including Orson Welles and Charlie Chaplin. Even when collecting Spanish folk songs, Lomax had found himself shadowed by “the black crows” of Franco’s guardia. After returning to the US, Lomax invited Collins to join him on a song-hunting trip through the deep south, a journey memorably recounted in this memoir – reissued after 15 years out of print, albeit without the atmospheric photographs of the first edition. It offers a vivid and sometimes shocking portrait of a country yet to confront the civil rights era. The couple’s encounters ranged from pentecostal choirs (both black and white) and hellfire preachers to blind fiddlers and mountain ballad singers, some of them familiar to Lomax from a previous trip with his father. For Collins, this was a new world of epic landscapes, rattlesnakes, racism and nocturnal gunfire. St Leonards-on-Sea it wasn’t. In Arkansas the pair recorded singer Almeda Riddle, who delivered a poignant version of The Merry Golden Tree, a British naval ballad from “the ocean she’d never seen in her life”. In search of the Memphis Jug Band, who had been a popular outfit in the 1920s and 30s, they found a scene of quarrelling musicians and whiskey-soaked squalor. In Mississippi they met (and “discovered”) 57-year-old Fred McDowell, who arrived in dungarees after a day in the cotton fields before proving himself a formidable blues guitarist, one who went on to enjoy professional glory. Also in Mississippi was the notorious Parchman Farm penitentiary, in whose fields Lomax recorded prisoners hollering work songs as they toiled, while Collins endured the unwanted attention of a guard. Decades later, one tune, Po’ Lazarus, would appear on the bestselling soundtrack of the Coen brothers’ southern jaunt O Brother, Where Art Thou?, leading Lomax’s daughter, Anna, to track down the lead singer, James Carter, by then 76 and living in Chicago, so that she could present him with a cheque for $20,000. Interspersed with Collins’s account of this “southern journey” (though New York, Chicago, California and the Newport festival also feature) are chapters describing her upbringing in Hastings. The Collins family were poor but resilient, and on her mother’s side arty and politically active, with uncles who were painters and writers. It was a warm, extended family whose lives were full of singing. Her father was a milkman for a local farmer until conscription took him into the army. He survived the second world war but his marriage did not. Collins and her big sister, Dolly (who would become a composer and accompanist to Collins), had much of their childhood claimed by wartime. Twice evacuated, they returned to Hastings to watch dogfights above the Channel and shelter beneath the stairs from deadly “doodlebugs” (V1 rockets). As postwar teenagers their screen idol was Laurence Olivier (the pair learned chunks of Hamlet to imitate him), their favourite singers Frankie Laine and Johnnie Ray, listened to on the radio while their mother was at work – as a communist she thought American pop was a corrupting influence (a view extant in some folk circles). The alternating chapters make for a jarring chronology but provide some striking contrasts. Food is a constant subtext, austerity-era Britain with its powdered eggs and watery trifles and a new world of steak, chicken, exotic produce (avocados!) and, in New York, pizza. At 18, Collins left home for London and the nascent folk revival, which is all too briefly described here, along with a capsule account of her later career, her ascent to doyenne of the folk scene, the loss of her singing voice and its recent, happy return, episodes explored more fully in her 2018 memoir All in the Downs, which followed her return to music making with 2016’s Lodestar album and her rediscovery by a new audience. Collins’s affair with Lomax didn’t endure (though in 1960 he came to England and proposed), but their mutual affection remained. Her American adventure receded into memory, but her experience reinforced her resolve to become “an English singer of English songs”, a description that applies to this day. • America Over the Water by Shirley Collins is published by White Rabbit (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWhen Ladi Kwali met the British studio potter Michael Cardew in the early 1950s, her traditional hand-built water jars were already well known in Nigeria’s Gwari region. Having spotted her work in the Emir of Abuja’s home, Cardew swiftly invited her to join his local government-backed pottery training centre. There she added modern industry’s wheel and kiln to her toolkit to create thrown tableware, and became a star turn within the touring demonstrations Cardew organised in Europe and America. She was a phenomenal figure, “taking two cultures in her stride”, explains Jareh Das, the Nigerian-British curator of Body Vessel Clay, the forthcoming exhibition teasing out lineages between Black female artists across three generations. Kwali provides the show’s baseline, yet her place in ceramics history is far from straightforward. Also in the exhibition is Bisila Noha, a ceramics artist whose work in Body Vessel Clay looks to pottery’s unsung African mothers. For her, UK museum collections only tend to include Kwali “because of the connection with a white British man, rather than elevating her pieces in themselves”. Das wants the exhibition to bring Kwali out of western patriarchy’s shadow, “to individualise her and where she’s coming from, the stories the pots tell us about her life and culture”. To do so, she draws attention not to Cardew, the British incomer, but to the matrilineal teaching crucial to global pottery traditions. Kwali learned her skills from her aunt and went on to train others, such as Magdalene Odundo, the lauded Kenyan-born British artist known for her swan-necked, swollen-bellied pots. Although they didn’t share a spoken language, Odundo has recalled how she learned from Kwali as a baby might – through touch, not words. “Craft is a language in itself that is universal,” says Noha, who has studied with female potters in Mexico and Morocco. “We can all come together through it, regardless of our background.” At the same time, the exhibition is a reminder that clay can be as edgy and political as it is timeless. Of the younger artists, Phoebe Collings-James’s ceramic torso with body piercings and scarred skin conjures sweaty club nights, Roman armour, tribal markings and war wounds. “I wanted them to be charged with a queered eroticism,” she says. Shawanda Corbett, an artist born with one arm and without legs, creates motley-glazed pots fashioned from tilting spheres. They invite us to imagine what it’s like to inhabit different vessels, different bodies. Jade Montserrat, meanwhile, explores the raw material in its most natural state. In a mud pit on a shooting estate in her home county of Yorkshire, she massages clay over her skin and hair, a Black woman “unearthing and building identity”, she says, as well as raising questions around land, belonging and ownership. It offers a radical conclusion to an exhibition that begins with traditional indigenous pottery. Montserrat’s interest in clay could be the show’s guiding principle. “It’s about making the circuits of energy evident,” she reflects. “It’s about potential.” Clay for today: five highlights from the exhibition Ladi Kwali (main picture) The Nigerian potter Ladi Kwali garnered international renown for her fusion of traditional Gwari forms and modern pottery techniques. “Her work went from functional domestic jars into works of art through glazing and the introduction of new technology,” explains curator Jareh Das. Jade Montserrat In this performance for video, Yorkshire artist Jade Montserrat covers her naked body with clay. It was filmed on a shooting estate where she grew up and “explores Black presence in northern England”. Magdalene Odundo This acclaimed Kenyan-born British ceramicist studied at the pottery training centre with Ladi Kwali in the early 1970s. “She started making pots in that Gwari style and learned how to hand build,” explains curator Jareh Das. “The experience also influenced her looking closely at pottery traditions in other parts of Africa and the world.” Bisila Noha The Spanish-Equatorial Guinean ceramicist Bisila Noha first created her bi-part vessels to portray her sense of being “in between countries, culture and heritage”. When she discovered an African potter, Kouame Kakaha, had used similar forms, it inspired her ongoing research project into “the unnamed women of clay; our shared mothers and grandmothers”. Phoebe Collings-James While making her ceramic torsos, Phoebe Collings-James says that “Makonde and Yoruba ceremonial body masks featuring pregnant bodies and Roman armour with door knocker nipple rings were all recent memories”. Her interests include “our clumsy signifiers of race, class, sexuality and genders, and how awkwardly or disobediently we may wear them”. • This article was amended on 10 February 2022 to remove the word “near” from a line saying that Jade Montserrat’s performance “was filmed on a shooting estate near where she grew up”. Body Vessel Clay: Black Women, Ceramics and Contemporary Art is at Two Temple Place, London, 29 January until 24 April.Introduction and contents This is the privacy policy for Guardian News &amp; Media Limited (“ Guardian”), our sites such as theguardian.com (“our sites”), and our associated apps. Some of our other sites and services have their own policies, which will be relevant to you when you are using those sites and services. Our values guide everything that we do – including our editorial approach and how we use personal data. We are strongly committed to keeping your personal data safe. This commitment exists throughout the lifecycle of your personal data, from the design of any Guardian service which uses personal data to the deletion of that data. To complement our global approach to privacy protection, this policy also incorporates specific information privacy rights granted to individuals under Californian and Australian privacy law. This reflects our relationship with our readers in these locations where we provide localised editions of our editorial content. We think carefully about our use of personal data, and below you can find the details of what we do to protect your privacy. This policy covers, among other topics: Information about your rights, the choices available to you, and our obligations in the European Union, in California, in Australia, and elsewhere Transparency about how we collect and use your personal data, including when and how it is shared Information on how we protect your personal data Information on how we will facilitate your rights and respond to your questions Find out more about how we manage your personal data below: About this privacy policy This privacy policy explains how we collect, use, share, transfer, and sell (for California residents) your personal data when you use the services provided on our sites and our apps or interact with us; and your data privacy rights. This includes subscriptions, vouchers and contributions. Personal data is any information about you by which you can be identified or be identifiable. This can include information such as: your name, date of birth, email address, postal address, phone number, mobile number, financial details, such as payment cards you use to purchase products, subscriptions or support our journalism information about your device (such as the IP address, which is a numerical code to identify your device that can provide information about the country, region or city where you are based) information relating to how you use and interact with our sites, apps and services When we refer to “personal data” in this policy, we are also referencing “personal information,” as it is defined under California law, which you can read more about here, and as it is defined under Australian law, which you can read about here. Some of our other sites provide additional privacy information. You can read that information using these links: Guardian Jobs (jobseekers) Guardian Jobs (recruiters) Guardian Holidays Guardian Crowd (pdf) Serelay app Guardian Foundation Sometimes our sites and apps may contain links to sites and services that are not part of the Guardian family of offerings. These sites and services have their own privacy policies. If you follow a link to these non-Guardian sites and apps, you should read the privacy policy shown on their site. Who we are and how to contact us Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU is the data controller in respect of your personal data. This means that we are responsible for deciding how and why we hold and use your personal data. If you want to contact us directly, you can find our contact details in the “How to contact us” section below. The types of personal data we collect about you We collect your personal data when you visit our sites and apps, subscribe for products or services, contribute to the Guardian or when you interact with us. We will only collect your personal data in line with applicable laws. We collect your personal data in various ways: directly from you, when you sign up for our services and when you browse our sites or use our apps personal data we generate about you, e.g. personal data we use to authenticate you, or personal data in the form of your IP address or your preferences personal data we collect from third parties, e.g. personal data that helps us to combat fraud or which we collect, with your permission, when you interact with your social media accounts More detail about these three categories of personal data are provided below. The personal data we collect when you register for a Guardian account When you register for a Guardian account on theguardian.com, we collect: your user name your name your email address other details such as your residential or billing address when you sign up for membership or a subscription some limited data from your social media profile (further information on this is below), if you have signed in to theguardian.com using your social media details your photograph, if you add one to your profile page You can change or remove these details using the profile and settings area of your Guardian account. Personal data we generate about you When you register for a Guardian account, we assign you a unique ID number that we use to recognise you when you are signed in to our services. This will recognise you if you sign in using the same account on a new device or through a different application such as the Guardian app on mobile devices. When you use our sites or apps we may also use cookies or similar technology to collect extra data, including: your IP address - a numerical code to identify your device, together with the country, region or city where you are based your geolocation data - your IP address can be used to find information about the latitude, longitude, altitude of your device, its direction of travel, your GPS data and data about connection with local Wi-Fi equipment information on how you interact with our services your browsing history of the content you have visited on our sites, including how you were referred to our sites via other websites details of your computer, mobile, TV, tablet or other devices, for example, the unique device ID, unique vendor or advertising ID and browsers used to access our content We will not collect special categories of data from you - such as personal data concerning your race, political opinions, religion, health or sexual orientation - unless you have chosen to provide that type of personal data to us. When you use our apps The Guardian apps use personal data based on the content you have viewed. Information on bugs and crashes is also sent to us when you use our apps. A list of the articles that you have recently viewed is also cached in the local storage on your mobile device. You can delete this reading history in the settings of the app. You can choose to receive notifications on your mobile device via the app, and manage these notifications in the settings of the app. Using your social media details to sign into your Guardian account When you sign in to our sites or apps using your Facebook login details, you give permission to Facebook to share with us your email address and certain aspects of your Facebook profile if you have made these public on your Facebook profile. This only includes your first and last name, age range, link to your Facebook profile and profile picture. We do not have access to updates on your Facebook profile. If you use your Google login details, you give Google permission to share the personal data that you have made public in your Google profile. This only includes your first and last name, your email address and whether your email address has been validated, your age range, a link to your Google profile and, if you have one, your profile picture. If you register or sign in with your Apple ID, you give Apple permission to share your personal data with us. You can also choose to hide your email and Apple will create a random email address so your personal email can stay private. This email address will be linked to your Guardian profile and will be used to retrieve your subscribed content. We will then use this personal data to form a profile for your Guardian account. If you remove the Guardian app from your Facebook settings, or from your Google settings, or your Apple ID, we will no longer have access to this data. However, we will still have the personal data that we received when you first set up your Guardian account using your Facebook, Google login, or Apple ID. Personal data when you post comments about the Guardian on other social media sites If you have mentioned the Guardian in posts on social media sites, then we may collect your social media handles. For example, when you mention the Guardian in a tweet, we may collect your Twitter handle. When you post publicly (comments) on our sites When you post on a discussion board or comment publicly on an article on one of our sites, the personal data you post, including your username and other information about yourself, are publicly accessible. This personal data can be viewed online and collected by other people. We are not responsible for the way these other people use this personal data. When contributing to a discussion, we strongly recommend you avoid sharing any personal details, including information that can be used to identify you directly such as your name, age, address and name of employer. We are not responsible for the privacy of any identifiable information that you post in our online community or other public pages of the site. How we collect personal data We collect personal data when you: become a supporter or register for an account on theguardian.com make contributions to fund and support the Guardian pay for a subscription or purchase any other products/services for yourself or others attend our events enter our competitions and surveys take part in our call-outs sign up for our editorial emails post in our online community sign up for marketing communications use mobile devices to access our content access and interact with any of our sites and app through cookies and other similar technology when you contact us via email, social media, our apps or similar technologies or when you mention us on social media How we use your personal data We use personal data collected through our sites and apps only when we have a valid reason and the legal grounds to do so. We determine the legal grounds based on the purposes for which we have collected your personal data. Legal grounds for using your personal data The legal ground may be one of the following: Consent: Often we will use your personal data because we have asked for your consent, which you can withdraw at any time. Examples of where we ask for your consent include: to send marketing emails to you, when we have asked your permission. You can withdraw your consent to receiving these emails at any time by clicking on the “unsubscribe” link at the bottom of the email or through your email preferences in the “emails and marketing” tab, when signed into your Guardian account. to place non-essential cookies, or other similar technology. We provide more details of how we use cookies in our cookie policy. You can withdraw your consent to us placing these cookies at any time through our Privacy Settings. to analyse your registration data and data collected from cookies to personalise advertising. We do this by analysing your data to predict what you might be interested in. We will also compare your registration data with trusted partners. Performance of a contract with you (or in order to take steps prior to entering into a contract with you): We will use your personal data if we need to in order to perform a contract with you. For example, where you have purchased a subscription from us, we will need to use your contact details and payment data in order to process your order and deliver your subscription. Compliance with law: In some cases, we may have a legal obligation to use or keep your personal data. Our legitimate interests: We may process your personal data where it is necessary for our legitimate interests in a way that might be expected as part of running the Guardian and in a way which does not materially impact your rights and freedoms. For example it is in our legitimate interests for us to understand our readers, promote our services and operate our sites and apps efficiently for the creation, publication and distribution of news, media and related journalistic content both online and in print form, globally. Examples of when we rely on our legitimate interests to use your personal data include: when we analyse what content has been viewed on our sites and apps, so that we can understand how they are used and improve our content. to display Guardian content on the unbranded version of the YouTube embedded player. We process personal data so that readers can access this YouTube player and we can understand how users interact with our content, for example whether users watch the full video or only a proportion of it. This will involve using cookies as described in our cookie policy and sharing information with YouTube as set out in the when we share or sell your personal data section of this privacy policy. to analyse our readers and supporters to better understand your interests and preferences so that we can make our marketing more relevant to you. This includes when we promote our own products and services. For example, we look at what you have viewed on our sites and apps and what products and services you have bought (including what you have looked at and what products or services you have bought on our other platforms, for example Guardian Jobs). You can opt out from having your personal data used for marketing analyses by going into your account to the tab “emails and marketing”. to show you more relevant advertising based on that analysis by creating “segments” of particular types of audiences so that we can show you advertisements that may be more relevant to you and the ‘’segments’’ you may be in. to use those “segments” to create”custom audiences” so that we can identify our audience across third party websites. This is normally by using cookies as described in our cookie policy. For example we use these “custom audiences” to present advertising on social media platforms like Facebook. You can manage the use of cookies by clicking the Privacy settings link on our sites in the footer of every page. to keep you informed about the Guardian if you have subscribed or supported us in the past, and have not opted out from receiving our communications. for internal administrative purposes related to our services - such as our accounting and records. to inform you of any changes to our services, such as updates to our terms and conditions. to collect and log IP addresses to improve and manage our site and apps. to personalise our services (for example when you sign in) by remembering your settings, and recognising you when you sign in on access the Guardian in different ways, such as by our app and on our site. enabling you to share our content with others using social media or email. contacting you directly via social media or email if you send us emails, enter competitions or engage with the Guardian on social media or contact us. when we respond to your queries and to resolve complaints. for security and fraud prevention, and to ensure that our sites and apps are safe and secure and used in line with our terms of use. Where we rely on cookies to collect any personal data please see our cookie policy for more information and how to manage your cookie choices through your Privacy settings. The Guardian is a media organisation and publisher. Data protection law includes certain exemptions when personal data is processed for the purposes of journalism. Those exemptions apply to some of the ways the Guardian uses personal data. This Privacy Policy does not cover personal data that the Guardian processes for the purposes of journalism. Access permissions when you are using the Guardian app When you use the Guardian app, we will ask for permissions to access particular functions of your mobile device. When we ask for permissions will depend on the operating system of your mobile device, but can include: when you decide to store content including photographs on your mobile device to read or use when offline. We will need your permission to save content to your mobile device. asking permission to access your contact details/profile on your mobile device, so that we can add or find your Guardian account on your phone; if you decide to submit content, such as photographs, to the Guardian we will ask permission to access your camera or photographs. Updating your personal data and your profile page on our sites When you register for an account with theguardian.com, you have access to a profile page. Under “edit profile” you can review and update what personal data is public when you comment on our articles, or if people look up your profile. You may also update your marketing preferences in the “emails and marketing” tab in your account. Personal data that we receive about you from other organisations Adding to or combining the personal data you provide to us When you sign up to our services we may add to the personal data you give us by combining it with other personal data shared with us by other trusted organisations. This includes, for example, the region that you are located in, so that we can show you the prices for subscriptions or other products in your local currency. We may also add personal data to improve the accuracy of your delivery address when we send out mail. We may also obtain your personal data from partners whose offers we include in some of our marketing communications and we use this personal data to ensure that we do not send you irrelevant marketing and to ensure the accuracy of the information we hold. We also use personal data based on the content you have viewed on our sites and apps and your interaction with the content to add you to groups with similar interests and preferences, so that we can make our online advertising more relevant. Sometimes we use data about your interests or demographics that some of our global third parties have collected from you online to add you to these groups, such as Comscore and Nielsen. Please refer to our cookie policy for more information on how we use cookies. Personal data shared by event partners When you register or book a ticket for a Guardian event organised by an event partner, your registration data may be shared with us by the event partner. Using children’s personal data We do not aim any of our products or services directly at children under the age of 13 and we do not knowingly collect personal data about children under 13. Some of our services may have a higher age restriction and this will be shown at the point of registration. We also note that California law prohibits sale of personal data of consumers between 13-16 years of age unless the guardian has authorised the sale. We comply with this requirement. Security of your personal data We have implemented appropriate technical and organisational controls to protect your personal data against unauthorised processing and against accidental loss, damage or destruction. You are responsible for choosing a secure password when we ask you to set up a password to access parts of our sites or apps. You should keep this password confidential and you should choose a password that you do not use on any other site. You should not share your password with anyone else, including anyone who works for us. Unfortunately, sending any information, including personal data, via the internet is not completely secure. Although we will do our best to protect your personal data once with us, we cannot guarantee the security of any personal data sent to our site while still in transit and so you provide it at your own risk. When we share or sell your personal data Within the Guardian group of companies Depending on where you live, we may share your personal data within the Guardian group of companies in the UK, US, or Australia. We may share it in order to perform a contract with you, for administrative purposes, or when we have a legitimate interest in doing so. For example: If you book an event held in Australia, at first we may hold your data on our systems in the UK and then we may share it with the Guardian in Australia for administration purposes If you are going to one of our events hosted by an event partner, we may share your personal data with that partner for event administration purposes Sometimes we may receive a letter, email or another form of communication from you that we consider to be significant to the history of the Guardian. We may decide to share this with the Guardian Archive run by the Guardian Foundation for historic and archiving purposes We may share your data to understand how you interact across our group products or to tailor and offer relevant advertising to you. With external organisations We share your personal data with other organisations that are not directly linked to us under the following circumstances: Service providers - We may share your data with other organisations that provide services on our behalf. We may do this to perform a contract we have entered into with you, where it is in our legitimate interests or with your consent. Examples of when we may share your data with service providers include sharing with: companies that help deliver newspapers and subscription vouchers, such as i-Movo online payments processors who process credit and debit card transactions on our behalf fraud management providers that help us to identify and prevent online fraud internet and cloud hosting services providers, such as Amazon Web Services (AWS) life-cycle engagement platforms such as Braze, to help us build and manage our campaigns software service providers such as Salesforce that assist us with our customer relationship management communications services providers, such as our podcast service provider called Acast error tracking software providers, such as Sentry and Google Firebase, to help us diagnose and fix errors and optimise the performance of our website and apps service providers that help us carry out analytics, facilitate audience creation and segmentation and to measure our audience engagement. For example, Permutive provides us with data management platform services service providers that help provide us with insights and analytics that help us to improve our products and services. For example, we use Google Analytics to understand how visitors engage with our sites or apps data management companies, such as Formstack, that help us collect data via online forms and surveys service providers that help provide online identity-as-a-service and access management services such as Okta service providers that allow us to compare your personal data with information held by advertising partners and identify if you are know to both us and our advertising partner, such as Infosum YouTube because we use their unbranded embedded player to provide video content on our websites and apps. The embedded player relies on the YouTube API, which is a type of software that allows data to be communicated between our website and apps and the YouTube player. This will include personal data which will also be collected by cookies as set out in our cookie policy. We will provide this data about how you interact with videos to enable YouTube to provide statistical information such as how many views a video has, or how many users watch the entire video. More information about how YouTube will use this personal data, which includes usage data when you interact or use the embedded YouTube player, can be found at the Google Privacy Policy: http://www.google.com/policies/privacy. Advertising partners - We may also share your data collected through our websites and apps with our advertising partners, as set out in our cookie policy. These partners help us deliver relevant advertising across our websites and apps. For example, we use Google Ad Manager to assist us with the delivery of relevant ads. Agencies and authorities if required by law - We may reveal your personal data to any law enforcement agency, court, regulator, government authority, or in connection with any legal action if we are required to do so to meet a legal or regulatory obligation, where the request is proportionate, or otherwise to protect our rights or the rights of anyone else (for example, in response to valid and properly served legal process such as subpoena or warrant). If we have your contact details, we will take reasonable steps to attempt to notify you prior to disclosing your data unless (i) prohibited by applicable law from doing so, or (ii) there are clear indications of unlawful conduct in connection with your use of GNM services. Event sponsors and partners - we may share your personal data with sponsors of Guardian events and partners who we hold events with for marketing purposes when you have given your permission for us to do so. Social media organisations - We may share your personal data with other organisations when our web pages use social plug-ins from these organisations (such as the “Facebook Recommend” function, Twitter’s retweet function, Google+ function). These other organisations may receive and use personal data about your visit to our sites or apps. If you browse our site or view content on our apps, personal data they collect may be connected to your account on their site. For more information on how these organisations use personal data, please read their privacy policies. Organisation/s that buy any of the Guardian group companies - We may share your personal data to any other organisation that buys, or to which we transfer all, or substantially all, of our assets and business. If this sale or transfer takes place, we will use reasonable efforts to try to make sure that the organisation we transfer your personal data to uses it in line with our privacy policy. Any organisations which access your data in the course of providing services on our behalf will be governed by strict contractual restrictions to make sure that they protect your data and keep to all data privacy laws that apply. We may also independently audit these service providers to make sure that they meet our standards. These transfers to third parties may constitute “sale” of your personal information under California law. A California resident can halt these sales at any time by pressing the “California resident - Do not sell” link that is located in the footer of every page on our site. Third-parties do not sell personal information that has been sold to them by the Guardian unless you have first received explicit notice and are provided an opportunity to exercise the right to opt out. You can read further about your California rights here. Anyone using the Guardian, our sites, or our apps may manually inspect the sharing, transfer, and sale of their personal data in our cookie policy. International data transfers Data we collect may be transferred to, stored and processed in any country or territory where one or more of our Guardian group companies or service providers are based or have facilities. While other countries or territories may not have the same standards of data protection as those in your home country, we will continue to protect personal data that we transfer in line with this privacy policy. Whenever we transfer your personal data out of the UK or the European Economic Area (EEA), we ensure similar protection and put in place at least one of these safeguards: We will only transfer your personal data to countries that have been found to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data. We may also use specific approved contracts that use Standard Contractual Clauses for the protection of personal data where appropriate, with our service providers that are based in countries outside the UK or the EEA, including those based in the US and Australia. These contracts give your personal data the same protection it has in the UK or the EEA. If you are located in the UK or the EEA, you may contact us for a copy of the safeguards which we have put in place for the transfer of your personal data outside the UK or the EEA. How long we keep your personal data We keep your personal data for only as long as we need to. How long we need your personal data depends on what we are using it for, as set out in this privacy policy. For example, we may need to use it to answer your queries about a product or service and as a result may keep personal data while you are still using our product or services. We may also need to keep your personal data for accounting purposes, for example, where you have bought a subscription. If we no longer need your data, we will delete it or make it anonymous by removing all details that identify you. If we have asked for your permission to process your personal data and we have no other lawful grounds to continue with that processing, and you withdraw your permission, we will delete your personal data. However, when you unsubscribe from marketing communications, we will keep your email address to ensure that we do not send you any marketing in future. How we may contact you Service communications From time to time we may send you service emails, for example, telling you your subscription is coming to an end or thanking you when you contribute or place an order with us. Marketing communications and editorial newsletters If we have your permission or you have not opted out, we may send you materials we think may interest you, such as new Guardian offers and updates. Depending on your marketing preferences, this may be by email, phone, SMS or post. We offer a range of editorial newsletters. You can manage your subscription to these emails through your profile page when you are signed in to your Guardian account. You can decide not to receive these emails at any time and will be able to “unsubscribe” directly by clicking a link in the email or through your email preferences in the tab “emails and marketing” when you are signed in to your Guardian account. Market research Sometimes we may contact you for market research purposes, for example about a survey. You can opt out from being contacted in this way by signing into your Guardian account and going to the tab “emails and marketing”. Responding to your queries or complaints If you have raised a query or a complaint with us, we may contact you to answer your query or to resolve your complaint. Special Note to California Users If you elect to use the “do not sell” button, we will not recontact you about that choice for at least 12 months. Cookies and similar technologies When you visit our sites or when you use our apps, we may collect personal data from you automatically using cookies or similar technologies. This privacy policy includes our cookie policy, where you can find more information about our use of cookies. Your privacy and data protection rights with regard to the personal data that we hold about you You have a number of rights with regard to the personal data that we hold about you and you can contact us with regard to the following rights in relation to your personal data: You have the right to receive a copy of the personal data we hold about you You have the right to correct the personal data we hold about you Where applicable, you may also have a right to receive a machine-readable copy of your personal data You also have the right to ask us to delete your personal data or restrict how it is used. There may be exceptions to the right to erasure for specific legal reasons which, if applicable, we will set out for you in response to your request Where applicable, you have the right to object to processing of your personal data for certain purposes Where you have provided us with consent to use your personal data, you can withdraw this at any time If you do not want us to use your personal data for marketing analysis, you can change your settings in the “Emails and marketing” tab of your Guardian account If you would like to exercise any of your rights specified above, please email dataprotection@theguardian.com or write to the Data Protection Officer at Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. We will deal with requests within one month. We may need to request specific information from you to help us confirm your identity. If your request is complicated or if you have made a large number of requests, it may take us longer. We will let you know if we need longer than one month to respond. You will not have to pay a fee to obtain a copy of your personal data (or to exercise any of the other rights). However, we may charge a reasonable fee if your request is clearly unfounded, repetitive or excessive. Your California privacy rights Under the California Consumer Privacy Act, California Civil Code Section 1798.100, if you are a resident of California you may contact us with regard to the following rights in relation to your personal data: Right of Access: You have a right to request access to the personal data we may hold on you for the past twelve (12) months. You may submit up to two (2) requests per year of access to your personal data. Right to Opt-In/Opt-Out of Sale of Personal Data: For individuals sixteen (16) years or older, you have the right to opt-out of sale of personal data we may hold on you. You can exercise this right at any time by pressing the “California resident - Do not sell” link in the footer of every page on our site. For individuals between thirteen (13) to sixteen (16) years old, you have the right to opt-in to the sale of personal data we may hold on you. Right to Deletion: You also have the right to ask us to delete personal data we may hold on you or restrict how it is used. There may be exceptions to the right to deletion for specific legal reasons which, if applicable, we will set out for you in response to your request. Right to Non-Discrimination: We will not discriminate against you for exercising any of your California Consumer Privacy Act rights. If you want to make any of these requests, please contact dataprotection@theguardian.com or by calling our designated toll-free number (888) 777-6069. We will deal with requests for access to your personal data within forty-five (45) days for California-specific requests. To help us respond as you expect, please specify that you are making a request under the California Consumer Privacy Act. We may need to request specific information from you to help us confirm your identity. Your rights under the Australian Privacy Act The Australian privacy Act has rules around how we handle your personal information that may be different to rules in other regions. These rules are set out in the Australian Privacy Principles in force under the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) (the Australian privacy Act). We are required to treat your personal information in line with those principles, including to disclose to you what personal information we collect and how we use it, to store your information securely and to support you in exercising your rights. Personal information we collect and use When we refer to “personal data” throughout this policy, we are also referencing “personal information,” as it is defined under Australian law, which you can read about here. Details about the personal information that we collect, use and disclose is set out throughout this privacy policy. You can navigate these relevant sections by going to the contents section at the top of the page. Your rights Your rights to privacy are also protected by the Australian Privacy Act, including your: Right of access to the personal information held about you; and Right of correction to correct your information when it is incorrect. These principles and rights are reflected throughout this privacy policy. Opt out of personalised advertising Under the Australian Privacy Act, you have the right to opt out of the use of your personal information for the purpose of direct marketing, including in relation to personalised advertising. You can opt out of personalised advertising across our website and apps at any time by going to Privacy settings at the bottom of the page. You will still see non-personalised advertising. We and our partners use cookies and similar technologies to collect information about your use of the website to help create reports and statistics on the performance of the website. Analytics cookies such as Google Analytics collect information such as your IP address, device type and operating system, referring URLs, location and pages visited. If you don’t want Google Analytics to be used in your browser, you can install the ‘Google Analytics Opt-Out Browser Add-On’, provided by Google. For a complete description of our use of cookies and similar technologies globally, please see our cookie policy. If you have contacted us at dataprotection@theguardian.com with a privacy related complaint and you are not satisfied with our handling of that complaint, you may refer that complaint to the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner: GPO BOX 5218, Sydney NSW 2001 T 1300 363 992 https://www.oaic.gov.au/ Contact us for information about how we use your personal data If you have any questions about how we use your personal data or if you have a concern about how your personal data is used, please contact the Data Protection Officer at Guardian News &amp; Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Or, email dataprotection@theguardian.com. Complaints will be dealt with by the Data Protection Team, and will be responded to within 30 days. If you are not satisfied with the way your concern has been handled, you can refer your complaint to the Information Commissioner’s Office. If you have a question about anything else, please see our Contact us page here. Changes to this privacy policy If we decide to change our privacy policy we will post the changes here. If the changes are significant, we may also choose to email all our registered users with the new details. If required by law, we will get your permission or give you the opportunity to opt out of any new uses of your data. Changes to this privacy policy to date The most recent changes to this privacy policy were made on: 28 January 2022 8 October 2021 20 November 2020 12 August 2020 30 June 2020 A list of all previous changes are available upon request.Joe Rogan has addressed controversy over his Spotify podcast, hours after the streaming service announced a plan to tackle the spread of Covid-19 misinformation. In a 10-minute video posted to Instagram on Sunday night, the comedian and host pledged to “try harder to get people with differing opinions on” and “do my best to make sure I’ve researched these topics”. “A lot of people … have a distorted perception of what I do,” he said, defending two recent episodes of the Joe Rogan Experience that featured guests who shared Covid conspiracy theories. He called these guests “highly credentialed … people [with] an opinion that’s different from the mainstream narrative.” Rogan framed his podcast – which reaches an estimated 11 million listeners per episode – as “just conversations” which “started off as … having fun and talking”. “It’s become what it is today, which is some out of control juggernaut that I barely have control of,” he said. “Often times I have no idea what I’m gonna talk about until I sit down and talk to people. “I am gonna do my best in the future to balance things out.” He also apologised to Spotify. “I want to thank Spotify for being so supportive during this time, and I’m very sorry that this is happening to them and that they’re taking so much from it.” The episodes sparked a fresh round of furore, including from musicians Neil Young and Joni Mitchell, who pulled their music from Spotify as a result. “I’m not mad at Neil Young,” Rogan said, describing himself as a lifelong fan of the singer. Earlier on Sunday, the chief executive of Spotify, Daniel Ek, released an official statement setting out the streaming platform’s plan to tackle misinformation, as more users publicly unsubscribed from the service, more musicians withdrew their music and the company lost billions of dollars in market value. Nils Lofgren, guitarist with Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band, joined Mitchell and Young over the weekend in removing his music. He called on “all musicians, artists and music lovers everywhere, to stand with us all, and cut ties with Spotify”. Without addressing Rogan, the popular American writer, lecturer and researcher Brené Brown announced she is pausing two podcasts, which are exclusive to Spotify – Unlocking Us and Dare to Lead – until further notice.January transfer window highlights The January transfer window is not normally where the big clubs, such as Real Madrid, Barcelona, Bayern Munich and Manchester City, do most of their business, but there are times when reinforcements are needed. And going into deadline day we have the prospect of PSG signing Ousmane Dembelé from Barcelona with Liverpool having already captured Porto’s Luis Díaz for an initial £33.3m Unsurprisingly Tottenham are still very much active, leaving their business to the last, chasing Juventus pair Dejan Kulusevski and Rodrigo Bentancur. Newcastle have been the window’s biggest spenders, and will take their spending past £80m if they manage to get the Dan Burn deal over the line. One unexpected move – well, at least before the window started – was Christian Eriksen moving to Brentford on deadline day.The anti-corruption campaigner Bill Browder has called on Britain to target Russian oligarchs close to president Vladimir Putin with economic sanctions to halt any invasion of Ukraine when new legislation is unveiled on Monday. The US-born financier believes the most effective means of getting the Russian president’s attention is to target his finances and the finances of those closest to him, and that there should be no need for the UK to wait and see if a war ensues. “They should sanction five oligarchs tomorrow. That would show there is political will to do this. Then should sanction another five if they don’t pull back in the 10 days and the top 50 if they invade,” Browder told the Guardian. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, is expected to unveil legislation on Monday to allow Britain to hit banks, energy companies and “oligarchs close to the Kremlin” with economic sanctions if Russia invades Ukraine. “There will be severe costs on an invasion into Ukraine. And we would target Russian financial institutions, we would target energy companies, we will target oligarchs close to the Kremlin,” Truss told the BBC on Sunday. Browder, who has campaigned for countries around the world to introduce Magnitsky legislation, allowing them to sanction individuals linked to human rights abuses or corruption, said there was “no need to wait” for an invasion. “From my experience, the only thing that Putin cares about is his money, which is held for him by oligarch trustees,” said Browder, who believes key Russian billionaires hold some of their wealth in trust for the Russian president. Putin, however, denies he is wealthy and official Kremlin disclosures show he has an income of about $140,000, plus three cars and a small apartment. Claims last year by the now-jailed campaigner Alexei Navalny that he owned a vast 17,691 sq metre palace on the Black Sea coast have also been officially rejected. The US president, Joe Biden, said last week he would consider personal sanctions against Putin if he orders an invasion of Ukraine – although it is not clear if the planned UK legislation will allow the president to be targeted. Foreign Office sources said Britain’s existing sanctions regime allowed the UK only to target those linked to the destabilisation of Ukraine; the new legislation will permit a wider targeting of the “strategic interests” of the Russian state. But Browder warned the UK would face “intense lobbying” by Russian oligarchs to ensure they are not personally sanctioned. “They will hire lobbyists and PR firms – and it will take strength and fortitude for the British government to deal with that,” he said. Bob Seely, a Conservative member of the foreign affairs select committee, said he welcomed Truss’s proposed legislation, but said it was “a decade too late”. He added: “We have needed a consistent and robust approach to Russia, across the tools of Russian state power, to act as a deterrence. We have not had it.” The Tories have been accused of allowing Kremlin-linked money to flow easily through the City of London, and several individuals with strong links to Russia have donated to the party. Last week, the Center for American Progress, a US thinktank close to President Biden, warned that “uprooting Kremlin-linked oligarchs will be a challenge given the close ties between Russian money and the United Kingdom’s ruling Conservative party, the press, and its real estate and financial industry”. The thinktank proposed creating a joint US-UK working group to “prod stronger action from the UK government”. When asked about the thinktank report, Truss told the BBC: “We are doing more. We are introducing new legislation.”An attempt to endorse three prominent sitting Morrison government MPs without the need for plebiscites has been rejected by warring factions of the NSW Liberal party, dramatically increasing the prospect of federal intervention. A motion sponsored by the prime minister’s office and sent to the 27-strong NSW state executive as a “fax ballot” has failed to pass. It asked the state executive to bypass the preselection process in North Sydney, Farrer and Mitchell – effectively saving the careers of the moderate faction leader, Trent Zimmerman, the environment minister, Sussan Ley and the immigration minister, Alex Hawke. The vote required 90% support to pass but the motion was rejected by “double digits” of the state executive, one factional organiser said. By late Monday afternoon, there were attempts to withdraw the failed motion – a trigger for federal intervention – as desperate factional organisers tried to come up with another compromise acceptable to the state executive. The party failed to consider a comprehensive peace deal on Friday night at its regular meeting because of lack of support. Federal intervention in the state branch using special powers is similar to appointing an administrator and would almost certainly trigger legal action – which could see the party embroiled in court action as it seeks to fight four state byelections on 12 February and a federal election likely in May. One state executive member, Matthew Camenzeuli, has already written to the state director, Chris Stone, foreshadowing legal action if preselections do not proceed according to the rules. The result suggests there is now such a level of distrust between the factions that a deal will be hard to reach, despite the prime minister, Scott Morrison, taking a direct interest. “Some people voted on a point of principle and do not want to bypass democracy, some want to poke the PM in the eye,” said one observer. The crisis within the NSW Liberals has in part been triggered by new rules introduced in 2018 by the Warringah motion championed by former primer minister Tony Abbott. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The rules require plebiscites to be held in branches to choose the state and federal candidates. Branch members have 75 % of the votes with head office making up the other 25%. The ongoing uncertainty is taking a toll and will make it extremely difficult for the Liberals to run effective campaigns throwing seats into doubt. Two contentious seats – Dobell and Hughes – are still be to resolved, as are preselections for several others with vacancies including Warringah, Bennelong and Parramatta. Morrison’s preferred candidate for Dobell, Jemima Gleason, a pentecostal preacher, has withdrawn and another potential candidate – a well-known cricketer – has also cooled on the idea. That leaves just one candidate, Dr Michael Feneley, who is backed by the right faction. The proposal to springboard a former Young Liberal from Manly, Alex Dore, into Hughes has also angered local branches who have been denied the right to choose a candidate for the last three federal elections. The party did, however, on Monday endorse a number of uncontentious preselections, including Morrison himself for Cook, the energy minister, Angus Taylor, for Hume, the communications minister, Paul Fletcher, for Bradfield, Fiona Marton for Reid, Michael Cains in Whitlam and Wissam “Sam” Kayal in Werriwa. The last two must still pass the vetting process which has been held up for months. The NSW Senate ticket will go to a ballot, with the foreign minister, Marise Payne, in the No 1 spot, and two other sitting senators, Concetta Fierrvante-Wells and Jim Molan battling it out for the next winnable spot at No 3. The No 2 spot is filled by the Nationals. Dallas McInerney, one of the right faction conveners, is not nominating. Nominations close on Monday. The NSW division has also set a date for its annual general meeting – another contentious matter – for 27 March.As Storm Carrie approaches with winds of up to 90mph, thousands of homes in Scotland and north-east England are still without power after being affected by Storm Malik. The areas mainly include Northumberland, County Durham and rural Aberdeenshire. If you have been affected by Storm Malik, we would like to hear from you. We are also interested in hearing from those who are still without power. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The Winston Machine is a typically probing and playful work from Kandinsky theatre, shot through with music and mischief. It’s about a young woman called Becky who dreams of the 1940s and the dashing wartime romance between her grandparents, while planning to buy a house in a town she does not like, with a boyfriend she does not love. It’s a rich production, which dances nimbly across the decades and explores how our links with the past can be a joyful and enriching thing – but painful, misleading and crushingly claustrophobic, too. Directed with head-rushing freedom by James Yeatman and with deft dramaturgy from Lauren Mooney, this show is also about communication. And noise. The scenes in the present are full of clamour: a cacophony of constant distraction. Becky’s boyfriend tries to get her to look at their house listing on the internet but, in one continuous line of speech (which Hamish MacDougall delivers with such skill and humour), he also vocalises everything else that Becky is looking at on her laptop screen: Instagram feeds, Facebook likes and, of course, pictures of cats. The present might be closest to us, suggests Kandinsky, but with all that scrolling and clicking it can also feel very far away. What are the feelings and experiences, then, that help to keep us grounded? Music. Definitely music. Becky (Rachel-Leah Hosker) is a singer and the way she most easily accesses the past is through song. Vera Lynn. Summertime. Songs rise up through the cracks between the past and present and – with Hosker’s deep and beautifully centred voice – hold everything still. Nathaniel Christian, in a strikingly mature professional stage debut, plays the romance in Becky’s life. He is her pilot grandfather and he is also Lewis, an old friend and successful musician recently returned home from London. Christian spends a lot of time wearing a blue RAF jacket. The picture of a hero. But as the scenes fracture and deepen, that heroic image blurs. Becky’s grandfather wasn’t always a good person. Lewis’s career has barely even begun. It’s all just a matter of perspective. The Winston Machine is at New Diorama theatre, London, until 19 February.Plenty of people – on the left as well as the right – believed George Osborne when he conjured up a dystopian vision of Britain after a vote for Brexit during the final weeks of the referendum campaign. The then chancellor said victory for leave would result in a “DIY recession”, the loss of 800,000 jobs, a weaker housing market and a stock market crash. Two years on from our date of departure from the EU, none of it has happened. Unemployment is lower than it was in 2016 and, although this is very much a mixed blessing, house prices are higher. Share prices have risen and until Covid-19 arrived there was no recession. That hasn’t halted the flow of gloomy predictions: Nissan would quit the UK, tens of thousands of City jobs would be lost to Paris, Frankfurt and Amsterdam. More recently, Brexit supply chain problems would mean a turkey-less Christmas and empty high street shelves in December. None of that happened either, and the wait for economic meltdown goes on. Far from quitting the UK, Nissan last year announced it was investing £1bn in electric vehicle production at its Sunderland plant. Children didn’t wake up to empty Christmas stockings. A study by the consultancy EY found almost nine out of 10 global financial services firms plan to establish or expand operations in the UK this year. Confirmation bias is where people latch on to evidence that suits their argument while zoning out things that don’t. Opponents of Brexit, for example, filter out the success of the UK’s go-it-alone vaccine procurement strategy and the freedom the government now has to cut VAT on domestic energy bills. Brexit supporters, by contrast, point out that UK exports to the EU in the second half of 2021 varied little from their level in the same period of 2020 when trade was still frictionless, but ignore the fact that other countries performed more strongly last year as lockdown restrictions were eased. Likewise, they downplay the loss of share trading to Amsterdam and the UK’s poor investment performance after the Brexit vote. Stripped of the social media spats, the reality is that Brexit has not magically transformed Britain’s economic prospects, but nor has it been calamitous. From a big-picture perspective, Britain’s economy will exit Covid-19 looking pretty much the same as when the virus first arrived two years ago, even though the UK left the single market and the customs union in the meantime. Unemployment is little different, interest rates are a little lower, the housing market is hot. The big difference is that inflation is a lot higher, as it is in every developed country. That’s not to say the transition from EU membership has been seamless or cost free. It has been a burden that small exporting businesses could have done without at any time, let alone when seeking to cope with the impact of a global pandemic. But the response to Covid-19 has proved two things: businesses adapt to changed circumstances pretty quickly, and that process can be accelerated by supportive government policy. The models suggesting the damage from Brexit will be permanent rather than transitional are flawed for two reasons: they are based on a number of questionable – and often neoliberal – assumptions; and they envisage life goes on as before, with no change in behaviour either by the private sector or the state. There is a parallel here with the aim of “greening” the economy. Clearly, there will be costs from decarbonising the economy, but supporters of the net zero target think these can be mitigated by activist government, and see the opportunity to break with a broken model. There are those for whom this represents a false parallel because there can be no possible benefits from leaving the EU. For them it is only a matter of time before the doomsday scenario comes about, and therefore the only way ahead is for Britain to rejoin. But this strategy would only work if one of the two main parties supported it, and neither of them do. The most significant Brexit development of the past two years has not been economic but political: the decision by Keir Starmer to accept that the left needed to come up with its own plan for a post-EU Britain. Interviewed by my colleague Simon Hattenstone, Starmer could not have been clearer: “Look, we’ve left the EU. There’s no case for rejoining so we have to make it work. We are out, and we’re staying out.” Asked whether that ruled out a return to the single market or customs union under a Labour government he went on: “Yes, it does. We’ve got to make Brexit work from the outside and not reopen old wounds.” Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, said the same when she recently outlined her five-point plan for the economy. For Labour, Brexit is a done deal, and accepting that has meant it has been Reeves, who supported remain in 2016, rather than Rishi Sunak, who backed leave, who has been making the case to cut VAT on energy bills. Labour’s new stance makes sense, and not just because it gives the party a chance of winning the next election. Until recently there were only two options: a wasted-opportunity Brexit where nothing much happens and the economy trundles along much as before; and a rightwing free-market Brexit. Now there’s a third: a Labour Brexit in which the state uses its new powers to build a greener, fairer, levelled-up Britain. Larry Elliott is the Guardian’s economics editor#family This whole time I’d been reading it wrong, seeing only broken things. In Orthopaedics, # is read as ‘fracture’ – #NoF is ‘fractured neck of femur’, #collarbone is ‘fractured collarbone’. When I was young, my mother dabbed dalanghita oil onto her hands to soothe a fissure in my chest – a finger swept the muscle between my ribs. The window trembled with fractures of lightning as frayed shadows swallowed the room. I focused on her touch and everything eased into the fluster of leaves. But I woke to the clatter of her luggage to find her gone. Perhaps that is how every waking hour begins. Now I rub Vicks on my breastbone, hoping the storm beneath will cease. I tread a dislocated world, and each spot I step onto cleaves. Romalyn Ante was born in Lipa, Batangas in the Philippines in 1989 and came to live in the UK at the age of 16. She has followed her mother’s profession as an NHS nurse, and she also works as a psychotherapist. Her prizewinning first collection, Antiemetic for Homesickness, was published in 2020 and is dedicated to her mother. Although Ante takes pleasure in the textures of language and uses Tagalog words and phrases to striking effect in many poems, #family suggests how a symbol might do some of the work of a word and even do it more simply, coolly, fluidly. The first stanza explains how the hash symbol is interpreted in orthopaedics, and gives examples. The terms “fracture” and “break” are used interchangeably in clinical practice, although there are degrees of severity, as explained here. If no displacement occurs, the fracture is less severe. As we glance back at the title from the “fractured neck of femur” and the “fractured collarbone” it seems we’re being asked to see “family” as fractured or broken. But the stanza contains a warning-to-self against “seeing only broken things”. Now a vivid childhood memory rises to the surface. The special oil used by the mother to treat her daughter’s wound is from the dalanghita, “a small fruit-bearing tree largely cultivated in Batangas”. The effect of the massage on the child and on the storm outside the window with its “fractures of lightning” is calming: “everything / eased into the fluster of leaves.” It’s as if the essence of the fruit had somehow shared this maternal soothing and healing with the tumult outside. Reassurance is shattered in the final stanza, with “the clatter” of the mother’s luggage and the inconsolable discovery of her absence. There’s tremendous bleakness in the suggestion, “Perhaps that is how every waking hour begins.” Somehow, now, the speaker takes over her own maternal tending. In the new country “Vicks” is the old-fashioned, comforting “folk” remedy. It’s not a certain salve in the poem, although the speaker places her hope in its power, like the dalanghita oil of childhood, to heal an internal storm. The poem doesn’t bring us to a place of comfort. “I tread a dislocated / world, and each spot I step onto cleaves.” The line-break emphasises the displacement, and the rhyme of “cleaves” with the “leaves” of the previous stanza further reinforces the devastating change. Not even the ground is trustworthy. If the poem has set up an internal argument against an idea of a complete fracture of family relations, it also expresses the more complex fact that it’s not only “things” or bones which can be broken. Romalyn Ante has recently been named as one of the winners of the 2021/2022 Jerwood Compton poetry fellowships, together with Dzifa Benson and Jamie Hale. Many congratulations to all three, and best wishes for their future projects and publications.Nicholas Ashe Bateman’s ambitious debut breaks away from the recent crop of fantasy epics based on existing materials. A mass of tangled storylines spanning decades envelops Anmaere, a post-apocalyptic world containing two cities named Whithren and Levithen, both of which are in a perpetual state of stagnancy. The citizens of the sweltering Whithren dream of escaping to Levithen, a journey made possible only by earning a coveted ticket on one of the ferries that transport horses to the elusive, snow-capped land. Despite Withren’s industrial griminess, the sun once shone on this forsaken land. Memories of better days haunt the city’s inmates – even those who were born after the mysterious events that cast Anmaere into darkness, the details of which are never specified. And while The Wanting Mare is able to create spectacular visuals out of limited means – it was largely shot in a New Jersey warehouse – the weak script offers little of emotional substance, as it haphazardly jumps from one character to another. Barely any time is paid to the doomed romance between Moira (Ashleigh Nutt), an orphaned loner, and Lawrence (played by Bateman himself), a wounded thief, before the film fast-forwards to the former’s children, who are struggling to break free decades later. New side characters are introduced and quickly discarded ahead of a reunion between the former lovers, which proves to be one of the film’s more coherent moments: they are actually allowed to speak at some length of lost dreams and regrets over the span of the third act. But in the end, The Wanting Mare is so invested in creating a dazzling atmosphere that it fails to grasp that, even in a world empty of hope, the interior life of its characters is still more interesting than visually impressive rubble and ruins. • The Wanting Mare is available on 7 February on digital platforms.If it hadn’t cost him so much money, Antonio Conte could have been forgiven for tearing out his hair. During a typically earnest round-table transfer discussion, Sky Sports presenter Jo Wilson asked her colleague, Michael Bridge, for his thoughts on Tottenham Hotspur’s not entirely unexpected failure to sign Luis Díaz. On the back of footage filmed some weeks ago of an extremely morose, middle-aged Conte telling reporters: “For sure we need to improve the quality of our squad,” Bridge explained, with the gravitas one might expect from a father explaining to his small child that a beloved hamster has died, why the Italian won’t be improving it by securing the services of the Porto winger. “Just on this player in particular, Spurs were prepared to match the fee and match everything which Liverpool are going to pay,” Bridge solemnly intoned. “I need to say this because I know that’s the case. On this occasion, I know the player just wants to go to Liverpool.” Going on to explain that this was no ordinary gazumping, that Liverpool’s interest in the player had been long term and they had not decided to out-bid Tottenham just to torment Conte for the hell of it, Bridge handed down his verdict. “Disappointment,” he said. “But Spurs will move on.” No strangers to transfer window disappointment, Spurs have little choice but to move on, and all associated with the club will hope to speed up the healing process by trying to “move on” several players who were once the subject of high-profile bids the club did successfully manage to get over the proverbial transfer line. Often unable to do right for doing wrong in the market, even when Spurs appear to have gotten one over on Premier League rivals their victories end up feeling pyrrhic. A penny for the thoughts of their chairman Daniel Levy if he ever surveys news stories from last July reporting that Manchester City were prepared to offer Riyad Mahrez, Gabriel Jesus, Raheem Sterling and Bernardo Silva in exchange for Harry Kane. In the six months since publication, three of the four City players rumoured to be part of the job lot the club was prepared to sacrifice have scored more top-flight goals than the striker Tottenham fought so hard to keep in the summer. Of course it behoves us to note there is no guarantee that the reported details of this potential summer mega-swap deal were even remotely true, and even if their bona fides stood up to scrutiny, the byzantine contract negotiations required for a deal involving so many box-office footballers, their representatives and a club chairman renowned for playing hardball would almost certainly have ended in tears. The torrents of bullshit which permeate and pollute each transfer window are now at such levels they rival the amount of effluent British water companies were recently discovered to dump into our coastal seas. As somebody who is regularly tasked with writing the early morning Rumour Mill for this newspaper’s website, it would be a gross dereliction of journalistic duty if I did not claim responsibility for at least a few metaphorical gallons’ worth. “Write what you know” has long been a sage bit of wisdom passed on to aspiring authors, but the mushroom clouds of rumours, counter-rumours, fan dissatisfaction and frenzied media speculation which plume over our biannual transfer windows increasingly seem to be generated by armies of journalists, broadcasters and In The Know fans often writing or talking about what they not only don’t know, but can’t possibly know. And all for the benefit of audiences who treat each new dollop of tittle-tattle and tell-all with healthy scepticism despite really wanting to believe it is true. While the peddling of idle transfer speculation is part of my job spec, it is one I remain ambivalent towards, having no real interest in which footballer might sign for what club until we’ve had the “Here we go!” from transfer guru Fabrizio Romano, the ink has dried on their contract and we’ve seen the photo of them beaming alongside their new manager while posing with the club shirt. While the endless hours of speculation with which Sky Sports News and various other media outlets fill their schedules in each window suggest demand for this harmless nonsense is high, I can’t be alone in having wished that, say, a fairly recent Deadline Day had been devoted to discussions about the 41 goals scored in the preceding weekend’s 10 Premier League matches, 16 of which came in Tottenham’s 6-1 smiting of Manchester United at Old Trafford on the same day Aston Villa famously beat Liverpool 7-2. Instead, viewers were treated to what seemed like half-hourly updates from Everton’s Finch Farm training centre regarding confirmed sightings of Ben Godfrey from a nervous reporter mindful of the fact that a colleague once had a large purple sex toy thrust in his ear by an over-enthusiastic fan while reporting from that very spot. When I am the king, there will be a blanket media ban on reports of all transfer speculation and dealings, with clubs forbidden from announcing Mbappé or anyone else until such time as the players in question run out to line up for their first game at their new team. If nothing else, it would be worth it to see the disappointment on the faces of Spurs fans when instead of Díaz, Adama Traoré and half of Manchester City’s first team, they are instead treated to the spectacle of the usual suspects being bawled out by a manager who could scarcely look more forlorn.Few people outside of south Texas, and even fewer outside the state, have heard of US representative Henry Cuellar, though he is one of the state’s most fascinating elected officials. But now the nation may know him as yet another member of Congress tied to a federal investigation. A recent FBI raid at this nine-term Democratic congressman’s home and campaign headquarters in Laredo, on the US-Mexico border, has potentially significant implications for Washington politics: it deals another blow to the art of compromise, a once-essential legislative tool, and one that Cuellar has mastered in his long political career. The FBI raid on January 19 is part of an investigation of several people with ties to the former Soviet nation of Azerbaijan. I have no direct knowledge of the nature of the federal investigation – and Cuellar has not been charged with anything – but allowing an FBI raid weeks before his hotly contested 1 March primary suggests the highest levels of the justice department signed off on this action. Although he calls himself a moderate, Cuellar is a conservative Democrat who reflects a different era of Texas and US politics. Many progressive Democrats in Texas and beyond view that as seditious to the party, prompting a national progressive Democratic effort to purge him from office. This includes support from Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, as well as Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, all of whom have endorsed Cuellar’s two-time challenger, Jessica Cisneros, who once interned for him. Cisneros, who came within four points of defeating Cuellar in 2020, has seen her fortunes dramatically increase this year thanks to the FBI. But there is concern that she might be too progressive for this border district, and a primary victory by her could bolster the chances of Republicans capturing that seat. I first met Cuellar in the 1990s when he had served in the Texas House of Representatives for nearly a decade. As the eldest of eight children to migrant farmworker parents, Cuellar pursued post-secondary education with vigour and has more degrees than most members of Congress. He earned an associate degree from Laredo Community College and then went to Georgetown University in Washington, DC for a bachelor’s degree before returning to Texas to get a master’s degree at Texas A&amp;M International University in Laredo. He then secured a doctorate and law degree from the University of Texas at Austin. Along the way, he also secured a black belt in karate. Always gregarious and down-to-earth friendly, Cuellar had already developed the politician’s veneer and seemed to be running for office even while in law school, a classmate of his once told me. Few people know that one of the first major political forces in Texas to publicly call on then governor George W Bush to run for president was the powerful Democratic lieutenant governor Bob Bullock. Cuellar was in the state’s lower chamber when Bullock, the head of the upper chamber, made that endorsement. And Cuellar seems to have learned what made Bullock so effective and powerful as a statewide elected official – bipartisanship. When Bush finally won the White House and stepped down as Texas governor, Republican Rick Perry, who succeeded Bullock, was elevated to the state’s top office and appointed Cuellar secretary of state, the most visible appointment a Texas governor can make. It showed a spirit of bipartisanship that Texas lawmakers then boasted about in contrast to the bitter partisan divisions that had already beset Washington. But it also put a pall on Cuellar in the eyes of Democrats, many of whom lost trust in him. That sense of betrayal dissipated as Cuellar left state politics and won a seat in Congress in 2004 by a 58-vote margin against former friend and incumbent representative Ciro Rodriguez. In his 17 years in Congress, Cuellar has developed a reputation as either a politician who is wily enough to reach across the aisle or a vendido, Spanish for sellout. He has received several A grades from the National Rifle Association and opposes abortion rights. From my vantage point, his willingness to play well with Republicans and his ability to compromise has made Cuellar arguably the most effective and powerful of the 13 Texas Democrats in Congress. Nothing is more emblematic of the duelling opinions about Cuellar than the congressional battle over funding Trump’s border wall. As a member of the House appropriations committee and its subcommittee on homeland security, Cuellar was in the thick of the fight over border wall funding during the Trump administration. His congressional district is huge, extending from Laredo north-east to San Antonio and south to Mission in the Rio Grande Valley, where early plans for the border wall raised a lot of concerns. As the only member of Congress on the border to be part of a negotiating team to fund the wall, Cuellar was able to carve out significant exceptions to where the wall could be built. This included La Lomita Mission, located on the banks of the Rio Grande, which is the namesake for the city of Mission; the Santa Ana national wildlife refuge, which sits at the juncture of two major bird migratory routes and is the home of more than 400 bird species; the National Butterfly Centre, a 100-acre preserve; and even the launchpad for Elon Musk’s SpaceX – all of which were threatened by construction of a wall and adjacent security zone for US Border Patrol agents to drive. Then to the consternation of those who opposed the wall, Cuellar voted twice to fund construction for nearly 100 miles of wall in south Texas, the second vote helping to avert a government shutdown. Debate continues over whether Cuellar was able to save some of the most environmentally and historically sensitive property in south Texas or whether he sold out his constituents. His actions suggest he was acceding to political compromise, a traditional mainstay of the legislative process that is becoming more of a liability in our take-no-prisoners political landscape. The actions of the FBI, just weeks before the 14 February start of early voting in the Texas primary elections, suggest Cuellar’s political sacrifice is the new cost of business in Washington. Carlos Sanchez is director of public affairs for Hidalgo county, Texas. He was a journalist for 37 years and has worked at the Washington Post and Texas Monthly magazine, as well as eight other newsrooms. He can be reached at borderscribe@gmail.comFor more than a month now, the press has been full of stories of “illegal” parties in Downing Street. The government, we are told, has almost ground to a halt because of the scandal. Given the coverage, one might easily get the impression that the law-breaking bash is a recent invention, something that could only happen in lockdown, driven by privilege and an unhealthy sense of entitlement. Yet the modern party began life as a crime just over a century ago, when the Volstead Act banned the production and sale of alcohol in the US. As the New York Times explained in 1920: You cannot carry a hip flask. You cannot give away or receive a bottle of liquor as a gift. You cannot take liquor to hotels or restaurants and drink it in the public dining rooms. You cannot buy or sell formulas or recipes for homemade liquors. You cannot … It was not technically illegal to drink at home – but procuring the booze for a party meant breaking the law. Not that that stopped everyone. The first “cocktail parties”, claimed the hard-drinking writer F Scott Fitzgerald, who was at most of them, were held in 1921. By the following year the New York Times was complaining that the once-innocent word “party” now meant, by definition, an “inebriate” bash. Fitzgerald found the whole thing so intoxicating that he wrote one of the century’s defining novels, The Great Gatsby, about a bootlegger famous for his decadent parties and limitless cocktails. Prohibition was America’s first culture war, imposing the conservative morality of teetotal small towns on cities vilified as warrens of drunken immigrants – Italians with their wine, Irish with their whiskey, Germans with their beer. Revisionist historians claim it was a success, reducing illness and crime. But that’s a narrow view of an extreme attempt to remake modern life. Prohibition changed behaviour all right – for it put wild parties at the centre of modern culture. Cocktails, the classic lubricant of the 1920s party, may have helped hide the awful taste of bootleg spirits. Or perhaps they just got you drunk faster. Either way, the rise of cocktail parties redefined what a party was. Soon this cocktail scene had spread to Europe. Even though drinking was legal in the UK, the aristocratic Bright Young Things in 1920s England managed to give their parties a spectacular excess that outraged and entertained the onlooking, purportedly sober and dull, masses. When police deferentially but firmly tried to end a party at St George’s Baths, London, in 1928, the Bright Young guests, all boozing in their bathing costumes, tried to get the bobbies to join them in the pool. Another novelist, Evelyn Waugh, evoked the permanent drunkenness of the decade in Vile Bodies’ nauseous opening on a wave-tossed ship in the Channel: “Oh,” said the Bright Young People. “Oh, oh, oh.” “It’s just exactly like being inside a cocktail shaker,” said Miles Malpractice. Yet those who really wanted to party hard in the 20s and early 30s headed for Weimar Berlin or surrealist Paris, where the norms of the time were more profoundly defied. Brassaï’s 1931 photograph Gay Ball at Magic City is sometimes mistaken for an image of Weimar decadence but actually shows men in everything from full drag to black tie dancing at a decaying Paris amusement park that found a new lease of life as a gay party venue. Brassaï was delighted by its “immense, warm, impulsive fraternity”. The Weimar republic’s endless uneasy party is preserved in paintings such as Max Beckmann’s Die Nacht – a true party from hell, with bondage, in a room that’s drunkenly shrinking – and Otto Dix’s depictions of sailors, sex workers and jazz bands. It was crushed in 1933 when the Nazis came to power. But – in modern mythology at least – they kept the decadence going. The image of Nazis cavorting in wild romps was paradoxically created by Hitler’s own propaganda chief, Joseph Goebbels. After Hitler had the leaders of the SA, the party’s streetfighting wing, massacred in 1934, it was said at least one of the leaders was caught in bed with another man in a Bavarian hotel. Goebbels whipped this up into a denunciation of the SA as “asocial” Weimar types. But did the Nazis actually party hard? A Soviet war correspondent, Konstantin Simonov, told how when the Red Army entered Berlin in 1945 he found the wreckage of a final fascist feast. Some German officers and their girlfriends had sealed themselves in a bunker with as much champagne as they could find for a blowout worthy of the dying gods. A half-century later, artist Mat Collishaw restaged this debauched scene in a series of pictures called Burnt Almonds, portraying a “desperate last party of champagne, sex and cynanide”. Yet the artifice of his photographs acknowledges that an obscene party involving Nazi officers and sex workers mixes history with our fantasies of what evil looks like. The liberation of Paris in 1944 was welcomed with a much nicer orgy – a spontaneous bacchanal of drinking and sex took over the city. From there it was just a short hop to the postwar party era, where decadence was no longer the privilege of Bright Young Things but available to everyone in an age of consumer democracy and pop culture. Rock’n’roll generated parties to make Fitzgerald blush – yet here again the real mayhem was laced with fiction. What Marianne Faithfull and Mick Jagger got up to in 1967 is one of those fantasies. Britain was blown away when an overheated press added its own lurid details to what was actually a quiet drug-taking party at Keith Richards’ house, Redlands. The civilised, if trippy, evening became a myth of excess when police raided (egged on by the News of the World) and were horrified by the “strong sweet smell of incense”. It did result in one of the greatest modern British artworks, when Richard Hamilton turned a photo of Jagger and art dealer Robert Fraser handcuffed in a police van into his acid-coloured masterpiece Swingeing London 67. Rock stars, not least the Stones themselves, would party much harder. Unfortunately, some of the most shocking stories about Led Zeppelin’s antics appear to be absolutely true. Witnesses have confirmed the story of the sublime hard rock band’s hotel room party in 1969 involving a freshly caught shark – the hotel was on a Pacific pier – and a young woman. It’s best told by Frank Zappa in his song The Mud Shark: “Say one night you checked into the Edgewater Inn motel with a 8mm movie camera, enough money to rent a [fishing] pole, and, just to make it more interesting, a succulent young lady with a taste for the bizarre …” As they say on BBC iPlayer, these lyrics reflect the time in which they were written. So does the claim that people with dwarvism were paid to walk around Freddie Mercury’s party at the Fairmont hotel, New Orleans, in 1978 with plates of cocaine strapped to their heads. That seems to be folklore, but some of the many stories about this party must be true, such as that naked models wrestled in a pit filled with raw liver. One party this century that competed with it, and even had Rolling Stone Ronnie Wood in attendance among the much younger artists and fashion stars, was Kate Moss’s 30th in 2004. It reputedly climaxed with some of the guests taking part in an orgy at Claridge’s. With true erudition in party history, Moss called it The Beautiful and the Damned, after Fitzgerald’s second novel. Don’t stop me now … Compared with the sins of the rock patriarchs, the parties that got Britain’s authorities outraged in the late 1980s and early 90s were joyous and harmless. That didn’t stop the Criminal Justice Act 1994 using some unintentionally comic language to try to specify exactly what was so wrong with a rave. Section 63 on “powers to remove persons attending or preparing for a rave” defines one as “a gathering on land in the open air of 20 or more persons (whether or not trespassers) at which amplified music is played during the night (with or without intermissions) and … by reason of its loudness and duration and the time at which it is played, is likely to cause serious distress to the inhabitants of the locality”. It carefully explains that “for this purpose … ‘music’ includes sounds wholly or predominantly characterised by the emission of a succession of repetitive beats”. Music characterised by the emission of a succession of repetitive beats once again pumped out illegally in 2020 at lockdown raves in warehouses left empty by the pandemic. Participants who were caught were, of course, fined without any need for a Cabinet Office inquiry to establish if they were at a rave or just a noisy, sweaty work meeting. Even before the pandemic so severely narrowed the field of social interaction for law-abiding citizens, the politics of wild parties was changing. Values are different. Many of the rock world’s legendary antics now look like abuse and elicit not amusement but revulsion. And there’s another kind of party that shocks: the depraved secret gatherings that rulers and the rich enjoy, or are imagined to enjoy. Here again fictional outrages abound, ever since Marie Antoinette went to the guillotine for imaginary crimes including depravity and keeping wine under her bed to bribe the Swiss Guards. But former Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi’s “bunga bunga parties” appear to have been real. According to young women who were there, the politician and media magnate’s private gatherings started as dinner parties and ended with women having to strip and pole dance until Berlusconi chose his partner for the night. One account describes him starting the entertainment by producing a statuette with an enormous penis, which the women had to lick. A pole dancing room also features in recently released photographs of what is claimed to be Vladimir Putin’s new secret palace. If excess is always enlivened by a hint of the criminal, the definition of wildness will change with the laws. It’s a long way from The Great Gatsby’s Prohibition shindigs where flappers and stockbrokers danced in the moonlight, to Boris Johnson and the staff of 10 Downing Street getting in the Tesco rosé and M&amp;S snacks. The scandal is in proportion to the limits imposed by lockdown on everyone else, of course. At the No 10 double party on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral someone, it seems, drunkenly sat on a child’s swing and broke it. It’s a detail in its pathos worthy of Fitzgerald.Armed counter-terrorism officers will be deployed on British cross-Channel ferries for the first time this summer, though government sources said there was no specific threat to passenger vessels. Firearms police from the Civil Nuclear Constabulary (CNC) are to be posted on ferries out of Dover, as well as on passenger ships between Newcastle and the Netherlands. The move will tighten security on British ferries, which are unguarded and seen as vulnerable, with passengers not individually searched or given body scans when boarding, unlike those on planes or Eurostar trains. A government spokesperson said: “The government will always take the strongest possible action to protect our national security and our priority remains maintaining the safety and security of our citizens. “We are constantly developing protection for UK citizens against the threat of terrorism. This includes strengthening security by fully equipping law enforcement and emergency responders to respond to terrorist incidents, no matter where they occur.” It is understood about 40 CNC officers will be posted on a rotation basis on ferries with a trial starting in July. The CNC has officers available as a result of nuclear power stations being decommissioned. A senior counter-terrorism source told the Times that ferries were seen as extremely vulnerable and “completely unguarded”. “Ferries are the weak link when it comes to policing transport against terror attacks. Moving a handful of CNC officers to ferries makes sense and they will be a visible deterrent,” the source said. A government source confirmed to the Guardian there was “no specific threat to passenger vessels” and the treaty and other cooperation with France formed part of the UK government’s wider strategy to ensure it was able to protect UK citizens against terrorism “no matter where it occurs”. With the decommissioning of nuclear power stations, the number of officers required to protect them is falling. The decision to redeploy CNC officers is part of a plan to extend the force’s remit to enable them to offer services beyond the civil nuclear sector and provide support to other police forces. A UK-France maritime security treaty was signed in July to improve joint working. It will come into force once the UK and France have completed ratification procedures and is designed to mitigate against a high-threat security incident on a ferry or other large vessel in the Channel. The treaty includes provisions that would enable the UK and France to share security information concerning potential threats, mount swifter and stronger initial responses to serious security incidents, coordinate more efficient joint responses and cooperate more effectively in the aftermath of an attack or incident, a spokesperson said.For more than two years, dozens of people in the Canadian province of New Brunswick have suffered from a distressing array of neurological symptoms, prompting speculation that they had fallen victim to an unknown degenerative illness. Provincial authorities are soon expected to release a report examining whether the cases are linked, or simply the result of misdiagnosis and clinical error. But as the public awaits the findings, those enduring the extreme symptoms say they’ve been left to suffer alone. Victims and their families have described a frightening deterioration of bodies and minds, compounded by an agonizing wait for more information. Gabrielle Cormier, 20, dreamed of attending medical school. But in 2019, she began experiencing muscle pain, difficulty concentrating and vision problems. Her family initially suspected it was fatigue from sports. Soon, however, she could no longer keep her balance. Cormier can now walk only with a cane, has trouble speaking and is unable to focus enough to attend university classes. Her dream of becoming a doctor is slipping away. “It breaks our heart. Young people should be out living and enjoying themselves. Instead they’re dealing with these health issues that we can’t explain,” said Gabrielle’s stepmother, Stacie Quigley Cormier. “Politics is slowing everything down. And what people don’t have is time.” The broader public first became aware of the illness last March, after a leaked government memo asked doctors to be on the lookout for patients with symptoms similar to Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. The government called it a “cluster of neurological syndrome of unknown cause”. At the time, the province was working alongside federal scientists to make sense of the suspected cases. Internal documents obtained by freedom of information requests and seen by the Guardian show that after a battery of diagnostic tests proved inconclusive, the province’s department of environment and public health units began exploring the possibility of environmental causes, including blue-green algae, toxicity in shellfish, chronic wasting disease and even glyphosate, a controversial forestry herbicide. But cooperation with the federal government ended abruptly in late spring and the province took the lead of the investigation. They created an oversight committee to re-examine suspected cases and determine if errors had been made in the diagnostic process. Victims families say that after the province took over, the investigation slowed down. “Everything went black. There was no communication. There was no information, medical appointments weren’t moving as quickly any more … That’s when Gabrielle’s morale really started to go downhill,” said Quigley Cormier. “Our questions can’t be answered and she’s really started to lose hope.” The government first identified 48 suspected cases last spring, although medical sources say the figure is closer to 150, with many of those afflicted in their 20s and 30s. But the provincial government increasingly suspects there is no single mystery illness in the region. An October report ruled out any significant links between the victims or evidence of toxins in food sources, and a previous study found that eight people in the cluster died of known illnesses. That conclusion clashes with recent reports that caregivers in some suspected cases have also developed symptoms, which some experts suggested could indicate an environmental cause. The province of New Brunswick did not respond to questions about its investigation of the cluster and whether it plans to test for possible environmental contamination. Officials have not announced when the report will be released and families say they’ve been kept in the dark. But the province has already started advising those within the “cluster” they are no longer believed to have an unknown illness, even if those people still suffer from debilitating symptoms. Earlier this month, Johanne Boucher, who was one of the original 48, received a letter from the committee advising her that she was no longer a prospective case. The letter said she could be suffering from a type of progressive aphasia, a form of Parkinson’s or a variant of corticobasal degeneration. The committee suggested she take tests which the 63-year-old says she has already taken. “I was shocked,” she said, writing to the Guardian on Facebook Messenger as she lost the ability to speak in late 2021. “I can’t even order a coffee. All I can do is write. After nearly four years, I’ve seen two neurologists … and had countless tests. I don’t know what I have. The disease remains unknown.” Terriline Porelle, 33, is equally dismayed by how the province has handled her case. In the summer of 2020, Porelle, felt a sharp pain “like electric shock” in her leg. Porelle, an avid hiker, found that in the following days, the sensation moved throughout her body, reaching her arms and face. Like Gabrielle Cormier, her vision worsened. An optometrist told her the muscles in her eyes acted similarly to those of patients in their 70s and 80s. After forgetting how to write the letter Q, she saw her family doctor. But tests turned up nothing. A neurologist ruled out other possible conditions and her brain scan was clean. “I was relieved it wasn’t a tumour or something. But we still didn’t know what it was. I try not to obsess over it,” said Porelle, who has trouble moving around her house. “I have sleepless nights where I wonder how this happened. What’s going on with me?” Recently, Porelle was referred to a neuropsychologist by the province’s oversight committee. After speaking to the specialist over the phone for four hours, Porelle was told she likely had PTSD – not an unknown illness. She had previously suffered from depression and anxiety, but she says her current symptoms are nothing like that. “I just laughed. I was like, ‘Are you serious right now?’ I’m still trying to digest that.” Porelle, who lives in a rural community, says her mental function continues to deteriorate. She finds it hard to complete daily tasks without the help of her partner. “We’ve been given no resources from the government and no help,” she said. “I don’t know what to do. I try to keep positive, but it’s hard. There are days when I don’t know if I should even bother saving for retirement. Am I even going to live that long?”Being a small business owner can be full of highs and lows. Working for yourself, or as part of a small team, in a “Soho” (small office/home office) setup can often be a lonely place. To unleash the full potential of your small business enterprise, you need to make connections. We explore five ways in which the right kind of network can help take you to the next level. The mentoring connection In the business world, the power of a good mentor is well known, and the statistics back up the benefits; according to a CNBC/SurveyMonkey Workplace Happiness survey, 91% of workers who have a mentor are satisfied with their jobs. The 2014 Apprentice winner Mark Wright has grown Climb Online, the digital marketing business he started on the show, to a turnover of £5m a year. He credits the mentorship of Lord Sugar with some of his success. “It can be lonely and somewhat daunting running your own business, and the last couple of years have been particularly isolating for many,” he says. “Having someone to bounce ideas off who understands you and your business and who has been in the process themselves, is invaluable. It is reassuring when times are tough, and their support will navigate you through.” Of course, we can’t all call on someone like Lord Sugar, but a mentor who knows your industry or has been through similar struggles will help you feel less isolated. “A decent mentor won’t just tell you what you want to hear,” says Wright. “Their experience will enable them to provide you with relevant and tested feedback and to encourage you to think more clearly about your ideas and problems.” The community connection The power and value of community has been thrown into sharp relief in the events of the last couple of years, and business is no exception. Entrepreneur Eddie Whittingham sold his startup cybersecurity business last year to a Nasdaq-listed company, and now provides consultancy and support. He created GoFounder, a platform for startups, having felt frustrated at the lack of community when he was setting up his own business. “As a small business owner, having a community of people in a similar boat to you can be hugely helpful,” says Whittingham. “It sometimes feels like you’re really alone or that other people can’t relate, but the truth is, most business owners go through a lot of the same troubles. So being part of a community of other startup founders can be invaluable not only to your success but also your mental health.” The partnership connection People who think collaboratively will always benefit in the long term, says Michael Edwards, founder of The Northern Affinity, a business community set up with the sole aim of connecting businesses based in the north. For Edwards, partnerships are crucial. “Running a small business often means you are competing with businesses that are bigger, better resourced and with bigger budgets than you. The only way you can compete is by being more agile and working with others to provide a fantastic service.” During the pandemic, Edwards says he’s seen “isolated business people engage in more virtual networking and rallying together virtually to support vulnerable people”. All this, he says, was driven by an increased awareness of how much everyone needed outside support. The tech connection For small businesses, getting the right infrastructure in place can be a hugely daunting task. But bandwidth is at the heart of almost every modern business function. With a powerful internet connection in place, minimising frustrating delays and hassles, you can start to build up to a level of tech that enables every employee to give their best. “As a tech communications consultancy, we wholeheartedly embraced the various uses of technology to keep the team connected,” says Heather Delaney, founder and managing director of London-based Gallium Ventures, “from workflow applications such as Slack and Google Meet all the way to the metaverse – for example, when the pandemic hit, we gave employees headsets to experiment with collaborating and social games in virtual reality. “By creating a solid technology infrastructure in which we can work virtually during the early days [of the pandemic], we have [had] no disruption to workflow [due to Covid waves].” The social connection Creating a social media presence and boosting paid ads is one of the first steps most small businesses take in marketing. But, says Delaney, drilling down to who your company wants to connect to on social media, and how you want to speak to them, is the real key. “Although it is tempting to pay for a high-profile influencer to promote your product or service, this isn’t always the best approach,” she says. “Opportunities like this can be expensive and if their fans and followers are not relevant to your customer targets, the return on investment will be low.” Start with free activities to build a presence until you understand who your audience is and what their interests are, says Delaney. “Digital ads and influencer relations can then be the next step in driving sales, downloads or customer acquisition.” Want to make the right kind of business connections? Get a connectivity package that gives you the capacity to do what you do best. To find out more about how Volt from Virgin Media and O2 can seamlessly supercharge you and your business, visit virginmediabusiness.co.uk/voltTech startups have transformed our lives in ways barely conceivable even a decade ago, with lots more innovation promised to come. And though it might appear we’re all just staring at screens, technology is connecting people like never before. We met three exciting young British tech startups to get an insight into the connectivity revolution. Inclusivity through equality “Tedious and unfulfilling Zoom meetings” drove Chris Rabbitt to the conclusion that “the optimum number of people to have in a meeting was four”. Hybrid working is here to stay, Rabbitt says, “but people miss making real connections, as they are tired of massive Zoom rooms where they can’t get a word in edgeways”. Rabbitt came up with Meeow, a “blind-date”-style networking and pitching platform for small and medium enterprises, where you get to meet three other business people selected by the platform each time. Launched in April, the company has high growth predictions for 2022. Meeow started on Zoom as an online business community and built up a loyal following and a group of ambassadors. But when Rabbitt and his team wanted to scale the business they realised they needed to create their own bespoke tech platform. Equality is a priority in their ethos: “The randomness of Meeow means that there is no unconscious bias in our platform – it’s important to us that we level the playing field for all business owners, regardless of their age, race, disabilities or sexual orientation,” says Rabbitt. “Meeow also removes the self-censorship people exhibit when deciding who they need to speak to.” Rabbitt is evangelical about how tech enables great cultural changes. “The next 12 months will be tremendously interesting as ideas born out of the pandemic begin to come to market,” he says, “I’m particularly excited by some of the fintech and future of work startups I’ve seen in recent months. Companies such as Work and Communications (WAC) are shaking things up in the gig economy, and Juggle in the jobs market. It’s a truly fascinating world to be a part of.” And connectivity is crucial for all of this. “It doesn’t just support our operation – it is our business,” says Rabbitt. “We are a truly digital business taking advantage of all the opportunities that connectivity affords.” Accessibility-led engagement Will Turner and Phil Steele came up with the idea of fitness tool GoJoe after a rain-soaked University of Leeds reunion sports event. It aims to bridge the gap between physical events and digital fitness apps, with the special sauce of “friendly, team-based, social competition”. GoJoe serves “neglected ‘ordinary Joes’ like us, who want to get and stay fit but don’t find existing products motivational all year round”, says Turner. “Existing fitness apps are great for invested athletes or for getting you started, but in our view don’t work well as longer-term, sustainable fitness solutions for most people.” After quickly achieving success in global accelerator challenges and securing major brands as corporate clients, GoJoe is now opening its second round of investment. Tech accessibility underpins the app, says Turner. “We’re a global digital product and we’re fully accessible and free for people to use. You don’t need an expensive bit of kit or a bike, for example, to be part of the GoJoe community and compete with friends, colleagues or celebrities – you really only need a smartphone. That’s allowed us to be present in more than 130 countries worldwide, including in some pretty remote places.” Connectivity for its customers runs through everything GoJoe does. “It’s played a part in some of the biggest decisions we’ve made as a tech company – in terms of developing our tech, integrating wearables, deciding which features to implement, and in how we engage across all our channels.” For Turner, tech means “turning everyday solo experiences into something more meaningful and social”. He’s passionate about how advancing changes in technology represent “a sea change in how we experience the world around us. We see some amazing opportunities for people to socialise their everyday fitness experiences and get closer to people virtually while exercising.” Infrastructure for innovation Omid Moallemi started social gifting app Prsnt in 2019 after discovering it was too late to send a friend a gift on his birthday. “A birthday card will take days and Amazon could only do next-day,” he says. He felt there was a better way to – quickly – express the emotional connection of gifting than a simple text message. Prsnt allows people to send a gift, such as a QR code, Starbucks voucher or a Deliveroo meal, all with a personalised video, direct to someone’s smartphone in under 15 seconds. With a background in product design and innovation, Moallemi used these skills to do what he sees as “overhauling the gifting process”. “There are several needs for the modern-day gift-giver – speed, convenience, personalisation and sustainability,” he says. “We service anyone with a birthday and a smartphone – which is a huge market.” Moallemi originally had the basic idea for Prsnt some 10 years ago but the infrastructure simply wasn’t in place. “Smartphone tech was fairly new, and the software systems weren’t available to process the Prsnt engine,” he says. “We have some great emerging tech that helps us, including digital payments and digital tokens from the brands.” Also passionate about tech’s power for good, Moallemi says: “It enhances our lives – it allows us to connect better, achieve more and ultimately create a better world. In a further 20 years’ time, we will live in a world full of technology that hasn’t been invented yet – and that to me is really exciting.” The right technology helps your business make game-changing moves. Get a connectivity package that gives you the capacity to do what you do best. To find out more about how Volt from Virgin Media and O2 can seamlessly supercharge you and your business, visit virginmediabusiness.co.uk/voltMyanmar’s military junta has threatened sedition and terrorism charges against anyone who shuts their business, claps or bang pots on Tuesday, as it tries to stamp out any protests planned to mark the one-year anniversary of the coup. The military, which ousted the democratically elected government of Aung San Suu Kyi on 1 February 2021, continues to face defiant opposition including peaceful protests and an armed resistance. On Tuesday, activists plan to hold a “silent strike” and have called for members of the public to stay at home between 10am and 4pm. At the end of the strike, people will clap or bang pots, an act that is traditionally thought to drive out evil spirits, and which is often used as a form of protest against the military. The junta has warned the public not to participate in such protests, announcing in junta-controlled media that people who do so will face a variety of legal charges. Over the past week, business owners have been sent notices from local administrators, reiterating such threats, and warning their property could be confiscated. They have been required to sign a document to pledge their agreement. Some shop owners who had told customers that their businesses will be closed on 1 February have already been arrested, according to local media outlet the Irrawaddy. Many businesses are proposing getting around the military threats by dramatically raising prices, opening only for a few hours and closing for “lunch break”, or keeping their store open but not selling items. Ahead of the coup anniversary, the United States, Britain and Canada unveiled on Monday coordinated sanctions on Myanmar officials. Sanctions were placed on attorney general Thida Oo, supreme court chief justice Tun Tun Oo and Anti-Corruption Commission chairman Tin Oo, whom the US said were closely involved in the “politically motivated” prosecution of Aung San Suu Kyi. “We are coordinating these actions with the United Kingdom and Canada ... to further promote accountability for the coup and the violence perpetrated by the regime,” the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said. “The United States will continue ... to address human rights abuses and press the regime to cease the violence, release all those unjustly detained, allow unhindered humanitarian access, and restore Burma’s path to democracy,” he added. A new generation of activists Aung Kaung Sett, president of Yangon University Student Union, who led mass protests in Yangon in the wake of the coup and is now in hiding, said the public would not abandon the struggle for democracy. “There is no turning back now. We live or we die,” he said. “The revolution must continue, whatever it takes.” While military violence means it is no longer safe to hold large street rallies, and leaders such as Aung San Suu Kyi remain in prison, new forms of protests continue, led by a new generation of activists. “There are guerrilla protests led by young people, especially students, poets and activists, across everywhere in Myanmar,” Aung Kaung Sett said. He said the coup had dramatically changed public opinion of the Myanmar military, which is known as the Tatmadaw. “People are beginning to feel the same way now as those who had faced oppression by the Myanmar military in the past,” he said, citing the brutal crackdown on Rohingya Muslims in 2017, and atrocities committed against other ethnic minorities. There was previously little sympathy towards minorities within Myanmar, but attitudes have shifted as the public has united in opposition to the military. The military has announced it will hold market festivals and a cycling contest in both Yangon and Mandalay from Monday until Wednesday, in an attempt to crowd the streets on the day of the Silent Strike and project an image of normalcy. However, one year on from the coup, the country is in a state of turmoil. Public services, such as health and education, have collapsed because many medical and teaching staff refuse to work in junta-controlled facilities and so are operating in the community. The economy is failing, with the UN estimating the crisis will have driven almost half the population into poverty in 2022. According to the World Food Programme, the cost of a basic food basket was almost a third higher in October 2021 when compared with the month prior to the coup. Fuel prices have surged more than 70%. The military has also inflicted extreme violence to suppress opposition, burning villages, launching airstrikes, carrying out massacres and blocking aid to civilians. Since the coup, 1,499 people have been killed, according to the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners, which tracks deaths and arrests. At least 11,801 people have been arrested. There are widespread reports of torture within detention facilities. Many young people have fled to the jungle and resorted to taking up arms and forming people’s defence forces. Among them is Costa, 21, who, prior to the coup, was studying International Relations at Yangon University. She is now in charge of managing finances for a battalion of the Karenni National Defence Force in Kayah state. “We will continue to ask for what we want: to abolish the 2008 constitution [which guaranteed the military huge powers, even during the governments of Aung San Suu Kyi], restore democracy and end dictatorship, even if it takes 10 years,” she said. Worsening conflict between the junta and its opponents has forced hundreds of thousands of people to flee their homes, especially in the south-east and north-west of the country. As of 27 December, an estimated 320,900 people remained internally displaced across Myanmar, according to the United Nations. This is in addition to the 340,000 people who were already displaced before the coup. David Carden, the head of UN OCHA Myanmar, said the people of Myanmar faced “an unprecedented political, human rights and humanitarian crisis that is now touching all corners of the country, posing grave protection risks for civilians, limiting access to services and driving deeper food insecurity”. Many of the people who were displaced were living in the open or sheltering in the jungle. Humanitarian access remains severely restricted, Carden added. International efforts to ease the crisis have been criticised by activists as inadequate. Ismail Wolff, regional director of the group Fortify Rights, described the response as “ineffective and incompetent”. “The [UN] security council must take the lead by passing a binding resolution enforcing an arms embargo on the Myanmar military … More pressure should also be applied to Thailand and India to authorise a comprehensive cross-border humanitarian aid effort,” Wolff said.Federal Labor says Snowy Hydro could proceed with building a new power plant in the Hunter Valley if it wins the upcoming election – but insists the plant should be powered entirely by green hydrogen, instead of gas, by 2030. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, and the shadow climate change minister, Chris Bowen, are expected to make the announcement during a campaign visit to the electorate of Paterson on Tuesday. Guardian Australia understands Labor wants the proposed gas “peaking” plant to be powered by 30% hydrogen at the time it becomes operational, promised by next year, and 50% by 2025 and 100% by 2030. The Morrison government’s decision to spend up to $600m on the Kurri Kurri gas-fired plant has been widely criticised since it was announced by the energy and emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, in May last year. Billed as part of the Morrison government’s promised “gas-fired recovery” from the pandemic, the plant was promised to be turned on only when needed to fill gaps in the market. Documents lodged with the New South Wales government show Snowy Hydro expects it will run at 2% of its full capacity annually. While this is not uncommon for “peaking” gas plants, analysts have said the plant was not needed to maintain electricity supply and did not “stack up” commercially given the range of cheaper and cleaner alternatives in development. Others have said the government interfering in the electricity market was likely to further discourage the huge private investment needed to deliver new power generation over the coming decades. Gas is a fossil fuel that releases about half the emissions of coal when burned but contributes more to global heating once methane that leaks during extraction is factored in. Taylor has suggested the plant could also use some hydrogen blended in with the gas to lower its greenhouse emissions. Snowy Hydro’s environment impact statement for the project said there was potential for this in the future, should hydrogen become economically viable, but it would require the plant to be modified at an increased cost. The billionaire Andrew Forrest has been more bullish about the possibility of blending green hydrogen – made with renewable energy – with gas for use in power plants. His company Squadron Energy is promising a 660 MW gas-hydrogen generator – roughly the same size as the Kurri Kurri station – at Port Kembla at an estimated cost of $1.3bn, including $30m in federal funding to help make it hydrogen compatible. The company says the plant will be capable of running on 50% green hydrogen when first turned on, with a goal of increasing that to 100% by 2030. Some international analysts have suggested electricity generation is likely to be among the least economically viable uses of hydrogen should an industry develop on the scale some have predicted. The National party is targeting Labor-held seats in the Hunter Valley in NSW, hoping to recruit voters disaffected by Labor’s more ambitious climate change policy commitments. Retiring Labor veteran Joel Fitzgibbon, who suffered a significant voter backlash in his Hunter electorate in the 2019 election, has spent much of this term warning Labor will lose another election if it pursues ambitious climate commitments at the expense of regional jobs in traditional industries. With a decision to pursue the controversial Snowy plant, but require that the peaker run on hydrogen rather than gas, Labor is attempting to walk a line between supporting a new development in the Hunter region, but not supporting the lock-in of fossil fuel-fired electricity. Taylor has argued the Kurri Kurri plant is needed to avoid a significant increase in wholesale electricity prices when the Liddell coal-fired plant shuts in 2023.Even in the context of the UK media’s famously curious coverage of everyday cycling, this was a surprise. Away from the more familiar tabloid cries of a “battle” over changes to the Highway Code, tucked away in the sober enclave of the Times’s editorial pages something odd was happening. It was near the bottom of a leader column on cycling that a paper which, less than a decade ago, launched the most concerted and effective media campaign for safe cycling seen in this country for years, decided in effect to declare war on those who opt for two-wheeled transport. It was, the column noted, beyond doubt that drivers should have licences, insurance and number plates for their vehicles. Then came the follow-up: “Requiring the same of cyclists is fair.” This was a triple-whammy, the full bingo card, the complete Littlejohn, the title that still styles itself the country’s newspaper of record formally declaring that it no longer wants to see cyclists on the roads. Of course, it wasn’t phrased so directly, but if you argue for such measures, that is in effect what you want. Any of those regulatory handcuffs being applied to bikes, let alone all three, would be so unwieldy, so counter-productive, so utterly, utterly pointless that pretty much no country or territory has ever attempted it, and the few that did generally gave up quite quickly. If the UK enforced these measures fully and with gusto, my guess is that somewhere between 50% and 75% of cycle traffic would vanish. And yes, this is a guess. There is no real data to base it on – because no one has been so stupid as to try it. The arguments against such regulatory tangles for cycling have been made many times before and don’t need repeating in full, but let’s just think about a couple of the potential hiccups. Consider children. Would they need to take a test and have insurance? If so, from what age? Some kids ride on the roads, with their parents, when they’ve five. Good luck giving them a multiple choice test on the Highway Code. And if under-18s are exempt, how do you enforce rules for teenagers? Would a 16-year-old have to carry ID when out on a bike to prove their age? Secondly: number plates for bikes. Anything light and small enough would be too small to read beyond a distance of a few metres. And what of people [holds up an apologetic hand] with multiple bikes? Would we have to register each one, or transfer plates between them? This is the point at which someone usually suggests riders wear a numbered, hi-vis tabard. One both light enough to wear on a 100-mile ride in mid-summer, but also big enough to go over the winter coat of someone cycling to work in the snow? And that’s assuming the commuter doesn’t have a bag on his or her back. You could go on, almost endlessly, which is why, when asked about such ideas, UK ministers and officials, in common with just about everybody else who has given the idea more than 90 seconds of thought, dismiss them. Cycling for transport is an undisputed social good – even the Times editorial concedes that. So why argue for all this? The Times, almost insultingly, doesn’t even try to square the circle, merely saying, without any attempt at elaboration: “The objection that it would deter legitimate cycling is not persuasive.” Instead we get this very odd sentence: “The road network is a service available to everyone, and it is reasonable to expect those who benefit from it to abide by its regulation and contribute to its upkeep.” Ignoring the intellectual howler of “contribute to its upkeep” – it is embarrassing for the Times to have got that one so wrong – we at last come to the crux of the argument, such as it is: “fairness”. It is the cry more usually seen in the murky depths of reader comments or the fringes of Twitter arguments: drivers face all sorts of regulations to use the roads, what’s so different about cyclists? One response would be: if you use a table saw and a screwdriver for the same wood-based DIY project, and you don goggles, ear protection and a mask for the saw, why don’t you for the screwdriver? That’s right – one is notably more dangerous than the other. Again, the statistics are well known. Of the 1,700 or so deaths and 25,000-plus serious injuries on the UK’s roads every year, only a handful are caused by a cyclist hitting someone else. To stress yet another well-worn point: it’s not about morals, it’s just physics. If I hit a pedestrian while doing 20mph in a Range Rover I would impart 25 times more kinetic energy than at the same speed on my bike. If you make the speeds more realistic – bike at 12mph, car doing 30mph – then the difference is 150 times. What should we make of the Times’s sudden outbreak of idiocy? It’s hard to know. It would be nice to think this is the response of a dinosaur class who realise history is against them. But even in the context of the UK’s cursed media narrative on everyday active transport, it is deeply depressing.Good morning. A sweeping new bill with powerful bipartisan support in the US Senate would establish an inquiry into the country’s Covid-19 response similar to the 9/11 Commission, among other provisions aimed at preventing the next pandemic. The new Covid commission would inform the US response to future outbreaks as well as the current impact of the disease. The bill will be co-sponsored by Senator Patty Murray of Washington and Senator Richard Burr of North Carolina, who plan to mark it up in committee in the coming weeks. “The pain of this pandemic is unforgettable, and we have a responsibility to make sure its lessons are unforgettable, too,” Murray said. The legislation, called the Prevent Pandemics Act, would lay the groundwork to enshrine new powers in federal health agencies. In November 2019, the US was ranked first of 195 countries for pandemic preparedness in a report co-produced by the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, but it has consistently had one of the worst responses to the Covid-19 pandemic, said John Farmer Jr, the senior counsel for the 9/11 Commission. US Senate panel close to approving ‘mother of all sanctions’ against Russia The leaders of the Senate foreign relations committee said yesterday they were on the verge of approving “the mother of all sanctions” against Vladimir Putin, warning there would be no appeasement as the Russian president contemplates an invasion of Ukraine. “We cannot have a Munich moment again,” the panel’s Democratic chair, Bob Menendez of New Jersey, told CNN’s State of the Union, referring to the 1938 agreement by which allies ceded parts of Czechoslovakia to Hitler, believing it would stave off war. “Putin will not stop if he believes the west will not respond,” Menendez said. “We saw what he did in 2008 in Georgia, we saw what he did in 2014 in pursuit of Crimea. He will not stop.” Menendez said he believed bipartisan negotiations for severe sanctions were “on the one-yard line”, despite disagreements with Republicans over whether measures should be imposed before or after any Russian invasion. The UK government promised to ramp up sanctions against Putin and his associates. What’s going to happen next? There is expected to be a UN security council meeting today, at the request of the US, to give Russia the opportunity to explain its actions. Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the US ambassador to the UN, said the US was “prepared to listen” but was “not going to be distracted by their propaganda”. What’s happening on the ground? Tensions on the Ukraine border have continued to escalate, with Reuters reporting the Russian military build-up included supplies of blood in anticipation of casualties. Florida Republicans advance wave of draconian bills It has been a long and painful month in the Florida legislature for opponents of the state’s Trumpist governor, Ron DeSantis, and his loyal band of rightwing Republicans, writes Richard Luscombe. A slew of bills has advanced attacking everything from diversity rights to abortion protections and free speech in schools, in addition to a proposal that would legally shield white people from feeling “discomfort” over the state’s racist past. Last Wednesday, an anti-masker physician, handpicked by the governor and apathetic about the value of Covid-19 vaccines, was backed unanimously by a Republican senate panel as the next surgeon-general after a walkout by Democratic politicians frustrated by Joseph Ladapo’s evasiveness. To hear DeSantis tell it, the “freedom state” of Florida is merely following the will of a populist citizenry in defying the perceived tyranny of the federal government, determined to protect liberty in the face of a deadly pandemic that has claimed more than 64,000 of their fellow residents, and standing up against the “indoctrination” of children. DeSantis is finding opposition beginning to harden. Those voices come from parents, doctors, LBGTQ+ activists, proponents of voting rights and others who will be affected if many of the Republican bills, as expected, become law. In other news … A booming online industry specialising in fake passports with official visas and travel stamps is offering people with links to Islamic State the opportunity to leave Syria and travel onwards to the US, EU, Canada and the UK, a Guardian investigation has found. The US east coast fell into a deep freeze on Sunday after a powerful nor’easter dumped mounds of snow, flooded coastlines and knocked out power to tens of thousands of people. The weather may have contributed to at least four deaths in New York, all on Long Island. Donald Trump’s promise to pardon supporters who attacked the US Capitol on 6 January 2021 was “the stuff of dictators”, Richard Nixon’s White House counsel said. Trump made the promise at a rally in Conroe, Texas, on Saturday. The United Nations says it has received “credible allegations” that more than 100 extrajudicial killings have been carried out in Afghanistan despite Taliban assurances of safety. Those killed include members of the ousted Afghan government, its security forces and those who worked with international troops. Don’t miss this: The age of intimacy famine As modern life has grown more distanced through technological innovation, our opportunities for deep, intimate moments have dwindled. Millions of people worldwide are isolated and lonely, woefully lacking in the meaningful and diverse social experiences that help support emotional and physical health. The pandemic has only exacerbated this trend, prohibiting or impeding many types of friendly and professional touch and sending many of us deeper into our online worlds. This has left many of us starving. We’ve entered an intimacy famine. … or this: want to sleep better? Try a short, gentle stretch before bed Studies have shown that low-level physical activity and meditation practice that uses gentle stretching such as yoga or tai chi can help with sleep quality. And while it is good to stretch at any time of day, establishing a gentle and quiet routine before bed can help send a signal to the brain that it is time for sleep. Best of all, stretching doesn’t require money. Climate check: Tilting menus towards plants cuts meat eating, study shows Tilting menus towards plant-based meals significantly cuts the amount of meat eaten, according to research. The experiments in work and university cafeterias showed making it easier to choose meat-free food can be effective and could be a more acceptable approach than other proposals, such as taxing meat or banning it on certain days. Meat production is an important driver of the climate crisis, and substantial falls in meat consumption are needed in rich nations to curb global heating. Last Thing: Cold iguanas could drop from trees in Florida The US weather service has warned Florida residents that immobilised iguanas could fall out of trees due to unusually cold temperatures across the region. “Iguanas are cold-blooded. They slow down or become immobile when temps drop into the 40s [4-9C],” the US National Weather Service Miami-South Florida said on Twitter on Sunday. “They may fall from trees, but they are not dead.” South Florida temperatures reached a low of 25F [-3.9C] on Sunday morning, according to the weather service. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comWhen Iona stepped into the hairdressing salon in 2019, she was hoping for a fresh look after a break-up. “I was going for the new hair, new me thing,” she says. “There was a bit of summer left and I thought I could still be hot and sexy.” She had been going to the same salon for a few years, but usually had her hair cut by a female stylist. “She wasn’t working when I wanted to go, so they booked me in with JP instead as he was the only stylist free,” she says. When Iona arrived, she was struck by how attractive JP was. They chatted as he cut her hair, bonding over their shared love of music. “I’d seen her around before,” says JP. “I remember thinking she was beautiful. We realised we’d been at the same small festival in France earlier that summer. It turned out we’d been in the same room quite a few times, but never spoken.” JP had recently come out of a relationship and had been looking forward to being single for a while. But he couldn’t resist the spark he felt with Iona. “Love finds you when you’re not looking for it,” he says. “It was like meeting my long-lost best friend.” She told him that she ran her own business as a florist, which impressed him. “I found her so motivated and ambitious. There was a lot of synergy and it felt very right.” He told Iona that he was living with his mum and she suspected that was code for “recently single”. “I was pleased,” she says. “He was an open book, like me, and we got along really well.” When she left the salon, she gave a note with her phone number to the receptionist, asking her to pass it on to JP. “He had given me a cute blunt bob, so it said: ‘Thanks for making me look like a French film star. Call me’ – but it was a few days before he called. He made me sweat!” They arranged a trip to a Thai restaurant in Peckham, south London, the following week. JP admits he was “incredibly nervous” as he hadn’t been on a date for a long time. “At first, it was awkward and I thought I’d made a massive mistake,” says Iona. “I wondered where the open, chatty guy I met at the hairdressers had gone. But after a few drinks he loosened up and we had a great time.” A few days later, they went on a second date and became a couple. Although they both worked long hours, they went out to dinner whenever they could and spent their free time driving around listening to music or going on trips out of London. In January 2020, JP moved into Iona’s east London flat. When lockdown hit, she continued to post orders from her flower shop, while JP found temporary work at a factory while the salon was closed. By April, Iona was pregnant and that summer the couple moved to a bigger house in Beckenham, south-east London. In September, JP opened his own salon. “It was a big risk at a volatile time but it has paid off,” he says. “And Iona always supported me 200%.” They married a year later at a register office. “It was just us and we went for lunch at the River Cafe afterwards,” says Iona. “We’ll have a big party in a few years.” Their son arrived on Christmas Eve 2020 and Iona is pregnant with their second child. As well as having lots of shared interests and values, Iona loves JP’s patience. “He’s such a steady, stable influence. He puts up with me being really erratic sometimes,” she laughs. “He’s also a great dad and husband.” JP finds his wife’s motivation inspiring. “She’s lived abroad and done so much at such a young age,” he says. “Now I see what an incredible mother she is and what a supportive energy she is in my life. She always believes in me.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.In 1961, there were 10 porters working at Testaccio market. Known as facchini, these men and boys were the moving muscles of the market, transporting both the stall structures, which were still unfixed, and fruit and vegetables from warehouses near Monte Testaccio to the market square. Once the market and stalls were set up, it was the work of i facchini to ferry produce from the market to the dozens of trattorie, osterie, pizzerie and tavole calde in Testaccio and beyond. In 1961, Silvio started working alongside his brother. He was 11. Their parents were longstanding vendors; at first, they had a fruit and vegetable stall, then, after the war, a grocery stall. The boys were born into the market universe; everyone knew them and they knew everyone, every bolt and corner, every trattoria kitchen door. It would be a few years before Silvio was considered a facchino, although from the first day he worked as hard as anyone else, proud of his memory, strength and ability to manoeuvre a trolley. Silvio was still working as a facchino when I moved to Rome 17 years ago. I would see him most days, stacking crates in the market or wheeling his trolley down the middle of the road, always in blue trousers, a canvas jacket with a breast pocket, and a flat cap. I took it as a sign of belonging when he began shouting, “Buongiorno!” to me. The first time we spoke, he was delivering chicory, fluorescent broccoli and the whitest cauliflower to the side door of a trattoria called Felice. I remember because I took a picture of him holding cauliflowers. I also remember an occasion when my son was small and we met Silvio with what seemed an impossible leaning tower of crates filled with artichokes on their way to another trattoria, Perilli. He retired two years ago, but still walks the streets much as he ever did. We meet most days and often chat. He holds the story of 70 years of his market universe, all those interconnected bits. He tells me how, over time, more stalls became fixed with storage, so the work for facchini reduced, even more so when vendors began delivering the goods themselves. Two generations of facchini have passed away, he tells me; he was the last. When we meet, he is often on his way to Perilli, who honour 59 years of well-timed deliveries by offering him lunch three times a week. He was never invited to eat at Felice, he notes. Six decades, all those crates of chicory, broccoli, artichokes, broad beans, peas, potatoes, cauliflower, and not one lunch. As Silvio crosses the piazza to go to Perilli, I come home to make lunch, a cross between cauliflower cheese and potato gratin. This sort of thing is known as sformato in Italy, which means “taken out of the dish”, and refers to a number of easy-going, comforting, vegetable and cheese dishes. Sformato di cavolfiore e patate – cauliflower and potato bake Prep 15 min Cook 30 min Serves 4 4 medium potatoes Salt and black pepper 1 medium cauliflower or romanesco cauliflower 50g butter 50g flour 600ml whole milk, warmed (with an onion studded with cloves, if you want) 50g parmesan, grated Breadcrumbs Boil the potatoes whole and unpeeled in salted water until tender, then peel. Trim and break the cauliflower into florets and boil until just tender (keep in mind they are going to bake again). Using your hands, break both the potatoes and cauliflower into small rough chunks. Next, make the bechamel. Heat the butter in a heavy-based pan. As soon as it starts to foam, whisk in the flour, keep whisking steadily for two minutes, then take off the heat. Add a little of the warmed milk and whisk to a smooth paste. Return the pan to the heat, then add the remaining milk, whisking continuously until it almost boils. Season, then lower the heat and simmer, stirring and whisking frequently, for about 10 minutes, until the sauce is thick. Add three-quarters of the grated parmesan. Mix the potatoes and cauliflower with the bechamel, then tip into an ovenproof dish. Top with breadcrumbs mixed with the remaining cheese, then bake at 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 until edges are bubbling and the top golden. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoAs California looks back on another wildfire season that razed thousands of homes and threatened thousands of lives, debate in the state has intensified over how to solve the state’s dire housing crisis as the climate grows ever more extreme. Increasingly, environmentalists who have long opposed large-scale housing developments in the state’s wildlands are finding support in the courts. “There’s a shift taking place,” said Char Miller, a professor of environmental analysis at Pomona College. “These developments are raising big questions about how Californians are going to live in a place that constantly burns.” This month, a judge in northern California forced a halt to the Guenoc Valley project, a $1bn proposed development featuring luxury villas flanked by vineyards, a golf course and a polo field, which was to be built atop 16,000 acres of open ranch land, oak woodlands and untouched savannah. The project promised to bring jobs to one of the state’s most impoverished regions. But the judge, siding with the state attorney general and environmentalists, ruled that planners failed to account for how residents and workers would escape in case of a catastrophic blaze. It didn’t help the developers’ case that just months after the project earned initial approvals, the LNU Complex fire barreled through the site – which had also burned 10 other times since the 1950s. Meanwhile, a judge in southern California dealt a blow to a proposal by the Tejon Ranch company to build 19,300 houses across windy wildlands north of Los Angeles, allowing legal challenges from two environmental groups to advance. It’s just the latest setback for Tejon’s Centennial development, which was first pitched two decades ago as a solution to California’s housing crisis but has been tied up in litigation ever since. The Tejon Ranch company had recently settled with the non-profit Climate Resolve. But two other environmental non-profits, the Center for Biological Diversity (CBD) and the California Native Plant Society, have continued their opposition. The Tejon project, said CBD attorney JP Rose, is of another era. The company should have to explain “why they should build this project in light of what we now know about wildfire risk, and the climate crisis”, he said. In a state still reeling from the tragedies of 2017’s Tubb’s fire, 2018’s Camp fire and 2020’s North Complex fire, the top prosecutor has agreed. Before leaving the post to join the Biden administration, former attorney general Xavier Becerra joined CBD’s lawsuit against the Guenoc Valley development, as well as lawsuits against two developments in the hilly, highly combustible scrublands of San Diego county. Such challenges have been bolstered by a 2018 change in the California Environmental Quality Act that now requires developers to take wildfire risks into account in building plans. California’s current attorney general, Rob Bonta, appears to remain dedicated to the cause. “Local governments and developers have a responsibility to take a hard look at projects that exacerbate wildfire risk and endanger our communities,” Bonta said after the Guenoc Valley ruling. “We must build responsibly.” Nearly 95% of fires in California are started by humans and human infrastructure, according to the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CalFire). An overheated vehicle, a faulty electrical line, a carelessly discarded cigarette, could easily spark a blaze. On warm, windy days, under the right conditions, fire will find a way and “housing is an accelerant,” said Miller, the Ponoma College professor. The legal challenges are a sign that California developers will have to start rethinking how they account for fire risks, Miller added. The developers of the Guenoc Valley proposal said their project would include fire breaks, fire cameras and safe zones – none of which fully reassured critics. As part of its settlement with Climate Resolve, Tejon had agreed to build three new fire stations and upgrade an existing one. But developers are not paying to keep up and staff these stations, said Stephanie Pincetl, a professor at UCLA’s Institute of the Environment and Sustainability. Over the past few fire seasons, as several, simultaneous megafires seared through the west, fire crews have repeatedly found themselves overstretched and struggling. “Fire stations are great. Fire stations are absolutely necessary,” said Pincetl. “But on their own, they’re not necessarily enough to contain a large, Santa Ana wind-driven wildfire.” *** Despite the setbacks, the idea of propagating California’s last remaining expanses of open land with houses, particularly as the state grapples with an acute housing shortage, holds a strong appeal. At the flanks of the Tehachapi mountains, Tejon Ranch is the largest private landholding in California. Spanning 422 sq miles, it is nearly as big as the city of Los Angeles, and as Tejon has repeatedly proffered – a prime spot to build. Tejon Ranch’s vice-president of communications Barry Zoeller said the company would “continue to aggressively defend” the approval of the project, “given the desperate need for new housing in California”. Of the 19,300 proposed housing units the company has planned, 3,500 will be affordable housing, according to its proposal. “In addressing the housing crisis, infill – building more density into already-developed areas – is always the better way to start,” said Chris Field, director of the Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment. “On the other hand, I’m not sure that fire risk should always be used as a cudgel to beat down housing proposals.” In some cases, and in some especially fire-prone areas, the hazard may indeed be too great. “But that doesn’t mean that there are no developments in fire-prone areas that make sense,” Field said. For Climate Resolve, one motivation to settle with Tejon Ranch was the sense that it was “important to try to find common ground between developers and environmentalists”, said Jonathan Parfrey, the group’s executive director. “California currently has a housing crisis and it has a climate crisis.” In that vein, the state’s governor, Gavin Newsom, in 2020 vetoed a bill that would have directed cities and counties to account for evacuation routes and raised fees to cover the costs of clearing flammable vegetation before approving new constructions, saying that the legislation would conflict with the state’s goals of quickly building new housing. Critics say pitting housing goals against fire and climate crisis concerns creates a false dichotomy. “We know that under the right conditions, houses will burn, and people will be faced with the tragedy of losing their houses, their livelihoods and potentially their lives,” said Nick Jensen, a botanist with the California Native Plant Society. “Are these projects really worth it?”Credit firms and online stores such as Zilch, Flava or Clearpay are offering “buy now, pay later” deals on items including groceries, pet food and hot drinks. We would like to hear about people’s experiences of buy now, pay later grocery schemes. What led to your decision to use one? What has your experience been like? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.When my eldest daughter was just a few months old, I threw her in a carrier and took her on a train to visit my friend, the chorus of Sisters Are Doin’ It For Themselves looping in my head. I arrived, giddy and smug in the notion that my adorable new addition hadn’t disrupted my life one bit, placed her in the crib set up in my friend’s guestroom, put my hand on the doorknob – and that’s when she started to scream. Which she did for the entire night. Twelve hours. Fourteen hours? Could have been 18. I lost count. I’d never seen her so furious. I’d never seen her so continuously awake. Cradling her hot, red, squalling body in those first few minutes, my instinct was to sing her the lullaby that had become part of our bedtime ritual: Tender Shepherd, from Peter Pan. Tender shepherd, Tender shepherd, Let me help you count your sheep, One in the meadow, Two in the garden, Three in the nursery fast asleep, Fast asleep. It did not have the intended effect. I briefly entertained the idea that my solo singing was unsatisfactory – my husband and I, back in those innocent days of having just one child and not three, would often sing it as a round. My friend came in to help. We sang together. The baby’s skin tone turned from rose to crimson. I banished all helpers from the room, and for the subsequent hours, sang about ruminant animals as my baby wailed. At some point, I realized she’d conked out. But, curled into the fetal position myself, I continued to mumble-whisper-sing, insisting that we’d both remain calm, that everything was going to be OK, that we’d be sleepy sheep soon enough. Lullabies are curious songs, often about unthinkable tragedies and somber realities – babies crashing down in cradles that are strung up in trees, poor darling Clementine who’s lost and gone forever, a troubled love affair that takes someone’s “sunshine” away – many part of a tradition that for centuries had to factor in the commonness of infant death, of a life that was unpredictable and often bleak. Seeking to understand more about the power of my nightly singing ritual to my preschooler amid an unpredictable and often bleak pandemic – my current hodgepodge lineup features Billy Joel’s Lullabye, a lethargic Bushel and a Peck from Guys and Dolls, and Baby Beluga – I headed to the library. There, I found a crispy yellow-paged little book called Lullabies, published in 1930 by one FE Budd, which collects lullabies from 1300 to 1900 and affirms their less-than-cheery heritage in the intro. “The key to which their music is attuned is that of subdued elegiac lament rather than of lyric rapture,” Budd writes. “The spirit that they foster is one of stoical resignation in the face of impending calamity, a quality of mind that enables a man to go through with things even if he sees no prospect of a successful issue.” Sweet dreams! Not that all of them are that rough. But even our modern choices, as I confirmed after an informal poll of friends, are often random and a bit odd. One landed on a Spanish song, Señor Don Gato, for her newborn. It’s about a cat who’s sitting on the roof, where he learns his beloved will marry him. In his excitement, he falls off, dies, and then is resurrected when he smells the fish stand in the market as his funeral procession passes by. Mmm-kay. Another sings The Streets of Laredo to his infant despite him not being a cowboy, or having any cowboys in his lineage. (He’s an engineer.) You don’t have to have a profound connection to a song for it to stick and, on the flip side, lullabies don’t always carry down from generation to generation. I tried Amazing Grace with my child, which my father used to sing to me, and couldn’t get past the “wretch” part without crying – because of the melody? Because of something etched deep in my being that remembers being cradled in my father’s arms? Perhaps it’s that the song is often associated with grief? Dunno, don’t care, I simply can’t end every day weeping. Hence: Raffi. The thing about singing to a child, I learned, is that it’s arguably as important to the singers as it is to the listeners, something we parents should take note of as we seek to quell our raging anxiety. (Just me?) Programs like Carnegie Hall’s Lullaby Project, which pairs parents and parents-to-be with professional artists to write personal lullabies, encourage new parents to sing, sing, sing. Cradling a child and singing is a one-stop-shop for bonding and connection – it involves the kinesthetic, the audio, the visual – and has been shown to support maternal health and child development. And in medical settings, the upsides are obvious: lullabies positively influence cardiac and respiratory function in premature babies, and they lower the heart rates of anxious caregivers, making them a near-zero-cost way to calm distress. “The first sound a person hears before they’re born is the rhythm of the mother’s heartbeat, the whoosh of the womb, and their mother’s voice,” Dr Joanne Loewy told me when I reached her by phone. “There’s neurologic evidence that a mother singing to a baby is the foundation for attachment.” Loewy has served as the director of the Louis Armstrong Center for Music &amp; Medicine at New York’s Mount Sinai hospital for the last 28 years, where she oversees clinical work and research into the importance of music therapy. One area of study involves what she calls the “song of kin”, which might have been passed down through generations, or be the parents’ wedding song, or a favorite song from childhood. She likened it to a “special ingredient” that, when sung by the parent or any loving caregiver, imparts profound meaning to the child. While what defines a lullaby is complex – they’re often in 6/8 rhythm, but many parents change the rhythm throughout the day, making it jaunty in the morning and more soporific at night – what matters is the act of singing itself, whatever the time. “Cuing into the mood of that child, collaborating, calibrating the music in real time, that’s where communication begins and is sustained,” Loewy said. The effect of singing is so powerful in humans, she told me, that stroke patients who have lost the ability to speak can be moved to sing if they hear a melody they remember, their neural pathways lighting up like a Christmas tree. Alzheimer’s patients, too. As for pandemic-era lullaby singing? “Its potency is much deeper, because there is so much stress in day-to-day action now,” Loewy told me. “The ritual of singing before bed, with those elongated vowels – it can have amazing outcomes.” My preschooler developed a croup-like cough last week that gave her a husky smoker’s rasp and woke her up multiple times per night, hacking away and crying. She kept testing negative for Covid, and yet, as I rushed down the hall to her room in the wee hours, my head would flood with concerns that ranged from the relatively anodyne – how will this upend our schedules? – to the most profound – What if she ends up at the wrong side of the fraction? After getting her some water and wiping her nose, I’d pick her up, cradle her, and sing – for her, yes, but, I now realize, for me, too. Sophie Brickman is a contributor to the New Yorker, the New York Times and other publications, and the author of Baby, Unplugged: One Mother’s Search for Balance, Reason, and Sanity in the Digital AgeAged care workers will receive two pre-election bonus payments worth up to $800 in total as the federal government seeks to claw back public support for its troubled pandemic response. Ahead of a major speech at the National Press Club on Tuesday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced on Monday night that the bonus would be paid to more than 230,000 aged care workers in government-subsidised home care and to residential aged care staff providing “direct care, food or cleaning services”. The first payment of up to $400 will be made this month with the second due in early May. The latest date the election can be held is 21 May. The payments were immediately criticised by the Health Services Union (HSU), which labelled the gesture as “too little, too late” when the workforce was in crisis. “Trinkets are not required when diamonds are needed,” the HSU secretary, Gerard Hayes, told Guardian Australia. “From day one, they have not understood aged care, they have never understood the rollout of the vaccine, they haven’t understood the booster shots, and they have never understood the workforce crisis we are facing – and they never complied with the outcomes of the royal commission. “People are leaving the industry, they are being paid $22 an hour, they are leaving for retail and hospitality and this is the best they can do? It’s a disgrace.” The HSU has launched a case in the Fair Work Commission seeking pay rises for aged care workers of 25%, or at least $5 more an hour. While providers and the unions have reached an in-principle agreement on a pay rise, the federal government has yet to declare whether it supports the wage claim. The bonus payments will be modelled on the $393m aged care workforce retention payments that were granted in the early stages of the pandemic in 2020. The bonus will be paid on a pro rata basis depending on hours worked, with each payment worth a maximum of $400. The $209m package comes as the government begins the political year reeling from a public backlash to its response to the Omicron wave of the virus over summer, fuelled by a shortage of rapid antigen tests, soaring case numbers, and workforce and supply chain disruptions caused by the mass furloughing of staff. A Newspoll published in the Australian on Monday showed support for the government tracking at its lowest level since the leadership spill in September 2018 that saw Malcolm Turnbull deposed as leader, with Labor ahead of the Coalition 56% to 44% on a two-party-preferred basis. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said the “message” in the Newspoll was that “Australians continue to do it tough through Covid”. “The pandemic has gone on for two years. Omicron disrupted many people’s summer plans, holiday plans, and there is that frustration out there. So we’ll continue to work hard for the public, both on the health front and on the economic front,” Frydenberg told ABC radio. But the treasurer was also forced to defend the government’s economic response, after the NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, said on Sunday he was “disappointed” the federal government had not matched its latest business support package. In response, Frydenberg said the government “can’t just keep writing the cheques”. “You actually have to take some tough decisions. And now with the vaccination rates well over 90%, Australia is well placed … to live safely with Covid, despite the challenges it poses.” Talking up the country’s health outcomes to mark the start of the political year, Morrison will tell the press club on Tuesday that the government payment would support the aged care workforce “to continue to care for older Australians through the pandemic”. “None of our health outcomes would be possible without the hard work, long hours and dedicated care offered by our frontline health and aged care workforce,” Morrison will say, according to draft excerpts of his speech released on Monday. “Their resilience over the past two years has been inspiring.” The move to target the aged care workforce comes amid widespread frustration within the sector about the government’s preparedness for the latest Covid-19 outbreak, with providers concerned about the lack of rapid antigen tests available for surveillance testing, and the pressures being placed on an already stretched workforce. Morrison has insisted that the commonwealth has fulfilled its responsibilities to the sector by providing rapid tests to residential aged care facilities when needed to contain outbreaks, and by focusing on the vaccine booster program for residents and workers. The latest figures from the Department of Health show there were 23,900 active Covid cases within the aged care system across 1,261 residential aged care facilities. That included more than 14,000 staff and close to 9,000 residents. Since July, there have been 657 Covid deaths within these facilities. The health and aged care minister, Greg Hunt, on Monday said Australia had recorded one of the lowest death rates in the sector in the world and 60% of the reported deaths were people already in palliative care. Hunt said that as of Monday, 99% of residential aged care facilities had taken part in the government’s booster program, despite criticism that the rollout had been too slow to prevent deaths. He also said the Newspoll figures reflected the fact that it had been “a difficult period” for many Australians and the country had not been “unspared” by Omicron. “I think that it is important to acknowledge, to understand and to recognise from a government perspective, our task, our mission is to continue to work to keep Australians safe,” Hunt said. “We recognise the challenges and the hardship people have faced, but also when it actually comes to keeping Australians safe, the Coalition and the prime minister Scott Morrison are the ones that, in our view, are best placed to do that.” Morrison’s $2.2bn research package Morrison will also use the traditional curtain-raising speech to announce a $2.2bn “research commercialisation action plan” that will include a $1.6bn acceleration fund aimed at linking academic research to industry. An extra $296m will fund 1,800 “industry focused” PhDs and 800 fellowships, while the CSIRO will receive an extra $250m to expand its Main Sequence Ventures program, which backs start-up companies and helps commercialise Australian research. The $2.2bn commitment is over 10 years, and includes $2bn in new money, which was allocated in the mid-year budget update as part of $15.9bn in expenditure for decisions “taken but not yet announced”. Morrison will say the plan would target areas where Australia had significant comparative advantage, including in medical products, food and beverage, recycling and clean energy, resources technology and critical minerals processing, defence and space. “85% of Australian research is rated at or above world standard, yet we continue to underperform in achieving commercialisation outcomes,” Morrison will say. “We need to accelerate the forging of linkages between Australian industry and Australian university researchers and we need to find and develop a new breed of researcher entrepreneurs in Australia.” Morrison said the $1.6bn acceleration fund would address a so-called valley of death, where early-stage research is frequently not progressed to later stages of development because of the risk and uncertainty about commercial returns. “We know this is not insurmountable,” he will say. “The fund will allow Australian innovators to access funding opportunities for each stage of their project provided they can continue to prove project viability and commercial potential. Industry involvement and engagement is required at every stage.” Morrison said the industry-focused PhDs and fellowships were aimed at addressing “people and culture”, pointing to the fact that 40% of Australia’s researchers work in private industry, below the OECD average. “This, together with low mobility between industry and the university sectors, leads to culture and capability gaps that reduce the ability of Australian businesses to innovate. “This $296m investment aims to fundamentally reshape the workforce of Australia’s universities and career options, encouraging mobility and collaboration between university researchers and industry.” The government focus on commercialising research comes after the Coalition came under fire for its decision to veto six humanities-based projects that had been awarded Australian Research Council grants. The acting education minister, Stuart Robert, rejected the grants on the basis they “do not demonstrate value for taxpayers’ money nor contribute to the national interest”.My friend Penny Holbrook, who has died suddenly after a short illness aged 43, was a talented and energetic Labour member of Birmingham city council for almost 20 years. Penny was dedicated to the community she served, and driven by a commitment to social justice. Born and raised in north Birmingham, Penny was the daughter of Mollie (nee Anderton) and Doug Holbrook. The family lived in Erdington and later on the Falcon Lodge estate in Sutton Coldfield. She attended John Willmott school and studied politics and contemporary governance at the University of Central England (now Birmingham City University). Penny worked in retail for Tesco while becoming increasingly active in the Labour party. In 2003, aged 25, she was elected councillor for Stockland Green ward, which she represented with just one short interlude until her death. She also worked in the offices of Sion Simon and Jack Dromey during their terms as MP for Birmingham Erdington between 2008 and 2014. In 2012, a newly elected Labour administration in Birmingham transferred a range of frontline council services to 10 district committees. As chair of the Erdington district Penny was a champion of devolution, working closely with residents to develop responses to unemployment locally and to keep services open despite central government austerity policies. In 2014 Penny joined the council’s cabinet, leading on skills, learning and culture. Her work in this helped to cut the number of young people not in education, employment or training. She also secured the future of the Library of Birmingham. The Labour administration had inherited the brand new (and very expensive) library, while at the same time having to deal with enormous budget cuts from central government. Penny worked to co-locate other services in the building, including the Brasshouse Language Centre, creating a vibrant hub of knowledge, learning and skills services and securing the library’s financial viability. She went on to chair the council’s housing and neighbourhoods scrutiny committee. In 2015, Penny stood for the leadership of the council and after a hotly contested campaign came just one vote short of victory. She was determined and had tremendous creative energy. Penny was honest and direct, but kind, compassionate and funny. This combination of characteristics enabled her to build coalitions and bring people together. Yet, as Jess Phillips MP put it: “Penny could never quite see how great she was.” Alongside her council work, Penny supported the Birmingham Poverty Truth Commission as a freelance consultant. Penny is survived by her mother and father, her sister, Vicky, and her niece, Coral.My mother, Catherine Finegan, who has died aged 90, was a strong advocate for social justice in her adopted home of Birmingham, where she served as a city councillor for 20 years. On retirement, in recognition of all she had done for the city, she was made honorary alderman for Birmingham city council. When she was elected, in 1978, Catherine, who had never had a formal education, was working as a breakfast and silver service waitress at the Grand hotel on Colmore Row, Birmingham. She had became politically active during this time, leading two protests locally for safer streets during one of which she was arrested for obstructing a road. She also unionised the Grand hotel, and became involved with a social group for families with children with disabilities. It was through listening to their difficulties and the lack of support available to them that she joined the Labour party, and was eventually invited to stand in the local elections. Born in Aughaville, Co Cork, Catherine was the eldest of eight surviving children of a farming couple, Mary (nee Ellen) and Jeremiah O’Driscoll. She attended the Dromore National school but effectively left education at eight years old due to a lung condition, bronchiectasis. Her first paid job was as a nanny, at 13; she worked as a housemaid and cook before leaving for England aged 22 to work as a cook/housekeeper. In 1954, Catherine moved to Birmingham to work as a “clippie” (conductor) on the buses. There she met James Finegan, from Monaghan. They married that November and settled in the suburb of Alum Rock, where they raised their six children. He got a job at Rootes car factory. Over the following years, Catherine worked at various factories, as a hospital auxiliary, and as a barmaid. In 1973 she finally settled into regular work at the Grand hotel, where she stayed until 1994. She began studying during this time, gaining O- and A-levels at Matthew Boulton College in 1976. She also took classes in tailoring and design, and began taking commissions to make suits, dresses and wedding dresses. She also did piecework for fashion boutiques in the city centre, including Chelsea Girl. In 1977 she began a humanities degree with the Open University, but, due to time constraints, had to give up the following year when she was elected to Birmingham city council, for Saltley ward. Catherine was particularly proud of her work with social services, visiting care homes. Her mantra was: “If it isn’t good enough for my mother then it isn’t good enough for anyone else’s mother!” She also supported the regeneration of Birmingham, and was on the commercial services committee when the Bull Ring redevelopment was approved in 1987, which brought 8,000 jobs to the city. In her retirement, Catherine sat on the fostering and adoption panel for social services. Jimmy died in 2009, and two grandchildren predeceased Catherine. She is survived by her children, Peter, Breda, Brendan, Gerard, Siobhan and me, 12 grandchildren and eight great-grandchildren, and by two sisters, Margaret and Philomena, and a brother, Peter.A row has broken out between the world’s richest person, Elon Musk, and a 19-year-old student and aviation enthusiast from Florida. Jack Sweeney created the Twitter bot @ElonJet, which tracks Musk’s Gulfstream private jet and posts real-time updates of its location. Musk, the co-founder and chief executive of Telsa and SpaceX, discovered the Twitter account and pleaded with Sweeney to delete it. “Can you take this down? It is a security risk,” Musk, who has amassed an estimated $220bn fortune, wrote in a direct message to the teenager. “I don’t love the idea of being shot by a nutcase.” After a series of messages, which Sweeney has made public, Musk offered Sweeney a deal: “How about $5k for this account and generally helping make it harder for crazy people to track me?” Sweeney attempted to negotiate. “Any chance to up that to $50K? It would be great support in college and would possibly allow me to get a car, maybe even a [Tesla] Model 3.” Musk replied that he would think about the offer, before declining, saying it “doesn’t feel right to pay to shut this down”. Sweeney said he had decided to go public with the correspondence in order to prompt Musk back to the negotiating table. “I’ve done a lot of work on this and 5k is not enough … ” he told Insider, “[to make up for] the fun I have in this, working on it. “He went the opposite way of me, so why wouldn’t I go the opposite way of him?” Sweeney said he had also offered to delete the account in return for an internship with Musk, but the billionaire had not responded to the offer. Sweeney said he created the account because he was a fan of Musk’s. “I knew he had the jet, and I just knew it would reveal what business is going on and where he is going and stuff,” he said. He has also set up accounts that track the private jets of Bill Gates and Jeff Bezos. “We track the plane not who may or may not be onboard,” the tracker account states.Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, will travel to Moscow on Tuesday in a visit that has drawn criticism from the country’s political opposition and is being watched nervously in other European capitals. Orbán, who has developed a reputation as Vladimir Putin’s closest ally inside the European Union, is due to meet the Russian president just as other EU leaders are trying to hash out a coordinated position on Russia’s menacing moves around Ukraine’s borders. “In this tense situation, it is simply treasonous to go to Moscow,” said a statement released on Sunday and signed by representatives of the six opposition parties that have joined forces to face Orbán in April elections. Orbán first came to public attention in 1989 when, as a young democracy activist, he called on Soviet troops to leave the country. But during his time as prime minister over the last 12 years he has cultivated warm relations with Putin, at the same time as his relations with Brussels have become ever more fractious. Nathalie Loiseau, the chair of the European parliament’s subcommittee on security and defence, said it was clear Putin was trying to divide Europe. “I sincerely hope that Viktor Orbán is aware of what is at stake, and that he sticks to the EU’s message of unity,” she said at a press conference late last week, according to Hungarian news outlets. The UK’s defence minister Ben Wallace struck a more positive note on a visit to Budapest on Monday, expressing support for Orbán’s trip. “We need to de-escalate this and stand up for the right for sovereignty of Ukraine,” Wallace said at a joint press conference with his Hungarian counterpart Tibor Benko. Péter Szijjártó, Hungary’s foreign minister, said last week the agenda for Orbán’s visit would include Hungarian gas purchases from Russia, production of Russia’s Sputnik Covid vaccine in Hungary and discussions on a long-delayed nuclear plant Russia is building in the country. While France and Germany have been notably less hawkish on Russia than the US and Britain, they have loudly condemned the Kremlin’s aggressive military manoeuvres. Orbán, on the other hand, has remained pointedly quiet about the military build-up on Ukraine’s borders, except to say he is “in favour of peace and de-escalation”, in a statement released after a gathering of European far-right leaders in Madrid over the weekend, hosted by Spains’s Vox party. Szijjártó has painted the current Ukraine stand-off as a dispute between Russia and the west in which Hungary wants to take no part, despite the fact that it is a Nato member. “Nobody can request such a thing from us,” Szijjártó told a pro-government newspaper, commenting on demands that Budapest should cool relations with Moscow. Hungary was the first European country to purchase Sputnik, which has not yet been licensed for use by the European Medicines Agency. Budapest has also regularly pushed back against closer cooperation between Ukraine and Nato, ostensibly over concerns about the treatment of the Hungarian minority in the country. In a sign of just how rosy the relationship is with the Kremlin, at a time when most European capitals describe relations as at a worrying low point, last November Putin awarded Szijjártó the Order of Friendship at a ceremony in Moscow. András Simonyi, a former Hungarian ambassador to the US who is now a non-resident fellow at the Atlantic Council, said that previously there were many people in the Hungarian foreign ministry who were deeply suspicious of Orbán’s friendly behaviour towards Russia, but over the years this has changed, as critics were gradually replaced with loyalists. “Hungary does not have a foreign policy, Viktor Orbán has a foreign policy. Everyone in Orbán’s government is just a staffer, and this is especially true for foreign policy,” he said. Orbán’s recent support for the Bosnian Serb leader, Milorad Dodik, has also raised eyebrows across Europe, and has widely been seen as a favour to Russia. Dodik has in recent months intensified secessionist rhetoric around the Republika Srpska entity inside Bosnia, to the alarm of much of the international community. Orbán flew to the Republika Srpska capital, Banja Luka, in November to meet Dodik, without stopping over in Sarajevo. He has promised to veto any EU sanctions against Dodik. “There isn’t any EU member state doing anything even slightly similar: it’s a systemic abandonment of the EU foreign policy alliance,” said Péter Krekó, who runs the Political Capital thinktank in Budapest. Alongside his clashes with Europe, Orbán also has poor relations with the Biden administration. Hungary was the only EU nation not invited to Biden’s recent democracy summit. Instead, Orbán has retained warm relations with Donald Trump. Earlier this month, Trump endorsed Orbán ahead of the April elections, and there are rumours he may come to Budapest to campaign for the far-right prime minister. The 1956 uprising, which was crushed by Soviet tanks, remains a vivid part of the national consciousness, and is one factor that makes many in the country uneasy about Orbán’s support for Putin, at a time when a further Russian incursion into Ukraine may be possible. “A prime minister who, in such a situation, remains silent and springs up to go to Moscow when he’s signalled to do so with a snap, only to stand on the edge of the carpet in the Kremlin, betrays the interests of both Hungary and Europe,” read the opposition statement.My friend Peter Greaves, who has died aged 89, was a health and nutrition officer for Unicef whose work made a huge difference to children’s lives around the world. He was an early advocate of low-cost interventions including immunisation, oral rehydration and breastfeeding. While he was Unicef’s chief nutrition adviser in the mid-1980s, he managed to get Unicef and the World Health Organization to agree on the final draft of The Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding. This document helped transform global maternal care policies. Born in Cardiff, the son of Methodist missionaries, Stella (nee Cox) and Lionel Greaves, Peter spent much of his early childhood in Kenya. He boarded at Kingswood school, Bath, then went to Jesus College, Cambridge, to study biochemistry, graduating in 1955. This was followed by a PhD in nutrition at the Royal Free hospital, University College London – and a crash course in tank-driving during national service in Germany. From 1959 he was in Tanganyika (now Tanzania), for two years, as a senior scientific adviser at the East African Institute for Medical Research, before moving back to London to work at the British Nutrition Foundation. He joined the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) in 1969, working first in Cairo, and then in Beirut as a health and nutrition officer. After three years working as the FAO adviser to Unicef New Delhi, he left that organisation to join Unicef full-time, where he spent the rest of his working life. In 1980 Peter became Unicef’s regional officer for South America in Brazil. There he set up a programme for street children in Rio, providing them with education, part-time work, a safe place to sleep and a hot meal. He also launched a highly successful breastfeeding programme. In 1983 his team developed a primary healthcare plan to tackle the appalling infant mortality rate in the poorest Brazilian state, Maranhão, resulting in a 33% reduction in infant mortality. The programme was taken up by the Brazilian government and extended across the whole country. He moved in 1984 from Brazil to the Unicef HQ in New York as chief nutrition adviser. His colleague Margaret Kyenkya-Isabitye recalled: “He was the backbone, the glue, that held the nutrition section together.” Peter’s commitment to good causes did not stop on his retirement in 1992. He joined the United Nations Association, which is how I met him, and campaigned on many issues, including climate change, and wrote regular letters to national newspapers (including his last one, published in the Guardian in November 2021). In the words of his son, Tim, “he is undoubtedly one of those rare people who has left this world a better, a more generous and kinder place than he found it”. He is survived by his wife, Chloe (nee Morgan), an actor whom he married in 1957, Tim, a daughter, Kate, and four grandchildren.In the example clues below, I explain the two parts of each: there is a definition of the answer and there is some wordplay – a recipe for assembling its letters. In a genuine puzzle environment, of course, you also have the crossing letters, which hugely alleviate your solving load. Hence “crossword”. Also, the setters’ names tend to link to profiles of the individuals behind the pseudonyms. The first words Inspector Morse says to DS Lewis are about a crossword clue. “Have a look at 14 down.” Fourteen down, Lewis sees, is: Take in bachelor? It could do (3) Morse has written BRA. Lewis isn’t sure what to say, so Morse airily dissects the clue: ‘“Bachelor” – that’s BA and “take” is the letter “r”, recipe in Latin. Did you never do any Latin?’ ‘No, sir.’ ‘Do you think I’m wasting your time, Lewis?’ Lewis was nobody’s fool and was a man of some honesty and integrity. ‘Yes, sir.’ This is when they know the partnership will work. The writer Colin Dexter devised a clue that demonstrates well the quirks a beginner needs to get his or her head round as the fun starts. “Bachelor” for BA is fair enough, if a little tweedy – but Lewis is not expected to know that “recipe” is the second singular present imperative for “take”, nor that doctors have long written the charming symbol ℞ (an R with a cross through it to indicate that it’s an abbreviation) to mean “take” in a prescription. At least the answer is a normal word. Here are some other Latin abbreviations that setters find handy and solvers quickly regard as second nature. ‘King’ = R As we see on letterboxes, ER II and GR VI indicate monarchs Elizabeth and George via regina and rex. Hence the pillow that we are told belonged to Minder fan Prince Philip with the motto “ER II INDOORS”. So when Vlad mentions this hapless monarch … 26a Anger that king has broken a bone (7) [ definition: a bone ] [ wordplay: synonym for “anger” (as a verb), “broken into by” abbrev for “king” ] [ STIR UP containing R ] … we turn him into an R before getting the bone in the ear we call a STIRRUP. ‘See’ = V Once upon a time, a writer might refer you to another text by telling you in Latin to go “see” it: vide (as in video) or more curtly, “V”. In crosswords, we pretend this is still the case. So it is with this clue from late setter (and former National Union of Teachers president) Rover … 9a See Ingrid worried about using the car (7) [ definition: using the car ] [ wordplay: anagram (“worried”) of abbrev for “see” &amp; INGRID ] [ anagram of VINGRID ] … for DRIVING. ‘That is’ = IE A more familiar one, now, although one that gov.uk is phasing out with the advice “Try (re)writing sentences to avoid the need to use it”. So, when Boatman says “that is”, he wants you to change it via id est to IE … 17d Wait around – that is an intimately touching thing (8) [ definition: an intimately touching thing ] [ wordplay: synonym for “wait around” + abbrev for “that is” ] [ LINGER + IE ] … to obtain some LINGERIE. ‘Penny’ = D When Lionel Bart’s furious producer Joan Littlewood yelled about the damage done to him by LSD, onlooker Barbara Windsor remarked: “That’s not fair. We’re all in it for the money, aren’t we?” Windsor knew that the “D” in the old abbreviation for “pounds, shillings and pence” was for a penny – from the Latin denarius. And so “coin”, “penny” or “pence” may be asking you to look for a D, as with this clue from the recently departed Chifonie … 6d Flirting gets Penny a relationship (9) [ definition: flirting ] [ wordplay: abbrev for “penny” + synonym for “a relationship” ] [ D + ALLIANCE ] … for DALLIANCE. Of course, it could be a P, but not in this case as I don’t think PALLIANCE is a word. ‘Now’ = AD In 2011, the BBC’s religion and ethics microsite explained why it used “BCE” in place of “BC” in its discussion of various faiths. Boris Johnson wrote a 1,000-word response as if the letters “BC” without the “E” had been banned across radio and television, notable for the aside: “I am afraid my faith is like a very wonky aerial, and I sometimes find the signal pretty scratchy”. In crosswords, BCE would only really be useful for the answer JOBCENTRE; it’s AD that we encounter more often, though it takes a few examples before you intuitively try a leap from “now” or “these days” to the abbreviation for anno domini. Here’s Vulcan … 21d Very surprised these days to go round part of Hampton Court gardens (6) [ definition: very surprised ] [ wordplay: abbrev for “these days” outside (“to go round”) something seen at Hampton Court ] [ AD outside MAZE ] … leaving you AMAZED. Beginners: any questions? Seasoned solvers and setters: which Latin abbreviations do you encounter more in crosswords than in “real life”? Stay safe. More guidance Cryptic devices: hidden answers; double definitions; cryptic definitions; soundalikes; initial letters; spoonerisms; containers; reversals; alternate letters; cycling; stuttering; taking most of a word; naked words; first and last letters Bits and bobs: Roman numerals; Nato alphabet; Greek letters; chemistry; abbreviations for countries; points of the compass; playing cards; capital letters; apostrophes; cricket; alcohol; the church; royals; newspapers; doctors; drugs; music; animals; cars; cities; rivers; boats; when the setter’s name appears; when the solver appears; ‘cheating’ Individual letters: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be obtained from the Guardian Bookshop.Norma Waterson, whose bracingly beautiful singing made her a key figure in British folk music alongside her siblings Mike and Lal and husband Martin Carthy, has died aged 82. Folk musician daughter Eliza Carthy wrote on Facebook: “Not much to say about such monumental sadness, but mam passed away yesterday afternoon, January 30th 2022.” Waterson had recently been hospitalised with pneumonia. The family was crowdfunding for her treatment and support for Martin Carthy, amid financial difficulty during the pandemic which had prevented them from earning on tour. Waterson was born in Hull in 1939, and was orphaned along with Mike and Lal and raised by their grandmother. They started out playing skiffle, then formed the Watersons with cousin John Harrison. With their stirring, unadorned vocal harmonising, sometimes without instrumental backing, the group helped to repopularise British folk music during the 1960s with a string of albums beginning with 1965’s Frost and Fire: A Calendar of Ceremonial Folk Songs. They split in 1968, with Norma moving to the tiny Caribbean island of Montserrat to work as a radio DJ, but after her return to the UK the Watersons reformed in the early 1970s with Martin Carthy, formerly of folk revivalist peers Steeleye Span, replacing Harrison. Lal and Mike also wrote original material, resulting in classic albums such as 1972’s Bright Phoebus, which Norma guests on. The Watersons continued to record throughout the 1980s, before Norma, Martin and Eliza formed Waterson: Carthy in the mid-1990s. Waterson also released three solo albums in the late 90s and early 00s – her self-titled 1996 debut was nominated for the Mercury prize – and then two further releases in collaboration with Eliza. In 2010, a serious illness left her in a coma. She recovered, but had to learn to walk and talk again. Among those paying tribute was Billy Bragg, who called Waterson “one of the defining voices of English traditional music”.After two years of the pandemic and largely socially distanced gigs, the scenes here feel surreal. Every inch of the sold-out, ram-packed venue hosts a heaving body. Hair is flailed and heads are banged. A succession of fans – many of them upside down, chunky footwear in the air – crowdsurf towards the stage, where they are helped down by security. Some people manage to actually get on the stage itself, launching themselves skyward back into the heaving throng. The jubilant atmosphere is partly informed by this week’s abandonment of Covid restrictions – only the venue’s powerful new ventilation system suggests anything has changed since 2020 – but also reflects how the Baltimore, Maryland band have become arguably the current hardcore punk scene’s most exciting band. Turnstile certainly stepped up a level with last year’s eclectic third album, Glow On, which combines hardcore with elements of soul, psychedelia and at least one Latin-funk breakdown. Being unable to tour it until now means Turnstile hit the stage with the ferocity of uncaged wild animals. There is barely a second’s pause between each song, as if the five-piece – all splayed legs and raised hoods – are racing against more than the early curfew. There are briefs forays into electronica and Underwater Boi and Alien Love Call detour into sparkling dream-pop, but with drummer Daniel Fang beating up a storm, live the focus is on riffs and rocking hard. Bare-chested singer Brendan Yates’s judo twirls and kicks provide an unusual addition to the arsenal of a frontman whose melodically barked vocals are jointly reminiscent of Jane’s Addiction’s Perry Farrell and Killing Joke’s Jaz Coleman. With the singer running on the spot or raising his mic stand above his head, audience participation turns songs into raucous, joyous singalongs. “It’s good to see so many of you after so long. We love you,” he smiles, before singer and audience sing Turnstile Love Connection’s Sly Stone reference (“I want to thank you for letting me see myself”) together, celebrating the return of the hardcore live experience. • At the Roundhouse, London, 1 February and O2 Forum Kentish Town, London, 3 February. Then touring.“If another stonemason had told me 10 years ago I’d now be playing rugby and living in Paris I would have thought: ‘No chance,’” Finn Russell says with amusement as he reflects on how his life has changed since early 2011. Racing 92’s brilliant fly-half will be vital to Scotland’s hopes of beating England again on Saturday in their opening match of the Six Nations – but 10 years ago he was playing for Falkirk in the second flight of Scottish domestic rugby while working as an apprentice stonemason. Russell is now feted as one of the most gifted playmakers in the world. After years of rugby being dominated by kicking metrics, robotic gameplans and grim attrition, he is at the heart of a much more attractive and imaginative attacking vision. The 29-year-old hopes to inspire Scotland to the Six Nations title while also leading Racing to their first Champions Cup triumph after losing three finals in the past six years. But Russell had to move from his hometown club, Stirling County, before the 2011-12 season because he could not break into their first team. At the age of 19 he dropped down a division so that he could play on a regular basis. “I went to Falkirk to give it a last crack at making a professional career,” Russell says. “I knew that if I didn’t do anything at Falkirk I was just going to be playing rugby for a hobby and working as a stonemason. I wouldn’t say I was concerned because I was accepting of being a stonemason. My best mate was there and I was happy enough with a normal life.” Did Falkirk work out immediately they had found an extraordinarily promising player? “Not from the get-go. But Bob Wylie [his coach at Falkirk] said something after a month. It was like: ‘You can’t stay here after this season. You need to play in a better league than our side because you’re too good.’ Bob gets a lot of credit for that and he is one of my best friends now. “I loved my time at Falkirk. I had to learn how to control a team of men so it was really good for me. It’s good fun to look back because after I finished at Tradstocks [the stonemasons in Stirling] I went to play for Glasgow in 2012 and then ended up at Racing [in 2018]. Six years from being an apprentice stonemason in Stirling to playing rugby in Paris is pretty quick.” He laughs when I ask if he was a natural stonemason. “I was quite good but you’d have to ask my boss. It’s a bit frustrating as it’s a four-year apprenticeship and having done three years I left to play rugby. But I had some good days and if I play golf at Gleneagles I can say to my mates: ‘Oh, I did work on that house.’” What was his hardest day as a stonemason? “They were all pretty tough but there was one winter when I’d start work at half-seven and it was -12C. You had to scrape a couple of inches of snow off the stone and carry it in. It was like a block of ice and when you cut into the stone with the saws the dust would spray into you and make your hands and body freeze. I don’t miss those days. But I left school at 16 and working made me see another side of life.” Russell is now an artist on the rugby field rather than just a craftsman. As we discuss his exhilarating performance for Racing in a 45-14 Champions Cup victory over Northampton in December, Russell says: “I was in the zone that day. For me it was very easy as the lineout was working, the scrum was working, the boys were carrying hard and I had plenty of options. Even if someone dropped the ball it was like: ‘It doesn’t matter. We’ll score again.” When he is playing with such assurance does the game almost slow down for him so he can see space opening up? “It comes down to the analysis you do during the week. Against Northampton, when I threw that pass [for Wenceslas Lauret to score], I’d seen the picture all week in training that their backs were going to come up hard. The picture is already there so you just have to catch and execute. It might look a hard pass but if you’ve done it during the week you’re ready. So I wouldn’t say the game slows down. You’re just prepared.” Russell is also more mature than he was two years ago when Gregor Townsend, Scotland’s coach, consigned him briefly to the international wilderness. Townsend was a mercurial No 10 for Scotland but as a coach he is far more pragmatic. He and Russell clashed repeatedly and his most skilful player complained that they had “no relationship”. Townsend told me last year that he and Russell had bridged the divide. The benefits were obvious as, with Russell leading the attack, Scotland beat England and France away. Russell is thoughtful when I ask him what he learned from his fallout with Townsend in February 2020. “You learn how to deal with that and how to get going again. Coming back into camp, it’s like: ‘Don’t mess around, lads, let’s just get going.’ “Me and Gregor had lots of chats. We got to know each other and that’s helped so much. I think we’re the best we’ve ever been and when any of the new boys ask how it is I say: ‘It’s so much fun, it’s amazing now.’ That plays a big role in the way you play at the weekend. If you had a good week building up, you’re excited and ready to play your best. If I have a rubbish week, I’m tired mentally and it can have such an impact on the weekend. “If we’re having a tough patch I can also now see Gregor and say: ‘Maybe this could be different. Could we change it?’ It’s up to the coach if they want to listen but I’ve learned how to approach situations like that better than before. Back then we were both learning and almost came to a breaking point. Gregor will take the blame for it, and I’ll take the blame for it. Both of us held our hands up and said: ‘It wasn’t good but it’s probably worked out for the best.’” Russell is diplomatic about the narrow series loss the Lions suffered in South Africa last year – when they changed their conservative approach in the final Test only after he came on as a replacement early in the first half. The Springboks won 19-16, after Morne Steyn kicked a 79th-minute penalty, but Russell added attacking verve the Lions had lacked throughout a stolid series. “Due to my [achilles] injury I couldn’t play much. But in the last Test I showed how you can potentially play. We won the first Test playing that kicking style. It didn’t really work in the second Test but, for me, the way we played in that third Test, the chances we created, was much better. We went out to play and beat them.” Does he believe that, with the rise of other gifted attacking players such as Marcus Smith for England, rugby will become a more expansive game again? “Yeah. We had a phase where it was all about kicking, building pressure and not losing the game. Now I feel more and more teams are going out to win. Look at the way Harlequins and Exeter are playing in England. In France, Toulouse, La Rochelle, Racing and other teams chuck it about and are very confident of getting results. Rugby becomes much more appealing.” Smith joined the Lions tour as a late replacement but he and Russell had struck up a rapport before then. “He’s a great player and a great guy,” Russell says of the player lined up to be his opposite number on Saturday. “We’ve got the same agent and last year we got in touch. Harlequins weren’t playing that well and he was being restricted so he asked me how I’ve dealt with things like that. We then played Quins and I called him briefly after the game and we just kept in touch ever since. So when he got called into the Lions it was brilliant that I got to work with him. It was good to make a proper friendship.” Just after Christmas, Russell says: “I was texting him, saying: ‘What are you doing? I’m in Paris, you should come over.’ But with the travel restrictions it’s tough and he might have come to Paris, got Covid and then he couldn’t play. If we get time off we’ll see if we can link up. I’m looking forward to playing against him in the first game. It’ll be good fun.” Russell laughs when I ask whether, hypothetically, he would like to play under Eddie Jones. “I don’t know. I met Eddie after we drew that [2019 Six Nations] game at Twickenham and he seemed a nice guy. But, no, I’m not sure if I’d fit into, or really enjoy, that very regimented schedule. Maybe I’d be able to change him a little bit?” That wry aside is typical of Russell but he sounds serious when praising Scotland’s squad. “We’ve got strength in depth in every position and the team is the strongest I’ve seen it. We were a few points away from winning the tournament last year but were just beaten by Ireland [27-24] and Wales [25-24]. It’s about finding a way of turning those narrow losses into wins. I believe we can.” That drive has been strengthened since Russell left Glasgow for Paris. “I wanted to play another style of rugby with new challenges. I needed a fresh start on and off the field and I told my agent: ‘I don’t want to go to the Premiership because that would become normal very quickly.’ I wanted to go to France for a complete change of rugby, culture and life. The language makes it even tougher but I’ve loved being there.” He has come a long way from being a stonemason and playing for Falkirk, so Russell smiles again when asked about the quality of his French. “I wouldn’t say I’m fluent but most of the boys say I speak pretty good French now. I’ve occasionally had dreams in French which is quite funny. My girlfriend [the Scottish heptathlete Emma Canning] tells me I sometimes talk in French in my sleep. She lives in Montpellier where she trains, but I’m more confident talking French because I was on my own in Paris at the start. So it’s very easy for her to ask me: ‘Can you order this?’ “I try to get her to talk French because that’s the best way to learn. Glasgow is very small compared to Paris and you can get very comfortable. I’ve had to learn how to be on my own and not have family and friends with me. I can feel the benefits both on and off the field.”Erotic body painting, deadly scorpions, Italian futurism, a ninja stuntman, a Warholian MacGuffin, the singer Anastacia, not one organised-crime faction but four: incorporating all the above and more, this art world-set thriller told non-linear-style believes it’s a scrambled cubist masterpiece. But in truth it is closer to an abstract expressionist hot mess, as writer-director Alessio Della Valle splatters his canvas with everything he can lay his hands on and sees what sticks. As if he’s force-feeding us the whole of Pulp Fiction in the first 15 minutes, Della Valle initially hops between three characters homing in on the botched exchange of a stolen print of Andy Warhol’s Pink Marilyn: a failed stuntman and would-be courier (Jeremy Piven), his high-class art dealer brother (Jonathan Rhys Meyers) and a shoddy bagman (Fortunato Cerlino). But goons sent by Emile Hirsch’s junior mafia don – who wants his artwork back – seize the wrong package. The ensuing mayhem lets Della Valle erratically collage even more elements: Meyers’ dodgy counterfeiting past; his smoking-hot affair with a Spanish restorer (Paz Vega); Hirsch’s Michael Corleone-esque misgivings about the family trade and artistic aspirations (he likes firing his assault rifle at his easel); Michael Madsen, included for reasons indeterminate, with a voice like a dodgy motorbike throttle. The plot is semi-incomprehensible, but the fragmented effect is not unpleasing. It isn’t capable, though, of carrying American Night’s intellectual pretensions, which are signposted in chapter titles such as “Art + Life”. What this gaudy rampage feels like is a commentary on the covetousness and inflationary madness of the art market itself. It’s telling that, beyond brash slogans and some gangster-film freeze frames, Della Valle’s film has no discernible style, with uncertain camerawork and attempts at Tarantino-esque black comedy – such as Cerlino’s narcoleptic bagman – getting lost in the chaos. Rhys-Meyers brings some substance, with his sophisticate’s gravelly tones suggesting despair behind the veneer. And even if American Night flirts constantly with ludicrousness, it is never boring. • American Night is available on digital platforms on 7 February.Brother to the more famous Alessandro, who composed more than 60 operas, and uncle to Domenico, whose 555 sonatas are one of the mainstays of the baroque keyboard repertoire, Francesco Scarlatti spent his life as a choir master, first in his native Sicily, and later in the British Isles, where his music was performed in London and at the Three Choirs festival; he apparently died in poverty in Dublin in 1741. Francesco’s own music is hardly known today, but one of the Armonico Consort’s earliest concerts, 20 years ago, included both of his surviving large-scale choral works, a Dixit Dominus and a Mass. As part of the group’s 20th anniversary season they have programmed the two again, before recording them. The pieces both date from the early 1700s, when Scarlatti was maestro di cappella in Palermo; they are written for a 16-part choir, divided into four groups, with an orchestra of strings and trumpet. But as these performances under Armonico’s director Christopher Monks vividly demonstrated, those forces are often employed in a strikingly distinctive way. In the Dixit Dominus psalm setting verses for the full forces, sometimes fugal and occasionally densely chromatic, are interspersed not with the usual solo numbers but with sections highlighting each of the voice types in turn, while the mass draws very selectively on the full Latin mass – there’s no Credo or Agnus Dei – though the use of antiphonal effects and the deployment of solo voices is just as striking. The crisp, sparkling accounts of the two Scarlatti works were each preceded by violin concertos from the same era, with Rachel Podger as the soloist – the 12th of Vivaldi’s Op 4 set La Stravaganza, and Bach’s A minor concerto, BWV 1041. Accompanied by just a handful of strings and continuo, they were full of carefully defined detail and easy give-and-take, the best kind of intimate period-instrument performances. • At the Forum, Malvern theatres, Great Malvern, on 5 February.A reworking of Sophocles’s tragedy Philoctetes by the performance poet, writer and musician Kae Tempest is one of 10 plays in the running for this year’s Susan Smith Blackburn prize for female, transgender and non-binary dramatists. Tempest – an award-winning poet and two-time nominee for the Mercury music prize – was shortlisted for the play Paradise, which was performed at the National Theatre in London last year. It is joined on the shortlist by two plays produced on smaller stages in the capital. Benedict Lombe’s memoir-monologue Lava, which spans from Mobutu’s Congo via post-apartheid South Africa to modern-day London, was presented at the Bush theatre. Amanda Wilkin’s Shedding a Skin, which will soon return to Soho theatre where it ran last summer, was described as a “wondrous weepie” by Guardian critic Arifa Akbar in her review. Two Irish playwrights have been shortlisted for the prize. Sonya Kelly’s The Last Return depicts prospective audience members waiting for their chance to see a play. With cruel irony, Kelly’s play itself – which was developed by Druid Theatre – is still awaiting the chance to welcome in theatregoers. A full production has been postponed a number of times due to Covid restrictions. Sarah Hanly’s Purple Snowflakes and Titty Wanks, about a convent schoolgirl in Wicklow who dreams of studying musical theatre, ran at the Abbey theatre in Dublin and opens in February at the Royal Court in London. The Guardian’s Helen Meany called it “a bold mix of the sacred and profane”. Australian playwright Joanna Murray-Smith is shortlisted for her play Berlin, a two-hander set in a Berlin loft, and there are four American finalists. Chiara Atik’s Poor Clare is based on the stories of Saint Clare and Saint Francis of Assisi, while in Daniella De Jesús’s Get Your Pink Hands Off Me Sucka and Give Me Back, a modern Dominican-American student encounters Isabella I and King Ferdinand II of Aragon. The characters in Zora Howard’s play Bust mysteriously begin to disappear and Lauren Whitehead explores the US war on drugs in a play strikingly titled The Play Which Raises the Question of What Happened in/to Low Income Black Communities Between 1974 and 2004 and Hints at Why Mass Incarceration Is Perhaps a Man-Made Disease and Highlights the Government’s General Lack of Empathy for Poor People of Color and Dispels the Notion That Our Condition Is Our Fault and Helps Make Visible Why We Riot When We Mourn and Also Tells the Story of Anita Freeman &amp; Her Kids. Leslie Swackhamer, executive director of the prize, said it had been a phenomenal year for new voices in playwriting: “Two of our finalists are debut plays, and nine are first-time finalists for this prize. All of the plays are highly theatrical and probe the burning issues of our times.” More than 160 plays were nominated for this year’s award, which recognises “works of outstanding quality for the English-speaking theatre”. Judges for the 2022 prize are Bridgerton star Adjoa Andoh, playwright Luis Alfaro, lighting designer Paule Constable, director Whitney White, actor Saidah Arrika Ekulona and Justin Audibert, artistic director of the Unicorn theatre in London. The winner will receive a cash prize of $25,000 and a signed print by the artist Willem de Kooning. Last year the prize was won by Erika Dickerson-Despenza for cullud wattah, a play about the Flint water crisis, seen through the eyes of an all-female Michigan family.Did you change what you ate or drank for January? The start of the year is an annual cue for a Pandora’s box of diet demons to be released; from meal replacements and super-keto diets to slimming teas. Alongside these trends live the regular and more ethical health-conscious messages of dry January and Veganuary, both of which have grown in popularity and have a much cleaner public image. Despite that, they are still not perfect. So this year I’d like to propose another idea that hopefully has longer staying power: call it the “real food revolution”. The premise of Veganuary is simple: use the pivotal month of January to make a big change to your diet, your health and the planet’s health by cutting out animal products. Veganuary is a not-for-profit charitable company that provides recipes and motivational emails to help you give up meat and dairy products for just one month, with, ideally, positive effects on your waistline and your carbon footprint. Overall, they do a great job, and there is plenty of evidence to support the efficacy of reducing animal-based foods for our health and our planet’s survival. We now know that agriculture is responsible for about 25% of global heating and the single most important action we as individuals can do to help address the climate crisis is not to give up cars, but to eat less meat. That said, I have two issues with Veganuary. First, dietary change should aim for a long-term, sustainable change rather than a one-month quick fix. Second, there is no clear evidence that strict veganism is better for health than vegetarianism, pescatarianism or flexitarianism (a diet where you’re allowed to eat occasional meat or fish). Second, it fuels the perception that all plant-based foods are healthier than all animal-derived ones, which is not always true. If people replace fish, meat, eggs and cheese with plant-based ultra-processed foods, it might actually do us – and the planet – more harm than good. What do I mean by ultra-processed foods? These are the things that have undergone such extensive change that you wouldn’t be able to reproduce them at home. An easy way to identify them is from the extensive list of ingredients, many of which are unrecognisable; or from their aggressive marketing; or from their high fat, sugar and salt content. For the average person in the UK, 56% of their diet comes from these ultra-processed foods, which are known to damage people’s physical and mental health, and our environment. The ultra-processed food industry is astute at picking up on trends in order to cash in on them. The ethical impulse to be kinder to animals and the planet is one of those trends. Bloomberg Intelligence predicts 451% growth for the plant-based food market by 2030 (already worth $29bn in 2020). Processed food companies are getting a slice of this by mass-producing vast quantities of plant-based burgers, mince, nuggets, pies, quiches, vegan cheeses and more, all assembled in industrial energy-guzzling factories. The products often use extracted or isolated plant proteins (frequently from peas or soy), which produce waste. Although the average carbon footprint of plant-based meals remains far lower than that of their animal-based equivalents, there is something else that has an even lower environmental impact and is far better for our health: it is called “whole unprocessed food”. That means fruits, vegetables, pulses and nuts that are bought as whole as possible. And there are important scientific reasons why they are better for us. A lot of it comes down to the gut: we know that having a flourishing, diverse microbiome – the community of trillions of gut microbes in your lower intestine – is important for all aspects of health. Unprocessed foods contain two key ingredients that help support this. The first comes in the form of polyphenols: chemicals used naturally by plants as defences against pests. The second is fibre, which gives plants their structure. Microbes in the gut find both of these things delicious, feeding on them and in turn producing a range of important chemicals the body needs to stay healthy. Variety is important, too: the more different plants you can get your hands on with different polyphenols in them, the greater the variety of beneficial microorganisms in your gut you’ll be supporting. In processed food, fibre or polyphenols are usually stripped, pressurised or heated away. The odd vitamin that might be added back in, so that the product can be marketed as “healthy”, cannot make up for the loss. Next January (well, there’s nothing to stop you from starting this February, actually), instead of eating artificial meat substitutes and vegan cupcakes for a month, why not add a new type of plant to your diet every day? Instead of obsessing about reducing calories and shedding pounds or inches, how about decreasing the number of factory-produced ultra-processed foods in your home with every weekly shop? Instead of demonising all animal products, you could try reducing your meat consumption while focusing on quality products from those companies that are farming regeneratively and fishing responsibly. Instead of buying ready meals, consider cutting out food in packets and teaching children to peel an orange or a banana instead. Eating more “real” food is the most scientifically backed way to live longer, healthier lives. Big change requires bold thinking, sure, but transformation requires consistent, sustainable change – to be implemented every day, one step at a time, with our own personal circumstances and limitations in mind. One month of change is not enough to break habits built up over a lifetime. But it’s enough to open up new possibilities. Every revolution, including this one, has to start somewhere. • Tim Spector is professor of epidemiology at King’s College London, and the author of Spoon-Fed: Why Almost Everything We’ve Been Told About Food Is Wrong. Further reading: Gut: The Inside Story of Our Body’s Most Under-rated Organ by Giulia Enders (Scribe, £12.99) Swallow This: Serving Up the Food Industry’s Darkest Secrets by Joanna Blythman (Fourth Estate, £8.99) The Clever Guts Diet: How to Revolutionise Your Body from the Inside Out by Michael Mosley (Short Books, £8.99)My brother, David de Peyer, who has died aged 87 of pneumonia, exacerbated by post-polio syndrome, was a dedicated public servant and director general of the Cancer Research Campaign. Using a wheelchair after contracting polio aged 20, he led a life of conspicuous achievement in the face of disability. Born in London, David was the son of Charles de Peyer, a civil servant, and Flora (nee Collins), a classical singer. Educated at Rendcomb college, Gloucestershire, he excelled at cross-country running and hockey. During national service in the 1950s he was seconded to the Royal West African Frontier Force, Nigeria, where he served in Kaduna. He was proud to have been chosen to represent Nigeria in a hockey match against Ghana. During this posting David contracted polio. Although it was a cruel personal blow for a sportsman like David, his disability did not stop him getting on with life. He went up to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he studied philosophy, politices and economics, assisted by good friends who carried him and his wheelchair up flights of stairs for lectures. After graduating in 1959, he married Ann Harbord, whom he met when she was an English student at Oxford. He joined the civil service at the Department of Health in 1960 and became assistant secretary in 1973, dealing with the terms and conditions of hospital doctors. He was appointed secretary to the 1975 royal commission on the National Health Service and from 1979 to 1984 was under secretary at the DHSS. In 1984 he became director general of the Cancer Research Campaign (now Cancer Research UK), a role he fulfilled with distinction until his retirement in 1996. He then continued to devote himself to public service, as vice-chairman of the Suffolk Health Authority and as a member of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Appeals Panel. He was a trustee of the Disabled Living Foundation and of Research into Ageing. His last public role was as founder member and first chairman of the friends of the church in Middleton, a small village on the Essex/Suffolk border, where he and Ann lived after retirement. They were keen to see the church used as a centre of activities for the local community, which had few other amenities. David loved good food and wine and had a permanent suntan acquired in or by the swimming pool and from the seat of his Triumph Stag convertible. He enjoyed many highly competitive games of garden croquet and racing demon. He is survived by Ann and by his siblings, Andy, Jenny and me.This vibrant dish is blissfully easy. Nutty, hot, fragrant, mouth-numbing and addictively salty-sweet, the sauce dresses the clean taste of the white fish and greens beautifully. You’ll want lots of rice alongside to soak up all those flavours. Steamed fish with Sichuan sauce and greens Prep 10 min Cook 20 min Serves 2 1 big thumb of ginger, peeled and cut into matchsticks 2 large white fish fillets (such as cod or bream) 2 spring onions, trimmed and sliced diagonally 4 small pak choi 2 tbsp vegetable oil For the sauce 1 star anise, bashed into small pieces 2 tbsp light soy sauce 1 tsp caster sugar 1 tsp chilli oil, such as Lee Kum Kee’s Chiu Chow 1 tsp sesame oil Set a large steamer over a pan of simmering water. Take a plate that will fit inside the steamer (or a sheet of foil), sprinkle it with half the ginger and lay the fish on top. Cover with the rest of the ginger, then sit the plate in the steamer over the simmering water. Cover and cook for 10-12 minutes (depending on the size of the fish), until just tender. Meanwhile, gently warm the sauce ingredients in a small pan, stirring until the sugar dissolves, then keep warm. Lift the fish plate out of the steamer, put the pak choi in its place and steam for three or four minutes, until just tender. Keep the fish on the plate, but pour away any liquid that’s collected during cooking. Warm the vegetable oil in a very small pan until sizzling hot. Scatter the spring onions over the fish and, once the oil is very hot, pour it over the top. Transfer the fish to plates with the cooked pak choi, spoon over the soy and chilli sauce, and serve immediately. The simple flex … This sauce works equally well on chunks of steamed turnip or celeriac, alongside the greens and sticky rice. It is a lovely match of flavours. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoHundreds of care homes in England remain closed to relatives because of Covid outbreaks, despite the government promising the return of “unlimited visiting” from Monday. Last week the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) scrapped rules put in place in December that restricted visits. However, 534 care homes in England reported Covid outbreaks to the UK Health Security Agency in the third week of January and many remain locked down to all but essential caregivers, with one designated person per resident allowed in. The DHSC said last Thursday that from 31 January there would be “no limit on the number of visitors”, adding that “self-isolation periods will be cut and now care homes only have to follow outbreak management rules for 14 rather than 28 days”. Updated guidance on visiting, isolating and testing had not been published by Monday morning, however, leaving many care home managers telling families that restrictions remained. Nadra Ahmed, the chair of the National Care Association, said the announcement about the easing of restrictions had come at a “challenging time”. “This virus has not gone away and we know there are around 50% of care services with outbreaks in them who will not be able to implement the guidance when it comes,” she said. Helen Wildbore, the director of the Relatives and Residents Association, said there was “confusion and caution as providers hadn’t even seen the new guidance”. Anita Astle, the manager of Wren Hall care home in Nottingham, said she has told relatives they won’t be changing rules immediately. “I don’t know how we are going to do this in a risk-assessed manner if we don’t know how many [visitors] they will be and how long they will be [there],” she said. “We are not just going to be flinging the doors open.” Jenny Morrison, a co-founder of the Rights for Residents group, which is campaigning for care home visiting rights to be enshrined in law, said: “Covid is no longer the biggest killer of the frail and vulnerable, and policies must reflect this reality. There is mounting evidence that thousands of excess deaths during the pandemic have resulted from loneliness and isolation and the government needs to urgently produce outbreak management guidance that takes into account the variety of risks.” The opening-up has started to have some positive effects. Brendoncare, which operates care homes in the south of England, said it would be opening for visits from Monday. Bruce Cutts, whose 89-year-old mother, June, is in a care home in Todmorden, West Yorkshire, was able to have her home for lunch on Sunday. “Mum was in tears when she could meet friends she hadn’t seen since December after weeks in a rolling lockdown,” he said, although he expects the reprieve to be only temporary. “The fact the rules have been loosened is great but all that stops as soon as there are two positive tests and the home goes back into lockdown,” he said. “I am sure that in the next week or so there will be another outbreak, which means Mum will be plunged back into safe storage, which is crushing her spirit.” Judith Nesbit, whose 96-year-old mother is in a care home in the north-east, said the isolation has been “heartbreaking”. Her mother ate Christmas dinner alone in her room when she was in 14-day isolation after an emergency hospital visit. Now a staff member has tested positive and there is another lockdown at the home, until 10 February. “As care home staff get on with their lives, there are going to continue to be positive tests, meaning our loved ones continue to be treated as prisoners and locked away from their families,” Nesbitt said. “Life is finite: many residents, including my mum, are running out of the time they should be spending with their loved ones.” A DHSC spokesperson said: “Thanks to the progress we’ve made, care home restrictions can now be eased further allowing residents to see more of their loved ones from today. “Updated guidance will be published shortly with further details on changes to visiting, isolation and testing.” • This article was amended on 8 February 2022 to correct the name of a care home resident to June Cutts, not Jane, and the name of a different resident’s daughter to Judith Nesbit, not Nesbittt.Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee may not have been the defining celebrity couple of their era, but they perhaps heralded the next: the leaked sex tapes, tabloid infamy and rock’n’roll excess presaged the game of media cat-and-mouse that has now become commonplace. A new drama series on Disney+, documenting their romance and how their stolen sex tape unwittingly ushered in a new era of celebrity pornography, begins next week. The show also displays Anderson’s surprise rise as a Gen Z fashion icon. From the X-rated Marilyn Monroe in Playboy to a living Barbie doll in Baywatch, Anderson’s fashion aesthetic has become an unlikely fashion reference for celebrities such as Megan Fox and Kourtney Kardashian. Despite being labelled “white trash” at the time, Anderson’s love of revealing outfits seems entirely in keeping with the current revival for low-rise jeans and cut-out looks. Lily James, who plays Anderson, wore a silver cut-out dress to the LA premiere. “So much of what Pam wore has come back around,” said Kameron Lennox, the show’s costume designer. “What Pam was creating was her version of a 90s pinup.” Lennox calls Anderson’s look a “mix of Bridget Bardot and Barbarella, with a rock’n’roll undertone”. As well as sourcing Anderson’s outfits by Versace, Vivienne Westwood and Azzedine Alaïa from vintage dealers – and remaking her infamous latex dress from scratch – the most challenging part of Lennox’s job, she said, was recreating the outfits that were fit for her surgically enhanced figure. “We spent a great deal of time making sure that Lily was wearing pieces the way Pam did,” she said. “For example, we studied the photos and videos of the real Pamela in the Baywatch bathing suit, to make sure the suit laid on [James’s] body the exact way it did in real life.” With a narrative that revolves around making and stealing the couples’ sex tape, the costume designer also faced the challenge of recreating those outfits. “There were many challenges: both of them are scantily clad in many scenes and it was important to us that not only did it look ‘right’, but that they felt confident and comfortable,” she said. Since the trailer was first released for the series in December, searches for “red swimming costume” and “black leather corset” (one of Anderson’s most famous looks) have increased by 74% and 45% respectively on eBay. Smaller details, such as Anderson’s thin eyebrows and oversized furry bucket hat worn at the MTV Awards, are still referenced. And there is also the rock-influenced look of the duo, that feels like a precursor to the modern Hollywood relationships of Machine Gun Kelly and Megan Fox, or Travis Barker and Kourtney Kardashian. “Pam is viewed as a strong, powerful, confident woman that held her own during a very difficult time,” said Lennox. “She inspired many young people that are now adults.”The names of Boris Johnson’s aides interviewed by detectives investigating parties in Downing Street may not be released because of police policy, even if they are being treated as suspects or issued with fines for breaking the lockdown rules they helped make. Sue Gray’s report contains minimal details of the parties the Met is investigating, which are among the most serious breaches and most politically controversial. The Met asked Gray to leave out all but bare details of the parties police are looking at, triggering huge anger at the force. The policy of the Metropolitan police on naming those who form part of its criminal investigations follows the guidance from the College of Policing, which sets standards for law enforcement in England and Wales. The policy is to usually name people only when they are charged or summonsed for an offence and a criminal investigation has progressed to the stage where guilt or innocence will be determined by a court. There are limited, ill-defined exceptions. Thus those interviewed as witnesses, or suspects, are not usually named. Furthermore the Met has not been naming people issued with fines for breaking coronavirus rules, and in some cases has issued anonymised details. A Met spokesperson said: “We follow the College of Policing guidelines. Those guidelines say police will only name people when they are charged, unless there are extenuating circumstances.” Nothing would stop Johnson or his press aides from themselves choosing to make public the names of those interviewed under caution or punishment such as a fine. The last time a criminal investigation centred on Downing Street, when the Met investigated Tony Blair’s government for allegedly handing out peerages for donations, the former Labour prime minister was interviewed by detectives three times. Then the Met did not name the PM as being interviewed as a witness, though political sources did. Cash for peerages, as the inquiry was dubbed, collapsed in 2007 with no charges. Blair’s aides beat back a police wish to interview him as a potential suspect under caution warning he would feel obliged to resign. As yet the Met will not say which parties are under investigation. The clampdown came after the 2012 Leveson report following concerns about police and media relations triggered by the phone-hacking scandal. Rules on what information could be released by police about those who were subject to investigation came under further scrutiny after the VIP paedophile scandal, where the Met fell for the lies of a fantasist and pursued establishment figures over baseless claims. Andy Trotter, the former media lead for chief constables until his retirement in 2014, said: “The exemptions were for a policing purpose, such as for the safety of victims or to get further information from the public about a crime.” Guidelines from the College of Policing about naming those under police investigation state: “Suspects should not be identified to the media (by disclosing names or other identifying information) prior to the point of charge except where justified by clear circumstances eg a threat to life, the prevention or detection of crime or a matter of public interest and confidence.” Trotter said that when new police media rules were being drafted after the Leveson report, there was discussion among chiefs about whether there should be an exemption if “the [Met] commissioner or prime minister was arrested”. But the issue was never resolved, other than to agree that a senior officer could decide whether the policy should be waived. That argument for any potential exemption may be weaker for “partygate” because breaches of pandemic rules are punishable only by fixed-penalty notices, which are low level, akin to a fine for a driving offence.Thousands of NHS cancer patients who have exhausted all other options are being offered liquid biopsy blood tests to match them to personalised medicines. The groundbreaking genetic analysis gives patients a better chance of successfully trying new treatments. A pioneering scheme piloted at the Christie NHS foundation trust in Manchester proved so successful it is being rolled out across the UK, the Guardian can reveal. The development is a significant breakthrough. Cancer patients who have run out of options but are still reasonably well have been able to access clinical trials based on their cancer type – breast cancer, for example – for decades. However, many of these trials do not target the DNA profile of the patient’s tumour. Now cancer patients running out of options are being offered personalised drugs via the nationwide initiative. By understanding the genetic faults in a patient’s cancer from a simple blood test, doctors can match more patients to specific clinical trials – with the hope of saving or extending lives. The Target National initiative is being funded by the Christie charity and the Sir Bobby Robson Foundation in Newcastle. It is recruiting thousands of cancer patients via 18 cancer centres in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The new approach is essentially a match-making service for patients and clinical trials. The quicker patients can try new drugs that may help them, the better chance of life-changing results. The pilot found patients accessing new drugs this way were more likely to see their tumours shrink. The results also suggested that a wider pool of patients and clinical trials would further increase the chances of success. “The learnings from our original Target study in Manchester were that genetic testing needs to be done on a large scale to identify rare genetic mutations and that broader access to medicines through clinical trials being undertaken across the country rather than just one site are required,” said Dr Matthew Krebs, a consultant oncologist at the Christie who is leading Target National. “This study will allow thousands of cancer patients in the UK to access genetic testing via a liquid biopsy. This will enable us to identify rare genetic mutations that in some patients could mean access to life-changing experimental medicines that can provide great treatment responses, where there are otherwise limited or no other treatment options available.” The scheme is open to cancer patients with solid tumours who have exhausted all other options and are considered by their oncologists to be suitable for early-phase experimental trials. Researchers analyse the genetic characteristics of a patient’s cancer from a blood sample and look for faulty genes that may inform that individual’s suitability to receive an experimental treatment. David Kearney was diagnosed with stage four prostate cancer in February 2016 but access to clinical trials through the pilot scheme has kept him alive. “Taking part in the Target trial helped me by enabling my doctors find the right clinical trials for me,” the 58-year-old father of two from Bury said. In 2021, he celebrated his 25th wedding anniversary with his wife, Amanda, and became a grandfather for the first time. “I have now been on clinical trials for nearly two years, which has kept my cancer at bay, and I really hope many more people from across the UK will experience the same success.” The new initiative uses a state-of-the art blood test made by Roche that spots genetic faults in the cancer. Because tiny amounts of DNA leak from tumours into the blood stream, a simple blood sample is all that is needed to find the tumour’s genetic code. “We can’t guarantee that we will find a fault in the genetic code of every cancer patient we recruit, or that if we do, there will be a suitable drug trial for them,” said Krebs. “However, as we learn more about the genetics of cancer in this study, it will help doctors and scientists develop new treatments to help people in the future. “Ultimately, we hope liquid biopsy testing will be adopted into routine NHS care but we need studies such as this to show the benefit of the test on a large scale and provide the evidence that patients can benefit from being matched to targeted medicines on the basis of the blood test.”In 2016, Portugal’s president, Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, issued a lighthearted rebuke to his prime minister: António Costa, the president noted, was prone to “a chronic and slightly irritating optimism”. Almost six years on, Costa’s optimism appears fairly well founded. On Sunday night the 60-year-old leader of Portugal’s Socialist party (PS) defied the polls, as well as political trends elsewhere in Europe, to secure a surprise outright majority in a snap general election. The PS had won an absolute majority only once before, and there have now been just four such majorities achieved by any party in the past 35 years. Expectations are likely to be high as the Socialists prepare to return to office to administer €45bn of EU Covid recovery funds. Costa, who has been prime minister since 2015, has been praised for overseeing an economic turnaround, reversing bitterly unpopular austerity measures and managing one of the most successful vaccination programmes in Europe. He has also shown himself able to navigate tricky political waters. Few imagined that his geringonça (improvised solution) with the Socialists’ erstwhile allies in the Portuguese Communist party and the Left Bloc would last a year, let alone six. Costa’s absolute majority now frees him from having to rely on the Communists and the Left Bloc, whose opposition to the 2022 budget triggered the early election. Parts of the leftwing electorate appear to have voted strategically, backing the Socialists as they had the best chance of winning and punishing the smaller parties they blame for bringing the last legislature to a premature end. The centre-right Social Democrats (PSD), who finished second, were ahead in some polls last week but may have been scorned by centrists voters who were uncomfortable at the prospect of a PSD minority government having to strike deals with the far-right Chega party. The Socialists have said they could increase the minimum wage in western Europe’s poorest country from €705 (£582) a month to €900 by 2026, and plan to spend most of the EU funds on updating Portugal’s infrastructure. The PSD, meanwhile, had promised to cut taxes on corporate profits and personal income. If the polls were wide of the mark when it came to the winners – the consensus was that it would be a close race between the Socialists and the PSD, with neither winning an outright majority – they were not wrong on Chega. And if Sunday was a monumental night for Costa and his party, it was also one for the former football pundit André Ventura and his far-right grouping. Chega won 12 seats, up from just one in the 2019 election, to become the third-largest party in the 230-seat parliament. Its share of the vote rose from 1.9% three years ago to 7.2%, meaning that more and more Portuguese voters are heeding Ventura’s populist, anti-Roma discourse. Chega’s rise echoes the arrival of the far-right Vox party in Spain’s parliament three years ago. Spain and Portugal – long fondly imagined to be immune to the far right because of their relatively recent experiences of the Franco and Salazar dictatorships – have each now proved themselves insufficiently vaccinated. Among those offering their congratulations to Ventura were Vox’s leader, Santiago Abascal, and Marine Le Pen. The latter hailed Chega’s victory as further proof that “throughout Europe, people are rising up to reclaim their freedom and their sovereignty”. Costa, whose natural optimism has now been buoyed by an unexpected electoral triumph, has acknowledged the scale of his new mandate and promised not to abuse it as he seeks to bring together a fragmented country and help lead its social and economic recovery from the pandemic. “An absolute majority doesn’t mean absolute power; it doesn’t mean governing alone,” he said on Sunday night. “It’s an increased responsibility and it means governing with and for all Portuguese.”Norway has halted a major hunt of wolves after campaigners secured a court injunction. Twenty-five animals, within four packs, are in the “wolf zone”, an area of nature set aside to protect the predators, and these have been given a stay of execution by the courts after campaigners argued wolves in a conservation area should not be shot. At the start of this month, 51 wolves were due to be slaughtered after pressure from the hunting and farming lobbies in the country – a significant proportion of the 80 animals thought to live in Norway. “The wolves are saved for this year, as the hunting season only goes on for two more weeks and then it is the breeding season, when they cannot be shot,” Siri Martinsen, the chief executive of the animal rights organisation Noah, told the Guardian. The Guardian reported in January that conservation groups across Europe were appealing to the EU to take action against wolf population culls in Norway, Sweden and Finland, arguing that the Nordic nations were creating the most hostile environment for wolves in western Europe and flouting laws that protect the species. On Friday, Finland also suspended licences to kill three packs of wolves, citing EU legislation. The wolf is on Norway’s “red list” of endangered animals, so the government has set up a “wolf zone” – comprising 5% of Norway’s territory – where the animals are free to roam without being persecuted. Three environmental organisations – Noah, WWF Norway and Association Our Predators – argued that killing the 25 wolves in the conservation zone would be a breach of European environment law, and secured an injunction until this could be debated. A similar issue cropped up in 2020, when Noah took the government to court for its decision to hunt a wolf family inside the wolf zone. Last summer the court delivered its judgment and concluded that the decision was in breach of the Nature Diversity Act, ruling that the government did not manage to show sufficient grounds to make an exception from the strict protection of the wolf. The judgment has been appealed by the government and the appeal hearing is scheduled for summer 2022. Martinsen said the government was hostile towards wolves – the leading Labour party last year formed a coalition with the Centre party, which has a policy to remove all wolves from the country. “They don’t want wolves in Norway, they have always been clear that wolves should not be breeding in nature,” Martinsen said. Other European countries have introduced anti-wolf policies. Hunters in Sweden have already shot dead most of their annual target of 27 wolves. In Germany, where wolves have appeared in recent years having crossed from other European countries, there has been a debate over the predator’s impact on agriculture, and in the UK there are fierce arguments over whether they should ever be reintroduced. • This article was amended on 31 January 2022. An earlier version said that Germany’s wolves had “crossed over from Denmark in 2017”. This may be the case but other crossing points and times are also likely.A heavily edited version of the Sue Gray report into alleged parties inside Downing Street and Whitehall during lockdown will be published later on Monday, No 10 has said, after a copy was sent to Boris Johnson. It appears likely that many of the most serious allegations will not be considered in the version of the report that will be released, because of a request by the Metropolitan police, which launched a parallel investigation last week. No 10 said it was still “unclear” whether there would be a further publication from Gray after the Met has completed its investigation. On the prospect of the release of a fuller report at a later stage, Johnson’s official spokesperson said: “At this stage, we will need to consider what might be appropriate and we are discussing with the independent Cabinet Office team in due course what might be appropriate, but at the moment it is unclear how the ongoing Met police investigation might interact with any further work.” Johnson will give a Commons statement, expected at around 3.30pm, about an hour after the report is published on the gov.uk website and issued to MPs, No 10 said. At about 11.30am, the Cabinet Office said that Gray, a senior civil servant, had sent her report to Johnson, saying in a statement: “We can confirm that Sue Gray has provided an update on her investigations to the prime minister.” The wording of “update” rather than “report” suggests the document Johnson has received is some way from the full findings gathered by Gray. While the report had been seen as potentially crucial as to whether Johnson remains in office, with a number of his MPs poised to move against the prime minister if it appears he has lied or misled parliament, the report as sent is set to miss out many significant facts. The full report had been nearly ready last week. However, the decision of the Met to investigate alleged offences means what has been sent to Johnson is expected to include minimal mention of a series of alleged social events. Johnson’s official spokesperson said all that Gray sent would be published in full, but declined to say whether her full findings would be released once any Met investigation was completed. “At this stage, we will need to consider what might be appropriate, and we will be discussing with the independent Cabinet Office team in due course about what might be appropriate,” he said. “But at the moment it’s unclear how the ongoing Met police investigation might interact with any further work on that.” Ed Davey, the Liberal Democrat leader, said it was as disgraceful as it was predictable that No 10 would not commit to the full report ever being published. He said: “Boris Johnson must confirm that the full report will be published as soon as possible. Every day it is delayed prolongs the pain for the millions across the country who just want answers and for justice to be done.” The Met asked Gray last week to make “minimal reference” in her inquiry report to matters its officers were investigating, which are expected to be the most serious allegations. When allegations of parties first emerged, Johnson told parliament he had obeyed all lockdown rules, and that he knew nothing of any parties at No 10, even though subsequent evidence showed he had personally attended what appeared to be social events. A prime minister misleading parliament is regarded as a resignation issue. Speaking to reporters on a visit to Essex on Monday, Johnson insisted he had been truthful, saying: “I stick absolutely to what I’ve said in the past.” Asked about warnings that the inquiry would be a whitewash because of the changes, he said: “You are going to have to wait and see both what Sue says and, of course, what the Met says.” Many Conservative MPs have been waiting to see if the findings include evidence of rule-breaking or misleading statements by the prime minister. If 54 Tory MPs submit letters to Graham Brady, the chair of the influential 1922 Committee, Johnson will face a vote of no confidence. However, if much of the report is missing because of the police investigation, many might find it hard to reach a conclusion, giving the PM some respite. The investigation, launched in December, was led originally by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary. He stepped down from the inquiry soon after the process began after reports that his office had also held a social event. Gray, who was director general of propriety and ethics in the Cabinet Office from 2012 to 2018, took over the inquiry in mid-December.Norma Waterson, who has died aged 82, was one of the finest and most versatile singers of the British folk revival. She spent most of her life singing traditional songs, many from her native east Yorkshire, in two highly successful groups, the Watersons and Waterson:Carthy, in which she was joined by other members of her family. But her no-nonsense, soulful and unashamedly emotional approach was well-suited to a wide variety of other musical styles, as she displayed in the solo recordings and collaborations with Eliza Carthy, her daughter, that won her a following far beyond the folk scene. She was a hard-working, prolific artist who refused to stop recording or touring, and was singing as well in her 70s as she had in her 20s. Her final album, Anchor (2018), was the second that she had recorded with Eliza, and was a typically varied and experimental affair. It included Norma singing lead on a dramatic, jazz-edged treatment of the Tom Waits song Strange Weather and on a gently powerful version of Nick Lowe’s The Beast in Me. The duo’s award-winning debut album, Gift (2010), was followed by a tour, during which Norma fell seriously ill, suffering from heart problems. She recovered, and returned to her home in Robin Hood’s Bay, on the Yorkshire coast, cared for by her husband, the singer and guitarist Martin Carthy, and Eliza. Although she found it hard to travel, she wanted to continue singing, and performed at the local annual festival, Normafest, set up in her honour. Her last such appearance was in January 2018. Norma was brought up in the port of Hull, Yorkshire, by her maternal grandmother, Eliza Ward, partly of Irish Gypsy descent, who ran a second-hand shop during the second world war. Norma’s parents, Florence and Charles, died when she was very young and she spent much of her childhood looking after her younger brother Mike and sister Elaine, better known as Lal. It was a time, Norma said, when “most people had a piano in the parlour. We didn’t have a telly but my grandma knew all the music hall songs and we listened to pop music on Radio Luxembourg”. The children sang together around the house, and formed a group, the Mariners, during the trad jazz and skiffle era of the 1950s. From American folk, they became increasingly interested in the English tradition. They started a folk club in a Hull pub, the Blue Bell, and changed their name to the Watersons. The group consisted of Norma, Mike and Lal, and their second cousin John Harrison, and they transformed the 60s folk revival in Britain partly because they dressed like any other fashion-conscious young musicians of the time (they were nicknamed the “folk Beatles”), but mostly because of their attacking, unaccompanied harmony treatment of ancient English songs. As Mike commented at the time “we’re earthy, like the Rolling Stones”. He and Norma handled most of the lead vocals, with Lal providing often highly adventurous harmonies – this was a group that followed no traditional rules. As Norma explained: “If you couldn’t find a note, you sang a harmony.” The Watersons’ first album, Frost and Fire (1965), was followed by The Watersons and A Yorkshire Garland. The group were widely praised but split up in 1968, exhausted from touring. Norma’s first marriage (in 1958), to Eddie Anderson, had also ended, and now she spent time away from her brother and sister, moving to Montserrat in the West Indies, where she worked as a DJ. When she returned in 1972, she married Carthy, who joined the reformed Watersons, taking the place of Harrison. The new line-up recorded three albums, For Pence and Spicy Ale (1975), Sound, Sound Your Instruments of Joy (1977) and Green Fields (1981). In 1977 Norma also recorded the album A True Hearted Girl with Lal. In 1976, all three siblings and their families moved to Kirk Moor, a group of isolated farming cottages on the edge of the North York Moors. It is an exquisite, remote location, reached down a narrow lane that can be snowbound in winter, and was known to local villagers as “the hippy commune”. The arrangement ended in the late 80s when Norma and Lal and their families moved to Robin Hood’s Bay. Lal left the Watersons in 1990, but Norma kept working in a new group, Waterson:Carthy, in which she was joined by her husband and daughter. This group differed from the Watersons because it made use of instrumental backing, with Martin Carthy demonstrating his celebrated guitar work and Eliza playing the fiddle. Waterson:Carthy recorded six albums, first as a trio (on Waterson:Carthy, 1994 and Common Tongue, 1997), then with Saul Rose joining them on melodeon (Broken Ground, 1999), and later with Tim van Eyken taking his place (A Dark Light, 2002, Fishes and Fine Yellow Sand, 2004 and Holy Heathens and the Old Green Man, 2006). They concentrated on English traditional songs, but also included material from the Bahamas, the US, or a song by Mike. Norma was also part of the occasional folk harmony “super-group” Blue Murder. On their 2002 album, No One Stands Alone, she was joined by Martin and Eliza, Mike and the vocal trio Barry Coope, Jim Boyes and Lester Simpson, for a set that included a rousing treatment of Mike’s Rubber Band. Norma was one of the finest exponents of English traditional songs, but displayed her love of other styles in her eclectic and soulful solo albums. Norma Waterson (1996) included songs by Jerry Garcia and Robert Hunter of the Grateful Dead, Elvis Costello, Richard Thompson and Lal, as well as the self-composed Hard Times Heart. The album was nominated for a Mercury prize, an award usually associated with pop and rock rather than folk, and very nearly won – the prize went instead to Pulp’s Different Class. Three years later, she expanded her range with The Very Thought of You, which included an emotional (but never sentimental) reworking of Over the Rainbow, and Love of My Life, by Freddie Mercury – along with the first recording of Lal’s angry Reply to Joe Haines, written after Harold Wilson’s former press secretary had written what Lal thought to be a deeply offensive article about Mercury’s death from Aids. In 2000, Norma recorded her first solo album of traditional songs, Bright Shiny Morning. With the album Gift, and the subsequent tour, she brought all these different musical influences together. She had suffered from a series of health problems, and had difficulty in walking, but was still in magnificent voice and handled the majority of the solos during the tour. At the BBC folk awards in 2011, Gift was named album of the year, and the song Poor Wayfaring Stranger, taken from the album, best traditional track. In 2016 she received a BBC folk awards lifetime achievement award. She was made MBE in 2002. Her last London concert, at which she appeared alongside Eliza at the Union Chapel, in 2010, was recorded and released as The Gift Band – Live on Tour album. It provided a triumphant and suitably emotional summary of her career. She told her audience that “it’s hard to stick to just one kind of music”, before joining her daughter for a set that included folk songs, contemporary songs by Thompson, the slow and emotional Dreaming, written for her by Loudon Wainwright, along with the gloriously tuneful Bunch of Thyme, a song about mortality, and songs she had learned in her childhood. Between songs, she chatted to the audience in the same easy-going and humorous way that she chatted to those who visited her home. Lal died in 1998; and Mike in 2011. Norma is survived by Martin and Eliza; and by Tim, her son from her first marriage. • Norma Christine Waterson, singer, born 15 August 1939; died 30 January 2022Shot in a Victorian hothouse in South Africa with a mixed cast of local actors and the odd imported Brit – including Jessica Alexander, soon be seen in Disney’s live-action The Little Mermaid – this tense dystopian horror-thriller feels geographically non-specific, almost as if it were taking place in some kind of dream world. That touch of hazy vagueness is just right for SA director and co-writer Kelsey Egan’s cracking feature debut (co-written with Emma Lungiswa De Wet) which imagines a family of survivors hiding out in the title’s botanical conservatory after a pandemic has ravaged most of the world’s population. The invisible threat here is an airborne virus called “the shred” which wipes out memories and leaves its victims in a bestial state, unable to remember even their own names. A matriarchal woman known only as Mother (Adrienne Pearce) guides her three female progeny – cautious Evie (Anja Taljaard), dreamy Bee (Alexander) and adolescent Daisy (Kitty Harris), alongside shred-infected brother Gabe (Brent Vermeulen) – by teaching them how to garden (they have to pollinate the plants themselves because the bees are all gone), to read, paint, and pass on the stories of the Before Times. Most importantly of all, they’ve ritualised the practice of killing anyone who comes near their home; then they eat the best bits of the invader and compost the rest to fertilise the pumpkin and strawberry plots. (This so relatable because so many of us got into gardening over lockdown as well as learning new skills around the house.) But when a handsome young man (Hilton Pelser) who seems unscathed by the shred arrives and the women only injure instead of killing him, they warily nurse him back to health. Could he be their long lost brother Luca, who left years ago as a teenager? Without any means of recording people’s faces – other than painting – fallible, fragile memory is all they have to go on. Egan and her team have dressed the cast in floaty white linens with lace and quasi-Victorian accessories, so they all look like Picnic at Hanging Rock; it is a dainty, craft-centric look that makes a refreshing change from the Burning Man bric-a-brac of most post-apocalyptic cinema. Plus it evokes the American civil war-era-set drama The Beguiled, made originally with Clint Eastwood in 1971 and then remade recently by Sofia Coppola, which is also a story about an injured man infiltrating a female-dominated space. Glasshouse takes the resulting themes and really runs with them, working up the material into a sinister, seductive meditation on memory, desire and loss. • Glasshouse is released on 7 February on digital platforms.For the past fortnight Sue Gray’s report on “partygate” has been hovering over Downing Street like a huge vulture, seeking only somewhere to land. A redacted version is expected imminently. In the meantime, Boris Johnson is panicking. For partygate he has substituted policygate, a wild orgy of populist pronouncements designed to show he is still in charge. If Johnson cannot lie himself out of trouble, perhaps he can bribe himself out of it. What do you want, everyone? I would get the Treasury to let you off extra taxes, if only that mean Rishi Sunak would let me. I can promise help with gas bills and heating allowances. I can shower the north of England with money and mayors. I can let you visit your loved ones in care homes, perhaps. I can even get on a plane, fly east and pretend to threaten Vladimir Putin with war. I can remind the country of my Brexit triumph by cutting £1bn in bureaucracy. I can let NHS staff off vaccinations and get tough on oligarchs’ boltholes. I can promise to sack the Downing Street madhouse staff and move my office to the House of Commons tearoom. I can leave Carrie in charge. British government is experiencing the reality of personality politics. There is no cabinet government, just cabals of courtiers, rivals and enemies. There is no democratic legislature, just an alternative court in waiting. Leadership has no recourse to ideology, to principles, even to a programme. Party has no meaning beyond opinion polls. The one guiding fixation of the UK government is its leader’s desire to stay in power. It is unlikely that the outcome of the contest between Sue Gray’s report on partygate and the Metropolitan police’s inquiry was a deliberate save-Johnson tactic. That suggests a cunning beyond the wit of the present Downing Street. It rather indicates the collapse of parliament as any sort of monitor of standards in public life. But, at the end of the day, Gray will have taken the heat off the prime minister. He has been given a last desperate throw of the dice. That it takes the imminence of defenestration to concentrate Johnson’s mind on government is comment enough on his leadership. His posturing against Russia is an absurd diversion. He has lost his battle with Sunak on the rise in national insurance. His daily one-man conduct of the health sector is whimsical and extravagant. The cabinet and parliamentary party are now aware, with varying degrees of explicitness, that they have a prime minister unable to conduct coherent cabinet government. His usefulness to them has solely been to win elections. He has done this in the past through charm. He now seeks to do it by brazen survival instinct, by fight not flight. The moment to topple Johnson was by a vote of his MPs a fortnight ago. The Sue Gray/Cressida Dick fiasco has awarded him time to assemble his fair-weather friends and cajole, bribe and bully them into giving him another chance. Johnson’s patronage, like his VIP contracts, must have yielded some tidy debts to be called in. There is a sense in Westminster that his darkest hour may have passed. The vulture still hovers, but Johnson’s luck has held and its feathers appear to have been plucked, at least for a while. And in politics a while is an age. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistA northern English outpost of the Eden Project has moved a step closer to reality after councillors in Lancashire granted planning permission for the £125m eco-attraction. Eden Project North, which would be built in giant, transparent domes on Morecambe’s promenade, is being presented to government as a “shovel-ready” initiative that could help boost the deprived seaside town. Eden has asked for £70m in public money towards the £125m educational project, which it says will “reimagine the British seaside resort for the 21st century”. The investment would inject £200m a year into the north-west economy, it says. An estimated 400 people would be directly employed at Eden Project North, which will combine a range of indoor and outdoor experiences all based on connecting people with Morecambe Bay and helping them to understand and protect the marine environment. The attraction could open in 2024 if the government stumps up the necessary startup cash. The latest milestone for the Morecambe project comes after years of development and extensive community consultation. David Harland, the chief executive of Eden Project International, said: “The project is now definitively shovel-ready and a compelling financial case has been made to government. We are primed and ready to create this beacon to a green and sustainable future, be part of ‘levelling up’ and drive economic and social enhancements across the region. “While we are incredibly proud of what we and our partners have achieved so far, we now need UK government support to quickly bring this to fruition and maintain momentum.” Caroline Jackson, the leader of Lancaster city council, said: “Eden Project North promises to be the most significant project in our district for a generation. It will provide huge benefits to our economy through a commitment to local purchasing and creation of good local jobs, as well as shining a light on sustainable regeneration. “The granting of planning permission is a major milestone in the project and all that remains now is for the government to show the same commitment and provide the necessary funding to make it a reality.” David Morris, the local Conservative MP, said: “I have been meeting with ministers for quite some time now and we are in the advanced stages of securing a funding package to allow the project to start being built. “Planning being granted gives this funding ask greater precedence and I look forward to being able to make a further announcement shortly on the work I have been doing with ministers behind the scenes.”Output from China’s manufacturing sector slowed to its weakest in almost two years in January as the country’s tough anti-Covid measures forced factories into temporary shutdowns. A monthly snapshot of industry in the world’s second biggest economy showed production being hard hit by Beijing’s zero-tolerance approach to the pandemic. The Caixin/Markit purchasing managers’ index dropped from 50.9 in December to 49.1 in January – putting pressure on China’s policymakers to step up support for the flagging economy. A reading below 50 suggests output is contracting rather than expanding, with January’s figure the weakest since February 2020, when blanket restrictions were in force during the first wave of the Covid-19 virus. Wang Zhe, a senior economist at Caixin Insight Group, said: “Over the past month, there were Covid-19 flare-ups in several regions in China, underscoring the downward pressure on the economy. “Both supply and demand in the manufacturing sector weakened. Several regions tightened epidemic control measures following the resurgence, which impacted production and sales of manufactured goods. The subindexes for output and total new orders in January fell to their lowest since August. Overseas demand shrank at an even faster pace.” Wang said the spread of the Omicron variant overseas hit China’s external demand, with the gauge for new export orders in January the lowest in 20 months. Craig Botham, the chief China economist at Pantheon Macro, said: “A spike in Covid cases – a mix of Delta and Omicron – is the primary driver of the slowdown in January, along with factory closures ahead of the lunar new year holiday, and a smattering of production limits to limit air pollution during the Winter Olympics.” Meanwhile, growth figures for the eurozone showed output in the single currency zone has returned to pre-pandemic levels. According to the EU’s statistical agency, Eurostat, gross domestic product in the eurozone rose by 0.3% in the final three months and by 5.2% in 2021 as a whole. The quarterly growth rate eased from the 2.3% recorded in the third quarter, following the reintroduction of restrictions to slow the spread of the virus. A breakdown by country found a marked divergence in growth, with the eurozone’s biggest economy, Germany, contracting by 0.7%, while France, Italy and Spain – the next largest – all expanded. France grew by 0.7% in the final three months of 2021, Italy by 0.6% and Spain by 2%. Fourth-quarter growth figures for the UK have yet to be released.Another week, another war of words between the British Horseracing Authority (BHA) and the Professional Jockeys Association (PJA): two bodies which seem to be, for the moment at least, in a state of perpetual antipathy. The latest dispute concerns the BHA’s announcement last week that the 3lb Covid allowance for riders, which has been in place since June 2020, will be replaced by a general 2lb rise in the weights from 26 March. The allowance was introduced when racing emerged from lockdown in June 2020, but with weighing-room saunas off-limits to maintain social distancing. Jockeys – or the 250 or so who responded to a survey – subsequently voted to keep the saunas closed, but apparently in the expectation that the 3lb allowance would be retained. Instead, the BHA – which also consulted with trainers as any rise in the weights has potential welfare implications at the other end of the scale – has opted for a general 2lb rise. A pound – or 453g in new money – might not sound like very much, and for some riders at least, it is not. For others, though, the ones who are engaged in an eternal battle against their own bodies, it feels as if the BHA is, fairly literally, insisting on its pound of flesh. Adam Kirby, last year’s Derby winner, is certainly in that group, and was one of the first to criticise the BHA’s plan last week. “I don’t get why the allowance was a problem in the first place,” Kirby told Sky Sports Racing. “Three pounds is a massive help to us. It’s no hindrance whatsoever to the horses. Track records have been broken and horse soundness is good.” The BHA, on the other hand, would argue that it needs to see the issue more generally, and take the views of other stakeholders into account. That includes both trainers and owners, who would rightly be concerned about the effect of rising weights on young horses in particular – the great majority of Flat horses, after all, are still growing and developing throughout their careers – and also the sport’s other major source of funding: the punters. In this respect, the BHA is rightly concerned about an increasing disparity in recent years between the published weights on the racecards and the actual weight in a horse’s saddle. Riders already get an allowance for their body protector, which was raised from 2lb to 3lb when the more effective Level Two protector became mandatory in 2018. Flat jockeys also get a further 1lb “warm clothing” allowance in the winter months. With the Covid allowance too, this means that the rider of a horse set to carry top weight of 9st 12lb in a Flat handicap this afternoon will actually tip the scales at 10st 5lb without being flagged as “overweight”. There is, of course, an argument that the relative weight is what matters, and that Horse A is still be giving 2lb to B if that is what their respective handicap marks say it should. But this assumes, for instance, that the relationship between weight carried and a horse’s performance is linear, even as actual burdens increase well beyond 10st. Dale Gibson, the acting chief executive of the PJA following the recent departure of Paul Struthers, has suggested that there is data – as yet unpublished – which shows that “the 3lb allowance was not affecting results”. Nor is it entirely clear how many jockeys will be seriously affected by the change. How many, for instance, were using saunas on a regular basis in the first place? Was it something that many jockeys resorted to occasionally, or a handful used almost daily? Top weights in Flat handicaps in 2019 – the only full year in which the 3lb allowance was in place – actually had a better strike rate (19%) than in any of the five years from 2015 to 2019, when it was 17.25% overall and ranged from 16.86% to 17.91%, which does not suggest that the unpublished extra poundage has held them back. In a general sense, though, it seems only fair and right that the gap between published and actual weights should be minimised as much as possible. On the other hand, riders have been getting taller, stronger and therefore heavier for decades and there is no reason to think the trend will stop any time soon. The sport needs several hundred healthy, professional and dedicated jockeys to maintain the punters’ supply of competitive races, many of whom, on the Flat in particular, will be maintaining a body weight from one year to the next that their genes have an issue with. The latest 2lb is unlikely to be the last, in other words, and when a rider like Kirby – who is at the sharpest end of that daily struggle right now – speaks out, it is probably a good time to listen.The prime minister and chancellor have bolted themselves together in a mutual destruction pact. Come hell or high water, the national insurance rise will happen, rudely snubbing a campaign by the Daily Mail. The Tory right wants no tax rises and no spending, while Labour wants the highest tax burden to be paid by those who have the most. But instead of hitting older people, or the unearned income of rich people, this tax will be paid by young people. It’s a political shocker: the NI rise will take £255 a year from typical earnings, in perfect synchronicity with the explosion in fuel bills, council tax rises and inflation, which is on track to reach 6% by April. The government has also ruled out abolishing VAT on fuel, another regressive tax. This is an epic case of political and policy mismanagement. The tax hike is intended to keep Boris Johnson’s pledge to solve social care “once and for all”. But virtually none of the money from this tax hike will reach care. Most of it will be consumed by the 6 million-long NHS waiting list. Johnson’s promise that “nobody needing care should be forced to sell their home to pay for it” is so badly framed that it will reverse his promises to “level up” the UK: the regressive £86,000 cap paid by everyone with property or savings is a flat tax, so those in the north with cheaper properties may lose everything, while owners of more valuable southern homes can expect to pay just a portion of their wealth. Every aspect of this policy seems designed to anger almost everyone while failing to tackle the real crisis that leaves a million and a half people with no care, while care homes and domiciliary services tumble into bankruptcy. The government has proposed no real reforms to this chaotic system. One of Margaret Thatcher’s most destructive privatisation programmes was forcing councils to shed care homes by only subsidising residents in private homes. The result was that a hotch-potch of private providers emerged in the following years, from small family businesses to huge private-equity companies and property asset-strippers that loaded care homes with debt. There has always been tension over the division between NHS and social care. The health and care bill now bumping through parliament creates “integrated care systems”, designed to pool resources between councils and the NHS. This may work in some co-operative areas, but it’s already clear that merging two hard-pressed sectors is too fraught to work. Who’s to blame for record numbers of NHS beds blocked this winter by patients waiting for social care? Even before Covid, these numbers were rising. From 2014-15, there were 1.6m total delayed bed days in England, when frail people languished in hospital due to the lack of a care package or care home place. Gaining only a nugatory share of this new levy, local authorities, which have suffered severe cuts over the last decade, still won’t be able to afford to put more money towards social care. But here, for once, is a bright glimmer of light. As far away from Westminster as NHS England stretches, Northumbria Healthcare trust is showing how health and social care can be merged – and it is doing so by reversing Thatcher’s social care privatisation. It is insourcing care, bringing it under the wing of the NHS. Sir James Mackey, chief executive of the Northumbria Healthcare NHS Foundation, returned in 2017 from a secondment to a national role as head of NHS improvement, full of innovations. Here’s how the Northumbrian plan works: Mackey’s trust has bid for social care contracts from local authorities that would usually be awarded to private providers. The NHS foundation will seamlessly integrate domiciliary care within the health service. Mackey plans to build care homes to take over residential contracts too, if he can raise the capital. Here is a smooth transition without bottlenecks between the two sectors, with health and social care funded from the same budget, with every incentive to stop people needing a hospital bed and to get them home quicker when they do. Better still, Northumbria is integrating what will be 250 care staff between the two services, so they are all on the same NHS agenda for change pay scale, preventing the flight of underpaid care workers to other sectors. Where care was often a dead-end job, Northumbria offers an NHS career path with training for everyone from porters and cleaners upwards. How can Mackey afford more generous pay, I ask? “Private equity takes 8-10% in profit, but we can spend that on better conditions for staff. I want home carers to have the chance to become directors of nursing,” he says. To this end, he is seeking to build a health and care training academy and has helped to set up a profitable factory making scrubs and PPE. “Why buy from China when we can employ people here?” Next comes a laundry and a sterile services unit, such as the NHS used to run in the days before outsourcing. What’s the catch? This fortunate trust is exceptional. It has less debt than most, fewer vacancies and a waiting list backlog so short it will probably be gone by April. Northumbria’s problems are social, Mackey says: “High unemployment, inequality, poor education cause the worst disease burden. Levelling up? Give us the money to do what we need locally.” Trusts around the country are flocking to see how Northumbria does it, though most are too sunk under debts, mile-long waiting lists and workforce crises to follow this path. Imagine if they could. The NHS could solve the social care crisis with a seamless gold-standard service that is as good for care staff as it is for patients. But first the health service needs to be freed from the crushing pressures it faces after a decade during which it has received the lowest ever level of funding. Instead, the Johnson-Sunak NI tax rise comes with no plan for any solution. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist This article was amended on 4 February 2022. An earlier version mentioned Northumbria University in connection with a possible training academy. The academy plan has yet to partner with a university.Kamala Harris, then vice-president-elect, drove within yards of a pipe bomb left outside the Democratic National Committee on January 6 2021 and remained inside for nearly two hours before the bomb was found, it was reported on Monday. Harris’s proximity to the bomb was known previously, but not how close or for how long. CNN reported the new details in the case, part of alarming events in Washington on the day Congress met to certify Joe Biden’s election victory over Donald Trump. A pipe bomb was also left near the Republican National Committee. More than a year later, no suspect has been named or apprehended. Citing “multiple sources”, CNN said Harris “pulled into DNC headquarters in Washington at around 11.30am ET with her motorcade through the garage leading to the parking deck near where law enforcement discovered the pipe bomb”. It also cited a US Capitol police document that showed “an unnamed ‘protectee’ was removed from the DNC building at approximately 1.14pm ET – seven minutes after Capitol Police began investigating the bomb”. That protectee was known to be Harris when Politico first reported the story, but it was not known how long she was in the building. More than 700 people have been charged in connection with the attack on the Capitol on January 6, including 11 members of a far-right militia who face charges of seditious conspiracy. One rioter pleaded guilty to bringing with him Molotov cocktails, guns and other weapons. The rioters attacked after Donald Trump told them to “fight like hell” in service of his lie that his defeat by Biden was the result of electoral fraud. Seven people died and more than 100 police officers were injured. Trump was impeached but acquitted. A House committee has recommended criminal charges. Steve Bannon, a former Trump adviser, has pleaded not guilty to contempt of Congress. The White House and Harris’s office did not comment on CNN’s pipe bomb report. A Secret Service spokesperson told CNN that “in order to maintain operational security”, it did not comment on protection arrangements. CNN said a “law enforcement source” said the Secret Service “swept the interior of the building, the driveway, parking deck and entrances and exits prior to [Harris’s] arrival” and Harris was “evacuated using an alternate route away from the bomb”. Earlier this month, Lis Wiehl, a former prosecutor and author of a book on the hunt for the Unabomber, told the Atlantic would-be bombers were usually “trying to send a message through killing people”. Of the Capitol Hill pipe bomber, she said: “Because it wasn’t successful and they weren’t apprehended, you can bet they’re thinking about doing it again – and doing it better.”Washington and its allies have prepared a list of Russian elites in or near Vladimir Putin’s inner circle who would be hit with economic sanctions if the Kremlin were to order an invasion of Ukraine, according to a US briefing. The language in the briefing by a US official to Reuters is notably similar to that used on Sunday by the UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who said Britain would introduce legislation to allow banks, energy companies and “oligarchs close to the Kremlin” to be targeted by London, and makes clear the targeting would be coordinated internationally. “The individuals we have identified are in or near the inner circles of the Kremlin and play a role in government decision-making or are at a minimum complicit in the Kremlin’s destabilising behavior,” the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Names were not made available but the official said the sanctions list would consist of elite figures – or oligarchs – plus their family members. “There is a broad list of individuals we can pull from,” the official told Reuters, noting that some would be from a classified list of senior Russian political figures and oligarchs outlined in section 241 of the Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act in a report sent to the US Congress in 2018. That list contains 114 “senior political figures” – though not Putin himself – and a further 96 “oligarchs”, although it is three years out of date. “Putin’s cronies will no longer be able to use their spouses or other family members as proxies to evade sanctions. Sanctions would cut them off from the international financial system and ensure that they and their family members will no longer able to enjoy the perks of parking their money in the west and attending elite western universities,” the official added. A shorter list of eight named individuals was published a year ago by an ally of the jailed opposition leader Alexei Navalny, selected from a longer, unreleased list of 35. Their number included the Chelsea football club owner, Roman Abramovich, and the metals magnate Alisher Usmanov, who has links to Everton FC. That list appears to have inspired other efforts by US lawmakers to sanction Kremlin insiders, including the recently introduced Putin Accountability Act, which targets an identical roster of 35 Russian oligarchs and top officials. It is not known if Abramovich or Usmanov appear on the sanctions list briefed by the US on Monday. Both have denied they are close to the Kremlin. The UK’s announcement of new legislation targeting Russian entities and people drew a fierce response from the Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, who described the proposed measures as an “outright attack on business” and threatened retaliation. “The statements made in London are very disquieting,” Peskov said during a telephone briefing. “I believe they not just make us, our companies, worry, they also demonstrate a significant degree of London’s unpredictability, which is a reason for serious concern of international financial institutions and business entities.” Peskov did not specifically respond to threats against wealthy Russians close to Putin, but he described the threat of sanctions as illegitimate, saying they would harm Russian and British business interests. “We should call a spade a spade: sanctions are something legitimate, formalised by a resolution of the UN security council, while here we are dealing with an outright attack on business,” he said during the call. The anti-corruption campaigner Bill Browder called on Britain to target Russian oligarchs close to Putin with economic sanctions to halt any invasion of Ukraine. The US-born financier believes the most effective means of getting the Russian president’s attention is to target his finances and the finances of those closest to him, and that there should be no need for the UK to wait and see if there is a war. “They should sanction five oligarchs tomorrow. That would show there is political will to do this. Then [they] should sanction another five if they don’t pull back in the 10 days, and the top 50 if they invade,” Browder told the Guardian. Truss is expected to unveil legislation in the Commons on Monday afternoon to allow Britain to target companies and elite individuals.My friend William Blackburn, who has died aged 92, was an American businessman who – before the arrival of Häagen-Dazs and Baskin-Robbins – introduced the British to ice-cream flavours from the US. Horrified by his first bite into the English product, Bill saw a golden market waiting for an entrepreneur. His New England Ice Cream Company, set up in London in 1972, was soon selling its delicious flavours from ice-cream parlours in some of the city’s department stores, including Harrods, Debenhams and Barkers. Bill was born in Evanston, Illinois, to Oliver Blackburn, a company secretary at Kraft Cheese, and his wife, Phrania (nee Carver). At New Trier high school in Winnetka he proved himself to be an excellent pianist and after attending Princeton University, where he majored in comparative literature, he went on to the Harvard Law School for two years, until his studies were forcibly interrupted by military service in the Korean war. The army seems to have turned him against the discipline of the law, because, on his return to civilian life he instead plunged into Chicago’s advertising world. From there he moved to New York and joined one of the oldest and largest American advertising companies, Benton &amp; Bowles. There he worked for big name businesses such as Procter and Gamble, for whom he created the brand name Pampers for “the first flushable and disposable nappy”. In 1962 he was transferred to work in their London office, but soon broke away to found his own London-based advertising company, Blackburn Daley. In London, Bill continued his interest in the piano with instruction from the celebrated pianist and teacher Maria Donska, and his house became a place for musical evenings, where you might meet the likes of Stephen Spender, Anthony Sampson, Freddie Ayer, Humphrey Burton and Julia O’Faolain. I first met William and his wife, Susan (nee Smith), in the early 1970s and found him a most attractive man with a strong Christian faith – amiable, social, relaxed, always a keen reader, and something of a thinker. In 1978, following Susan’s death from breast cancer, Bill channelled his grief into a charitable endeavour to honour and memorialise her. Together with Susan’s sister, Emilie (Mimi) Kilgore, he established the first and still most prestigious award for female playwrights, the Susan Smith Blackburn prize, which is awarded annually to women from around the world who have written works of outstanding quality for the English-speaking theatre. Since the prize’s foundation, 10 Susan Smith Blackburn finalist plays have subsequently won the Pulitzer prize for drama. In 1987 Bill married the fashion designer Perri Thompson and went into business with her, forming the fashion company Perri Ashby. His artistic zest never flagged, and even during the last decade of his life he recorded himself playing Chopin, Schubert, Mozart, and Beethoven. He is survived by Perri, their daughter Christabel, two children from his first marriage, Lucy and Adam, and seven grandchildren.Manchester City have signed the River Plate forward Julián Álvarez on a deal until 2027, paying an initial £14m for the Argentina international. The 22-year-old will continue on loan at the Argentinian club until at least July. The highly sought-after Álvarez has five caps and the City director of football, Txiki Begiristain, said: “Julián is a player we have monitored for some time. He is capable of operating in a number of attacking roles, and we firmly believe he’s one of the best young attacking players in South America. “I am so happy we have managed to bring him to Manchester City. I really believe we can provide him with the right conditions to fulfil his potential and become a top player.” Álvarez has been with River since 2015, made his debut in October 2018 and has scored 36 goals in 96 first-team appearances. He got his senior international debut in a World Cup qualifier against Chile in June last year, replacing Ángel Di María after an hour, and was part of the squad that won the Copa América in July.Senior ministers in the Welsh and Scottish governments have furiously criticised “last-minute and cack-handed” plans from the Conservatives to scrap or amend thousands of EU rules. The move – nicknamed the “Brexit freedoms bill” – has also raised alarm from constitutional experts who said it would make it easier for ministers to bulldoze through important parliamentary scrutiny. Senior sources in the devolved governments have accused the UK government of failing to properly consult ministers in Edinburgh, Cardiff and Stormont, even though the proposals, released on Monday by No 10, will have a significant impact on hundreds of areas controlled by devolved governments. One source said the Welsh, Scottish and Northern Irish parliaments first learned an announcement was imminent when they were invited at 1.51pm last Friday to an unexpected meeting on Saturday with Suella Braverman, the attorney general. It involved ministers from all three devolved administrations and the cabinet ministers for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The source said Braverman was badly briefed and was unable to provide full answers to questions the Scottish government asked, even though the proposals had a direct impact on Scottish law and policy. “There were no meaningful answers at all,” said one source. Another said the meeting was “last-minute, fractious, and cack-handed”. Hannah White, the deputy director of the Institute for Government, said MPs needed to closely scrutinise the scope of ministers’ powers to change retained EU law without primary legislation. “Allowing ministers to repeal or modify fundamental rights embodied in retained EU law without full parliamentary scrutiny would be wrong,” she told the Guardian. Dr Ronan Cormacain, a senior research fellow at the Bingham Centre for the Rule of Law, said the proposal “appears to be proposing a system to change EU law which bypasses parliament. Under the guise of taking back control, it would appear that the executive is taking away control from parliament and giving it to ministers. “There is nothing wrong with making new laws that deviate from the EU. There is everything wrong with bypassing parliament to do so.” The devolved governments suspect the rushed launch of the proposals suggest UK government departments are under intense pressure to announce major policies to deflect attention from the “partygate” crisis threatening Boris Johnson’s premiership. Mick Antoniw, the Welsh government’s constitution minister, was described as furious. He said after the meeting the proposals would “drive a coach and horses through the concept of mutual consent”. There was no effort by the UK government to properly consult devolved governments on the details of the plans nor seek their views on their impacts on devolved areas of policy and law. Angus Robertson, the Scottish constitution affairs secretary, said the mishandling raised profound doubts about Boris Johnson’s pledge earlier in January to promote “mutual respect, maintaining trust and positive working” between the four governments, as part of a new ministerial council the prime minister would chair. Johnson’s initiative, instigated by Michael Gove, the UK minister for intergovernmental relations, followed increasingly angry complaints the UK government has failed to consult devolved leaders or to respect their independent policymaking over Brexit and its impacts, including reforms of the UK’s internal market. “Within days of the UK government promising more respectful ways of working, we were informed of what is clearly a rushed exercise over the weekend with nothing more than a vague verbal briefing,” Robertson said. “If these proposals involve changing the law in devolved policy areas, then pressing ahead without the consent of the Scottish parliament would demonstrate yet again the UK government’s intent to undermine devolution.” The areas affected by the proposed bill, which has yet to be published, include climate policy, agricultural rules, food safety, genetic modification, vehicle safety and industrial subsidies. Many of these areas are directly controlled by devolved parliaments. A UK government source said the devolved administrations’ criticisms were unjustified; meetings in government were often arranged at short notice. “They have been brought in at an early opportunity. That’s actually part of constructive engagement,” he said. “If they’d just read about it in the Sunday papers, they would’ve had a leg to stand on.”With Omicron ripping through the nation’s schools, and the rules on mask-wearing, travel testing and vaccine passports all in flux, the public might have expected to hear from Boris Johnson at the Downing Street podium in recent days. But the embattled prime minister last gave a Downing Street press conference almost four weeks ago, on 4 January. Instead, as partygate revelations have continued to emerge, we have seen him in a series of carefully-choreographed public appearances at a vaccine centre, a school or a green energy project. Occasionally, journalists are allowed to fire a few questions at him – but since a disastrous interview with Sky political editor, Beth Rigby, a fortnight ago he has submitted himself to little public scrutiny. Johnson’s image has always been carefully controlled. He employs a taxpayer-funded photographer on a salary of more than £100,000 a year, and his aides have long favoured scripted broadcast clips as a way of putting his message across directly to the public. And as he fights for his political life, Johnson’s every move is being as carefully controlled as it was during the 2019 general election campaign, when he dodged major interviews, and was so reluctant to answer impromptu questions that at one point he hid in a fridge. That bunker mentality is expected to continue this week, as Downing Street plans a flurry of announcements to distract Johnson’s own MPs from Sue Gray’s pared-back report and the ongoing police inquiry. Political journalists have travelled with previous prime ministers to Iraq and Afghanistan but when Johnson flies to Ukraine on Tuesday, he will do so without the scrutiny of a pack of pesky reporters – although one doughty wire journalist and one broadcast team will go along to record proceedings. Despite the humility he has awkwardly sought to display in his public apologies for lockdown-busting behaviour in Downing Street, by hot-footing it to Ukraine he appears determined to project political strength. That echoes the bullishness on display in the House of Commons last week as he confronted Keir Starmer, with Tory backbenchers roaring him on. Labour frontbencher Emily Thornberry, who shadowed Johnson when he was foreign secretary, calls it “strongman politics” – she has accused him of aping Donald Trump and the Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, in wanting to project a macho public image. When there were questions about Johnson’s health in the wake of his severe bout of Covid in 2020, he treated an interviewer from the Mail on Sunday– and their photographer – to a display of press-ups. Aside from tough guy, Johnson’s other winning public persona is the bumbling-but-likeable buffoon – perhaps the worst possible demeanour for a man accused of overseeing (or failing to notice) a slapdash party culture. It will be a sure sign that No 10 believes he has weathered the storm, if the prime minister returns to his bumbling old ways – but for the next perilous few days, his every utterance is likely to be carefully controlled, and the Downing Street podium kept firmly under wraps.Trix Worrell, creator and writer When I was at the National Film and Television School, Channel 4 was running a writers’ competition. Unbeknown to me, one of the actors in a play I’d written and directed sent my script off. When I got the call saying I’d won, I went, “Oh, fuck off!” and hung up, thinking it was a joke. But I got another call saying Humphrey Barclay, a producer, wanted to talk to me about doing a comedy. I thought: “I don’t really do comedy.” But I went to meet him, because he’s a legend. And on the bus there, we stopped on Queens Road in Peckham, London. I saw this barber’s called Fair Deal that I went to as a kid. It got me thinking. When I hit Humphrey’s office, I said: “I’ve got this idea set in a barber’s shop.” His face dropped all the way to Australia. He went: “Do you know how many sitcoms I get sent a week set in a barber’s shop?” I went: “This is not a barber’s shop – this is a community centre. This is where people can see, for the first time, a successful Black man running his own business. You don’t go there to get your hair cut! You go there to eat, watch sport and talk bollocks. You might get your haircut – but only if you give yourself three to four hours!” As soon as we started recording, the reaction was unbelievable. We were shooting in front of a live audience – and when jokes hit, they really went for it. People were laughing so hard, the sound man started complaining. It was so loud, we worried we wouldn’t be able to use the take. We’d have to say to the crowd: “Can you calm it down a bit?” Black Entertainment Television, a TV network in America, started showing Desmond’s which gave us a great platform. I met Whitney Houston, who told me how much she loved the show. I worked with Diddy. In fact, a lot of rappers were into Desmond’s big time. Ice Cube was a big fan – if you watch his first Barbershop film, it’s not too far from an episode of Desmond’s. I never wrote Desmond’s for Black people, though. I wrote it for white people. As far as certain newspapers were concerned, Black people patented mugging, but I wanted to show what actually happened behind closed doors. But do you know what gave me the greatest amount of joy about the show? The fact that its largest audience was in Northern Ireland. In a place where there weren’t Black communities, I was able to show them what we were really about. Ram John Holder, played Porkpie The BBC had offered me the lead part in a six-episode series, but I chose Desmond’s instead, because I loved the character of Porkpie. I just got him. It was also very attractive to me that Norman Beaton [who played Desmond] was going to be in the show. I’d known him for years and had worked with him before – I knew it would be good if he was involved. On set, it was such a marvellous, happy ensemble. The way we collaborated with each other and the camaraderie was great. We knew the neighbourhood, we knew those characters. We loved how it had been written. Norman and myself used to say: how can Trix, this young guy, get all these nuances of these West Indian characters? He was 30 years younger than us. He was a young boy. And he had somehow managed to create this incredible thing. I realised it was a hit after the very first series. When I’d go to the streets in my neighbourhood, people would start shouting, asking for my autograph, or running after me. In the early days, they’d always shout: “Desmond!” It didn’t matter who your character was. Even Carmen Munroe, who played Desmond’s wife Shirley, had “Desmond!” shouted at her. The thing I’m proudest of is that we reached people all over the world. I went to New York during the show’s run and the taxi driver from Kennedy airport wouldn’t take my fare! He said: “No, you’ve already given me so much pleasure!” And when I went to the Wembley concert to celebrate Nelson Mandela being released from prison, I actually met him. When he saw me, he did a double take – because he watched Desmond’s. • All episodes are available on demand at channel4.comIn the rain-sodden opening to the 1966 black and white BBC documentary, Travelling for a Living, a family of young folk singers are heading home to Hull. Big sister is driving the van, a cigarette pursed in her lips under her sharp, beatnik bob. She brooks absolutely no nonsense as she speaks about working-class culture being blitzed in the war, and how folk music can revive that community’s traditions. And then Norma Waterson sings, her full-blooded delivery coming straight from the gut, like torrenting water rushing over old stones. Waterson, whose death was announced this morning, was one of folk’s greatest voices, and one of folk’s greatest people: proud, forthright and open about the music she made. I interviewed her in 2010 with daughter Eliza, in the family home in Robin Hood’s Bay, Yorkshire, shortly before she suffered an ankle injury that led to cellulitis and septicaemia and a four-month coma. After the illness, she had to learn to walk and talk again. She was brusque and funny but also incredibly tender, her granddaughter Florence at her knee, her musician niece Marry popping round for tea and biscuits, the room filled with laughter. This warmth was at the heart of her as well as her toughness, and it sang loudly in her songs. Norma’s family band, the Watersons, helped to spearhead the folk revival in the 1960s, playing London’s Royal Albert Hall and touring across the UK. She managed them, prioritising the values of real life above any professional commitments: one week of gigs were always followed by a week off so they could practise together, read books, and spend plenty of time with their children. Her younger sister Lal, brother Mike and she were its core, and they sang together as they had ever since they were children (they were brought up by their grandmother, from a Gypsy family, after their parents died young). Their voices had a bone-jolting beauty together: the title of their first album, Frost and Fire, conveyed their elemental power, as did the ballads they chose to sing on it. Norma was also adventurous in her love of life and music. Following a man she loved to the Caribbean in 1968, she built up a huge calypso record collection there, and became a radio DJ for a few years. Her later records also boldly revealed her interests in music beyond British folk. Her 1996 self-titled solo album debut included songs by The Grateful Dead, Elvis Costello and modern blues and soul singer Ben Harper. Her last album with daughter Eliza Carthy, 2018’s Anchor, saw songs by Tom Waits, Nick Lowe and Eric Idle sitting alongside hardy traditionals. Waterson’s solo album is how I first encountered her. I was a Britpop-era indie kid, watching the Mercury prize on TV, and I remember the lightning bolt of seeing a woman her age – 56 – looking like women I knew from ordinary life, full of charisma and character. She sang gutsily, without any semblance of prettiness or ego. She nearly won the prize, too. So close was the Mercury result that the jury debated for nearly four hours, but characteristically, Norma wasn’t aggrieved. “I wanted to adopt Jarvis,” she told me (Pulp’s Different Class was the eventual winner). “He wanted me to adopt him, too.” The rest of her back catalogue holds numerous treasures, many of them with fascinating edges, rewarding appreciation from different perspectives. Her other two solo albums (1999’s The Very Thought of You and 2001’s Bright Shiny Morning) are more traditional but no less affecting: her take on Scottish ballad Barbara Allen is jolting in its simplicity, a cello and double bass echoing her depths. Her lead vocal on Red Wine and Promises, one of her contributions to sister Lal and brother Mike’s extraordinary 1972 album of folk-rock inspired originals, Bright Phoebus, is another high. Her rendition of a melancholy, drunken night out is accompanied by someone who was, back then, an old friend from the 1960s, Martin Carthy, on guitar: “the cheap red wine in me drunken brain / has left a burning flame in me belly,” she sings lustily. She and Carthy got together and married soon after. The couple kept on keeping things in the family. With daughter, Eliza (named after Norma’s grandmother) they formed Blue Murder and the more traditional Waterson: Carthy; Norma’s rugged voice operated like a central nervous system in both. Her largely unaccompanied 1977 record with Lal, A True Hearted Girl, is also an overlooked beauty, the sisters’ voices clashing and curling together like whipping northern winds. Norma was devastated to lose Lal in 1998, only a week after her cancer diagnosis. At the end of her life, ill-health beleaguered Norma, and the pandemic has been devastating for the family, bringing frightening financial pressures (Eliza recently set up a crowdfunder to help them through the recent winter). Throughout those last years, though, her family kept on bringing music into her life. In 2016, Eliza set up a festival, Normafest in Robin Hood’s Bay, to enable her mum to perform, and hired an old Methodist chapel in their home town to record Anchor live, renting Norma a house next door so she could “watch Corrie” and then come in to do her parts. “She comes alive when she sings,” Eliza said. And so she still does on record and camera, her legacy a living thing, those waters torrenting on.A British woman found guilty of fabricating a claim that she was gang-raped in a holiday resort in Cyprus has been vindicated after the island’s supreme court overturned the conviction. Two years after the then teenager received a suspended four-month sentence for fomenting public mischief, the court threw out the case, acknowledging she had not been given a fair trial. “This is a watershed moment,” said Michael Polak of the legal aid group Justice Abroad, who had coordinated the appeal against the conviction. “Not just for our client who has always maintained her innocence even when doing so caused her the hardship of not being able to return home during the lengthy trial proceedings, but also for others round the world in similar positions.” The verdict, he said, had been achieved “against the odds”. Persefoni Panayi, the British-born president of the supreme court, upheld the appeal against the conviction, although the three-member panel was divided, with one voting against. The Derbyshire student, now 21, had described in detail how she was raped by up to 12 Israelis in a hotel room in Ayia Napa in July 2019 after a night out with one of the tourists went horribly wrong. She had threatened to go to the European court of human rights if the effort to clear her name had failed on Monday. The guilty verdict, handed down by the district court judge Michalis Papathanasiou, had hinged on the Briton allegedly admitting she had falsified her original complaint. Her defence team had argued the handwritten confession, which formed the basis of the prosecution case, was extracted under duress, in the absence of a lawyer, or translator, after more than seven hours of police questioning. Papathanasiou had repeatedly refused to allow the defendant, as she stood in the dock, to speak about the assault, saying: “This is not a rape trial.” The retraction allowed the alleged assailants, who were aged between 15 and 22 and included the sons of senior Israeli officials, to immediately return home. The woman’s status changed overnight from victim to suspect and she spent four weeks in Nicosia general prison before being forced to remain on the Mediterranean island for a further six months as court proceedings dragged on. The woman, who has never been publicly named, was not in Nicosia to hear the news on Monday, with her lawyers describing their client as still too traumatised to travel. But in a statement, her mother responded to the outcome, saying: “It is a great relief we hear that the authorities in Cyprus have recognised the flaws in their legal process. Whilst this decision doesn’t excuse the way she was treated by the police, or the judge or those in authority, it does bring with it the hope that my daughter’s suffering will at least bring positive changes in the way victims of crime are treated.” Demonstrators who had gathered outside the capital’s supreme court cheered as Polak applauded the Briton’s “brave Cypriot female lawyers” who, he said, were repeatedly “shouted at and treated with contempt during the trial proceedings”. Some carried banners scrawled with the words “end rape culture” and “rape is a crime”. Women’s groups, which have deplored the handling of the case, believe the woman not only fell victim to macho culture but also to issues of diplomacy. At a time of heightened tensions in the eastern Mediterranean over offshore energy rights, the Greek Cypriot government has been keen to maintain close ties with Jerusalem. In Israel, where women’s rights activists have also come out in support for the university student, local media asked: “Will the boys now go on trial, or will we never find the truth?” Having denied any wrongdoing, most have spent the past two years in obligatory national service. Polak said he was pleased with the result, but he told the Guardian that for justice to be properly rendered a fresh investigation of the rape complaint would need to be conducted. In a 154-page dossier submitted before the supreme court, the defence team argued that the police inquiry into the teenager’s sexual assault claims was in breach of investigating standards. “We want the investigation to be transferred to a different police force so that all the evidence in this case can be considered fairly and dispassionately,” he said. “Cypriot authorities now have a duty to properly investigate the rape complaint because it is clear that was never done.”Belgian civil servants will no longer need to answer emails or phone calls out of hours after the country became the latest in Europe to offer workers the right to disconnect. The law, which comes into effect on Tuesday, means 65,000 federal officials are able to make themselves unavailable at the end of the normal working day unless there are “exceptional” reasons for not doing so. There are also government plans to extend the right to private-sector employees despite the opposition of some business groups. Petra De Sutter, the Belgian minister for public administration, said the law was necessary to combat a culture of people feeling they should always be available. That perception is said to have been exacerbated by the necessity to work from home during the Covid pandemic, a situation that is likely to lead to permanent changes in people’s habits. In a recent survey on remote working more than four out of five (84%) Belgians, of which 40% held managerial positions, said they would like to continue to work from home for two or more days a week post-pandemic. Without the right to disconnect, said De Sutter, “the result will be stress and burnout and this is the real disease of today”. The federal government is also examining a proposal to move to a four-day week of 38 to 40 hours for full-time staff, meaning longer working days but a three-day weekend. Belgium has followed a trend set in Europe by Volkswagen in Germany, which decided in 2012 to ban certain employees from accessing emails after hours in order to avoid burnout. In France, the sense that a different work-life balance needed to be struck was turned into action in 2017, when organisations with more than 50 workers were required to start negotiations to define the rights of employees to ignore their company smartphones and laptops. Portugal went further last year by approving legislation under which employers with more than 10 staff can be liable to fines if they text message, phone or email workers who are off the clock. Companies must help pay for expenses incurred by remote working. However, the Portuguese parliament rejected a proposal to include a legal right to switch off work-related messages and devices outside office hours. Last November, the European parliament backed a resolution calling on the European Commission to draft an EU-wide law that would protect workers who wished to “disconnect”. Alex Agius Saliba, a Maltese MEP, who drove the vote, said: “We cannot abandon millions of European workers who are exhausted by the pressure to be always ‘on’ and overly long working hours. “Now is the moment to stand by their side and give them what they deserve: the right to disconnect. This is vital for our mental and physical health. It is time to update worker’s rights so that they correspond to the new realities of the digital age.”Tony Blair, Gordon Brown and Keir Starmer were among friends and family to attend the funeral of the Labour MP Jack Dromey on Monday. The former leading trade unionist died aged 73 at his flat in his Birmingham constituency of Erdington, which he had represented in Westminster since 2010, on 7 January. Dromey, who was married to Labour’s former deputy leader Harriet Harman, “remade history many times over” throughout his political career, according to the former prime minister Gordon Brown. He told mourners at the funeral at St Margaret’s Church in Parliament Square, Westminster, to remember his “infectious enthusiasm”, “fighting spirit” and “relentless optimism”. He said: “From the start, Jack had a bigger mission, born of the intensity of his idealism and the courage of his convictions. “He saw wrongs and wanted to right them, injustices and wanted to resolve them, and where there was unfairness, there Jack always was, fighting it. “He was the ‘Jack of all campaigns’. ‘Four quick points’, he’d say when you met him, and there were usually eight. “And when he said ‘finally’ that meant there were at least three more proposals to be acted on, as he ran a seemingly endless succession of landmark, groundbreaking, often life-changing campaigns, and made and remade history many times over.” The former prime minister Tony Blair gave a bible reading, while Dromey’s daughter Amy Harman read an extract from her mother’s book A Woman’s Work. The current Labour leader, Keir Starmer, and deputy leader, Angela Rayner, were among those in attendance, with political figures from both sides of the house present to pay their respects. Starmer tweeted: “Today, we honour and remember our friend, Jack Dromey. Jack was highly respected across parliament for his lived commitment to social justice, which he pursued with humour and grace. “We will miss him. May he rest in peace. The father-of-three is understood to have died from natural causes.” Jess Phillips, the Labour MP for Birmingham Yardley, told the PA news agency: “It was brilliant and funny and beautiful and a testimony to Jack. “I just felt very much that Harriet and Jack will be very proud of their children who stood up very bravely and gave brilliant testimonies.” Dromey was born to Irish parents and raised in Kilburn, London. He became heavily involved in the trade unionist movement in the 1970s and had a prominent role in supporting a strike at the Grunwick film processing laboratory from 1976 to 1978, where he met Harman. The couple married in 1982 and had three children. Harman, approaching 40 years in parliament, announced last month she would step down at the next election. Dromey joined the Labour frontbench as shadow housing minister in 2010 under then leader Ed Miliband, who was also at the service. Announcing his death earlier this month, his family said: “He was a much-loved husband, father and grandfather and he will be greatly missed.” A byelection will be held in Dromey’s Birmingham Erdington seat, which Labour has held since it was re-established in 1974.Austria has lifted its “lockdown of the unvaccinated”, Switzerland is gearing up for a “turbo” reopening and Germany’s finance minister has demanded an end date for Covid curbs as more countries prepare to ease pandemic controls. It follows the Netherlands, Denmark, Belgium and France, who last week began to take steps to return to a semblance of normal life, with the Danish government declaring Covid-19 “should no longer be categorised as a socially critical disease” after 31 January. Although infections, driven by the highly transmissible Omicron variant, are still hitting record highs, data continues to show hospital and intensive care admissions are not surging in line with cases. Austria’s chancellor, Karl Nehammer, said that from next Saturday, shops and restaurants would be able to stay open until midnight and the maximum number of people able to participate in events would rise from 25 to 50. The country this week also became the first EU member state to make vaccination legally compulsory for adults under a law making those who refuse the jab liable for fines of up to €3,600 from mid-March, after an introductory phase. Nehammer’s announcement came as Austria lifted a lockdown that – while proving difficult to enforce – has in principle barred those who have not been jabbed from leaving their home except for essential reasons since 15 November. Restrictions on movement for the unvaccinated were lifted on Monday, although they remain barred from eating in restaurants or shopping for non-essential items as part of government efforts to boost what was western Europe’s lowest vaccination rate. So-called “2G” rules banning those who have not been been vaccinated or recovered from the virus from non-essential shops will end on 12 February, with restaurants and tourist attraction also open to those with just a recent negative test a week later. New daily coronavirus infections have been rising in Austria, but pressure on hospitals has eased and the wave is expected to reach a peak on around 7 February, the public health director, Katharina Reich, said. In Switzerland, meanwhile, experts who studied both Swiss and German infection rates said Omicron was significantly more infectious, but seemingly less severe, than the Delta variant and was “unlikely to cause record numbers of admissions to ICUs”. The finding followed a call last week by an alliance of Swiss businesses and rightwing parties to ease curbs – including working from home rules and a Covid pass needed to enter indoor public places such as restaurants, cinemas and gyms – that the group said were “disproportionate” and causing “enormous suffering” to companies. Amid estimates that up to 40% of Swiss companies were experiencing staff shortages due to quarantine rules, the Swiss health minister, Alain Berset, has called for remaining restrictions to be lifted from 16 February, saying he wanted a “turbo” reopening of the economy. Germany’s finance minister, Christian Lindner, also said the government should be laying the foundations for a smooth return to normal, arguing that even though the peak of the Omicron wave may still be several weeks away, business required a “planning horizon”. Data from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control on Monday suggested that the country, which is recording record high infections numbers, had failed to hit its goal of vaccinating 80% of the population before the end of January. As of Monday, 75.8% of Germans had received at least one vaccine dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, putting the country behind other large European countries including Italy, France and Spain. German MPS are expected to vote next month on making vaccinations mandatory. The World Health Organization has said it is “plausible” that the Omicron variant, which seems to cause less severe symptoms in the fully vaccinated, may signal the pandemic’s transition towards a more “manageable” phase and eventual endgame, but warned the situation remains unpredictable.Donald Trump was accused of “saying the quiet part loud” on Sunday night, when he protested that Mike Pence, his former vice-president, could have overturned his election defeat by Joe Biden. Though he has appeared to admit Biden won before, Trump usually insists he won and his opponent stole the election through voter fraud – the “big lie” which animates rallies like one in Conroe, Texas, on Saturday. On Sunday Trump attempted to seize on moves by a bipartisan group of senators to reform the Electoral Count Act of 1887, which Trump tried to use to have Pence refuse to certify Biden’s victory. Pence concluded he did not have the authority to do so. On the same day, 6 January 2021, supporters Trump told to “fight like hell” attacked the US Capitol. Seven people died and more than 100 police officers were hurt. More than 700 people have been charged, 11 with seditious conspiracy. Trump and his aides are the target of congressional investigation. But Trump survived impeachment when enough Senate Republicans stayed loyal and he is is free to run for office. On Saturday, he promised pardons for 6 January rioters if re-elected and exhorted followers to protest against investigations of his business and political affairs in New York and Georgia. In a statement on Sunday, Trump claimed “fraud and many other irregularities” in the 2020 election – no large-scale fraud has been found – and asked: “How come the Democrats and … Republicans, like Wacky Susan Collins, are desperately trying to pass legislation that will not allow the vice-president to change the results of the election? “Actually, what they are saying, is that Mike Pence did have the right to change the outcome, and they now want to take that right away. Unfortunately, he didn’t exercise that power. He could have overturned the election!” Collins, of Maine, was one of seven Republicans to vote to convict Trump over the Capitol attack. Such is his grip on her party, on Sunday she would not say she would not support him if he ran again. But she did tell ABC why she wanted to reform the Electoral Count Act. “We saw, on 6 January 2021, how ambiguities, simple law, were exploited. We need to prevent that from happening again. I’m hopeful that we can come up with a bipartisan bill that will make very clear that the vice-president’s role is simply ministerial, that he has no ability to halt the count.” Dick Durbin of Illinois, a member of Democratic Senate leadership, said reform to the electoral college process was merited because Trump gambits including false slates of electors “really raise a question about the integrity of that process. It hasn’t been looked at for 150 years. Now’s the time.” Pundits seized on Trump’s latest apparent blunder into the truth. Bill Kristol, a conservative writer, said: “Talk about saying the quiet part loud. Trump here admits or rather boasts [about] what he wanted Mike Pence to do.” Chris Krebs, fired as head of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency under Trump but who pronounced the 2020 election “the most secure in US history”, said: “In the last 24 hours the former president: (1) floated pardons for [January 6] defendants, (2) encouraged civil unrest if he’s indicted in [Georgia or New York], (3) once again confirmed he pressured Pence to overturn a lawful election. “He’s radicalizing his base to be his personal Brown Shirts.” Olivia Troye, a former Pence aide, wrote: “Every Republican candidate and official should go on record with their answer: Do you support sedition and pardoning domestic terrorists?” On Monday, Liz Cheney, one of only two Republicans on the House committee investigating Trump’s attempt to overturn the election, said: “Trump uses language he knows caused the January 6 violence; suggests he’d pardon the January 6 defendants, some of whom have been charged with seditious conspiracy; threatens prosecutors; and admits he was attempting to overturn the election. “He’d do it all again if given the chance.”This is a disturbing, deeply upsetting Czech documentary about the threat of online child abuse. It is not something I would normally choose to watch and it left me feeling sick to the stomach. But it is an important film on an urgent issue and perhaps should be required viewing for parents. The set-up is like a reality TV or tabloid gotcha. Film-makers Barbora Chalupová and Vít Klusák cast three young-looking actors to play 12-year-old girls. For 10 days in bedrooms built in a studio, the “girls” live chat and message men on sites such as Facebook and Skype, where they are groomed, coerced and blackmailed. The women work to a code of conduct: they’re not allowed to make approaches, only to respond to messages; and must always say their age, 12, at the beginning of conversations. Psychologists and lawyers are on standby. The abuse begins almost immediately. “Hi you’re pretty and sweet,” messages one guy. A man on live chat: “What grade are you in?” When the actor replies seventh grade, which would make her 12 or 13, the man’s hand goes straight down his pants. There’s some nervous giggling to begin with in the studio (the directors often pull back the camera to show the film-making process). But it gets dark quickly. The men range in age from late 20s to pensioners, faces blurred except for eyes and lips (the effect is unnerving). Their predatory behaviour runs the gamut. A youngish man with clenched, seething body language and a nasty smirk is a blackmailer: he coerces one of them into sending him nude photos then threatens to publish them. Another man is a groomer with a gentle voice, always smiling: “Hey, sweetie.” This film is a difficult, depressing watch, though at the end in a confrontation with one of the men, the three actors are able to take back power. Not an option, of course, available to the actual children who are preyed on and damaged. • Caught in the Net is released on 7 February on digital platforms.He had spent 43 years in prison, and a spell on death row, for a murder he did not commit. In 2019 Charles Ray Finch, an African American man from North Carolina now in his 80s, was finally set free. “He went in at age 40, the prime of his life, and he came out in a wheelchair having suffered a stroke, and he suffered another stroke since then,” says David Rudolf, a criminal defence lawyer who worked on the case. “His whole life was taken from him. That was a particularly tragic circumstance.” Now Rudolf, 72, has interwoven Finch’s life story with his own in a book, American Injustice, that offers a bracing account of abuses of power and corruption in the criminal justice system. It tells how over the past 30 years more than 2,800 innocent American prisoners – their combined sentences exceeding 25,000 years – have been exonerated and freed after miscarriages of justice. This, Rudolf argues, is only a fraction of the actual number of people wrongfully accused and convicted over the same period. “We should be worried just from the statistics we know right now because obviously that’s the tip of the iceberg,” says the lawyer, exuding a bearded, bespectacled and genial presence via Zoom from Toronto, Canada, where he is doing legal work. “Those are the people who were lucky enough to find lawyers, then lucky enough to have those lawyers find the evidence they needed and then lucky enough to be able to litigate it successfully, overcoming all kinds of odds and the whole preference for finality in the criminal justice system over justice or truth.” How do wrongful convictions happen? In taking the reader through numerous crime scenes, Rudolf identifies misconduct at all levels of law enforcement, such as concealing evidence of the defendant’s innocence, confirmation bias, suggestive procedures that make an eyewitness identification of a suspect more likely, fabricating or planting evidence and coercing innocent people into giving false confessions. The case of Finch, convicted in 1976 of murdering a grocery shop clerk during an attempted robbery, was particularly egregious, the consequence of a sheriff’s department covering up its own corruption. A store employee who saw the killer flee the scene told police that the killer had been wearing a three-quarter-length coat. An eyewitness later identified Finch in three different lineups. But working with Duke University’s Wrongful Convictions Clinic at a 2013 hearing, Rudolf cross-examined the then chief deputy sheriff and, in what he describes in the book as a “Perry Mason moment”, demonstrated that Finch had been forced to wear a coat that made the lineup procedure unduly suggestive. Rudolf says now: “It’s one of the few cases where I can honestly say that a police officer set out to frame an innocent person. In most of these cases – let me stress this – I don’t think police are setting out to frame innocent people. “Through a combination of their hubris and experience and confirmation bias, they walk into a scene and say it was a murder, then everything gets filtered through that lens and you have confirmation bias and tunnel vision and all the things that I talk about. “I think that’s 98% of how wrongful convictions occur, whether it’s a false confession, planting evidence, fake science, whatever the mechanism is. I don’t think that’s as important as the motivation. What I really wanted to cast a light on in this book was motivations and their impact on the people.” Speaking of motivations, the 2020 police murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis delivered a brutal reminder of systemic racism. Rudolf, a New Yorker who worked as a public defender in the South Bronx then practiced law for decades in North Carolina, says the warping effect of racism is most evident when the victim is white and the defendant is a person of colour. “I’ve been in trials where prosecutors have challenged every Black juror for reasons that were obviously, patently, transparently racial. There’s been studies done of jury selection in North Carolina made it clear that prosecutors were knocking people off because they were Black, for no other reason. In that setting, it’s pretty overt.” Such findings are a crystal clear indictment of capital punishment. Finch, for example, was initially sentenced to death but this was reduced to life in prison after the supreme court declared North Carolina’s mandatory death penalty unconstitutional. American Injustice also highlights the plight of Henry McCollum and his half brother Leon Brown, convicted of the 1983 rape and murder of an 11-year-old girl; McCollum spent three decades on death row. Antonin Scalia, the late supreme court justice, cited the case to justify capital punishment in a legal opinion, contending that lethal injection would offer a “quiet death” compared with the victim’s. But it was all a lie. Rudolf says: “Now we flash forward to 2018, 19. The two men have been completely exonerated. There’s a lawsuit filed against the police who essentially caused their wrongful conviction, and a jury in eastern North Carolina awards $75m to these two mentally handicapped brothers. This is the case that Scalia held up as the poster child for the death penalty and these guys were stone cold fucking innocent. What does that tell you?” It might be assumed that the march of science, in particular DNA evidence, should make wrongful convictions less likely now than in the past. Not necessarily, says Rudolf, noting the growth of an “experts” industrial complex that is far from neutral. “It’s a double-edged sword because 50 years ago we didn’t have things like blood spatter experts, dental experts, tyre impression experts, shoe impression experts. We didn’t have this whole plethora of pseudo-experts who are not scientists; they are laypeople. They’re mostly law enforcement and their way of validating their opinions is: did the jury or did the jury not convict? If the jury convicted, hey, they got it right! That’s absurd.” To illustrate the point, Rudolf cites his most famous case – featured in the Netflix documentary series The Staircase – in which Michael Peterson, a novelist in North Carolina, was convicted of first-degree murder after the death of his wife in 2001 and sentenced to life without parole. The jury’s verdict had turned on evidence provided by a blood spatter expert, Duane Deaver, which Rudolf was sure was not supported by science. In 2011, he was able to prove that Deaver had lied on the witness stand about his conclusions. Peterson was released and eventually sentenced to time served. “Duane Deaver is hired to come in to the scene at the Peterson house. The detective says, ‘I think this is a murder. Can you come in and take a look at this?’ He’s on the homicide team. So is he going to say to the homicide detective, ‘You know, I think you’re full of shit, this was a fall’? “No! His confirmation bias is to help his fellow law enforcement officer. That’s natural. We would all be subject to that. So I’m not being especially critical of that. I’m just saying, let’s recognise it for what it is.” Rudolf never expected The Staircase to be such a hit and believes it challenged negative perceptions of his profession. “People came to see the criminal justice system in a much more nuanced way and that was my goal. When I grew up, Perry Mason, the criminal defence lawyer, was a hero. Matlock was a hero. These weren’t sleazy people. These were people who were trying to find the truth and who would actually exonerate people. “Those were my role models growing up and then all of a sudden we get to Law and Order and all the defence lawyers are drunks and they don’t give a fuck, and they’re sleazy, and that was the public perception. “It made me angry and so I thought to myself, it would be interesting if people could really see what we criminal defence lawyers do, that we’re not sleazy, that we’re actually trying to find the truth, that sometimes the truth is elusive, but we have a role to play that’s important and we do our jobs conscientiously with as much faithfulness as prosecutors and sometimes more.” He adds: “I can tell you that I have received hundreds, if not thousands, of comments from people who say, ‘You really changed my view of what criminal defence lawyers do. I had no idea.’ That’s gratifying to me, not for myself but for everybody who does what I do. All of a sudden if those people go into a jury box they’re not viewing the defence lawyer as a sleazebag, so it levelled the playing field a little bit. That’s something I’m proud of.” Such was the success of The Staircase that it is being turned into a TV mini-series starring Colin Firth and Toni Collette. Rudolf spent time with the actor Michael Stuhlbarg, who will portray him on screen. “I said to him I was proud of what came out of The Staircase in terms of criminal defence lawyers and how people viewed us and your TV series could either reinforce that or it could totally smash that, and I want to let you know how important it is to me that you play this in a way that’s true to what was in that documentary. I’m not talking about guilt or innocence or any of that stuff. I’m talking about what we do and how we do it.” Rudolf is also getting his message out with a podcast called Abuse of Power, co-hosted with his wife and law partner, Sonya Pfeiffer. Late in his career, he has discovered the power of media megaphones. “I decided that rather than talking to 12 people in a jury box, I could talk to 12,000 people or 120,000 people on a podcast or who knows how many people in a book,” he adds. “That’s how change gets made. It gets made incrementally with a particular jury, but it gets made a lot quicker with this.” American Injustice is out nowMy friend Mike Owen, who has died aged 83, was a merchant navy engineer who became a world-renowned expert in the field of fluid mechanics and jet engines. Born in Cheam, Surrey, to Charles, an electrical engineer, and Ruth Hadfield, a forewoman at an electrical company, Mike went to Epsom grammar school until he was 16, when he started a marine engineering apprenticeship with Esso in 1954, spending two years at college, two years at sea and then a final year back at college and in workshops. Afterwards he remained with Esso, becoming a second engineer at the early age of 23 before studying mechanical engineering at King’s College, Durham (now Newcastle University), during which time he married Doreen Chapman in 1964. Graduating with a first-class degree the following year, he then set off with Doreen for Canada, where he had landed a job as a research engineer in fluid machinery with Crippen Consultants in Vancouver, testing scale models of dams, spillways and rivers for the hydro-electric power stations that would be constructed as part of the Fraser River Project in British Columbia. A year later he was invited by the new University of Sussex to come back home and work on a Rolls-Royce-funded project on the fluid mechanics of rotating discs. At Sussex he combined research with his love of walking the South Downs, climbing with the university club and making beer. He added a DPhil and later a DSc to his academic honours. During 20 years at Sussex, Mike supervised many research students, grants and contracts funded by government and international gas turbine companies, becoming director of the Thermo-Fluid Mechanics Research Centre at the university. In 1989, having further established his reputation with a two-volume book, Flow and Heat Transfer in Rotating-Disc Systems, published that year and co-authored with Ruth Rogers, he became chair of the University of Bath’s Department of Mechanical Engineering, where he wrote more than 100 journal and conference papers, plus other books. His experimental and theoretical work centred around research on jet engines, and one of his most notable achievements was to set up the now world-renowned Centre for Rotating Flows at Bath: he became its head of school and department. He formally retired in 2003 but carried on his research at Bath and was writing scientific papers right up to his last few days. Mike was always very fit, walking long distances and cycling up and down the hills around Bath. He enjoyed sailing and also loved to deliver a funny story with an unexpected twist at the end. He is survived by Doreen, their daughters, Julie and Sharon, and seven grandchildren.YOU GOTTA FIGHT FOR THE RIGHT TO LAMPARDIA! Nobody was expecting Frank Lampard to conduct his first interview as manager of Everton atop an overturned blue bucket and with a copy of Inverting the Pyramid tucked neatly under his arm. But many a Blue Nose was left scratching the their heads on Monday afternoon at the Hollyoaks-soaked introduction, as well as what actual tactics Lamps might use to dig the Toffees out of the almighty mess they are in: four points off the relegation zone in 16th place, with over half a billion notes of Moshiri’s moolah down the pan. Instead, Lamps put on a clinic in “heart”, “fight” and “ambition” and much like Augustus Gloop and Ferenc Puskás, insisted he was “hungry” to get started. In fact, the word “passion” was mentioned 10 times in the first three and a half minutes of said interview, at an average of once every 21 seconds – a little glimpse into the half-time team talks to come. Lampard was probably a little lucky to get the Chelsea job in 2019 and a tad unlucky to lose it just over a year ago. But as the appointment of Tactics Tommy [Tuchel] has shown, a little bit more Double Pivot and a little less “desire” had quite the effect at Chelsea. Some people have questioned Lampardia, what it all means, and where it came from and where it might take us. Was his early success at Derby because he galvanised a bunch of underachievers to a Championship play-off berth, via a gegenpress and triple overlap the likes of which had never been seen in the second tier, or more to do with the fact that he passioned Chelsea loanees Mason Mount and Fikayo Tomori to within an inch of their lives, into a division that was well beneath them? The jury remains out. But fear not, now he’s back in the managerial saddle, Lamps is talking tough again. “After speaking to the owner, chairman and the board, I very much felt their passion and ambition,” Frank Lamparded. “I hope they felt my ambition and how hard I want to work to bring it together. You can feel the passion Everton fans have for their club. I think Everton is a unique club in that you can really understand what the fans want to see. The first thing they want is fight and desire and that must always be our baseline. “I keep saying the words passion [you’re not wrong, pal!] and fight and I think it related to Everton Football Club,” he unfortunately continued. “It’s probably how I tried to build my own career as a player.” That’s all very well, Frank, but on top of your Work Ethic™, you also happened to have one of the best right foots in the business, a couple of lungs the size of Dixie Dean’s shorts and an unerring ability to be in the right place at the right time. I’m not sure the same can be said of Cenk Tosun and co, but there’s still time to prove The Fiver wrong. It wouldn’t be the first time. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join our team of writers for updates on the unsightly scramble for signings before the men’s January transfer window slams shut™ at 11pm GMT. QUOTE OF THE DAY “It has been a while since I last coached him, and a lot has happened since then … he hasn’t trained with a team for seven months but has done a lot of work on his own. He is fit but we will need to get him match fit and I am looking forward to seeing him work with the players and staff to get back towards his highest level” – in one of the more remarkable transfer stories of this window, Thomas Frank confirms Brentford have signed Christian Eriksen, who has not played since his cardiac arrest at the Euros. RECOMMENDED LISTENING If like The Fiver you thought Cryptocurrency and NFTs was an album from the late 1990s, you will probably find this Football Weekly explainer on football’s relationship with digital dosh very handy. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS A man in his 20s has been arrested on suspicion of rape and assault, police have said, after Manchester United suspended the footballer Mason Greenwood. Rayo Vallecano have defended their decision to hire disgraced coach Carlos Santiso to take charge of their women’s team, despite being aware of a leaked recording in which he encourages his staff to find a girl to gang-rape to help team bonding. Mo Salah helped to drive Egypt past Morocco and into an Afcon semi-final against hosts Cameroon, while Cheikhou Kouyaté made an instant impact against Equatorial Guinea as Senegal booked a last-four date with Burkina Faso. Dele Alli and Donny van de Beek may well be Everton players by the time you read this bob. Julián Álvarez will become the latest striker to be left out of the Manchester City side in favour of five dazzling talented No 10s, but not until next season. Lee Johnson has been marched through the Sunderland door marked Do One after a 6-0 pumping at Bolton. Plain Old John Terry is linked with the vacancy. Yikes! Canada look set for the Human Rights World Cup, a first since 1986, after beating USA! USA!! USA!!! 2-0 in Hamilton. “I genuinely believe that these men know they have an opportunity to leave a proper football legacy moving forward,” roared coach John Herdman. Karna Solskjær, the teenage daughter of Ole, stole the spotlight as she made her Manchester United debut in the 2-0 Women’s FA Cup win over Bridgwater United. Burnley plan to get it launched to 6ft 6in Wout Weghorst after their done deal with Wolfsburg for the Dutch striker. “We wish Wout well as he earns the right to push our group forwards,” growled Sean Dyche. And Pierre Emerick-Aubameyang’s proposed loan move to Barcelona has broken down over money, but hopefully he enjoyed the ‘family trip’ to Catalonia. RECOMMENDED VIEWING Just a Sunday league goalkeeper with a last-minute overhead-kick equaliser. STILL WANT MORE? Andy Hunter roots through Frank Lampard’s overflowing in-tray at Frank Lampard’s Everton, while Jacob Steinberg suggests Frank Lampard needs to learn from his mistakes at Frank Lampard’s Chelsea. Tottenham’s travails are all part of the emptiness of the transfer window, writes Barry Glendenning. The curious, doomed fable of Ousmane Dembélé and Barcelona is recanted by Sid Lowe. John Terry: captain, leader, legend … and head coach of Ape Kids Club FC. Some digital Barney Ronay gold for you here. Look back on every deal that has gone through in Europe’s top, top, top leagues in our men’s transfer window with our whizzy interactive. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ARE YOU SURE?As the world returns to the office, doggy daycare is booming. You hear of kingpins who never even have to meet the dogs, but run establishments packed with canines, whose owners are each paying more for the day than the dog-loving apprentices are receiving. They offer “enrichment activities” – AKA other dogs with buttholes – and nap time, which is to say, all day. Sorry, that is unfair. There are also many fine and upstanding dog lovers providing these services, and right across the spectrum, everyone reports a surge in demand as people who got a lockdown puppy now have a regular, grownup dog. But it’s a dog with a difference. It can’t be left alone for one second. Dog behaviourists report weird, amazingly strategic new methods to stop owners going out: dogs that will hide shoes, lie down across front doors, or – in the case of one high-risk fellow – across the rear wheels of a car. Realistically, what’s the upside, for a dog, of anyone leaving the house? You can hardly blame them, but you have now created an animal that needs £40 a day spent on it just to stay sane. You might as well have bought a lockdown racehorse. I’m wondering what this all means for the lockdown spouse, the cherished life partner who worked at home anyway, but has now spent two years getting used to constant company. Which is to say, I’m wondering what it means for me. I complained constantly throughout 2020 about the limits on my considerable pre-Covid freedom. I used to live as if in a fairytale or dream – totally normal on the surface, then, wham, 9am, the final person would leave and the home was my castle, or my oyster, or whatever. Sometimes I’d work, sometimes I’d just stare. I could feast on crisp sandwiches and solve the tea/coffee dilemma by making both at the same time. Once the lockdowns began I formed a support group-cum-prayer-tree with other people who had previously worked from home alone, where we’d swap recent outrages. On one occasion, a friend’s formerly office-based wife told him what time there was a break in her meeting, in case he wanted to bring her a cup of tea. Another friend exploded: “All he does is Zoom! Zoom Zoom Zoom, always more Zoom, every word is Zoom, everywhere I go I can hear the Zoom!,” and we thought she was making a strong point, while having a nervous breakdown. I could discuss this stuff for hours, except I’d have to go for a walk to do so, because how are you supposed to bitch about people who are always in? Then, finally, we all got used to it, and one second after that, the company was more like a necessity or a birthright. I want someone around when a package arrives – not so that they’ll open the door, or maybe that, too, but someone reliable, someone invested. Someone who will celebrate the arrival of a heated pet pad or some pasta made of yellow peas. I want to be able to say: “What’s that word beginning with S?” into not-a-void. I want to eavesdrop on someone else’s meeting and ask questions about the future too banal for a phone call. If I do anything at all pro-social, anything domestic or thoughtful, I want it to be observed in the moment. Then I want a medal. If I hear a noise on the street, I want to ask someone else what they think it was, and if the sun comes out, I want to be only one of two simultaneous voices saying, “Look, the sun’s come out.” I don’t even want to think about what would happen if there were to be a rainbow, with me the only witness. I want to peer into the flats opposite and make suppositions about their relationships and housekeeping, like in Rear Window. I’ve acclimatised so completely to this unboundaried life – is he a co-worker or a flatmate or a partner, or are we actually both students? – that I can’t imagine life after it. I don’t see myself lying down across the rear wheels of a car, however.A party in Boris and Carrie Johnson’s flat is one of 12 events being investigated by the Metropolitan police over alleged lockdown breaches, it has emerged, as the Sue Gray report found “failures of leadership and judgment” in No 10. Gray, a senior civil servant, criticised the culture in Johnson’s Downing Street that allowed social gatherings to take place during lockdown, which were “difficult to justify”. The findings were released on the government’s website in a shortened and redacted form, after the Met last week said it was investigating some of the gatherings. Although Gray said she was not able to publish her full report, a string of Conservative MPs said the conclusions were still extremely serious for Johnson – not least because one of the gatherings under police investigation was in the prime minister’s apartment. In the Commons, Johnson was challenged by Theresa May, his predecessor as prime minister, who said either he “had not read the rules, didn’t understand the rules, or didn’t think they applied to No 10”. Andrew Mitchell, a Tory MP and former cabinet minister, said Johnson “no longer enjoys” his support. And in a dramatic moment, Ian Blackford, the SNP Westminster leader, accused Johnson of having “lied and misled” the house of Commons and was ejected from the chamber by the Speaker. Johnson had previously denied in the House of Commons that any party on 13 November, 2020, had taken place. Johnson was also present at another of the parties under investigation by police – in the Downing Street garden on 20 May, 2020. Johnson rejected these criticisms in turn but promised that he would overhaul the structure of No 10 to address some of Gray’s criticisms. “I get it and I will fix it,” he told MPs. In the report, Gray did not criticise the prime minister personally, or pass judgment on his past statements, but highlighted failures of leadership in No 10 and the Cabinet Office. The 12-page report said: “At least some of the gatherings in question represent a serious failure to observe not just the high standards expected of those working at the heart of government but also of the standards expected of the entire British population at the time.” It added: “At times it seems there was too little thought given to what was happening across the country in considering the appropriateness of some of these gatherings, the risks they presented to public health and how they might appear to the public. “There were failures of leadership and judgment by different parts of No 10 and the Cabinet Office at different times. Some of the events should not have been allowed to take place. Other events should not have been allowed to develop as they did.” Gray listed 16 gatherings on 12 dates across 20 months in 2020-21 that she had examined for evidence of rule-breaking, of which 12 are being investigated by police. These include a gathering in the No 10 flat – thought to be a reference to the prime minister’s own residence even though he lives at No 11 – and a Christmas party in Downing Street, as well as several leaving parties. The civil service chief said she had interviewed more than 70 people and examined relevant email information, WhatsApp messages, photographs and exit logs. She said some staff had “wanted to raise concerns about behaviours they witnessed at work but at times felt unable to do so”. “A number of these gatherings should not have been allowed to take place, or to develop in the way that they did. There is significant learning to be drawn from these events which must be addressed immediately across government.” Gray said her report was limited by the Met police request for her to make only minimal reference to gatherings they were investigating. She said she had decided not to publish factual accounts of the other four dates as she did not feel able to do so without detriment to the overall balance of findings. However, she left the door open to returning to the evidence she gathered after the Met police had investigated, saying it was being stored and saved “until such time as it may be required further”. Earlier on Monday, No 10 had said it was “unclear” whether she would publish a further, more comprehensive, report in the future.One hundred photographs chronicling the private world of Pablo Picasso up to and after his death in 1973 at the age of 91 have been donated to the Musée de l’Élysée in Switzerland. The pictures are a sample of 25,000 taken of the artist by David Douglas Duncan, an American war photographer who first met Picasso in Cannes in 1956. Duncan’s first photo of Picasso was of him soaping himself in the bath in his La Californie home moments after the two had first met. After opportunistically ringing the bell at the villa’s front gate in the hope of capturing an image of the world’s most famous painter, Duncan was astonished to find himself being led up to the bathroom by the artist’s wife, Jacqueline. Duncan, who died in 2018, became a firm friend of the Spanish-born painter despite their difficulties in communicating. Picasso did not speak English and he would laugh at Duncan’s grasp of Spanish. But Duncan, who had covered the Korean war as a photojournalist, found himself allowed to come and go as he pleased at Picasso’s various homes during a 17-year friendship. Despite being keenly aware of his legacy, and becoming perhaps the most photographed artist ever, Duncan claimed that Picasso did not pose or demand to be captured on film at any point. The man he called maestro throughout their friendship instead told him: “You take pictures, I paint.” Duncan’s photos were taken with a custom-built Leica M3D camera with extremely quiet shutters so that Picasso would not be disturbed as he worked. Asked in 2012 about the artist’s working habits and character, Duncan told the French newspaper Le Monde that he could not reconcile claims of misogyny with the man he knew, and he regarded him as a dedicated “Spanish gentleman”. “For this one – Les Baigneurs – it lasted two days and two nights. He could stop and sit down in front of a painting for half an hour, quite motionless, just looking at it, with one hand on his head. No movement. He was thinking,” he recalled. “One day when I was there, someone asked him which period of his work he liked best, the blue period, the rose period, cubism and so on. Picasso stretched out his hand, his fingers splayed, and answered: ‘Well, which of these five fingers do you prefer? Personally, I need all of them.’”The long awaited Sue Gray report has been published and, although she has been restricted in what she can say, she has shed light on yet more events. Only time will tell what political implications her report, on a series of claims about staff parties held in Downing Street and elsewhere in Whitehall, will have. Some have argued the “partygate” scandal could ultimately topple the prime minister, who has apologised for the things he did not get right. However Boris Johnson loyalists within the UK government and the wider Conservative party will be hoping that it will allow the prime minister to draw a line under the controversy. With more than 178,000 Covid deaths to date, the Guardian plots the UK death toll against dates on which the staff parties are alleged to have occurred, as well as other alleged breaches of lockdown rules and Johnson’s recent comments on the 2020 gatherings. The prime minister will have hoped to have drawn a line under the controversy. Only time will tell how this sequence of events will play out for Boris Johnson. Data notes and methodology UK daily deaths are as recorded by the Office for National Statistics – which includes all deaths where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate deaths to 14 January 2022, as in the most recent publication – and stood at 178,978 people. This time lag means that the graphic remains static for the final 12 days of the interactive which does not reflect the actual situation on those days. This differs to the government’s primary metric sourced from the Covid-19 data dashboard, which only includes those deaths occurring within 28 days of a positive Covid test, which, at the time of writing, had recently exceeded 151,000 deaths. The restrictions level is sourced from the University of Oxford’s coronavirus government response tracker. A stringency index score of above 75 is classed as “very high” restrictions level, above 50 “high”, above 25 “medium” and then anything below is classed as “very low”.Privatising Channel 4 would sabotage Boris Johnson’s efforts to boost the British economy and cut future tax revenues by hundreds of millions of pounds, senior cabinet ministers have been warned. Four prominent Scottish television executives have written to the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, Michael Gove, the levelling-up secretary, and Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, urging them to oppose the “shortsighted” proposals to sell it off. The previous UK culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, floated privatising the state-owned but advertising-funded broadcaster in a consultation paper last June, to consternation from the industry. In their letters to the three ministers, which have been seen by the Guardian, the executives argue that Channel 4 plays an essential role in supporting and nurturing British broadcasting talent, making UK-wide programmes, in Glasgow, Belfast, Bristol, Cardiff and Leeds. It buys programming from across the UK and guarantees to invest in programmes made outside London and the south-east. Channel 4 commissioning in the UK’s nations and regions is worth nearly £1bn to regional economies; it has spent £200m directly in Scotland since 2007, and supports 400 jobs. It also allows production companies to own the rights to their programmes, unlike other channels, boosting the independent sector’s income. Producers argue this also means Channel 4 has much less economic value to private buyers, since they do not own the global rights to their shows. “All evidence suggests, though, that once in private hands broadcasters prioritise shareholder returns, not broader public goals,” the four producers said. That, they warned, would cause “significant harm” to Boris Johnson’s levelling-up strategy, to spread investment and wealth outside south-east England. There are strong suspicions Nadine Dorries, the current culture secretary, is wavering over privatising the channel, with signs the Treasury has become anxious about its economic rationale. The four producers believe targeting Sunak, Gove and Kwarteng will bring greater pressure on the cabinet as a whole, by making their policy areas central to the final decision. “It is our shared view that selling the broadcaster will damage our national creative economy and threaten the existence of independent producers – currently an international success story for all the UK. “Privatisation is a shortsighted move, contrary to any genuine levelling-up agenda, and any financial benefits to the exchequer would be short-term, as nought in comparison to the long-term loss of tax income generated year-in-year out by those independent producers and their employees, contractors, suppliers.” The letter, organised and co-signed by Susan Aitken, the leader of Glasgow city council, has been signed by Jane Rogerson and Ross Harper, joint managing directors of Red Sky Productions, which made Spring at Jimmy’s Farm and Puppy School for Channel 4; Jane Muirhead, the managing director of Raise the Roof Productions, which produces Kirstie and Phil’s Love It or List It, and Gok’s Fill Your House for Free; and Alan Clements, the managing director of Two Rivers Media, which co-produces the hit series Escape to the Chateau. “Over half the broadcaster’s commissioning budget is now spent outside London, further opportunities are emerging for young people entering the industry, and around a third of Channel 4’s £990m [economic value] is now across the nations and regions,” they told the three ministers. “Channel 4 is actively levelling up the UK’s creative sector, with the supply chain ecosystems it nurtures having a positive impact on regional economic growth.” A spokesperson for the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport said no decision has been made on whether to press on with the sell-off but added its public service remit would be protected if it were privatised. She said: “We value Channel 4’s contribution to levelling up and are clear its public service broadcasting remit and the government’s commitment to independent regional productions would continue following any potential sale. “There is a wealth of evidence on the future challenges for linear TV broadcasters and it is right that a change in ownership to support Channel 4’s long-term sustainability is considered. This could allow more and quicker investment in creative content and new platforms to support the wider creative industries.”The high court should overturn a landmark decision finding Aboriginal Australians cannot be aliens because it threatens to confer “political sovereignty on Aboriginal societies”, the Morrison government has argued. Government lawyers made the claim in an appeal, warning that the Love and Thoms decision barring the deportation of Aboriginal non-citizens threatened the principle that Aboriginal sovereignty did not survive the colonisation of Australia. In submissions lodged on Friday, the commonwealth also argued that Aboriginal people’s spiritual connection to the land does not create a “special relationship” to the commonwealth. In February 2020 the high court held in a four-three split that Aboriginal Australians were not aliens for the purpose of the constitution and could not be deported. Guardian Australia revealed in October that the government was seeking to overturn the decision, which by April 2021 had resulted in nine people being released from immigration detention. In November, the federal court ordered the release of Shayne Montgomery, finding it was “not reasonable” to conclude the New Zealand citizen was not Aboriginal because although he lacked biological descent from an Aboriginal person he had been culturally adopted as Aboriginal. In its appeal against that decision, the government has asked the high court to overrule Love and Thoms. Two of the judges in the original majority have since retired, prompting Amanda Stoker, now the assistant attorney general, to note in a June 2020 research paper that “there is a significant possibility that a reconstituted bench would reconsider the decision in the event of challenge”. In submissions for the commonwealth the solicitor general, Stephen Donaghue, argued no leave was required to reopen the case because there was no “consistent reasoning” from the four majority judges, who came to the same conclusion through different reasoning. Donaghue argued that it “does not follow” from the “spiritual connection between Aboriginal persons and the land that those persons have a special relationship with the … Commonwealth of Australia”. Connection to land existed before British sovereignty and “would continue unaffected even if the Australian body politic ceased to exist”, he said. Donaghue said the “overwhelming majority” of Aboriginal Australians were not aliens but the few who never acquired Australian citizenship were likely to be citizens of other countries and therefore could belong elsewhere and be aliens with respect to Australia, despite their connection to land. In a section titled “implicit conferral of political sovereignty on Aboriginal societies”, Donaghue noted that under Australian law Aboriginal people “did not retain any residual sovereignty over the territory of Australia” after colonisation. Even the landmark Mabo land rights decision was “entirely at odds” with the idea that “sovereignty adverse to the Crown resides in the Aboriginal people of Australia”, he said, quoting former chief justice Anthony Mason. “Love implicitly challenges that state of affairs, because it makes the question [of] whether some people are members of the Australian body politic dependent on whether they have been recognised as members of an Aboriginal society.” Donaghue noted Stephen Gageler’s minority judgment in Love, warning that to find Aboriginal Australians could not be aliens would give a “non-constitutional and non-representative non-legally-accountable sub-national group” powers even state parliaments lack, ie to determine whether a person can be excluded from a polity. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Donaghue said immigration officials were now faced with claims from people they were seeking to detain or deport that they were Aboriginal, “commonly at least initially on the basis of little or no evidence”. “Those are difficult issues for administrative officers, including those tasked with high volume of decision-making,” he said, citing the need to check with members of Aboriginal societies that a person is recognised as Indigenous. Donaghue submitted that even if Love and Thoms were correctly decided, the federal court decision to release Montgomery should be overturned because he lacked Aboriginal biological descent. According to court documents, Montgomery was born in 1981 in New Zealand before coming to Australia in 1997 to live with his mother and stepfather. After Montgomery was convicted of a non-violent aggravated burglary in March 2018, the Australian government cancelled his visa. He was taken to immigration detention after his release from prison on 21 February 2019. Montgomery argues that because he has been culturally adopted by the Mununjali people, he is Aboriginal. In October the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, claimed that the government had “no intent to deport an Aboriginal from Australia” despite the fact he and the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, applied to the high court to restore their power to do so. Hawke said the case was about “a complex question of law, it’s not about an opinion of the government, and it has to be tested and resolved”. “That’s what the government is doing. Of course, there is no intent to deport an Aboriginal from Australia, ever.” The shadow home affairs minister, Kristina Keneally, has said Labor “respects the decision of the high court” in Love and Thoms and the government should “abide by the ruling”. The matter is yet to be listed for hearing.The world would be better protected against new Covid variants and there would be substantially fewer deaths in low and middle-income countries if rich nations donated half of their vaccine doses, new research suggests. The modelling study found it was in wealthy nations’ self-interests to donate doses because vaccine inequity would prolong the pandemic and increase the risk of new variants developing. The research found if high-income countries donated 46% of their Covid vaccine supplies, low and middle-income countries would see a significant decrease in virus deaths – but that even small increases in vaccine donations would have a disproportionately beneficial effect. Just over 5% of people in low-income countries are fully vaccinated compared to 72% in high-income countries. Qingpeng Zhang, an associate professor at the City University of Hong Kong and a lead author of the study, said it was understandable that richer nations sought to secure doses to protect their own populations first before distributing vaccines to other countries. But, Zhang said, the “benefits to the high-income countries of preserving or stocking up vaccines isn’t as significant as they would have expected, because that’s only very short-term protection”. “People didn’t take into consideration the future viral mutations that will break through the protection built by existing vaccines.” The modelling was based on aviation data that tracked human movement internationally – and predicted what would happen over five years with different vaccine allocation strategies. It showed inequitable vaccination would lead to a faster drop in mortality in high-income countries in the first year, but that in subsequent years the countries would become vulnerable to re-infection and new waves of Covid. The team began the research before the rise of the Delta and Omicron variants – developments that reflect the study’s predictions. “Both of those new strains emerged from middle- and low-income countries,” Zhang said. “If, at first, those countries got sufficient vaccines to protect their populations, then probably those new strains could have been contained.” The research found that when richer nations donated vaccines only to their neighbours there was only a limited benefit. “It would be better to have a global allocation instead of a regional allocation,” Zhang said. Australia has distributed 18m Covid vaccine doses to neighbouring countries but committed zero doses to the Covax initiative, a World Health Organization-backed fund that aims to equitably distribute vaccine doses globally. In December, a group of scientists and aid organisations – among them the Doherty Institute, the Burnet Institute and the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations – asked the Australian government to commit an additional $250m in funding for Covax, called calling the vaccination gap “unfair, immoral [and] dangerous”. In March 2021, an international survey of epidemiologists found that 88% said persistent low vaccination rates in many countries would make it more likely for vaccine-resistant strains to develop. Prof Michael Good, head of the laboratory of vaccines for the developing world at Griffith University, who was not involved in the modelling study, said the research quantified the benefits of equitable vaccine distribution and highlighted the need for long-term thinking when it came to vaccine decision-making. “If we make decisions as a country today about how we use vaccines, that can have an impact on variants that are going to develop in one, two, three or five years’ time,” Good said. “This paper says: don’t just give them to your nearest neighbours, give them to all lower-middle income countries equally, because you don’t know where the next variant of concern is going to come from. “We make decisions that will certainly affect the health of people in low-income countries, but it will also affect our health in high-income countries in the next three to five years as well.” The study was published in the peer-reviewed journal Nature Human Behaviour.Almost half of Australia’s aged care facilities are battling Covid outbreaks with unboosted residents dominating the nation’s death toll, as the Morrison government defends missing its own booster rollout deadline. The impact of the delayed rollout was laid bare on Sunday, when health authorities in New South Wales revealed that 31 of the 52 daily deaths were aged care residents, with just two having received their third shot of the Covid vaccine while seven were unvaccinated. More than 400 aged care residents in Australia have died of Covid since the beginning of January. There were active outbreaks at 1,261 of the roughly 2,700 residential aged care facilities in the country, new data revealed. Given there were no active outbreaks at any of Western Australia’s almost 200 facilities, more than one in every two homes in all remaining states and territories are battling outbreaks. However, aged care industry groups remain sympathetic to the impact that Covid isolation orders for health staff have played in the delays, instead pointing the finger at state governments, specifically in NSW, for easing Covid restrictions too quickly and contributing to “another disaster that was at least partly preventable”. The commonwealth had aimed to have offered booster doses to every aged care residential facilities in the country by Monday. Paul Sadler, chief executive of Aged &amp; Community Services Australia, said organising the mobile booster clinics in aged care homes – a process which began in early November, a week after regulatory approval was given – “was always going to be a logistical challenge”, but acknowledged it had become “overwhelmed by Omicron”. “Because of the staffing shortages, both within aged care and among vaccine clinic providers, there really was such a slowdown in the pace … we started to lose staff pretty heavily from mid-December,” he said. Sadler said the commonwealth clinics had not yet visited about 500 facilities, but this was because many aged care providers had organised their own booster vaccinations with GPs and pharmacies ahead of the scheduled visit offered to them by the government. Despite the delayed rollout, Sadler cited relaxed rules around masks and gatherings and the pace at which that allowed Covid to sideline health workers and spread the virus into homes as a key driver of the high Covid death toll in the sector. “The bigger picture issue here is the decision, particularly the decision from the NSW government, to open up the general community at a time when aged care did not have access to boosters, to rapid antigen tests to test residents and families, and access to enough protective equipment.” “The policies to open up to allow community transmission in the way it happened without the protections in place for the aged care community has ended up in another disaster that was at least partly preventable,” he said, adding that tighter rules in December “could have slowed it down and had an impact on how bad the situation has ended up”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Sadler said he had been assured that booster clinics would visit all facilities by the end of this week. He said many residents remain unboosted because the interval between second and third doses was six months when the rollout began in November. The interval window has now been shortened to three months. He said many residents had been ineligible when the booster clinic was run at their facility, in part due to the delayed rollout of the initial two doses in the sector. “These people account for the largest group of those unvaccinated in aged care. They simply weren’t eligible at the time the vaccine clinic visited them,” he said. The health minister, Greg Hunt, played down the number of homes yet to be offered booster shots. He said “approximately 99%” of facilities were expected to have completed their booster shot rollout by Monday, and that those not yet visited were due to “reasons such as outbreaks” in a facility or vaccination providers having an outbreak among their staff. Hunt also reiterated that the deadline had now been revised from the original schedule to the end of January in response to the spread of the Omicron variant. “In fact, we will have finished about six weeks ahead of our intended schedule, and that was a fast schedule in any event.” “We have one of the lowest rates of loss of life in aged care. But every, every life we fight for,” Hunt said. Sadler called on the commonwealth to release data about how many aged care residents had been boosted. Guardian Australia has requested this data from the health department. A spokesperson said that more than 2310 residential facilities had so far hosted booster clinics, and that homes with active outbreaks had been prioritised. Mark Butler, opposition health spokesperson, called the booster rollout to aged care “a gross failure on the part of the government”. “It’s very clear we needed those boosters in the arms of aged care residents as quickly as possible – that was all the advice that had been given to the government.” “This booster program began 12 weeks ago. How on earth can this happen?” Butler said.Experts have questioned whether a new $500 voucher scheme for New South Wales parents to access before- and after-school care will be enough to change behaviours altered by the pandemic. The $155m scheme, announced by the NSW premier Dominic Perrottet on Monday, will cover the gap fee for care services, covering about 60 sessions per primary student. “This pandemic has been incredibly tough, balancing homeschooling with work, we want to do whatever we can to improve the daily juggle,” he said on Monday. “This $500 voucher will put a downward pressure on family budgets … (and) help mums and dads balance work and family life.” However, Terry Rawnsley, a demographics and urban economics expert at KPMG, said getting parents back into the office would not be as easy as making childcare services temporarily more affordable. “There is this entrenched behavioural change for people over the last 12 months, especially in NSW where before and after school care has dropped off,” he said. “Behaviour is really hard to change.” Rawnsley expected the vouchers to be cashed soonest by parents who wanted or needed to go into their workplaces more regularly as the economy opened back up. But he said the temporary nature of the scheme meant people would not be likely to take on extra shifts or start a new job because of it. “In the eastern suburbs where there’s a high percentage of work from home workers, they probably won’t get a big rush of activity,” he said. “But if you think about the southwestern suburbs, the growth areas in the northwest … they are the places where you might expect to see more of an impact.” Sam Page, chief executive of Early Childhood Australia, welcomed the attempt to boost enrolment numbers, which dropped drastically in the second half of 2021, but said she feared the sector would be able to cope with an influx of new students. “The vouchers are a terrific idea but do we have the staff to cope if there’s a sudden change in demand? Because there are workforce shortages,” she said. “It will be a matter of ensuring that the service has had the capacity to respond as children come back into outside school hours care.” Page said enrolling in before- or after-school care could potentially help students readjust after long periods at home. “Some kids might be feeling quite isolated, quite anxious about school, finding it difficult to be with peers so for them to be part of an outside of school hours programme might be more beneficial,” she said. “It’s up to parents to weigh those risks themselves.” Vouchers will be available through Service NSW from the end of February.The federal government has quietly agreed to allow the importation of unapproved rapid antigen tests for personal use amid shortages of approved kits. Even the kits approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration have varying degrees of accuracy, and the TGA is currently reviewing the effectiveness of the 23 tests approved for detecting Omicron. Low sensitivity on tests could mean people receive negative results even though they are infectious, and go on to spread the virus. The agriculture, water and the environment department’s website was updated on 12 January with new rules for imported tests. Up to three months’ supply of the unapproved tests can be brought into the country as long as they meet various conditions including “does not contain bee pollen”, and are commercially prepared and packaged for testing humans. The relative accuracy of the tests is not mentioned. The TGA said individuals can legally import therapeutic goods but if they are not approved for supply within Australia there are “no guarantees about their performance or quality”. It advises that when buying home tests, “only tests that are approved by the TGA should be bought”. “The TGA cannot vouch for the effectiveness of unapproved products,” a spokesperson said. The Australian Medical Association vice-president Chris Moy said people importing their own unapproved tests was a symptom of “frustration” over the “chaotic” rollout of the tests, and it went against earlier statements from the government about the relative accuracy of them. “We have had such a chaotic implementation in terms of access, equity, use and advice on how to use them. The bottom line is this is just a symptom of the mess, the lack of pre-planning at both a federal and state level in terms of a strategy and plan to access and use RATs across the board,” he said. According to the department’s website, RAT kits do not need an import permit if they are approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration, or if they are unapproved but for personal use. “Personal use only includes: a three-month supply for use by the person importing the goods; or for use by any spouse, de facto partner, child, parent or sibling of the person importing the goods,” the website states. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Note personal consignments of Covid-19 RAT kits that are not approved for supply in Australia by the TGA (ie listed on the ARTG) may be referred to the TGA for assessment upon arrival in Australia.” Moy said it was “so inconsistent” to bring the tests in. “We had this idea we had to have them TGA approved, with fines for not reporting results, and now it’s just a free for all,” he said. The government had minimised the usefulness of RATs, Moy said, until they needed them to back up the “overrun” PCR system, to keep workplaces going, and to help people work out their chances of being infectious. “It was downplayed as an idea that they were for personal use, a though it’s a luxury,” he said. The TGA said rapid antigen test results were unreliable when there was low community transmission, because there would be many false positives, but that has changed as the virus has spread and positives are more likely to be real results. “It is self evident that they would be helpful for people to determine whether they’re likely to be infectious, to determine their personal responsibility.” The Australian federal police and the TGA are investigating forged documents that have allegedly been used to import and sell RATs. It is still illegal to sell RATs imported for personal use. However, Dean Whiting, the chief executive of Pathology Technology Australia, said a “grey market” of Covid products was emerging. “We’re now becoming aware of a grey market in Australia for all sorts of products,” he said. Whiting added that on a reputable test, the instructions include advice on contacting state health authorities to notify them in the case of a public test. “But if a product is coming in without the current instructions, then people who test positive don’t know who to contact and we might have people out in the community who haven’t followed up on their results,” he said. People should stick with reputable, known brands, he said. The TGA said anyone testing positive must still “report the positive result to the appropriate state or territory health department and follow the public health order for their state or territory”.Netflix June Again Film, 2021, Australia – out 4 February Noni Hazlehurst delivers an excellent, multifaceted performance as June, a woman suffering from dementia, who one day suddenly and inexplicably recovers. The catch? Her newfound lucidity won’t last long. So June escapes her nursing home to reconnect with her family, only to discover circumstances have changed for the worse, creating for her a kind of bizarro reality, sort of familiar and sort of not. A world conceptually similar to that experienced by the protagonist of the Australian film (and novel) Bliss. If the premise sounds heavy, writer/director JJ Winlove’s film has a lightness of touch. It’s frequently funny, warm, but also prickly around the edges, with well drawn characters and a great cast including Hazlehurst, Claudia Karvan and Stephen Curry. Murderville TV, 2022, US – out 3 February Will Arnett has some big runs on the board – including and especially BoJack Horseman and Arrested Development. Based on the British sitcom Murder in Successville, the trailer for his procedural crime comedy about butter-fingered senior detective Terry Seattle (Arnett) looks pretty goofy, which is perhaps to be expected. This is a semi-improvised show, with a different celebrity playing Seattle’s offsider to help solve a crime each episode, but the celebrities (including Sharon Stone, Kumail Nanjiani and Conan O’Brien) don’t get a script. Netflix claims it is “Law &amp; Order meets Whose Line Is It Anyway?” Why Are You Like This TV, 2021, Australia – out 16 February Edgy humour often involves satirising the cultural mores of the time, which is a particularly fraught exercise with modern minefields including identity politics and cancel culture. Creators Naomi Higgins, Humyara Mahbub and Mark Bonanno go where many fear to tread, producing uncomfortable comedy through the story of a trio of opportunistic gen Zers – Mia (Olivia Junkeer), Penny (Higgins) and Austin (Wil King) – who exploit positive societal progress to serve their own interests. After arriving on iView last year, season one is finally on Australian Netflix this month. Hopefully the ABC commissions a second season to nurture original, incisive young voices. Honourable mentions: Red Dog: True Blue (film, 1 February), The Tinder Swindler (film, 2 February), Jindabyne (film, 4 February), Inventing Anna (TV, 11 February), Bigbug (film, 11 February), The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (film, 18 February), Vikings: Valhalla (TV, 25 February). Stan Bel-Air TV, US, 2022 – out 14 February In 2019 a fan of the classic 90s sitcom The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air made a mock trailer for a dramatic remake of the series, retaining the same premise – a young Black man from wrong-side-of-the-tracks Philadelphia is sent to live with wealthy relatives in the affluent titular neighbourhood. Will Smith saw the video, liked the idea and voilà – a new series arrives with a semi-autobiographical twang, starring Jabari Banks as a semi-fictional version of Smith himself. Locke Film, UK/US, 2013 – out 9 February A film consisting entirely of Tom Hardy driving a car, never once leaving the car, and with no other actors and no sets may not sound like the best time. But Hardy and writer/director Steven Knight do a bang-up job building and sustaining interest throughout this highly ambitious and tightly constructed dialogue-driven drama about a construction worker who drives to London to be with a woman (voiced by Olivia Colman) about to give birth to a child they conceived during a one night stand. Honourable mentions: The Fear Index (TV, 11 February), Frank (film, 13 February), Sleeping with Other People (film, 20 February), Counterpart seasons 1 and 2 (TV, 21 February), Primal Fear (film, 25 February), Airplane! (film, 26 February), Babel (film, 27 February). Amazon Prime Video Reacher TV, 2022, US – out 4 February Like the Tom Cruise movies Jack Reacher and Jack Reacher: Never Go Back, this eight-part action thriller is based on author Lee Child’s Jack Reacher books, following a former military major who frequently finds himself in rather precarious cloak-and-dagger situations. This time the protagonist is played by the very buff Alan Ritchson, presenting a version of the character who swings his fists, frowns a lot and can open screw cap bottles by pressing them against his biceps. Flight Film, 2012, US – out 1 February Robert Zemeckis’ underrated 2012 drama opens with a spectacular white-knuckle plane crash sequence in which the pilot, Whip Whitaker (Denzel Washington), performs a daring crash landing after a mechanical error. He flips the plane, realigns it, and saves almost everybody on board. A bona fide hero, right? But Whitaker, a drug user and alcoholic, was three sheets to the wind at the time. Which leads to a bold question: what if being drunk gave him the audacity to pull the manoeuvre that saved almost everybody? It is an intriguing, potentially fraught way to approach the issue of drug use, in a film that is ultimately about a man confronting his demons and overcoming his addictions. Honourable mentions: Central Intelligence (film, 1 February), Cast Away (film, 1 February), Beverly Hills Cop 1 and 2 (film, 1 February), Overlord (film, 1 February), Into the Wild (film, 1 February), It’s a Wonderful Life, (film, 1 February), Scrooged (film, 1 February), Ted (film, 1 February), The Fame (film, 1 February), The Truman Show (film, 1 February), The Witch (film, 1 February), School of Rock (film, 1 February) The Marvelous Mrs Maisel season 4 (TV, 18 February), Phat Tuesdays (TV, 4 February), I Want You Back (TV, 11 February). ABC iView Starstruck season two TV, UK/US, 2022 – out 16 February Rose Matafeo – whose oeuvre includes Baby Done and Squinters – is such a funny, charming and relatable presence, you never want to stop being around her. The New Zealand comedian created, wrote and stars in the thoroughly bingeable Starstruck, playing a woman living in London who discovers her one night stand is a super famous movie star (Nikesh Patel). This triggers a “will they or won’t they?” romantic back and forth that never gets old. Fingers crossed the second season is as good as the first. Troppo TV, Australia, 2022 – out 27 February Now that Jack Irish has finished and Guy Pearce has hung up his cape (well, cardigan) as one of Australian TV’s greatest private eyes, there is space for new players. Enter former police officer Ted Conkaffey (Thomas Jane) and ex-con Amanda Pharrell (Nicole Chamoun), who partner up to solve the disappearance of a Korean tech pioneer. Shot in Queensland and directed by veteran Jocelyn Moorhouse (whose work includes the superb Wakefield), Troppo is based on Candice Fox’s bestselling novel Crimson Lake. Honourable mentions: Good Grief (film, 9 February), Dementia and Us (TV, 15 February), How to Paint the Mona Lisa (TV, 16 February), The Missing Children (TV, 28 February). SBS on Demand Shadow Film, China, 2018 – out 5 February You may not have heard of director Zhang Yimou’s visually ravishing epic, but it was the best action movie of 2018, offering a genuinely fresh aesthetic experience. Inspired by Chinese ink brush paintings and the tai chi diagram, the production was shot in colour but filled with black and white sets and costumes, with almost all of its colour coming from the actors’ skin. Set during the Three Kingdoms era of Chinese legend (AD220-AD290), the narrative involves a bad-tempered king (Zheng Kai) and a commander (Deng Chao) who rallies against him. Unbeknown to the king, the commander is actually a doppelganger or “shadow”, with the real commander (also Deng Chao) wounded and in hiding. Police Story Film, China, 1985 – out now Jackie Chan is to movie martial arts what Charlie Chaplin was to silent comedy – pure physical genius. A decade on from the international superstar’s retirement announcement, nobody has come remotely close to filling his shoes, making it abundantly clear (if it wasn’t already) that history will remember him as a true one of a kind. Chan co-wrote, co-directed, starred in and of course performed his own stunts for this rolled-gold 80s classic about a kung fu police officer who must protect a witness (Bridgett Lin) from being killed by gangsters before being able to testify against them. Like many of his films, the final credits scene of Police Story includes a combination of outtakes, bloopers and behind-the-scenes footage. SBS on Demand has a ton of other Jackie Chan films to stream including Police Story 2, Armour of God, The Young Master and Wheels on Meals. Honourable mentions: Hidden Assets (TV, 2 February), Burning (film, 3 February), The Long Call (TV, 3 February), Educators seasons one and two (TV, 10 February), Devilsdorp (TV, 10 February), 12 Years a Slave (film, 22 February), The Light Between Oceans (film, 23 February), Hope (TV, 24 February). Binge The Girl Before TV, UK, 2021 – out 10 February In this four-part series based on the 2016 novel of the same name, Jane (Gugu Mbatha-Raw) moves into a sleek, ultra modern house after being interviewed by the architect/landlord himself, the mysterious Edward (David Oyelowo). He offers cheap rent with certain stipulations – the tenant must have few belongings and no kids. When Jane discovers a previous renter, who looked just like her, died at the house, she becomes a wee bit distraught and starts asking questions. But is her resemblance to the deceased woman merely a coinkydink? I learned that very fun word while reading Lucy Mangan’s review, immediately vowing to use it in as many places as possible going forward. Coinkydink! A Quiet Place Part II Film, US, 2020 – out 11 February I remember the name of the first (sadly now defunct) Facebook group I joined – “People who talk during movies deserve to get their tongues ripped out”. In John Krasinski’s well made smash-hit horror movies, people who make noise kind of do get their tongues ripped out and worse – getting quickly and gruesomely killed by vicious, blind aliens with an amazing sense of hearing. The catch, sadly, is that people in this world can’t watch movies either, unless they turn the volume right down. Krasinski shows a knack for sustaining suspense in both films, including the sequel, which follows the Abbott family’s continual struggle to survive (and stay silent) in a post-apocalyptic world. Honourable mentions: Raised by Wolves season 2 (TV, 3 February), An American Pickle (film, 4 February) Modern Family seasons 1-11 (film, 9 February), My Year with Helen (film, 15 February), The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part (film, 18 February), Dream Horse (film, 18 February), The Last Impresario (film, 21 February), Aretha Franklin (film, 24 February), Driving Miss Daisy (film, 25 February), Phar Lap (film, 25 February), Old (film, 27 February). Disney+ Pam &amp; Tommy TV, 2022, US – out 2 February We were all expecting something salacious, with wobbly bits and super-attractive celebrities but Pam &amp; Tommy delivered so much more. It is, among other things, a shrewd comedy, a crime drama and a history lesson of the early days of the internet centred around a cultural artefact (OK – sex tape) that arrived prior to the era of high-speed video streaming. Spending time in the company of the titular characters (played by Lily James and Sebastian Stan) is kind of fun and kind of irritating – their vacuousness infects everything. But creator and writer Robert D Siegel finds numerous ways into the story, including through an aggrieved electrician (played with broad appeal by Seth Rogen) who steals the infamous tape then tries to work out what to do with it. The French Dispatch Film, 2021, US – out 2 February Wes Anderson’s print journalism-inspired anthology film, set in the newsroom of an US publication in a fictitious French city, is far from the director’s best work – but it’s another opportunity to savour one of the most visually distinctive auteur’s working today. Expect a fastidiously arranged aesthetic and a stellar cast including Bill Murray, Owen Wilson, Tilda Swinton, Timothée Chalamet, Frances McDormand and Anjelica Huston. Honourable mentions: Torn (film, 4 February), The Proud Family: Louder and Prouder (TV, 23 February), No Exit (film 25 February), The Kid (film, 25 February). Paramount+ Women of the Movement TV, US, 2022 – out 15 February The first instalment in this anthology series about overlooked women in the civil rights movement – created by Marissa Jo Cerar and executive produced by Jay-Z and Will Smith – revolves around the brutal murder of Emmett Till in 1955, and the story of his mother, Mamie (Adrienne Warren), who famously resolved to “let the people see what they did to my boy”. Guardian reviewer Adrian Horton described the show as one that, at its best, “provocatively explores a chapter of American history most don’t know enough about with sensitivity, faithfulness and care not to exploit trauma”. Honourable mentions: Steelers: The World’s First Gay Rugby Club (film, 1 February), MT Unplugged: Lady Gaga and Tony Bennett (TV, 1 February), Star Trek: Prodigy (TV, 11 February), Line in the Sand (TV, 16 February).On Wednesday evening, in the first event of the 2022 Winter Olympics, Australians Tahli Gill and Dean Hewitt will make history. That is no mean feat. Representing a country with a proud Olympic record, there are few firsts left to be claimed in the green and gold uniform: Australia has competed at the Summer Games since federation and the Winter Games since 1936. But when the pair step out on to the ice for their opening encounter in the mixed doubles, they will become Australia’s first-ever Olympic curlers. Hailing from a country without a single dedicated curling facility, Gill and Hewitt’s road to Beijing has not been easy. At the Games they will be up against the sport’s heavyweights. “I think given we’re not a typical curling nation, we are probably considered an underdog,” says Gill. “It’s a strong field, every single team there is really good. But that means that any team could come out on top.” Including, potentially, Australia. “For everyone at the Olympics, you want to try and get a medal – that would be fantastic,” adds Hewitt. “We’re just going to push as hard as we can every game and see what we can do out there.” Curling was first played in Scotland in the early 16th century, with large, flat-bottomed rocks slid over frozen lakes. Today it typically takes place indoors on artificial ice-rinks and is popular in many cool-climate nations; Canada, Sweden, Switzerland, Norway and Great Britain dominate the sport competitively. “There is a lot involved: the precision, the power and endurance from sweeping as well,” says Hewitt. “And the strategy behind it is huge, the mental game is really important. It’s chess on ice, but we have to play really quickly – you’re on the clock.” So how did two Australians, Gill from sunny Queensland and Hewitt from Victoria, end up competing in an icy sport, at the highest level? Gill credits her mum. “She once saw curling at the Winter Olympics [on TV] and wanted to give it a go,” the 22-year-old says. “At the time I was figure-skating, so she was already in contact with the local ice rink.” When Gill’s mother was told the rink did not offer curling, she rounded up some Canadian and American expatriates and formed a curling club in Brisbane. “I saw her go training each night and ultimately represent Australia,” says Gill. “She really inspired me to give it a go – and now here I am.” It was a similar story for Hewitt, inspired by his Canadian mother, also a curling enthusiast. “I’ve been curling my whole life,” he says. Growing up in the tight-knit domestic curling scene, Gill and Hewitt knew each other from junior competitions. But Hewitt, now 27, five years older than Gill, graduated to senior competition first. It was not until they met again at the national championships a few years ago that the possibility of competing together emerged. “At the time Dean was playing with his mum, and I was playing with another partner,” says Gill. “Then Dean and his mum had a chat, and I got a call.” Hewitt stresses that it was a mutual decision, rebuffing a tongue-in-cheek interpretation that he dumped his mum for a new teammate. “She would have been over 60 for this Olympics, so we thought it was probably time to make a change and develop a team for the future,” he says. The decision to curl together soon paid off, with the pair finishing fourth in a field of 48 nations at the 2019 world championships in Norway. It was the best finish for an Australian team in any curling discipline. Two years later, Gill and Hewitt needed a similar performance to qualify for Beijing, with the top seven teams automatically progressing to the Olympics. But despite a win over heavyweights Canada, the pair ultimately placed 13th. This left Gill and Hewitt needing to finish in the top two at a last-gasp Olympic qualification event in the Netherlands in December, from a pool of 14 teams. A narrow one-point triumph over South Korea saw them secure their historic qualification spot. “It was very surreal,” Hewitt says. The magnitude of their achievement for Australian curling is not lost on Gill and Hewitt. “We knew that if we got a team to the Olympics, it would grow the sport, because there’s always a lot of interest after an Olympic year,” says Gill. Hewitt adds: “I hope it does wonders for Australian curling.” In an ideal world, increased interest would see the construction of a dedicated curling rink in Australia. “Hopefully that’s on the cards in the future,” Gill says. At present, clubs across the country train on multi-purpose hockey ice, used for ice hockey, figure skating and speed skating. “Those are the ice conditions we have to deal with, which are very different from when we’re overseas on dedicated curling ice,” she says. “But we make do with what we have and use the resources we’ve got in Australia.” The absence of a standalone curling rink is not the only barrier to the growth of curling in Australia. Curling stones, which weigh 20kg and are sourced from only two granite quarries in the world, one in Scotland and one in Wales, do not come cheap, at about $500 a stone. While some of Gill and Hewitt’s foreign rivals in Beijing curl professionally, the limited support for the sport in Australia means they both have other careers. Gill is studying to be a primary school teacher, while Hewitt is an exercise physiologist and works “a couple of odd jobs on the side”. After their 2019 world championships performance, the pair received some financial support from state institutes and the Olympic Winter Institute of Australia (which is underwritten by the Australian Institute of Sport). But compared to Summer Games sports, winter sports – and particularly curling – receive paltry funding. Having overcome the lack of facilities and support to blaze an unlikely trail to the Winter Olympics, Gill and Hewitt offer a fairy-tale story. Already, other smaller curling nations are rallying behind the Australians. If the pair perform well at the Ice Cube in the coming days (the round-robin competition begins on Wednesday, with games played through to the gold medal match the following Tuesday), a cult following awaits. Comparisons have been made to the Jamaican bobsleigh team’s 1988 Winter Olympics debut, which inspired the Disney movie Cool Runnings. “I think it has been mentioned that it’s kind of a Cool Runnings story, just because it’s so hot [in Australia], and curling is not very common,” says Gill. “That’s really cool.” Gill’s preparations were momentarily derailed when she tested positive upon arrival in Beijing, only to be given the green light to compete after then returning two negative results, and while she and Hewitt know that they will make history when they step out on the ice on Wednesday, the pair hope to take it all in their stride. “I think once you get out there, feel that ice underneath the slider and throw that first stone, I think once you actually get on the ice, it’ll feel like home,” says Hewitt. “It’s just when you look up, that’s the difference – when you see those Olympic rings.” For Australia, a proud sporting nation, it will be the first time Australians curlers have seen those Olympic rings. If Gill and Hewitt have their way, they will not be the last.This year hasn’t exactly got off to a roaring start for most people. 2022 feels more like, as one friend put it: “2020 – the trilogy”. As much as we’re hungry for change, many of us do not have the energy to make big, sweeping shifts; and even if we did, it’s entirely possible that the world will have other plans. So, what little things can we do to feel better right now? This January, Guardian Australia staff and contributors embarked on a month of easy wins – sharing the small discoveries and changes that improved their lives. Some involved giving back, some giving yourself a break, and a few involved personal admin – because if you just need to achieve something, anything, you can always turn to paperwork. If you’re looking for somewhere to start, treat this as an incrementalist, feelgood laundry list. Try one, or try the lot – whatever feels easy for you. Give yourself a break 1. Do something nice for yourself first thing in the morning. Whether your bliss looks like a bubble bath, a good book, a run or a video game, make it the first thing you do when you wake up, even if it’s only for five minutes. 2. Chronic people-pleasers, listen to this one: write a not-to-do list. When you find yourself trapped in a commitment you loathe, write it down. Keeping a list will help you remember to say no next time. 3. Dress like a seven-year-old. It’s fun, it saves you from fashion agony, and no one knows what to wear now anyway. Improve your health and wellbeing 4. Extend your on-foot commute. Getting off the bus a stop or two early will certainly lift your step count, and it might just lift your spirits too. 5. Want to cut down on booze? Impose alcohol-free days. A hard rule about when you can’t drink will give your body a break, and might make you more mindful on the days you do indulge. 6. Remember caffeine has a quarter life of 10-12 hours, so it’s best to stop drinking it after midday. Cutting out afternoon coffee and tea is a game-changer for troubled sleepers. And if you’re really lucky, you could even replace that 2pm piccolo with a nap. 7. Do kegels while the kettle boils. For men and women, a strong pelvic floor is core to all sorts of bodily functions (including fun ones like orgasms). Look after yours by incorporating a few minutes of exercises into your existing routine – you can do them anywhere. 8. If you’re having problems like acne, dryness or redness, treat your skin like what it is – the largest organ in your body – and ask your doctor for help. A scientifically sound skincare plan might involve a script or two, but it will be more effective (and maybe cheaper) in the long run than experimenting willy-nilly at the cosmetics counter. 9. You don’t have to sit still to meditate. Much like pelvic floor exercises, meditation can be incorporated into all sorts of daily activities. “When you give something the awareness and concentration to realise its causes and effects, that is meditation,” writes Bertin Huynh. 10. Do a cooldown without the workout. You’ll benefit from a few stretches or mobility exercises any time of day, but they’re particularly good before bed. 11. Speaking of nighttime routines, read for six minutes before bed. One-and-done wins 12. Renegotiate a bill. We might think loyalty is a trait to be rewarded, but when it comes to your utilities, insurance and other regular bills, it can be costly.. Contact your provider and call them out for it. 13. For an instant drop in stress levels, switch your Siri to the voice of an Irish man. It just sounds so much nicer. 14. This one is a bit of a pain at first, but the rewards are ongoing: set up a password manager. You’ll never have to remember a stack of random passwords again – or worse yet, use the same one for everything. 15. Consolidate your superannuation. It takes less than five minutes and could compound into a more comfortable retirement. 16. Keep your memories private by archiving your social media history. It will allow you to hide whatever you want from prying eyes, while still retaining a copy for your own records. Culinary achievements 17. Buy imperfect produce. It may not look as cute, but it’s cheaper, better for the planet and tastes just the same. 18. If your pantry is causing you panic, clear it out one shelf at a time. An orderly and decluttered fridge or store cupboard will make your life more pleasant, but that doesn’t mean you have to do it all at once. 19. Learn to make chilli oil. It goes with basically everything. 20. While you’re at it, learn to make dal. It’s healthy, easy and freezes well – so a pot tonight is a gift for your future self. 21. Plant an edible garden. Nothing tastes better than food you’ve grown yourself, and you’ll only need to tend to it five minutes a day. 22. Instead of frantically Googling what to cook for dinner every night, keep a written copy of your favourite recipes on file. 23. Or, prepare even further in advance and meal plan before you go grocery shopping. It’ll prevent that weird situation where your pantry is “simultaneously full of food … without the constituent parts to make a decent meal”. Saving time (and money) 24. If you miss having a coin jar that actually gets full, set up a round-up savings account. 25. Find a good tailor. Your clothes will look better because they fit better, and they’ll last longer because they’ll be fixed when they break. 26. You can’t mindlessly scroll what you can’t open: delete your social media apps from your phone. 27. Set up a throwaway email. Rather than climbing a mountain of unsubscribe buttons, if you use a different email address for commercial transactions, you’ll never have to deal with the ensuing spam. 28. Keep yourself organised the old fashioned way, and use a no frills, lo-fi notebook. Reconnect and give back 29. Get in touch with an old friend. A weird time to be alive is a good time to reach out – don’t worry if you’re in email debt or missed their last birthday, they probably feel the same way. 30. Directly help someone with something your body makes for free, by giving blood. How else can you save three lives in 10 minutes? 31. Set up a monthly charitable donation. Automating your philanthropy is quick, easy and better for the charity, because their cashflow is more predictable. Have you tried any of our easy wins? Let us know how they went in the comments belowAs temperatures soared last week, Cass Willcocks’s rental apartment in inner Melbourne quickly became “unliveable”. “It’s gotten to the point where the tiles in my kitchen are hot, I try to put moisturiser on and it’s hot. Everything in my apartment is literally baking and I feel like I’m suffocating,” she said. “I pay $395 a week for an apartment that’s basically unliveable. I’ve had to go work from my friend’s kitchen table in the air conditioning because I can’t concentrate. I’m barely sleeping.” Willcocks’s blackout curtains and a borrowed portable air conditioner were barely making a dent – a thermometer on her fridge showed the temperature inside her Thornbury apartment reached 36C on the evening of 25 January. There were three more days of above-average temperatures and warm nights ahead. “I sent my property manager an email with photos of the temperature gauge and tried to explain that I am really struggling. I told her I was desperate for a solution,” Willcocks said. She said her property manager replied: “I understand it has been very hot in Melbourne the past few days but it looks as though there’ll be a drop in temperature on the way”. Willcocks was left feeling “absolutely helpless” after the exchange. In Victoria, a suite of changes to rental laws were introduced in March 2021, including a requirement for landlords to provide a fixed heater in “good working order” in the living area of any property. From March 2023, the heater must also meet energy efficiency standards. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Tasmania is subject to similar requirements but is yet to introduce energy efficiency standards. But no state in Australia mandates that a landlord must provide a sufficiently cool living environment. This is despite extreme heat killing more Australians than any other form of natural disaster. A Victorian Council of Social Services (VCOSS) report, released last year, details how the January 2009 heatwave contributed to 374 excess deaths in the state and the January 2014 heatwave led to 167. VCOSS chief executive, Emma King, said “it’s not good enough that Victorians are sweltering in poorly insulated rentals, getting sick and sometimes even dying. “The government has indicated it’s looking to expand the current minimum standards in this manner. VCOSS looks forward to this work progressing, and the standards being updated in the future.” Victorian Greens leader, Samantha Ratnam, has written to consumer affairs minister Melissa Horne, asking her to amend the minimum standards for rental properties to make cooling mandatory. “With Victorian summers likely to get hotter and longer as we feel the effects of climate change, effective cooling will be necessary to keep rental homes safe and liveable in the summer months. “Introducing insulation standards for rental properties will also make it easier and cheaper for renters to keep their homes cool in the summer and warm in the winter.” Ratnam said adequate cooling could be in the form of air conditioning, ceiling fans or good insulation. Executive director of tenant advocacy group Better Renting, Joel Dignam, said not every rental property needed air conditioning but everyone did need a healthy home. “The standard wouldn’t necessarily explicitly require air conditioning but it should cover measures that reduce incoming heat, like curtains, as well as measures to deal with heat in your home, like ceiling fans,” he said. “We don’t want a situation where everyone needs to run an AC to try to cool down a sweltering dogbox, but we do need to keep people safe in their homes as we continue to face dangerous heatwaves.” Willcocks said landlords should have a responsibility to keep their properties at a safe and comfortable temperature. “Air conditioning at the moment is a luxury item and that is unacceptable in an Australian summer. It has to be an essential part of the service provided to us in our homes, regardless of how much rent you’re paying to the landlord,” she said.There are two highly anticipated new cookbooks that won’t be troubling Pinch of Nom’s position at the top of the charts any time soon – after they sank to the bottom of the ocean. New copies of Mason Hereford’s Turkey and the Wolf, which collects recipes from Hereford’s award-winning New Orleans restaurant, and Melissa Clark’s one-pot cookbook Dinner in One, were being transported on cargo ship The Madrid Bridge, which lost around 60 containers overboard in the mid-Atlantic earlier this month. Sharing the news with his would-be readers, Hereford appeared to be taking the loss in good spirits, describing it as “perhaps the most hilariously 2022 thing to happen yet this year”. “There was a container collapse on the cargo ship that contained the Turkey and the Wolf books. The good news is that there were no critical injuries, as can happen in these situations. But the bad news is the books might be in a cargo container at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean,” said Hereford on Instagram. The new release date for Hereford’s cookbook, which contains recipes including “potato chip–loaded fried bologna sandwiches, deviled-egg tostadas with salsa macha, and his mom’s burnt tomato casserole”, is 21 June. The title had originally been due out in February. Clark’s Dinner in One, featuring recipes for Miso-Glazed Salmon with Roasted Sugar Snap Peas, Cheesy Meatball Parm with Spinach and Cheaters Chicken and Dumplings, is also currently residing at the bottom of the ocean, and is thus also delayed, in Clark’s case until 6 September. “There was a maritime storm. Containers were crushed, some fell overboard. My cookbook, along with@turkeyandthewolf’s cookbook, is MIA on the wine-dark sea,” wrote Clark on Instagram. “I like to think that if the books are at the bottom of the ocean, they’re teaching whole schools of fish some very tasty recipes. Poseidon and his nereids are dining in style.” She also appeared sanguine about the disappearance of her book, joking: “I’m wrecked about this (ha), and SO impatient to get these one-pot recipes into your hands. Sigh. Glub, glub.”Customers of the UK’s biggest banks and building societies will be able to continue to use Post Office counters to pay in and withdraw cash, after an important arrangement was renewed. Following months of negotiations, the Post Office has announced that it will continue to offer basic banking services to most UK bank customers for a further three years. Had the negotiations failed, it would have left millions of people without reasonable access to cash withdrawals. The service, described as a “lifeline” for the millions of people and small businesses that rely on cash, allows customers at 30 banks and building societies to deposit cheques/cash at Post Office counters. The new agreement will see this remain until at least the end of 2025. The new deal, which covers three years from next January, is seen as key in securing the future acceptance of cash. Almost 98% of the population live within three miles of a Post Office, which tend to have longer opening hours than banks, with about 4,000 open at weekends. In December, the consumer group Which? claimed that almost half of the UK’s bank branches had been lost, or scheduled for closure, since 2015. The closures have left a number of towns without a functioning bank. Many smaller communities have lost access to free-to-use ATMs. More than £3bn a month of cash is deposited and withdrawn every month from the Post Office’s 11,500 branches. Nick Read, chief executive at the Post Office, said: “This agreement provides a continued lifeline to the millions of people and small businesses that rely on cash nationwide. It highlights the unique and vital role that the country’s Post Offices play in local communities and economies. “While banks are cutting their branch networks, Post Offices are seeing more and more deposits and withdrawals with Postmasters keeping their branches open long hours and helping to draw people to our high streets.” The online bank Monzo is the only big-name UK bank not to sign up to the initiative. The branchless bank allows customers to deposit cash using Paypoint, which is available in over 28,000 convenience stores. Last October, Lloyds Banking Group said it would close 41 Lloyds Bank and seven Halifax branches across England and Wales between January and April 2022. That came on top of 100 closures earlier in the year. Several weeks later TSB announced it was closing 70 branches – a quarter of its network, meaning it had more than halved the number of outlets it had over less than two years.Ryanair is preparing to slash prices to lure customers back on to its planes before the spring, as it warned of a “hugely uncertain” financial outlook. The Irish-listed carrier said “media hysteria” over the Omicron variant had worsened its losses in the last quarter of 2021 and shareholders could expect further disruption from Covid, although it was gearing up to run more flights overall this summer than before the coronavirus pandemic struck. Ryanair made a loss of €96m (£80m) in the last three months of last year – despite revenues four times higher than the autumn of 2020, when stricter international travel restrictions were still in place. Its chief executive, Michael O’Leary, said the first three months of 2022 would require “significant price stimulation at lower prices” to attract customers. The airline cut its capacity for January by a third after December passenger numbers dropped 1.5 million below forecast after Omicron hit travel. O’Leary said recent bookings had improved after the easing of travel restrictions but passengers were still booking later and nearer departure. The airline did not change its forecast for a full-year loss to March of €250m-€450m – a wider than usual range. O’Leary added: “This outturn is hugely sensitive to any further positive or negative Covid news flow and so we would caution all shareholders to expect further Covid disruptions before we here in Europe and the rest of the world can finally declare that the Covid crisis is behind us.” The chief financial officer said the legacy of the pandemic could mean a long-term change to airline practices, including wearing masks on board. Neil Sorahan told the Telegraph: “Masks will be something that will be with us for a while longer to come. It’s a bit like after 9/11, we ended up with our toiletries in plastic bags, maybe we’ll have to live with masks for a while longer.” The current high price of fuel was not a concern, Sorahan said: “We’re the best-hedged airline in Europe at the moment – fuel trading over $91 a barrel this morning we’ve locked in our fuel requirements at $60 a barrel so we’re in very good position on that over the next 15 months.” Ryanair meanwhile retained ambitions to open bases in Ukraine, should tensions with its neighbour recede, O’Leary said: “If it is not invaded by Russia, it is a country where we would expect to open a couple of bases … Some time in the next two or three years subject to agreements on costs.” Route planners had visited Ukraine again this month but the authorities were not in a position to discuss Ryanair’s expansion plans, O’Leary said, “as they were somewhat otherwise distracted”. The airline is targeting growth to 225 million passengers a year by 2026, and has taken delivery of 41 Boeing 737 Max aircraft, after years of delays after design flaws caused two fatal crashes. O’Leary has repeatedly described the Boeing 737 Max as a “game-changer” for the airline, offering lower costs and lower carbon emissions per flight. However, its overall footprint will grow: the planned 50% growth over the next five years would be accompanied by only a 16% reduction in fuel use per new plane. It hopes to cut fuel use per passenger by another 10% over the next decade by using synthetic fuels, which are not currently available at scale. Gerald Khoo, an analyst at Liberum, a stockbroker, said Ryanair was positioned for a strong recovery, adding: “There is growing industry optimism that summer 2022 could represent a near-normal trading period, with strong pent-up demand exceeding restrained industry capacity, so long as international travel restrictions continue to ease.”“The whole tour is one where the development of our game is actually more important than the series win,” Eoin Morgan said before a ball was bowled. “Our level of intensity and our performance is far more important than the result, and actually the result looks after itself.” The results did not, in the end, look after themselves. England leave Barbados defeated 3-2 in the T20 series but having participated in some gripping games in front of boisterous crowds. There is no shame in providing compelling entertainment and after a lopsided opening match, when on a poor pitch England were bowled out for 103 and West Indies won with ease, this series was tense throughout. As well as featuring two well-matched sides its success was largely down to scheduling. This was just the 14th five-game bilateral T20 series and it demonstrated how they allow narratives to emerge and intensity to build in a way that is impossible when there are fewer matches (England’s home T20 series against India and South Africa this year will be three games, as will West Indies’ in India this month). Once minds dizzied by an unforgettable conclusion have refocused on the medium-term goal of October’s T20 World Cup, Morgan might struggle to identify the positives. England’s captain missed three matches through injury, games where he would have hoped to reestablish his batting credentials, while players whose strengths are well known demonstrated those strengths – Adil Rashid was outstanding – players with acknowledged weaknesses had those weaknesses exposed and the ones we knew little about we learned little about. The series was not a good one for England’s batters. Including Akeal Hosein, who scored an unbeaten 44 in his only innings, West Indies had eight players whose batting average was equal to or, in most cases, significantly better than England’s best – and only 12 of their players batted. Jason Roy was England’s most consistent performer but often scored with uncharacteristic sluggishness at the start of his innings and ended with a strike rate of 130, not exactly shameful but his second-lowest in a series since 2016. The other opener, Tom Banton, had said: “I’m not going to fit in the strongest team at the moment so I’m just trying my best to one day hopefully be able to cement my position at the top.” He did enough to suggest one day he might. Of the squad’s other emerging talents three made their debuts in the third match but only one played more than once: Phil Salt’s 24-ball 57 was followed by two failures which, considering he was forced by circumstance into instant wild attacking, are forgivable. It would surely be worth experimenting with putting him higher up the order over the summer. With the exception of Reece Topley, whose return to the side after an absence of nearly six years exceeded all expectations, England’s seamers struggled. In Sunday’s decider, West Indies scored 45 for four in 10 overs against spin and 122 for none against seam. The death bowling was regularly savaged but while Chris Jordan and Tymal Mills hemorrhaged runs in the final overs, Saqib Mahmood leaked runs everywhere. Other than Topley, the only English seamers with their reputations enhanced were the absent Jofra Archer and Mark Wood. West Indies entered the series at the lowest of ebbs, humbled in their defence of the World T20 title last year and beaten at home by Ireland in an ODI series. For all that they faced a weakened England side and beat them narrowly, they travel to India with team, and hope, refreshed. “After losing to Ireland everyone was very, very down and deflated,” Jason Holder said. “Everybody had to do some soul-searching, and feeling the way we did really made us pull together. It’s one of the first times I’ve felt that strong togetherness in the dressing room.” Holder beat his previous highest score with the bat, as did Hosein, Kyle Mayers, Nicholas Pooran, Rovman Powell and Romario Shepherd. Well led by Kieron Pollard, they played with intensity and ability and the results looked after themselves.The much-anticipated report by the civil servant Sue Gray was published on Monday, but with a police inquiry now under way, it was limited in what it could say. Here we look at the questions it failed – or was unable – to answer. Does the Met expect to question Boris Johnson? Gray’s report doesn’t name who the police may wish to talk to, but there is an implicit suggestion that the prime minister is among those being investigated because of two events that are under scrutiny. The two events – one in his private flat and one garden party that he attended – have been judged to be serious breaches of lockdown. Johnson has always denied hosting events in his Downing Street flat, but the wording of Gray’s report suggests there is no ambiguity here. Gray identifies failures of leadership and judgment – but by whom? In other circumstances, Gray would have been expected to name Johnson and other senior No 10 figures who were responsible for the failings she identifies. Whitehall sources suggest she had the option of doing so but she has not named any of those she might have censured if she had more freedom. There are some hints of whom she might have criticised or found mitigations for. She writes: “Too much responsibility and expectation is placed on the senior official whose principal function is the direct support of the prime minister. This should be addressed as a matter of priority.” This is understood to refer to Martin Reynolds, Johnson’s principal private secretary. Who organised the gatherings, and how many people went to them? Whitehall sources have always made clear that lists of junior officials who attended each event were never likely to be published, though HR disciplinary processes could follow and those officials could receive penalty charge notices. But there is an expectation that it might be disproportionate to allow all those names to become public. The question of who organised the events is a different story, and throws the spotlight on Reynolds, who sent an email inviting people to summer drinks, and other senior staff who organised leaving or Christmas parties. There is also a question about the flat party – should the Met now investigate the PM’s wife, Carrie Johnson? Is it plausible that Johnson could have believed the garden gathering was a work event? There is no focus on the prime minister’s claim that he thought “implicitly” that the May 2020 “bring your own booze” party organised in the Downing Street garden by his senior aide was a work meeting. But Gray does make some acknowledgment that the garden was used for work meetings. That is not necessarily accepted as an excuse. Indeed, Gray finds that it was potentially inappropriate. “The use of the garden at No 10 Downing Street should be primarily for the prime minister and the private residents of No 10 and No 11 Downing Street,” she writes. “During the pandemic, it was often used as an extension of the workplace as a more Covid-secure means of holding group meetings in a ventilated space. This was a sensible measure that staff appreciated, but the garden was also used for gatherings without clear authorisation or oversight. This was not appropriate. Any official access to the space, including for meetings, should be by invitation only and in a controlled environment.”A Connecticut mayor has ordered two police officers placed on administrative leave amid scrutiny over the alleged mishandling of investigations of the deaths of two Black women. According to family members, investigations into the deaths of Lauren Smith-Fields, 23, and Brenda Lee Rawls, 53, both on 21 December, were mishandled by officers who did not investigate in a timely manner or notify relatives. Smith-Fields was found unresponsive in her apartment after a date with a man she met through the dating app Bumble. The man, who is white and whose name has not been released as he has not been charged with a crime, called 911. Police did not notify Smith-Fields’s family. When she did not respond to text messages or calls, her mother and brother drove to her apartment. They found a note on her door reading: “If you’re looking for Lauren, call this number.” Smith-Fields’s landlord subsequently told her family about her death and passed on the number of the detective assigned. When Smith-Fields’s family asked officers about the man who was with her, her mother told the New York Times, the investigating detective said not to worry and that “he’s a really nice guy”. Amid widespread outrage, a medical examiner said Smith-Fields died from an accidental overdose of fentanyl combined with prescription medication and alcohol. The acting Bridgeport police chief, Rebeca Garcia, said police were now focusing on “the factors that led to her untimely death”. Confirmation of the cause of Rawls’s death is pending, according to the Connecticut chief medical examiner. She was reportedly found unresponsive by an acquaintance who said her body was taken by police and coroner’s officials. Family members were not notified directly by law enforcement. After calls to police, hospitals and funeral homes, the state medical examiner, who had already performed an autopsy, confirmed her death. “It’s almost like they’re not aware of her death, or they just don’t care and that made us angry,” Dorothy Washington, Rawls’s sister, told CNN. “She was raised and born in Bridgeport, Connecticut, paid her taxes, voted and they treated like she was nothing. Like she was roadkill.” On Sunday, Joseph Ganim, the mayor of Bridgeport, shared his condolences with the families of the two women. He was, he said, “extremely disappointed with the leadership of the Bridgeport police department”. Ganim also called for disciplinary action against the two officers, “for lack of sensitivity to the public and failure to follow police policy”. “The Bridgeport police department has high standards for officer sensitivity, especially in matters involving the death of a family member,” Ganim said. “It is an unacceptable failure if policies were not followed. “To the families, friends and all who care about the human decency that should be shown in these situations in this case by members of the Bridgeport police department, I am very sorry.” Bridgeport police did not immediately comment.We would like to hear about your exercise routines and how they might have changed since Covid restrictions eased in the UK. Do you continue to use your exercise bike at home? Or have you abandoned it and returned to the gym or exercising outside? Tell us all about it below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The Pulitzer prize-winning Holocaust graphic novel Maus: A Survivor’s Tale has become a bestseller on Amazon, after a Tennessee school board banned it. Last week, according to meeting minutes, 10 school board members in McMinn county agreed to remove Maus from the eighth-grade curriculum, citing “rough, objectionable language” and sketches of naked women they deemed unsuitable for 13-year-old students. By the American cartoonist Art Spiegelman and first published in 1986, Maus describes the experiences of Spiegelman’s parents in Nazi concentration camps and his mother’s suicide. The book depicts Jewish people as mice and Nazis as cats. “We don’t need to enable or somewhat promote this stuff,” McMinn county board member Tony Allman said, adding in reference to the murder of 6 million Jewish people in the second world war: “I am not denying it was horrible, brutal and cruel. “It shows people hanging,” he said. “It shows them killing kids. Why does the education system promote this kind of stuff? It is not wise or healthy.” Another board member, Mike Cochran, said: “If I was trying to indoctrinate somebody’s kids, this is how I would do it. You put this stuff just enough on the edges, so the parents don’t catch it but the kids, they soak it in. I think we need to relook at the entire curriculum.” Spiegelman, 73, told CNBC he was “baffled”. “It’s leaving me with my jaw open, like, ‘What?’” he said, adding that the board was acting in “Orwellian” fashion. “I’ve met so many young people who … have learned things from my book,” he said. “I also understand that Tennessee is obviously demented. There’s something going on very, very haywire there.” As news of the McMinn ban spread, Maus shot on to multiple top 10 lists in Amazon book categories. As of Monday morning, The Complete Maus was second in Amazon’s overall bestseller category. In history, it ranked first. In second world war history, Maus I, the first installment of the novel, also ranked No 1. Variations took the first, second and third spots as bestsellers in literary graphic novels. Efforts have also emerged to make Maus more accessible to students. One professor at a North Carolina college offered eighth-grade and high-school students in McMinn county a free online class. “In response to Spiegelman’s Maus I and Maus II being removed from the schools by McMinn county, Tennessee school board members, I am offering this free online course for any McMinn county eighth-grade or high school students interested in reading these books with me,” said Scott Denham of Davidson College. “I have taught Spiegelman’s books many times in my courses on the Holocaust over many years,” he added, on his website. Richard Davis, owner of the Nirvana Comics bookstore in Knoxville, Tennessee, offered to loan The Complete Maus to any student. Davis also set up a GoFundMe campaign to buy additional copies. Created with a target of $20,000, it had raised more than $80,000 by Monday. “Art Spiegelman’s masterpiece is one of the most important, impactful and influential graphic novels of all time,” the page said. “We believe it is a must-read for everyone.”The government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, is to become the next chair of the Natural History Museum, a position he is understood to be taking on in addition to his current roles. Vallance has been a key figure in informing the government’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic, most notably around understanding the risks and mitigation of the virus and prioritising vaccine development. He said he had loved the museum since he was a young boy. He is expected to join its board of trustees in October and become its non-executive chairman in early 2023, taking over from Lord Stephen Green. He said: “I have loved the museum since first visiting as a young child. It inspired me to pursue a career in science and continues to inspire wonder in visitors of all ages as well as being a world-leading scientific research institute. “I am hugely looking forward to the opportunity to contribute to its continuing success.” The Natural History Museum is based in South Kensington, London and has another site at Tring in Hertfordshire. Dr Douglas Gurr, director of the museum, said: “The Natural History Museum is well known as a much loved visitor attraction but is also a world-leading scientific research centre working on solutions for the planetary emergency – from biodiversity loss to climate change. “We are thrilled that Sir Patrick will be joining to drive forward our mission of creating advocates for the planet and building a world in which both people and planet can thrive.” The appointment was made by the board of trustees of the Natural History Museum, and endorsed by Boris Johnson and the culture secretary, Nadine Dorries. Dorries said Vallance had been “an extraordinary, dedicated servant to the nation during the coronavirus pandemic”, adding that he would bring a wealth of experience to “help the museum take its important work forward and inspire more people from all backgrounds to pursue an interest in natural history”. Vallance was the chief scientific adviser to the Cop26 climate summit, and leads the Net Zero Innovation Board, which supports the drive to cut emissions to zero overall by 2050. He previously headed research and development at GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and before that was a clinical academic, professor of medicine, and led the division of medicine at UCL. He has also been a consultant physician in the NHS.Galina Samsova, who has died aged 84, was a ballerina with a distinctive Russian style, who was acclaimed in the west at a time when few Soviet-trained dancers were performing there. A radiant and musical dancer, Samsova was noted for her soaring jump, her stunningly eloquent and pliable back, her rich port de bras and her acting ability. Once seen she was not forgotten, despite lacking the advantages of a traditional ballerina’s body. Not only was Samsova a great dancer but she was also a generous person, ever ready to help her colleagues and young dancers. She was loved and respected by those she worked with, and in the last three decades was in demand as a judge at international ballet competitions. It was through seeing talented young dancers in competitions that she brought, for example, the Czech Daria Klimentová and Spanish Tamara Rojo to Scottish Ballet, where in the 1990s she served as artistic director, launching their careers in Britain. As she rarely danced with the most publicised companies, making few appearances with the Royal Ballet (although she did dance Kenneth MacMillan’s Isadora in 1982), Samsova was less of a household name in Britain than she deserved to be. Samsova was permitted to move from Ukraine to the west, initially joining the National Ballet of Canada, in 1960 when she met and married Alexander Ursuliak, a Canadian-Ukrainian teacher who was extending his experience of Russian dance. The marriage eventually ended in divorce. Her arrival just months before the defection of Rudolf Nureyev attracted nothing like the same attention in the media. She had only been of soloist rank at the Kiev Opera Ballet, but quietly she exerted a similar influence, staging short works from the Russian repertoire such as Laurencia. She also mounted the version of the virtuosic Corsaire pas de deux (in Robert Klavin’s staging) in Canada just weeks before Nureyev presented it partnering Margot Fonteyn in London. As the critic James Neufeld noted: “At a time when artistic contact with Russia was virtually impossible, her arrival generated excitement and artistic ferment within the company. Samsova was an electrifying performer, in full command of the Russian strength and athleticism which Canadian dancers had only heard about.” Samsova secured her position as an international star, dancing the title role in Cinderella, choreographed by Vaslav Orlikovsky, for the first international festival of dance in Paris in 1963. Receiving the festival’s gold medal opened doors for Samsova to guest with a range of companies, and she eventually found a “home” at London Festival Ballet (1964-73). Galina Martinova Samtsova (her name was simplified to Samsova in the west) was born in Stalingrad (now Volgograd). On her own initiative, as a child she auditioned for, and was offered a place at, the Kiev Opera Ballet school, where she became a pupil of Natalia Verekundova. But she then had to win her parents’ approval to accept. She graduated into the company in Kiev in 1956, and never severed her links with the Kiev Opera Ballet. She returned to dance in Swan Lake and later to research for the acclaimed production of that ballet she mounted with Sir Peter Wright for the Sadler’s Wells Royal Ballet in 1981. At the National Ballet of Canada in the early 60s, she was exposed for the first time to choreography by Antony Tudor (whose dramatic work she enjoyed), George Balanchine and John Cranko, a trio of choreographers whose work she would include in Scottish Ballet’s repertory when she became artistic director there three decades later. After moving to London Festival Ballet, she could be relied on to add glamour and excitement to the ballet’s divertissement and mixed programmes, dancing Le Corsaire and the lyrically acrobatic Spring Waters. She triumphed as an interpretive artist in Swan Lake with her lyricism and pathos; brought femininity, charm and wit to the lively Kitri in Don Quixote (1970); and her performances as Giselle were ethereal and deeply moving. In the 1970s she established New London Ballet with her partner and second husband, André Prokovsky, whom she had met while guesting and brought back to London Festival Ballet. They married in 1972. New London Ballet was a small company designed to tour in Europe and Asia, focusing on creating new ballets. Samsova was delighted by opportunities to work closely with leading choreographers, many of whom invited her to dance elsewhere. As she said: “Some things worked choreographically, some things didn’t … but at least it gave me a chance to … see how I could develop in another way.” For Samsova, Peter Darrell created Desdemona in his Othello (1971) and the mature but still vibrantly passionate courtesan Léa in Chéri (1980). Jack Carter made a powerful 20-minute solo for Samsova as the Delphic Sybil in Pythoness Ascendant (1973) in which she developed into a visionary prophetess of awesome grandeur. Prokovsky drew on his wife’s comic ability in his academic showpiece Vespri (1972), and, later, her dramatic talent in Königsmark, as well as Anna Karenina (both 1979), for Australian Ballet. In the late 70s she began appearing as a guest with Sadler’s Wells Royal Ballet, joining the company from 1980 until 1990. Here again, her wide repertoire revealed her versatility, and she had the opportunity to create and dance roles for MacMillan. She also became an inspiring and considerate company teacher, and produced the grand pas from Paquita, and, in 1999, Giselle with David Bintley. After a brief period in 1990 as a caretaker artistic director for Scottish Ballet in the interregnum following Darrell’s death, she was officially appointed to the post in 1991. While there, she built up the company’s academic ballet repertoire and invited Jasper Conran to design new productions of Sleeping Beauty and Swan Lake. She also invited Robert Cohan to choreograph full evening ballets. Eventually, frustrated by funding cuts, in 1997 she resigned. Samsova and Prokovsky divorced in 1981. • Galina Samsova (Galina Martinova Samtsova), born 17 March 1937; died 11 December 2021Learn more about Velux’s sustainability journeyIt can be easy to lose track of the main alleged lockdown parties, leaving dos, “wine Fridays” and work meetings being investigated by Sue Gray and by the Metropolitan police. Here is a full rundown of who is looking into what, and the broad details of all the claims we know about. Events being investigated by police 1) 20 May 2020: ‘BYOB’ in No 10 garden One of the more explosive revelations, after the publication of a leaked email to No 10 staff inviting them, during the first lockdown, to “make the most of the lovely weather” and attend drinks in the garden, adding “BYOB” – “bring your own booze”. The email was sent by Johnson’s principal private secretary, senior civil servant Martin Reynolds. The PM and his wife Carrie attended for a time. Johnson apologised but insisted he only realised in retrospect it might have been a social gathering. 2) 18 June 2020: Cabinet Office gathering for departure of official This is a claim that has not previously seen the light of day. Gray’s report describes it only as “a gathering in the Cabinet Office, 70 Whitehall, on the departure of a No 10 private secretary”. No indication whether Johnson was present. 3) 19 June 2020: PM’s surprise birthday The most recent public revelation. Downing Street has accepted that about 30 people, among them the interior designer Lulu Lytle, who is not a member of staff but was renovating Johnson’s flat, gathered to mark Johnson’s birthday in the cabinet room. No 10 say Johnson was there for less than 10 minutes. There was, reportedly, a birthday cake, singing, and picnic food from Marks &amp; Spencer. The Northern Ireland minister, Conor Burns, later memorably defended Johnson, saying the PM had been “ambushed with a cake”. 4) 13 November 2020: No 10 leaving event On the day that Johnson’s former chief aide Dominic Cummings was removed, there is a mention of “a gathering in No 10 Downing Street on the departure of a special adviser”. As Cummings left abruptly, this seems likely to refer to the departure on the same day of Lee Cain, Johnson’s then head of communications. It is not clear whether Johnson attended. 5) 13 November 2020: gathering in Johnson’s flat Sources have reported that on the day Cummings departed, loud music and other party noises came from the No 11 flat occupied by Johnson and his wife Carrie, a known foe of Cummings. Downing Street has denied any rule-breaking, and it is not clear who was there. 6) 17 December 2020: the Christmas quiz An alleged social event took place in the office of the cabinet secretary, Simon Case – who was initially meant to have led the Gray report but stepped down after the claim about his own office. The invite billed it as a “Christmas party”, but government insiders said it was a virtual quiz and Case only passed through the event on the way to his office. Johnson did not attend. 7) 17 December 2020: Cabinet Office leaving event for senior official Kate Josephs, the former Covid taskforce head, has apologised for attending a drinks gathering to mark her leaving the civil service on the same day. She is now chief executive of Sheffield city council, where her future is uncertain. 8) 17 December 2020: No 10 leaving event Another previously unknown gathering mentioned in the report. It says only: “A gathering in No 10 Downing Street on the departure of a No 10 official.” It is not clear who that was, or who attended. 9) 18 December 2020: No 10 Christmas party According to witnesses, dozens of staff gathered for a Christmas party, with cheese and wine passed around, a mock awards ceremony and secret Santa gifts exchanged. This event propelled coverage of the parties after a video emerged of Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then press secretary, joking about it a few days later. 10) 14 January 2021: No 10 leaving event for officials Another claim emerging for the first time in Gray’s report. It is described thus: “A gathering in No 10 Downing Street on the departure of two No 10 private secretaries.” It is not confirmed who they are, or who attended. 11) 16 April 2021: Downing Street garden/first leaving party One of the most damaging claims – that on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral, where the Queen sat alone, two leaving events were held in No 10. The first, and seemingly less rowdy, was for James Slack, who was the prime minister’s official spokesperson under both Theresa May and Johnson, before becoming Johnson’s director of communications. Johnson was at Chequers that evening. 12) 16 April 2021: Downing Street garden/second leaving party The second of the events, for a government photographer, reportedly began in the basement, with music played by an official. It is believed this is the event for which an official bought a suitcase full of wine from a nearby supermarket. The two events later combined in the garden, where one reveller sat on and broke the swing of Johnson’s infant son, Wilfred. Events in the Gray report but not part of the police inquiries 13) 15 May 2020: gathering in No 10 garden This was the event captured in a now famous photo shown to the Guardian, portraying a series of groups on the No 10 terrace and lawn, among them the Johnsons, Cummings and Reynolds, sitting at a table with wine and a cheese board. The Gray report refers only to “a photograph showing a number of groups in the garden of No 10 Downing Street”, perhaps indicating that she did not hear from witnesses about it. Johnson insisted he believed it was a work event. 14) 27 November 2020: No 10 leaving do For No 10 aide Cleo Watson. Johnson is known to have attended the event, remarking on how crowded the room was before making a short speech and leaving. 15) 10 December 2020: Department for Education Christmas event Gavin Williamson, then education secretary, held drinks in his department for staff. The department’s most senior civil servant, Susan Acland-Hood, said she attended the “work-related” gathering in which people congregated in the canteen for Williamson to “say a few words”. 16) 15 December 2020: No 10 Christmas quiz Johnson hosted the Christmas quiz in Downing Street, and was pictured on a screen reading out questions flanked by staff who wore tinsel and a Santa hat. Some staff joined virtually, but sources said others crowded around desks. Events not in the report 17) 25 November 2020: Treasury ‘impromptu drinks’ The Treasury defended officials holding an “impromptu” drinks party to celebrate Rishi Sunak’s autumn spending review during lockdown. A spokesperson said a “small number” of staff had celebrated around their desks. 18) Before Christmas 2020: defence adviser leaving event The Mirror alleged that the PM gave a speech at a leaving event for his then defence adviser, Capt Steve Higham, in the run-up to Christmas. 19) 14 December 2020: CCHQ Christmas party for Shaun Bailey A picture showed that an event hosted by the campaign for the Conservatives’ London mayoral candidate, Shaun Bailey, was held in Tory campaign headquarters, with buffet food. Police are looking into the gathering. 20) 16 December 2020: Department for Transport gathering The Mirror said staff of the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, threw a Christmas party at which almost a dozen staff were “boozing and dancing” in a Whitehall office.In a 2021 study, 57% of UK residents said they wanted to be “more eco-friendly”, and for many people this quest has begun at home. Interest in green home improvements has grown thanks to increased awareness of sustainability and because, having spent a long time in their homes during the pandemic, householders have become more creative with renovations. Everyone has a part to play in helping the environment – here’s how three people have done this at home … ‘We’re no longer wearing coats in our house’ “We could almost see the energy disappearing out of the house and we realised this was having a damaging impact on the environment,” says Matt Lowing. When Lowing and his wife, Valéria, bought a 1930s semi in Tadworth, Surrey, they noticed it had drafts running through the downstairs. “We were shivering all the time and wasting lots of fuel,” he says. “We had very high heating bills, which was a concern but so was the environmental impact. For a while we would have a coal fire running to warm us up but then we realised that was bad for the environment too, so we decided to get some [more energy efficient] triple glazing installed.” The 46-year-old is delighted with the results, which have made his home a more comfortable place to live. “We’re no longer wearing coats in the house, which is nice, and we’ve noticed a significant reduction in our bills,” says Lowing. “The heat isn’t escaping through gaps in doors and old windows. “Also, since having our first child, Raphael, we’ve become more aware of how important sustainability is. We want to carry on making small changes that will hopefully make a difference to the home and the wider planet.” ‘I can see the birds and bees enjoying the garden we’ve created for them’ Hanna Hammond lives with her husband, Mark, in the Wiltshire village of Great Somerford. Last year, they decided to transform their garden into an ethical, wildlife-friendly paradise. “There’s lots of wildlife around us and we wanted to make sure our garden was friendly to butterflies, bees, birds and hedgehogs,” she says. She and Mark consulted a gardener, who helped them select plants such as foxgloves and astrantia, which would attract bees, butterflies and birds. “There are lots of geraniums and they’re so prolific and robust that they’re basically thugs, which is great because the bumble bees love them,” she says. “So last summer we had different types of bees and it sounded amazing out there – you could really hear the buzzing.” The 50-year-old’s garden is on a hedgehog highway and she was keen to make it more safe and welcoming for the prickly visitors, particularly because she has six rescue dogs and they would sometimes “terrorise” the hedgehogs. So she has fenced off a part, giving the hedgehogs a safe space. She has also installed hedgehog tunnels in the fencing and left part of the grass to grow wild, so hedgehogs can hide in it. “We’ve also now got some hooligan sparrows that live in the hedging,” she smiles. “Itwas so lovely to look out of the office window and see all the birds and bees enjoying the garden we’ve created for them.” For Hammond, the transformation of the garden was a philosophical, as well as physical, pursuit. “I believe that a garden can either take away from the environment and the animals or it can give to them,” she says. “We prefer to give. The countryside belongs to the animals and not us. We just live here with them.” ‘Insulating the loft was quick and easy to get done’ When Saphia Fleury and her husband moved from London to Hull in 2020, they noticed that their winter heating bills at the new home were “colossal” because it was poorly insulated. To address the issue, they decided to get insulation put in their loft, and were surprised how cheap this was – less than £200 – and how simple. “I think people imagine it’s complex, akin to getting a new roof, but it’s really quick and easy to get it done,” she says. “It took an afternoon. They brought in these big rolls of insulation material and just unrolled them across the floor of the loft and then they were done.” Fleury says she wanted to make her house as energy-efficient as she could – “for ourselves and the environment”. She says the simple improvement has made her house warmer and it now doesn’t take so long to heat up. “We find we don’t need to have the heating on at night, thanks to the insulation,” she says. “It’s nice to know that you’re not just burning fuel unnecessarily and that you can save money,” adds Fleury, who also buys appliances that are as energy-efficient as possible and is replacing any spent light bulbs with LED versions. With predictions that gas bills will soar, Fleury is even more delighted she got her loft insulated. “There’s been a very noticeable difference and I really recommend it,” she says. For anyone looking to make their home more environmentally friendly, roof windows from Velux may well hit the spot because the manufacturer has put sustainability at the core of its strategy. In keeping with goal 3 of the UN 2030 sustainable development goals, the Velux Group says it strives to bring “health and wellbeing” to a building’s users. When it comes to sustainability, the durability of a product is key, which is why Velux roof windows are built to last for at least three decades. Additionally, Velux is working on deep emission cuts across its entire value chain. Velux roof windows are made with wood from responsibly managed forests thanks to the company’s forest partners, with replacement trees being planted and biodiversity and wildlife habitats protected. Learn more about Velux’s sustainability journeyOn paper, it’s the ultimate property no-brainer. Why move house when you can add an entire new floor – and extra value – to your home, for significantly less stress, upheaval and money? Enquiries about loft conversions have rocketed since the start of the pandemic – and it’s easy to see why. Converting your loft can can transform the space, by providing an extra bedroom (or two), or a home office, bathroom, dressing room or playroom, without eating into your garden. And the work can add to the value of your home, potentially increasing it by about 20%. For many homeowners, though, the prospect of building upwards is quite daunting; and, as with any building work, it can be hard to know where to begin. The good news is that loft conversions are a lot simpler than you might think, and most are surprisingly straightforward. All you need to do is take a few key factors into consideration during the planning stages: Is your loft suitable? First, you’ll need to know if your home is suitable for conversion. Measure the head height of your loft, from the floor joists to the highest point of the room; ideally it should be more than 2.2 metres. Another tip is to look at other similar houses on your street – if they have loft conversions, it’s likely you will be able to have one too. Ask to have a nose around – it’s a great way to get an idea of what’s possible. Other things to consider include the type and shape of your roof; and whether there’s room for the staircase to wind up from the floor below. A surveyor, builder or architect can help you with this. The legal bit Building into your loft is officially classed as a “minor home improvement” in the UK. As such, most conversions fall under permitted development rights, and don’t require planning permission, unless your build is particularly large or tricky. However, you will still need building regulations approval, to make sure your new loft is structurally sound, fire safe, and sufficiently insulated. If your build is going to involve a wall you share with an adjoining property, you’ll also need a party wall agreement, to let your neighbours know your plans. Ask your builder, loft conversion company or architect to advise you. Assembling your team of tradespeople Start with recommendations; talk to neighbours and friends or visit local online forums; and ask anyone locally with a loft conversion who they used and whether they’re happy. You can choose to work with an architect and a separate builder; or a specialist loft conversion company that will handle both the design and build. Get several detailed quotes, ask for references, check accreditation, and always get everything in writing. Configuring the space Deciding on the layout for your loft will depend not only on what’s structurally possible (and your budget) but also how you plan to use the space. When talking to your architect or loft company, think about what’s missing in your home – do you need a place to work, play, or an extra bedroom? Would a separate bathroom or an ensuite work better? Once your loft is converted, you’ll have less room for general storage, so plan some clever solutions for that, too. Let there be light Filling your loft with natural light will transform the space, making it bright and welcoming, which can bring benefits for wellbeing – and it’ll also make it look and feel bigger. Ideally, glazing should cover an area equivalent to at least 20% of your overall floor space. Choose windows carefully – with dormers, go for the largest size possible; or consider french doors with a Juliet balcony. Velux roof windows are a good choice as they let in up to twice as much light as windows on the walls. They come in many styles, including centre-pivot roof windows for easy cleaning; top-hung styles for great views; and electric roof windows that can be opened or closed at the flick of a switch or a swipe of your smartphone. What’s more, they can be fitted with a wide range of integrated blinds, for privacy, blackout, or simple good looks, as well as exterior products that include shutters and awning blinds. Material difference Choosing long-lasting, durable and sustainable materials will reduce your energy consumption and save time, money and stress on repairs down the line. Your roof will be exposed to our unpredictable, and at times unforgiving, climate, as will any new windows you install as part of the conversion. Velux roof windows often last more than three decades, and are built with sustainably certified wood, making them a great choice if you want to consider the environment in your build, while also minimising wear and tear down the line. Speak to your builders about where sustainability can be improved – from recycled insulation to paints free of volatile organic compounds, most elements of the loft conversion process can be made greener with a little research. Ventilation and insulation Heat rises, so when you’re planning a loft conversion it makes sense to consider carefully how to keep it in – and let it out. A badly insulated home can lose a quarter of its heat through the roof, so insulating your walls and roof properly will improve the energy efficiency of your home, reduce your carbon emissions and save you money, as well as keeping you warm. However, loft spaces can get very hot during the summer; so ventilation is worth considering. Ventilation is also important in the winter, as a means to avoid humidity in the home – humidity leads to mould, which can damage fixtures and is also bad for your health. While you can look at ventilation systems or air conditioning, the simplest way to ventilate is via your windows. Velux roof windows give you the benefit of the stack effect. If you open a facade window at the same time as a roof window, the air flow can be many times greater than just having an open facade window. Velux Integra electric roof windows even have pre-defined ventilation controls for automatic airing. Decor decisions Creating rooms from scratch gives you a blank canvas to work with. Search Pinterest and Instagram for ideas on colours, finishes and features; look at friends’ lofts for inspiration; and don’t rush decisions – this is the fun bit, after all, how often do you get to do out a room from scratch? Learn more about Velux’s sustainability journeyFor many of us, home working – or at least hybrid working – appears to be here to stay. Our increased time at home means that, quite naturally, we’re more conscious of the functionality of our environment there. While we probably can’t alter our offices at work in any significant way, homeowners are free to make the changes they need to transform their space and create the most beneficial setting for their mental health and wellbeing. One way to do this is by investing in solutions that give you access to as much natural light and ventilation as possible. Jens Christoffersen, who works at Velux as a senior researcher in the Daylight, Energy and Indoor Climate group (DEIC), says that daylighting (the use of openings, such as roof windows, to bring sunlight into your home) and air quality are vital when considering health and comfort in building design. “We know that sitting close to a window increases satisfaction because you have the possibility of seeing a view outside, and if you are satisfied, you might also be more productive,” Christoffersen says. This is backed by a study on office workers and is linked to the innate human need to have a regular connection to the natural environment. “We also know that access to daylight in an indoor environment like a classroom at a school can help nurture learning abilities.” In a study of 2,000 classrooms, it was found that students in classrooms with the highest window surface area produced 7% to 18% higher scores on tests than those with the least window area or daylight. Appropriate light signals during the day and darkness at night have been shown to be important when it comes to the alignment of our body clock. As Christoffersen says: “One of the things we have learned over the past 20 years is that the light that comes through our eyes influences different elements within our body and brain. It controls different hormones, so if you get enough and proper light at the right time, it can have an impact on alertness. This can entrain your body to follow a 24-hour cycle and improve your circadian rhythms. “Some of us are also more affected by the shorter daytime light and the longer night-time light in winter,” he says. “A significant portion of the population does have challenges with seasonal changes, and these kinds of things can knock your mental health.” In fact, 0.4% to 9.7% of the world’s population are estimated to suffer from seasonal affective disorder (Sad), which is largely associated with how much outside light is available to us in the winter. In addition, two to three times as many are somewhat mildly (sub-Sad) affected by seasonal changes. It has been shown that exposure to daylight can reduce Sad symptoms, and since S-Sad is relatively widespread, the impact of daylight on performance may be high. A WHO survey, which looked at eight cities across Europe, demonstrated that individuals reporting inadequate natural daylight in their homes had a greater risk of depression and falls. Since 2010, Christoffersen’s role at Velux has involved using research to develop innovative products that provide daylighting solutions for architects, designers and builders to use in their projects, for example specially designed sun tunnels, flat-roof windows and programmable roof windows. He points to good air circulation, fresh air and a less humid environment created by the opening of windows. The additional benefits of making an investment in daylighting solutions include energy efficiency, which equates to potentially lower bills. “Changing your single-glazed window to a triple-glazed window, for example, can make a difference. Our products are getting more and more energy efficient and that of course will affect your energy bill,” he says. This is not just about reducing heating loss – one study showed that increased daylight is estimated to reduce the need for artificial lighting by 16-20%, depending on the location and orientation of the house. Christoffersen believes that homeowners are much more aware of the benefits of having a pleasant space from which to work, especially as a result of lockdown. Over the past two years, he says, people have been “adding windows and getting a good indoor environment with a good flow of daylight that can totally transform a space”. Aside from the clear physical and psychological advantages, natural daylight and ventilation can reduce condensation and the possibility of damp and mould, which, for Christoffersen, is another reason to continue finding new ways to factor daylight into future building design. “It’s very important that we are always boosting our buildings,” he says, “and that we are learning more and more from our research. We can see that bringing in plenty of daylight has an obvious impact and that in itself will change the buildings of the future.” Learn more about Velux’s sustainability journeyPolice have been given extra time to question the Manchester United footballer Mason Greenwood on suspicion of rape and sexual assault. The 20-year-old was arrested on Sunday afternoon after a woman posted images, a video and audio online alleging he had assaulted her. Greenwood has been held in custody since then and Greater Manchester police (GMP), who have not named the player, said detectives had now been given more time to question the suspect. The footballer, regarded as one of United’s rising young stars, was suspended from playing for or training with the club until further notice after the allegations. He remains on full pay, the Guardian understands. Nike have also moved to distance themselves from Greenwood. A statement on Monday read: “We have suspended our relationship with Mason Greenwood. We are deeply concerned by the disturbing allegations and will continue to closely monitor the situation.” The images and allegations were visible on the woman’s Instagram on Sunday morning but have since been deleted. GMP said in a statement on Monday afternoon: “Detectives have been granted additional time to speak to a man in his 20s who is being held on suspicion of rape and assault of a woman. “Inquiries are ongoing and the victim is being offered specialist support. We remind people to avoid any commentary or sharing of images that could compromise the victim’s right to lifelong anonymity, or risk prejudicing a live investigation with active proceedings.” • This article was amended on 1 February 2022. The arrest was made on Sunday, not Saturday as an earlier version said in the subheading.Sue Gray’s edited report on alleged lockdown-breaking parties in government is relatively brief (only 12 pages) but contains a series of important elements. Here is what it says. There were serious failures of leadership and judgment Gray’s conclusion is general, after police asked her to remove details of the majority of alleged events, which are being investigated for alleged offences, but damning in parts. At a time when ministers were asking citizens to severely limit their lives, “some of the behaviour surrounding these gatherings is difficult to justify”, she wrote. Some gatherings “represent a serious failure to observe not just the high standards expected of those working at the heart of government but also of the standards expected of the entire British population at the time”, she said, adding: “There were failures of leadership and judgment by different parts of No 10 and the Cabinet Office at different times. Some of the events should not have been allowed to take place. Other events should not have been allowed to develop as they did.” Police are investigating 12 alleged social events Gray’s report looked at 16 gatherings, on 12 dates between May 2020 and April 2021. Of these, the Metropolitan police are not looking at four of them. One alleged event has not been previously reported, on 14 January 2021. It is described as “a gathering in No 10 Downing Street on the departure of two No 10 private secretaries”. This is not the “meaningful” report Gray intended There is a particularly strongly worded section outlining how the police asked last week that Gray edit her report so that it not contain details of the events it was investigating. Gray makes it plain this should not be seen as the final word on the parties: “Unfortunately, this necessarily means that I am extremely limited in what I can say about those events and it is not possible at present to provide a meaningful report setting out and analysing the extensive factual information I have been able to gather.” This means she cannot even give details of the four parties To do so would be impossible “without detriment to the overall balance of the findings”, Gray said. Gray will not divulge the other information – at least not yet Having turned over information about the 12 alleged events to police, Gray said she would ensure the “secure storage and safekeeping of all the information gathered until such time as it may be required further”, adding: “I will not be circulating the information internally within government.” Three events we have not heard about before Gray lists three events which had not been revealed, and about which little is known: a gathering in the Cabinet Office on 18 June 2020 for the departure of a No 10 private secretary; on 17 December 2020, a gathering in No 10 for the departure of a No 10 official; and on 14 January 2021, another No 10 event for the departure of two private secretaries. Inquiry: Interviews, emails, photos, messages, official logs Gray sets out the extent of her investigation. She explained she had carried out “interviews of over 70 individuals, some more than once, and examined relevant documentary and digital information, such as emails; WhatsApp messages; text messages; photographs and building entry and exit logs.” Gray said she had also had access to “official records … the investigative work is now essentially complete”. Covid context: “Every citizen impacted by pandemic” Gray acknowledges Downing Street and the Cabinet Office “were at the centre of the government’s response to the pandemic. Tight knit groups of officials and advisers worked long hours under difficult conditions in buildings that could not be easily adapted as Covid secure workplaces.” But she then notes “those challenges, however, also applied to key and frontline workers across the country who were working under equally, if not more, demanding conditions, often at risk to their own health.” She added: “Every citizen has been impacted by the pandemic. Everyone has made personal sacrifices, some the most profound, having been unable to see loved ones in their last moments or care for vulnerable family and friends.” Alcohol is too ubiquitous around No 10 Gray’s quote speaks for itself: “The excessive consumption of alcohol is not appropriate in a professional workplace at any time. Steps must be taken to ensure that every government department has a clear and robust policy in place covering the consumption of alcohol in the workplace.” The No 10 garden was misused While saying it was “sensible” to hold outdoor staff meetings in the garden, Gray said the garden “was also used for gatherings without clear authorisation or oversight”. Staff felt unable to speak up Some staff wanted to raise concerns, the report found, “but at times felt unable to do so”. Gray added: “No member of staff should feel unable to report or challenge poor conduct where they witness it.” No 10 is too large and without proper direction Gray says that the number of people working in No 10 has increased, but that “the structures that support the smooth operation of Downing Street, however, have not evolved sufficiently to meet the demands of this expansion.” Leadership structures “are fragmented and complicated”, she says. Without naming the official, she says that “too much responsibility and expectation is placed on the senior official whose principal function is the direct support of the prime minister. This should be addressed as a matter of priority.” Conclusion: “Significant learning must be addressed immediately” Gray says the gatherings she looked at were spread over a 20-month period – a period, she says, “that has been unique in recent times in terms of the complexity and breadth of the demands on public servants and indeed the general public”. She says the whole of the “country rose to the challenge”, including ministers, special advisers and the civil service. But she is clear that mistakes were made – and immediate remedial action is necessary. “A number of these gatherings should not have been allowed to take place or to develop in the way that they did. There is significant learning to be drawn from these events which must be addressed immediately across government.”A Dutch publisher has apologised for a book that made headlines around the world by identifying a Jewish notary as the prime suspect for the betrayal of Anne Frank to the Nazis. Ambo Anthos has said that it had decided to suspend further prints of The Betrayal of Anne Frank until there was more work done on the book’s central claims. In a statement, the publishing house said it now believed it had been carried away by “momentum” around publication of the book and that it should have take a more “critical” stance. HarperCollins, the US publisher which bought the English language rights to the book, were said by Ambo Anthos to have “determined the [book’s] content”. HarperCollins has been contacted for comment. The Betrayal of Anne Frank, by Canadian author Rosemary Sullivan, is based on six years of research gathered by a team led by retired FBI detective Vince Pankoke. The book was published on 18 January with some fanfare, including a CBS 60 Minutes programme. But within 24 hours of publication, historians and researchers had raised doubts about the central theory that Arnold van den Bergh, who died of throat cancer in 1950, had probably led the police to the Frank family’s hiding place above a canal-side warehouse in the Jordaan area of Amsterdam on 4 August 1944. Critics specifically questioned the evidence behind the claim that as a member of the Jewish council in Amsterdam, an administrative body the German authorities forced Jews to establish, Van den Bergh would probably have had access to the places in which Jewish people were hiding. Pieter van Twisk, who was part of the investigating team behind the book, said the claims made in the book had been appropriately caveated and that he was perplexed by the publisher’s statement. The book, a result of a six-year investigation, suggests that Van den Bergh, who acted as notary in the forced sale of works of art to prominent Nazis such as Hermann Göring, had been forced by risks to his own life to use addresses of hiding places as a form of life insurance for his family. Neither he nor his daughter were deported to the Nazi camps. Following the arrest of the family, Anne was sent to Westerbork transit camp, and on to Auschwitz concentration camp before finally ending up in Bergen-Belsen, where she died in February 1945 at the age of 15, possibly from typhus. Her published diary spans the period in hiding between 1942 and her last entry on 1 August 1944.The latest move in golf’s global power struggle will take place on Tuesday, when the Saudi Arabian business fronted by Greg Norman reveals detailed plans for 10 events – including one in the UK – on the 2022-23 Asian Tour schedule. The UK element of the new series will be perceived as openly hostile given relations between the Saudis and golf’s main tours. Norman is due to hold a press conference at Royal Greens Golf &amp; Country Club ahead of this week’s Saudi International, which is now sanctioned by the Asian Tour. The DP World and PGA Tours are strongly opposed to Saudi’s plans for the top level game – which they view as a commercial threat – meaning leading players may soon have a choice to make over whether to remain in the current ecosystem or accept vast sums to play within a rival organisation. Ultimately the Saudis have plans for a Super Golf League, comprising 14 events. Information seen by the Guardian shows that LIV Golf Investments, represented by Norman, a former world No 1, and funded by the Saudi Public Investment Fund, is expected to announce their newly-branded International Series, worth up to $2m per event plus inevitably lucrative appearance fees. Under the plan, March will see the first of the new tournaments take place in Thailand. The Centurion Club in Hertfordshire is expected to stage a competition in early June, immediately before the US Open. Other events will be staged in Korea, the Middle East, China and Hong Kong. Key, of course, is whether or not golfers will see the appeal in what is a congested schedule. The DP World and PGA Tours will not make it easy for their members to compete routinely on the Asian Tour, should such dispensation even be granted at all. Bryson DeChambeau, Phil Mickelson, Dustin Johnson, Shane Lowry, Lee Westwood and Tommy Fleetwood are among those playing in the Saudi International from Thursday. Notable absentees include Rory McIlroy, Jon Rahm, Collin Morikawa, Viktor Hovland and Justin Thomas.Boris Johnson has announced the appointment of a new Office of the Prime Minister after Sue Gray’s interim report into Downing Street parties called for a major overhaul of Downing Street and questioned the roles of two of his most senior civil servants. Fighting for his political survival in the Commons, Johnson also said he would introduce a new permanent secretary in Downing Street, and would review the civil service and special adviser codes of conduct. “It is time to sort out what Sue Gray rightly calls the ‘fragmented and complicated’ leadership structures of Downing Street, which she says have not evolved sufficiently to meet the demands of the expansion of No 10, and we will do that, including by creating an Office of the Prime Minister with a permanent secretary to lead No 10,” he said. The Gray report criticised the leadership of the Cabinet Office, which is currently headed by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary and the UK’s most senior civil servant. “There were failures of leadership and judgment by different parts of No 10 and the Cabinet Office at different times,” it said. Downing Street staff felt unable to raise complaints about poor behaviour they had witnessed within No 10 and a new route for whistleblowers should be introduced, Gray’s report said. Johnson told MPs he would review the code “so that no one should feel unable to come forward with complaints they may have”. Martin Reynolds’ job as the prime minister’s principal private secretary is also expected to be radically changed, after Gray’s updated report found that he bore “too much responsibility and expectation” to run No 10. The abridged report released on Tuesday does not accuse any civil servants of wrongdoing by name, which has disappointed many of the government’s critics. Sources said that such information would be expected to be included if the full report is released after the conclusion of the Met police inquiry into 14 parties. Lord Kerslake, the former head of the civil service, said Gray could not name individual civil servants or politicians who had broken rules because of the impending criminal inquiry by the Met into a number of gatherings. “She can’t conclude whether the rules are broken because she would be prejudging the police inquiry, but she gets as close as she can to saying that these events broke the rules and by implication the PM misled parliament. “She is unable to be definitive in her criticisms of individuals because of the criminal inquiry.” Gray was clear early on in her report that she was not making a judgment on whether any crimes had been committed, saying this was “properly a matter for law enforcement”. As well as describing some of the behaviour during the gatherings as “difficult to justify”, she concludes that some of the gatherings themselves represented “a serious failure to observe … the standards expected of the entire British population at the time”. She also found that some gatherings “should not have been allowed to take place”, although whether this was because they were illegal or because they contravened official guidance is not spelled out. The report contains stinging criticism of the culture at No 10. Gray said: “The excessive consumption of alcohol is not appropriate in a professional workplace at any time.” The conclusion follows allegations of frequent excessive drinking by Downing Street staff to the extent where a wine fridge was bought and staff were dispatched to local supermarkets to fill a suitcase with wine. Any specific action taken against civil servants criticised in any report would be decided by their line managers and the Civil Service Commission. In the case of special advisers, it would be up to the prime minister to decide whether they should stay in post. Those who are not facing any form of disciplinary action but who have been present at illegal events could be offered alternative jobs across the civil service, Whitehall sources have said. The question of which details were to be published and when were complicated by Gray’s decision to refer some of the Downing Street parties to the police. On 25 January, it was announced that the Metropolitan police would investigate allegations of breaches of Covid regulations at “a number of events”. This suggests Gray felt there was sufficient evidence to suggest that some of the events broke Covid-related laws. The inquiry was established to investigate more than 16 different parties and drinks events across Downing Street and Whitehall, and sought to establish who organised and authorised them. The officials in the frame Martin Reynolds Boris Johnson’s principal private secretary, the most senior civil servant in his office, is widely believed to be at the centre of one of the most damning party allegations. He wrote an email inviting up to 100 Downing Street staff to a “bring your own booze” garden party on 20 May 2020. Johnson claimed that he thought this was a work event, but at least two senior aides are said to have warned him not to go because it was against the rules. Reynolds also reportedly attended other gatherings, including Johnson’s surprise birthday party in the Cabinet room in June 2020. Simon Case The 43-year-old was appointed in September 2020 by Johnson to be head of the civil service and cabinet secretary, the UK’s top mandarin. A former private secretary to Prince William, he is Sue Gray’s boss and was originally appointed by Johnson to run the inquiry into lockdown parties across Whitehall. He stood down from that role after it emerged that a Christmas quiz was held in his own private office. Dan Rosenfield Johnson’s chief of staff has been accused by many Tory MPs of allowing a culture at No 10 where staff believed it was acceptable to flout the lockdown rules. He took over as chief of staff in January 2021, and is understood to have been aware of, if not actually present at, a number of the gatherings.During the first weeks of the new tennis season, the top players are usually at their most relaxed. As they step forward into the new year after quality time away from competition, they arrive in Australia before the toll of constant travel, countless matches and numerous frustrating losses leaves its mark. But this was no normal Australian Open. The tournament began in the shadow of unprecedented drama as Novak Djokovic’s visa saga played out for nearly two weeks. His building was surrounded by human rights activists protesting for the thirty-plus refugees detained indefinitely, hundreds of Serbian-Australians and numerous anti-mandate protesters. After many long, dull court hearings expedited at the speed of light, it ended with Djokovic being deported from the country on the eve of the tournament. This had nothing to do with any of the other players, many of whom had not been vaccinated a few months ago but chose to do so in order to compete, yet the vibes across the Australian Open at the beginning of the tournament were off. Djokovic’s deportation loomed large, with players constantly peppered with questions about him. Naomi Osaka summed up the mood as she passed on giving an answer. “Is my opinion going to help anything?” she said. Yet what unfolded over the following two weeks is an affirmation of the sport itself and the moments of joy, levity and hope it brings. From the first rounds of a grand slam tournament when 256 men and women play for the titles, almost every round has the potential for someone to enjoy one of the best days of their life. One of the most poignant stories of the fortnight was Alizé Cornet’s long-awaited moment in the sun. While contesting her 60th consecutive grand slam tournament at 32 years old, Cornet finally reached a quarter-final. In one of the most joyous moments of her life, Cornet used it to shine a light on Jelena Dokic, the interviewer, applauding her strength for being a survivor of abuse. Her compatriot, Gaël Monfils, entered the press room at 1am on Wednesday morning after a tight quarter-final loss to Matteo Berrettini, yet as he talked with two English-speaking journalists he delivered one of the most emotional moments of the event by resolving to fight for the possibility of winning a grand slam title. “All the time in my career, I never made the good decision [on court],” he said. “I’m fine with that. I must say I’m very fine with that, but I believe I can click once. Before I finish, I believe that once I will do it. So, that’s my faith.” The Special Ks continued to rise as Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis won the men’s doubles title. Osaka bounced back, losing in the third round but tackling her career with a greater perspective that she hopes will carry her through the season. Carlos Alcaraz, the next great hope, ploughed on. Two 17 year-old trailblazers emerged in the the juniors, with Angella Okutoyi becoming the first Kenyan player to ever win a junior grand slam match as she reached the third round and Meshkat al-Zahra Safi becoming the first Iranian to win at a junior major. The tournament ended with a variety of lessons and ample perspective. Danielle Collins is only nine months on from a surgery to remove a tennis ball-sized cyst from her uterus due to her endometriosis, yet she marched all the way to the final, taking her chance with a performance of the highest quality. As she won and won, Collins was continually open about her health problems and, at times, the crippling effects they have had on her. Ash Barty had arrived in her home slam as the heavy favourite and in her third Australian Open as the world number one. With all of the pressure that can arise in front of a home crowd, Barty blocked the world out and picked apart her opponents one-by-one to take her first Australian Open title, delivering an all-time great sporting moment before a huge audience. Barty’s victory was watched by a record-breaking average national audience of 3.577 million and, a day later, the men’s final became an instant classic as Rafael Nadal and Daniil Medvedev did battle. Nadal had no reason to expect that he would still be present in the draw by this point in the tournament. Just reaching the final had already been enough for him to react with tears. His preparation for the tournament was a mess, yet his mental fortitude carried him through to one of the most astounding wins of his storied career. Despite the gloom at the beginning of the tournament, what unfolded at Melbourne Park was an extraordinary few weeks and there will probably never be anything like it again. It is a reminder that no player is bigger than the sport, but also that, despite its flaws, tennis has a knack of providing uplifting, human moments from the least celebrated players in the earliest rounds right until the end.Boris Johnson will publish the full report into lockdown parties in Downing Street once the Metropolitan police investigation has concluded, in a significant U-turn after an angry response from Conservative MPs. No 10 had promised only to consider publishing fuller evidence once police inquiries have ended. But a spokesperson said on Monday night that Johnson would ask Sue Gray to make a further update to her report, after a severely redacted version was published to avoid prejudicing the Scotland Yard probe. The No 10 spokesperson said: “Given the police have said they are investigating a number of events, it would not be appropriate to comment further while the Met’s investigation is ongoing. “But, at the end of the process, the prime minister will ask Sue Gray to update her work in light of what is found. He will publish that update. However, the prime minister is clear we must not judge an ongoing investigation and his focus now is on addressing the general findings.” The change came after a number of MPs hinted they would no longer support Johnson unless he fulfilled his pledge to release the full findings. Mark Harper, the former chief whip, said his constituents had questioned the prime minister’s “fitness for office”, but he had reserved judgement. He said Gray’s findings should be published “immediately and in full” after the Met investigation. Tobias Ellwood, chair of the Commons defence committee, also tweeted: “If the PM fails to publish the report in full, then he will no longer have my support.” Julian Lewis, chair of the Commons intelligence and security committee, said: “May I advise him publicly what I have said to emissaries from his campaign team privately: that it is truly in his interest, in the government’s interest, and in the national interest that he should insist on receiving the full, unredacted report immediately, as I believe he can, and that he should then publish the uncensored version without any further delay?” Before the scale of Tory anger became clear, the prime minister’s official spokesman told journalists Johnson was not committing to further publication. “He will consider what is appropriate. Obviously, at the start of this, he was the one that commissioned this report.” Gray is understood to have prepared a fuller version of the report for publication before the Met announced its inquiries on Tuesday last week. In a statement on Monday, the force said it had received more than 500 pages of evidence and 300 photos linked to apparent parties in Downing Street and Whitehall. But the Met said its request to keep “minimal reference” to events being investigated would apply only for the duration of their investigation. A statement from the force said: “As part of the investigation, it is necessary for us to contact those who attended these events to get their account. As a result, the Met has requested that any information identified as part of the Cabinet Office investigation about these events is not disclosed in detail. This request only applies for the duration of our investigation and does not apply to events we are not investigating.” The Met is not investigating four of the 16 gatherings examined by Gray, but she said she could not give details of the four parties “without detriment to the overall balance of the findings”. Whitehall sources said Gray needed permission from Johnson to publish a fuller version, but suggested that in providing an “update” on Monday she was making clear that it was not the version she hoped would be eventually published. “This is a clever tactic,” one source said. “It makes it very difficult to avoid publishing a fuller version. This is not her first rodeo. I always thought appointing her would be their biggest mistake.”It’s not the version of the report Sue Gray had intended to publish, but her 12-page “update” on more than a dozen Downing Street parties could be described as a damning masterpiece of succinct understatement. Written in the first person against a backdrop of intense anticipation, its language is in line with the work of a veteran civil servant with significant experience examining ethics breaches at government’s highest level. At points, Gray’s frustration at being asked by Scotland Yard to hold back on what are thought to be the most damning details is apparent. “Unfortunately, this necessarily means that I am extremely limited in what I can say about those events and it is not possible at present to provide a meaningful report,” she writes. Saying she considered whether it would be better to pause her investigation, Gray adds: “Given the widespread public interest in, and concern about, these matters, and to avoid further delay, I am providing an update on the investigation.” The use of the word “update” is seen as a signal by Gray that she does not consider this the final word and expects to submit a full report after police investigations are complete. The Downing Street parties report was expected to be similar to two other investigations into ministers. In 2020 the standards chief Sir Alex Allan examined bullying allegations against Priti Patel, and three years earlier Gray examined allegations against Damien Green. The earlier Gray report led to Green’s sacking as first secretary of state after he admitted lying about pornographic images on his House of Commons computer. While the then cabinet secretary, Sir Jeremy Heywood, was unable to reach a definitive conclusion on separate allegations made by the writer and Tory activist Kate Maltby that Green had behaved improperly towards her, Gray’s finding that Maltby’s account was “plausible” was also highly significant. The word “plausible”, –which Gray is said to have insisted be included in her 2017 report, does not appear in her parties report, but she still manages to convey a damning verdict on some of the behaviour she investigated. “Against the backdrop of the pandemic, when the government was asking citizens to accept far-reaching restrictions on their lives, some of the behaviour surrounding these gatherings is difficult to justify,” she writes. As for the report on Patel, it was its author, Allan, who ended up resigning as Johnson’s ethics adviser after the prime minister refused to sack his home secretary despite the report finding evidence that she had bullied civil servants. Gray is unlikely to be going anywhere, even after taking on the altogether more difficult task of investigating not just her boss, the prime minister, but also Simon Case, the head of the civil service, who stepped down from leading the investigation. Those familiar with Gray are convinced she will not have been daunted. A succession of profiles has seldom failed to mention her time in the 1980s as a “no nonsense” landlady running a pub with her husband outside Newry during the Troubles. The stint was a career break from the civil service, which Gray had joined in the 1970s, before she was lured back to London to work at the Cabinet Office under Gordon Brown and Tony Blair. Higher-profile roles followed under David Cameron, before she was appointed as the director general of the propriety and ethics team in 2012. In Monday’s report, Gray makes her feelings clear about her role in the civil service when she talks in her conclusion about the “whole of the country” rising to the challenge of the pandemic. “Ministers, special advisers and the civil service, of which I am proud to be a part, were a key and dedicated part of that national effort,” she writes.Name: Dream work. Age: People have been dreaming since people have been people. This is more about the exploration of dreams. Freud, Jung, those dudes? Attempts to understand dreams predate them. Ancient Egyptians thought dreams were communications with gods; for the Greeks, they were prophecies; the Bible is crawling with dreams … I know! (Though mainly from Joseph and The Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, to be honest). Anyway, this is about even more than understanding them; it’s about using dreams, exploiting them even. Who does that? Jane Campion, for one. The New Zealand film director, who made The Piano? And much more. While making her most recent critically acclaimed movie, The Power of the Dog, she enlisted a dream coach, by the name of Kim Gillingham. “She’s the only person I think that really helped me as a director go very deep,” Campion said. Kim Gillingham rings a distant bell … In the first series of Friends, she played Joey’s ex. Plus, she was in an episode of Seinfeld. More importantly, and more interestingly, she now practises dream work. And what exactly is dream work? It “offers access to the rich and undiscovered content of the unconscious, allowing artists of all disciplines to create more authentic work”, apparently. I’m thinking about my own dreams, and what films I’d make from them: there’d be a movie about not being prepared for an exam, another about missing a plane, a film about falling and … well, quite a lot of X-rated material to be honest. That’s probably why you don’t make films. Also, it’s not simply a question of making a film about your dream. What else is it about? Gillingham, who works with two other coaches, uses artwork and exercises “to bring the material to the top side world and invite it into expression. The practice cultivates unique and authentic creativity, acceptance, permission and presence.” Is it a load of hippy-dippy new-age nonsense? Well Campion obviously doesn’t think so. Or Sandra Oh, who thanked Gillingham on stage when collecting an award for Killing Eve. Bill Pullman and Benedict Cumberbatch have, also worked with her – Cumberbatch called her “an amazing woman”. There are other practitioners of dream work as well, Kirsten Dunst has used one. OK, I get it, dream work is hot right now. If you’re in a creative field, get involved so as not to get left behind. Not just creative: Gillingham has also seen a scientist or two. Hang on, I’ll take a look in my dream … oh yes, there’s the theory of everything. You mock, but Einstein’s Theory of Relativity is said to have come to him in a dream. Do say: “Sign me up, I’m ready to go deep and unlock.” Don’t say: “Yeah, keep dreaming.”Your story left me in tears (Sri Lankan man left in immigration limbo for decades can stay in UK, 30 January). I cannot believe that the Home Office is not offering a full apology and compensation to this man. He has missed out on education, marriage, having a family, seeing his own family and so much more that we take for granted. Unfortunately, this is still happening to many other people. Rekha Shah Bournemouth • A dear old friend from up north had some wonderful expressions (Letters, 30 January). If anyone was miserable Mary would say they had “a face as long as a gasman’s mac”; if she had a troublesome stomach, “I’ve got a tummy like a boiled pudding”; and if anyone was in a bit of a muddle, they’d be “in a worse state than Russia”. Cath Green Chislehurst, Kent • After making my first batch of marmalade this year, I looked up my mother’s costing of the same recipe in 1961. Then, a jar cost about 6d (2.5p); mine cost 60p. So still a bargain. I’m 87, but I hope I will be like your older readers a couple of years ago and still be doing it for a few more years yet. Terry Bailey Westley Waterless, Suffolk • I still have a copy of The Hitch-hiker’s Guide to Europe from the early 1970s. The write-up for Albania is just two words: “Forget it.” It seems times have changed (UK tourists head to Albania for ‘sense of exotic’ without long-haul flight, 29 January). Paul Wadsworth Buckfastleigh, Devon • British institutions to be proud of (Letters, 25 January)? The pub. Barry Norman Drighlington, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Thank you to Ashley John-Baptiste for his account of growing up as a looked-after child, and his vivid and moving description of how he only discovered in his mid-20s that he had a brother (A moment that changed me, 26 January). He says: “Do children’s services even care about, or prioritise learning about, the family histories of looked-after children?” At least in my experience, I can answer “yes”. Life story workers engage with children to help them make sense of their family history and prepare a life story book that stays with them. For looked-after children with siblings, keeping in regular contact is key, and is encouraged whenever possible. This aspect of social work practice has come a long way since Ashley was a child. But, as he rightly points out, there still aren’t enough foster carers able to take sibling groups and more carers are urgently needed. Cllr James Valentine Lead member for children’s services and education, Bedford borough council • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Neil Young and Joni Mitchell are part of the soundtrack of my life; I have bought their albums for 50 years. I am also aware that each of these remarkable artists contracted polio before a vaccination was available. Young’s challenge to Spotify to remove a popular podcast that has featured anti-vaxxers and conspiracy theorists, and Mitchell’s act of solidarity with him, will cost them money they can afford to lose (Report, 31 January). However, their principled stand has warmed the hearts of many retired hippies whose trust in other institutions such as parliament and the police has been sorely tested recently. Les Bright Exeter, Devon • There is no need to worry about losing playlists, saved artists and albums etc when leaving Spotify (My Spotify playlists tell the story of my life – can I really quit now?, 29 January). Deezer, for one, allows you to transfer over everything to its streaming service in just a few seconds. So I can now listen to Neil Young once more, and everyone should do the same. Bye, Spotify! Richard Smith Carbis Bay, Cornwall • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Peter Johnstone says the “Sam Vimes ‘Boots’ theory of socioeconomic unfairness” was not invented by Terry Pratchett but by Paul Jennings in the Observer in 1954 (Letters, 28 January). The same theory was in fact put forward much earlier – by the character Owen in The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists by Robert Tressell, published in 1914. Owen illustrates it with reference to buying stockings, boots, shoes and underclothes for his family. He says: “This is how the working classes are robbed. Although their incomes are the lowest, they are compelled to buy the most expensive articles – that is, the lowest-priced articles. Everybody knows that good clothes, boots or furniture are really the cheapest in the end, although they cost more money at first; but the working classes can seldom or never afford to buy good things; they have to buy cheap rubbish which is dear at any price.” If you want to know about capitalism and socialism, The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists is still a good guide. Sally Goldsmith Sheffield • Neither Terry Pratchett nor Paul Jennings was first with this idea. The adage “buy cheap, buy twice” was a favourite of northern grannies long before 1954. Cassy Firth Morley, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.George Monbiot makes important points about the role of nature-based solutions (Carbon offsetting is not warding off environmental collapse – it’s accelerating it, 26 January). We need to preserve our natural forests, mangroves, sea grasses and peatlands to slow current heating levels, and we need to restore and expand them to deal with our legacy carbon. But in suggesting that all offsetting is simply greenwashing, he does a disservice to the hundreds of community-based projects that are working to improve lives and conserve natural carbon sinks. The Association for Coastal Ecosystem Services helps people in Kenya protect their mangrove forests and use money from the sale of carbon credits for water, education and health. The forests, the money and the projects belong to them. We do not take money from fossil-fuel companies, but rather from individuals and small corporations that are committed to reducing emissions but still want to compensate for those that they cannot avoid. This is ethical offsetting and it has an important role to play. Please don’t confuse this with the corporate greenwashing of big oil. Prof Mark Huxham Convener, Association for Coastal Ecosystem Services • In pointing out the misuse of carbon offsetting by multinationals, George Monbiot only shows one side of the coin. In my 25 years of working to save CO2, I avoided offsets for two reasons: failed offsets, such as forests dying, and future offsets, eg claiming that a flight to New York today is offset by planting trees that take 50 years to absorb the same amount of CO2. But we need a way to fund the drawdown of excess CO2 in the atmosphere (estimated at up to a trillion tonnes). To do this, carbon sequestration activities need a rapid injection of cash, which offsetting can provide. Certification has dealt with offset failures and there are now genuine time-bound offsets available that only count CO2 absorbed in, say, the current year. Whether they pay to replace wood stoves with solar stoves in Africa or to finance British farmers to adopt low-carbon practices, offsets are essential to reach net zero. The question is not whether offsets are good or bad, but which ones are good. Mukti Kumar Mitchell Director, Carbon Savvy • For some time I have felt that there was something amiss about flying off to some distant land for a holiday and salving one’s conscience by paying a carbon offsetting charge. Thank you, George Monbiot, for making it clear why the climate catastrophe will not be solved this way. Planting a few more trees with one hand while destroying forests or drilling for more oil with the other does not pass muster. Those of us of mature years who have created the problem should be first to try to limit our carbon footprints. Barbara Foster Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire • Your report (26 January) that at least 100,000 ghost flights could be flown across Europe this winter makes for highly disturbing reading. The consequential impact on the climate through the flights’ release of an estimated 2.1m tonnes of greenhouse gases is mind-boggling. All this being imposed just to force airlines to retain their slots at airports is irresponsible and inhuman. Whatever is happening to the commitments made by European nations at Cop26? MSR Seshu Secunderabad, India • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.UK food producers and brewers have warned of shortages of meat, beer and fizzy drinks, as well as higher prices, after the government opted not to renew support for the carbon dioxide industry. Meat processors, brewers, bakers and soft drink producers all use CO2 in making and packaging their goods. It is also required for the humane slaughter of animals including pigs and chickens. The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) said last autumn it had brokered a deal between businesses in the CO2 sector, to ensure supplies of the gas to the food and drink industry, as well as hospitals and nuclear power plants. It came after the government was forced to use taxpayer money to fund a short-term bailout for CF Industries, which accounts for 60% of the UK’s CO2 supplies, to prop up the company and stave off supply chain chaos. CF Fertilisers, which is owned by a private firm in the US, had halted production at two of its plants, Billingham on Teesside and Ince in Cheshire, as a result of rocketing prices of gas required to power its operations. However, the three-month deal came to an end on 31 January, and BEIS said it was now up to the CO2 industry to work together. A spokesperson from the department said: “We welcome industry’s agreement in October to ensure CF Fertilisers on Teesside can continue to operate even during the current period of high global gas prices. It is for the CO2 industry to ensure supplies to UK businesses.” During the three-month deal, customers of CF Fertilisers had agreed to pay a set price for CO2 until at least the end of January. The deal was intended to give the industry time to develop alternative sources of food-grade CO2. The Guardian understands that while some extra production has become available – such as from anaerobic digestion at biomass plants – and there have been extra imports of the gas, this has been limited and food industry remains concerned over the reliability of supply. CF Industries said on Monday that negotiations with its industrial gas customers over pricing agreements were continuing. Industry analysts said continued CO2 availability was reliant on a new deal between CF Industries and UK distributors of the gas, Nippon Gases and Air Liquide. On Friday, the Food and Drink Federation (FDF) sent a letter to the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, and the environment secretary, George Eustice, outlining its worries about the impact of further CO2 shortages in the absence of a new industry deal. “It is critical that together we ensure supply can continue and that we build long-term resilience into the production of food-grade CO2,” said Kate Halliwell, the FDF’s chief scientific officer, as she called on ministers to work with industry. Halliwell said that without guaranteed supplies, “this could lead to shortages in the products we find on our supermarket shelves – adding further pressures to families already coping with high food-price inflation”. The British Meat Processors Association said its industry had been assured by government that animal welfare would be a priority, and that supplies to abattoirs would take precedence, along with those to the NHS and the nuclear sector. Emma McClarkin, the chief executive of the British Beer &amp; Pub Association, said the sector needed a long-term solution as it struggles to recover from repeated closures during the pandemic. “After a devastating winter period for our pubs and brewers, ongoing supply chain disruption could add to the burden of additional costs or seriously hinder our recovery as a sector,” she said.Portugal’s ruling Socialists are preparing for a third consecutive term after winning a surprise absolute majority in a snap general election that confounded predictions, pundits and pollsters and saw the far-right become the third-largest group in parliament. The prime minister, António Costa, has pledged to use his unexpectedly large mandate to bring in reforms and investments that will make Portugal “more prosperous, fairer, and more innovative”. Among the new government’s key priorities will be passing a new budget for 2022 to begin using €45bn in EU Covid recovery funds. Squabbles over Costa’s draft budget at the end of last year triggered Sunday’s general election after the Socialists’ former allies in the Communist party and the Left Bloc joined rightwing parties in rejecting the budget bill after weeks of negotiations. But Costa’s landslide victory means his party no longer has to depend on the partners that made up the so-called geringonça, or improvised solution, that defined his first two terms. “Freed from the shackles of the radical left, the Socialists and António Costa can now implement more moderate and Europe-focused solutions,” the newspaper Publico said in an editorial on Monday. The comparatively rare triumph of European social democracy was hailed by Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, who heads a Socialist-led coalition government across the border. “Portugal has once again backed a social democratic project that combines growth and social justice,” Sánchez said in a congratulatory tweet. Costa’s victory was also welcomed by many left-leaning voters. At a bus stop in Alcântara, a waterfront neighbourhood in west Lisbon, a 69-year-old voter called Olivia said she hoped the result would bring stability and social progress. “I didn’t expect that the Socialist party would get the majority, but I hope it can be a solution for governing for four more years without disruption,” she said. Olivia added that many far-left voters had decided to back the Socialists to prevent the formation of a minority government of the centre-right Social Democrats (PSD) that would cut deals with the far-right Chega party. The populist, anti-Roma party saw its seat count surge from one to 12 on Sunday night. “It was sad to see many parties lose strength – and to have the far-right as the third party in parliament,” she said. In a fractured political landscape, and after weeks of polls suggesting a tight race between the Socialists and the centre-right Social Democrats (PSD), much of the electorate hadn’t even contemplated the prospect of either party winning an absolute majority. In the end, the Socialists won 41.7% of the vote and a 117 seats in the 230-seat parliament, while the PSD came second with 28% of the vote and 71 seats. Some were nervous at the prospect of a government with an absolute majority – something that has happened in only four elections since 1987. When the results came in late in Sunday night, Costa himself assured reporters that “a majority win is not absolute power; it doesn’t mean governing alone”. Carlos Madeira, who was sitting on a bench in a busy Lisbon street on Monday morning, confessed to mixed feelings. “I wanted the socialist party to win, but not with an absolute majority,” he said. “I think it’s too dangerous to leave it in one person’s hands.” Madeira, who became homeless two years ago after losing his job as a cook at a luxury hotel in the capital, thinks many voters – including himself – opted for the Socialists as a safe bet given their stewardship of the economy, reversal of painful post-crisis austerity measures and efficient Covid vaccination plan. He now hopes the new government will increase wages and lower taxes to boost employment. Meanwhile Chega’s leader, André Ventura, appears to be relishing a fight. “António Costa, I’m coming for you,” he told supporters after the vote. “From now on there won’t be a soft opposition. We’ll assume the role of the real opposition to the Socialists … and restore dignity to this country.” Although Chega’s share of the vote rose from 1.9% in the 2019 general election to 7.2% on Sunday, some wonder what the noisy and pugnacious party will do now that it has consolidated its parliamentary presence. Pedro Rovisco, a taxi driver who voted for the PSD, said: “Chega is the reflection of people being unhappy with the state of affairs, but they will never be in government – they don’t have that ability of course.” Carlos Vilela, 42, who works at a fruit market, offered a similar assessment of Ventura and Chega. “It’s all lies … his talk on immigrants being a burden, criticising those who live off benefits. I don’t even know what he will be doing in parliament.” • This article was amended on 1 February 2022 to correct the spelling of “Alcântara”.Liz Truss, the British foreign secretary, has said Russian oligarchs and key supporters of Vladimir Putin will be targeted by UK sanctions if Russia invades Ukraine, but left Britain’s existing much-criticised anti-corruption laws largely untouched. Insisting that the Russian president’s allies would have nowhere to hide their assets if an invasion went ahead, the Foreign Office, clearly working in lockstep with the US, threatened to seize the wealth of Putin’s inner political circle and business backers. Boris Johnson travels to Ukraine on Tuesday to meet President Volodymyr Zelensky as he pledged £88m of new funding to “support stable governance and energy independence”. Ahead of the visit, Johnson said: “It is the right of every Ukrainian to determine how they are governed. As a friend and a democratic partner, the UK will continue to uphold Ukraine’s sovereignty in the face of those who seek to destroy it. “We urge Russia to step back and engage in dialogue to find a diplomatic resolution and avoid further bloodshed.” Johnson’s efforts to take a leading role in the crisis were dealt a blow when he had to cancel his scheduled call with Putin so he could answer questions in the Commons about the Gray report into parties in Downing Street. No 10 tried to reschedule the call, but Moscow said it was not possible, leaving Johnson to say he would speak to the Russian president as soon as a time could be agreed. The Biden administration has drawn up a list of potential sanctions targets among Russian oligarchs and their families, who Washington deems to be in the Kremlin’s orbit or “complicit in the Kremlin’s destabilising behaviour,” according to a US official quoted by Reuters news agency. “Putin’s cronies will no longer be able to use their spouses or other family members as proxies to evade sanctions”, the official said. “Sanctions would cut them off from the international financial system and ensure that they and their family members will no longer be able to enjoy the perks of parking their money in the west and attending elite western universities.” US officials would not provide names, but said sanctions targets were vulnerable because of their investments and residencies in the west. Truss, giving a statement to MPs on Monday, also refused to name any individual Russians at risk of being sanctioned, saying the aim was to create the maximum anxiety among Putin’s allies. Truss said the new legislation, which will be in place by 10 February, would be the “toughest sanction regime against Russia we have ever had”, and would give the UK “the power to sanction a broader range of individuals and businesses”. She said the package meant the UK “can target anyone providing strategic support close to Vladimir Putin”. Labour criticised the package for failing to speed up the long-promised structural measures to tackle money laundering in the UK, including measures first announced by David Cameron in 2014 and 2015. David Lammy, the shadow foreign secretary, said: “The proposals need to be part of a coherent policy. “For years, Labour has raised the alarm about the role of dirty money in keeping Putin in power. Warning after warning, report after report, the government has been asleep at the wheel. London is the destination of choice for the world’s kleptocrats. We are the home to the services and the enablers that help corrupt elites to hide their ill-gotten wealth.” Russia described the transatlantic measures as extremely alarming and likely to damage the business climate in the UK. The net of those potentially subject to sanctions in the UK is being widened in the event of an invasion by making Russians and companies supportive of Putin liable to travel bans and asset freezes. Previously, only individuals regarded as guilty of destabilising the sovereignty of Ukraine could be sanctioned, although the UK can and has sanctioned Russians for human rights abuses and corruption. Currently, 180 Russian individuals and 48 entities are subject to UK sanctions, more than half linked to the destabilisation of Ukraine. Truss, who is due in Moscow for talks in the next fortnight but will not be travelling to Ukraine this week after testing positive for Covid on Monday, told MPs the proposals meant the UK would be able to act in lockstep with the US. “Whether you support Russia’s aggressive actions against Ukraine, or you’re of wider significance to the Kremlin, we will have the power to sanction you,” she said. “Nothing is off the table and there will be nowhere to hide. “This will amount to the toughest sanctions regime against Russia we have had in place yet, and mark the biggest change in our approach since leaving the European Union.” The reference to nothing being off the table was designed to show that the government has not abandoned other structural measures. These include reforms of Companies House, a register of properties held by overseas citizens and a public register of beneficial ownership in the British overseas territories – measures that have been repeatedly promised but held back as a result of opposition from the City of London. Some of the stiffest opposition is coming from Gulf states and not Russia. An economic crime bill containing many of the measures looks likely to be delayed, a move that has infuriated the government’s own anti-corruption tsar, John Penrose. In the House of Lords on Monday, ministers were challenged about their personal links to firms operating in tax shelters. John Heathershaw, co-author of a recent Chatham House report on “Britain’s kleptocracy problem”, said: “The use of sanctions here appears to be as an ad hoc and preventive measure – essentially as a form of deterrence. The reason such measures are necessary is that there is already a great deal of money in the UK from Russia which has been welcomed by UK banks, estate agents, football clubs and companies with minimal checks on the sources of wealth and beneficial ownership. The problems that led to the UK welcoming suspicious Russian wealth are structural British problems.” Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, described Truss’s package as an “extremely alarming” statement that “undermines investment attractiveness and the United Kingdom’s attractiveness as such”. “It’s not often you see or hear such direct threats to attack a business,” he told reporters. He added that Moscow would “proceed from its own interests when formulating retaliatory measures”. “An attack by one particular country on Russian business of course implies retaliatory measures,” he said. The Russian ambassador to the UK, Andrei Kelin, stressed that the UK was now pursuing an “aggressive line” in Europe regarding Ukraine. He said the exaggeration of the “Russian threat” was being stoked by Britain’s domestic problems. Russia last week expanded its blacklist of EU and member states’ personnel on a no-fly list who Russia said “were personally involved in promoting anti-Russian policy”.A journalist and former member of parliament who helped uncover one of the worst miscarriages of justice in British history is to fight a police attempt to force him to reveal source material for his research into the Birmingham pub bombings. Chris Mullin, 74, said he will contest the police attempt to get a high court order served on him in relation to his investigation into the Birmingham Six, whose convictions were quashed in 1991. “If West Midlands police had carried out a proper investigation after the bombings, instead of framing the first half-dozen people unlucky enough to fall into their hands, they might have caught the real perpetrators in the first place. “It is beyond irony. They appear to have gone for the guy who blew the whistle,” he said. A court hearing is scheduled for the Old Bailey on 23 and 24 February where Mullin will be represented by Gavin Millar QC. West Midlands police have applied for an order requiring Mullin to disclose material in relation to his 1985-1986 investigation into the bombings in 1974 under the Terrorism Act 2000. Journalists are professionally bound to maintain confidentiality of sources and many, over the years, have said they would be prepared to go to jail rather than reveal sources. “The principle of protecting your source and keeping your word when confidentiality is pledged is a vital one for all journalists and lies at the heart of the NUJ’s code of conduct. The case brought by West Midlands police risks compromising that core principle and undermining press freedom, which is why the NUJ stands four-square behind Chris and is backing this case,” said Michelle Stanistreet, NUJ general secretary. In one of the earliest cases to test the principle, Goodwin v the United Kingdom in 1996, the European court of human rights backed a journalist with The Engineer magazine, Bill Goodwin, after a court in Britain tried to force him to reveal a source. Mullin’s book, Error of Judgment: The Truth About The Birmingham Bombings, was published 36 years ago with further editions published in 1987, 1990 and 1997. Police believe Mullin has interviews that could confirm the identity of a surviving member of the IRA gang behind the pub bombings. A spokesperson for West Midlands police confirmed the proceedings and said the force remained committed to bringing those responsible for the bombings to justice. “It would not be appropriate to comment further at this stage,” they said.Thousands of people are facing another night without power in Scotland and north-east England after two storms battered parts of the UK. Some schools in Scotland will remain closed on Tuesday after winds of up to 92mph were recorded in northern parts of the UK over the weekend as the storms Malik and Corrie hurtled in from the Atlantic. Northern Powergrid said about 80,000 of its customers in the north-east were affected by power cuts across the weekend, and about 1,800 were still without power on Monday evening.. In Scotland, about 38,000 households suffered power cuts, largely in Aberdeenshire and the Angus border, as well as parts of Perthshire, the Highlands, Western Isles and the Moray coast. SSE, which supplies electricity to much of Scotland, said: “Restoration efforts from Storm Corrie will continue into Tuesday with the possibility that for small clusters of customers this may extend into Wednesday, subject to today’s damage assessment.” In Aberdeenshire, food vans were offering hot meals to households with no power throughout Monday, while leisure centres were open throughout the day for people to shower and charge their phones. Twelve schools in the region will remain closed on Tuesday due to heating, hot water and catering issues, the local council said. Andy Bilclough, director of field operations at Northern Powergrid, said on Monday evening: “It is fair to say that Storm Corrie hasn’t helped. But we are making good progress and we have more teams coming to help later in the day. The larger jobs that affect the supplies to multiple customers are now all under way. Some are quite large and so will run through this evening and into tonight. Our whole team’s commitment is to get as much done as possible tonight – and get all our customers back on supply as soon as possible.” The back-to-back storms were linked to two deaths over the weekend, after a nine-year-old boy in Staffordshire and a 60-year-old woman in Aberdeen died after being hit by falling trees on Saturday. Storm Malik was named by the Danish Meteorological Institute and Corrie by the UK Met Office. The Met Office lists storms alphabetically but skips Q, U, X, Y and Z to comply with international storm-naming conventions and to maintain consistency for official storm naming in the North Atlantic. On Monday night, two flood warnings remained in place for parts of the south-east coast of England, with the Environment Agency warning that flooding was expected along the tidal rivers Waveney and Yare because of exceptionally high tides at Great Yarmouth. There was major travel disruption across England and Scotland as operators including ScotRail, London North Eastern Railway, CrossCountry and TransPennine Express cancelled or suspended services on Monday morning.It was a busy day of diplomacy, threats and warnings. Here is a summary of all the developments: The UK has warned Moscow that an invasion of Ukraine would be met with “massive consequences for Russia’s interests and economy”. Foreign secretary Liz Truss said the UK government will also bring in new sanctions legislation so “those in and around the Kremlin will have nowhere to hide”. Truss added that the government was “considering options for further deployments of our armed forces”. The Kremlin slammed proposed UK sanctions as an “outright attack on business” and has threatened to retaliate. Italian media have reported six Russian warships entered the Mediterranean Sea on Monday and might be heading towards the Black Sea. Ukraine said 130,000 Russian military personnel are close to its borders. Boris Johnson’s ‘partygate’ crisis may have meant he missed an opportunity for a high-stakes call with Vladimir Putin on Ukraine. Russia, with its ally China, failed to block a UN Security Council meeting on Ukraine from going ahead. Russia has launched the ‘largest mobilisation of troops in Europe in decades,’ according to the US. Washington warned of “decisive, swift and united” action if Russia invades. Russia accused the west of ‘hysterics’ over troop deployments near Ukraine. We will be closing the blog down shortly. When we do, be sure to follow our US Politics live blog. Washington is considering sanctions, with some calls to implement them even before an invasion. Overwhelmed by a scandal over boozy lockdown parties at 10 Downing Street, Boris Johnson was unable to make a high-stakes scheduled call with Russia’s Vladimir Putin on Monday. As the UK Prime Minister batted away calls to resign in parliament, his spokesman said the call may now slip to Tuesday. It was not clear if Moscow has agreed to the late-minute rejig. Earlier on Monday, Johnson said he had tough words prepared for the call on Ukraine. “What I will say to President Putin is, as I’ve said before, that I think we really all need to step back from the brink and I think Russia needs to step back from the brink,” he said. But the call may now need to start with an apology from Johnson, if it happens at all. Earlier, the Mirror newspaper reported the talk had been cancelled as the Russians could not shift the timing. Senior civil servant Sue Gray long-awaited report was published on Monday. It had several criticisms for Downing Street, including the “excessive consumption of alcohol” and “failures of leadership and judgment by different parts of No 10 and the Cabinet Office at different times”. Johnson, whose political career is at stake, apologised in parliament on Monday: “I want to say sorry.” Truss says any invasion of Ukraine would be met with “massive consequences for Russia’s interests and economy”. “Today, I am setting out our readiness to act”, she said, adding that the government is proposing new legislation to sanction a “much broader” number of people and businesses linked to the Kremlin. “Those in and around the Kremlin will have nowhere to hide,” she adds. That last comment was made to laughs in parliament, likely because London has been nicknamed ‘Londongrad’ as it has been used as a location for Russian oligarchs to keep and spend their money. Truss ends by saying the government will not immediately say who they plan to sanction. UK foreign secretary Liz Truss tells the British parliament the government is “considering options for further deployments of our armed forces to reassure and protect allies on Nato’s eastern flank”. She says London will consider supplying Nato with more “fast jets, warships and military specialists”. “The UK is determined to lead the way through deterrence and diplomacy”. The UN meeting in New York has finished. Heading over to the Mediterranean now, where my colleague, Lorenzo Tondo, reports on possible Russian warship movement: Six Russian warships entered the Mediterranean Sea today and might be heading towards the Black Sea in the next few hours, according to media reports in Italy. The vessels from the Russian Navy’s Northern Fleet, were allegedly spotted by a Spanish Navy Meteoro class offshore patrol vessel entering the Central Mediterranean early on Monday via the Strait of Gibraltar. According to the Italian newspaper la Repubblica, the vessels are carrying 60 tanks and over 1,500 soldiers. The warships are currently navigating in the Sicilian Channel. The news was repeated by Andriy Zagorodnyuk, Ukraine’s former defence minister, who had been speaking about the likelihood of a Russian invasion. “Six Russian warships had just entered the Mediterranean,” Zagorodnyuk said, adding: “If they enter the Black Sea we will change our views to negative.” Moscow has not confirmed the reports. Back at the UN, Ukraine’s representative, Sergiy Kyslytsya, says there are 130,000 Russian military personnel on Ukraine borders. “The question is ‘why are all these Russian forces there?’” he asks. He says there are there to pressure Ukraine to make “illegitimate” concessions. Ukraine should be allowed to make “alliances”, he says, in a reference to Nato. The US State Department has just confirmed that Secretary of State Tony Blinken will talk by phone tomorrow with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov. It will be the first time they have talked since the US delivered a written response to Russian demands. Heading away from New York and over to London, my former colleague Pippa Crerar is reporting that Boris Johnson’s domestic woes around ‘Partygate’ have meant he won’t make an important call with Putin today. Crerar said that once the report into whether parties at Downing Street was published today, the UK prime minister attempted to delay the call but was rebuffed. More quick analysis from my colleague in New York, Julian Borger: The Russian permanent representative to the UN, Vasily Nebenzya, echoed Moscow’s tactic of ridiculing any thought that there might be a threat to Ukraine, while also delivering a threat. He ended his address to the Security Council with these chilling lines: “If our western partners push Kyiv to sabotage the Minsk agreements, something that Ukraine is willingly doing, that might end in the absolute worst way for Ukraine. And not because somebody has destroyed it, but because it would have destroyed itself, and Russia has absolutely nothing to do with this.” (Note: the Minsk agreement aimed to end the fighting in eastern Ukraine and was signed in 2015 by the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France.) Kenya’s representative to the UN, Martin Kimani, frames the crisis as a power battle between Nato and Russia, which he says is solvable through cooperation. Kimani ends by quoting an African proverb: When the elephants fight, it is the grass that suffers. On troop numbers, my colleague in Kyiv, Luke Harding, has an update from Ukraine’s former defence minister: Andriy Zagorodnyuk has been speaking about the likelihood of a Russian invasion. Last week, he published a much-cited paper arguing the Kremlin did not currently have sufficient troops to launch a large-scale attack on Ukraine. In an update today Zagorodnyuk said Moscow has now stationed 135,000 troops on Ukraine’s border. The number had gone up by 8-10,000 ahead of Russian military exercises this week in Belarus, he said. Asked if a Russian attack was about to happen he said: “No. it’s not imminent. We don’t believe the apocalyptic large-scale scenario by mass media is reasonable.” But he said there was a “high risk” of Vladimir Putin launching an operation in the eastern Donbas region, where the Ukrainian military has faced off since 2014 against Russian-backed separatists. Nebenzya is now questioning the 100,000 troop figure that western countries cite as being on Ukraine’s borders. He accused the west of “pumping Ukraine full of weapons”. Russia’s ambassador to the UN, Vasily Nebenzya, starts his speech by thanking China – which opposed – and the three countries that abstained from the vote to hold the meeting. He says the “deployment of troops in our own territory” does not mean there will be an “act of aggression”, and that there is no need for “hysterics”. “There is no proof” that such an action will take place, he says. Russia has repeatedly denied it will invade Ukraine, he adds. China’s ambassador to the UN, Chen Xu, repeats that Beijing opposed holding this public meeting at the security council. The ambassador says Russia has made clear it will not invade. “What we urgently need now is quiet diplomacy but not ‘microphone’ diplomacy,” he says. “Regrettably, the US did not accept such a proposal.” India’s representative to the UN, TS Tirumurti – who abstained in the vote on whether to hold the meeting – has called for a “de-escalation”. Ghana’s representative Harold Adlai Agyeman – who also abstained – has noted that Russia’s troops are still within Russia, in a line that will please Moscow. He also calls for “peace” and “dialogue” and says “we should also note the delicate situation”. France’s UN ambassador, Nicolas de Rivière, says the international response will be “robust and united” if Russia invades. (Clearly coordinating speeches with US and UK) India’s representative now speaking … UK deputy representative to the UN, James Kariuki, is more technical and less forthright than his US colleague. He is cautioning against war, based on how “destabilising” it would be. However, a day after the UK foreign secretary said London was preparing sanctions, one part of Kariuki’s speech does have bite: he warned such a war would be “costly” for Russia. Albania’s representative just spoke; now on to the UK. Thomas-Greenfield had some new figures. She said that there were 10,000 Russian troops already in Belarus with heavy armaments, and there are expected to be 30,000 there by early February, ie in the coming days. The Ukrainian UN representative will be speaking towards the end of the session. It will be interesting to see if their permanent representative echoes the Kyiv line, playing down the threat. US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield says: We seek the path of peace. We seek the path of dialogue. We do not want confrontation. But we will be decisive, swift and united should Russia further invade Ukraine.” Note: Thomas-Greenfield says “further invade” as she is referring to past incursions. The US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, is speaking. Russian threats to Ukraine “also threaten Europe”, she said, calling Moscow’s actions “aggressive behaviour”. Thomas-Greenfield says 100,000 Russian troops on Ukraine’s border is “the largest mobilisation of troops in Europe in decades”. The US, UK, Norway, UAE, Albania, Brazil, Ghana, France, Ireland, and Mexico all voted to have the debate. Some snap analysis from my colleague, Julian Borger: This was the last day in which the US could hold a Security Council meeting on Ukraine before Russia takes over the presidency on the council, allowing Moscow to frame the debate. This is the last day of the Norwegian presidency. Russia tried to stop the hearing going forward, but the US only needed nine votes to make sure it went ahead and got 10 votes. Only China voted with Russia against holding the session. Gabon, India and Kenya abstained. For meeting: 10 Against: 2 Abstensions: 3 They are voting … US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, is now responding. She says this is not about “antics”. “Imagine how uncomfortable you would feel if you had 100,000 troops on your border,” he adds. Russia’s ambassador to the UN, Vasily Nebenzya, has called for a vote on whether the security council should hold the meeting on Ukraine today. Moscow will now need support from nine of the 15 members. Nebenzya says the meeting was called on “unfounded accusations” and talks about “the myth of Russian aggression”. Nebenzya said the topic is “extremely sensitive” and calls it “megaphone diplomacy” by the US to “whip up hysterics”. The United Nations Security Council is in session for what is likely to be a confrontational debate between world power over Russia’s troop build-up on the Ukraine border. It will be the first time the global body will discuss recent threats of a Russian invasion. Seems there is a genuine effort to block the meeting from going ahead. China’s ambassador to the UN, Chen Xu, said Beijing is against the meeting, calling it “microphone diplomacy”. He calls for “quiet diplomacy”. Efforts are under way to block the vote, he confirms. France’s ambassador to the UN, Nicolas de Rivière, has told reporters outside the security council room that he thinks the debate will go ahead. That suggests he believes Russia will not have enough votes to block the meeting, which it might attempt to do. Heads up. The UN security council meeting starts in less than 10 minutes. Expect diplomatic fireworks. Ukraine’s interior minister Denys Monastyrsky has given a briefing saying a group of people who were planning mass riots in Kyiv were detained by authorities on Sunday. He claimed the plan was to gather thousands of people in the city centre, including “up to 1,500 thugs who would start fights with law enforcement officers”. He said the plotters had fake blood to provoke panic. In Ukraine, many officials are more worried about this kind of “hybrid” threat they say is backed by Russia than the prospect of a full-blown invasion, which is considered less likely. Ukraine has also seen a spate of thousands of bomb threats phoned into police stations across the country – there were more than 3,000 in the first three weeks of the year, all of them false. Britain is about to exploit one of the benefits of Brexit – the freedom to impose sanctions without waiting for the most reluctant member of the EU to be brought on board. The UK became sovereign over its sanctions policy on leaving the EU, giving London the ability to remain in lockstep with US policy. Hence the tough policy on Putin’s cronies to be unveiled by the foreign secretary Liz Truss on Monday is likely to be very similar to the package being trailed in the US by the Biden administration. None of this would be implemented unless and until Russia invaded Ukraine, although there has been a debate in the US about whether some of the measures should be announced regardless of Russian troop movements. The ability of the UK to set out powerful deterrent sanctions is a sign of UK agility and flexibility post Brexit in stark contrast with the inability of the EU to do the same. Standing alongside the UK defence minister Ben Wallace, the Hungarian defence minister Tibor Benko signalled a looming problem for the EU. He said the prime interest was not sanctions or conflict, but dialogue, before adding various criticisms of the way in which sanctions policy is selectively enforced. Hungary has been one the countries most critical about sanctions on Russia and could now repeat this role. The manner in which the EU takes decisions in foreign policy – through unanimity – requires the EU to run at the speed of the slowest. Simon Tisdall, our foreign affairs commentator, has taken a look at what Putin seeks to gain from all the panic – even without an invasion – and what he could lose in the process: It’s true Putin has succeeded in forcing the US to focus on Russia’s security concerns, including future missile deployments and Nato exercises. He will keep up the military and diplomatic pressure for now, to see what concessions and freebies he can get. But Washington will not agree to freeze Ukraine out of Nato or remake Europe’s post-cold war security structures, and Putin surely knows it. Meanwhile, his aggressive tactics have rallied the fractious western democracies and stiffened opposition to his regime. While a watching world is waiting for Putin, Biden is threatening to sanction him personally, as urged in this space last week. Like a thief in the night looking to see what he can grab, Russia’s leader makes a pariah of himself and his country on the global stage. War or no war, real or imaginary, that look likes defeat. A group of European parliamentarians have voiced solidarity with Ukraine during a visit to the port city of Mariupol, close to the frontline where Russian-backed separatists hold territory. David McAllister, a German centre-right MEP who leads the European parliament’s foreign affairs committee, said the Russian military build-up was “a huge concern for all of us in Europe because the country of Ukraine is closely linked to security all over our continent”. He added: The European parliament has been very clear in its call on Russia to deescalate the situation. This conflict, this crisis can only be solved by diplomatic means and that is why we call for continued efforts through diplomatic talks in all different formats … The ball is in the Russian court. He was accompanied by Nathalie Loiseau, an ally of the French president Emmanuel Macron, who chairs the parliament’s subcommittee on security and defence. She said: We already see Russia trying to destabilise your country through disinformation, cyber-attacks and diverse manipulations. We will stand firm and we will continue to support Ukraine because nothing about the future of Ukraine can be decided without the Ukrainians. The European parliament has no formal foreign policy powers, which tends to make it more assertive than EU member governments. In a resolution adopted last month, MEPs said that sanctions should include cutting Russia from the Swift international payments system, as well as blocking the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. In contrast, neither the European Council (of EU leaders), nor the EU council of ministers has spelled out the sanctions Russia could face for invading Ukraine. The eight-strong delegation of MEPs will be in Kyiv on Tuesday to meet Ukraine’s prime minister Denys Shmyhal, the speaker of the Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine’s parliament, as well as its committees on foreign affairs, EU integration, security and defence. The US and the UK, home to leading financial centres, are clearly gearing up to announce a coordinated effort to target members of the Russian elite with economic sanctions if the Kremlin orders an invasion of Ukraine. The language from today’s US briefing – that economic sanctions will target Russian elite members “in or near the inner circles of the Kremlin” – is almost identical to that used by British foreign secretary Liz Truss on Sunday. Truss had warned that sanctions could target “oligarchs close to the Kremlin”. However, neither the US nor the UK is yet willing to make any names public, conscious of legal and security risks. American officials referred to a long list of names drawn up under the Trump administration in 2018, which contains 114 senior government figures and a further 96 “oligarchs” as people who could be sanctioned. Ukraine’s foreign minister has unsurprisingly welcomed the UK’s threat of sanctions on oligarchs close to the Kremlin as a deterrent. British prime minister Boris Johnson will speak to Russian president Vladimir Putin later on Monday, as London attempts to pressure Moscow over its troop build-up on the border with Ukraine. “The prime minister is expected to speak to President Putin this afternoon,” Johnson’s spokesman told reporters. That will be an awkward call. It comes as London is preparing possible sanctions on Putin’s inner circle. On Sunday, UK foreign minister Liz Truss said legislation to allow Britain to hit banks, energy companies and “oligarchs close to the Kremlin” would be introduced by the government this week. “The number one thing that will stop Vladimir Putin taking action is if he understands the cost of that action,” she told the BBC. Truss will make a statement to parliament on the Russia sanctions regime later today, and Johnson and Truss will travel to Ukraine on Tuesday. While the west waits anxiously for war, it appears the people of the two countries that would be directly involved in it are less concerned. In Moscow, as my colleague Andrew Roth has found, US warnings of an imminent attack are not shared. Roth reports: As Russia approaches a perhaps even more fateful war, it feels as though the public has barely taken note, despite the warning signs coming from both sides. He spoke to Konstantin Danilin, 36, who had brought his two daughters to go tubing at Park Patriot, an amusement park just outside Moscow. Danilin said talk of war was “hysteria”, adding: “Putin is aggressive: he takes risks, it’s possible he makes mistakes. But this is all just a negotiation.” Meanwhile, in Ukraine, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has talked down the threat of war, despite the 100,000 Russian troops gathered on his country’s border. Moscow moved in additional troops before major diplomatic negotiations, he said, to build diplomatic pressure and get concessions. “It’s psychological. They want to make believe they are there. They are trying to build up psychological pressure.” However, Zelenskiy has an interest in playing down any perceived threats. Reports of imminent war, he said, were causing panic in the financial sector, and depleting Ukraine’s gold reserves and currency. The Kremlin has criticised Britain’s announcement of new legislation to target Russian firms and oligarchs in the event of a war in Ukraine as an “outright attack on business” and has threatened to retaliate. “The statements made in London are very disquieting. I believe they don’t just make us, our companies worry, they also demonstrate a significant degree of London’s unpredictability, which is a reason for serious concern from international financial institutions and business entities,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said during a telephone briefing. Peskov did not specifically respond to threats against wealthy Russians close to Putin. But he did describe the threat of sanctions as illegitimate, saying that they would harm both Russian and British business interests. “We should call a spade a spade: sanctions are something legitimate, formalised by a resolution of the UN security council, while here we are dealing with an outright attack on business,” he said during the call. Russia’s state-owned gas company is politely reminding Europe how its liquid gas reserves are at an “all-time low”. Gazprom just tweeted that Europe’s underground gas facilities hold nearly 30% less gas than they did this time last year. They are around 40% full, it said. The not-so-subtle subtext: don’t rock the boat. Europe is reliant on Russia for energy. Britain has also sought to dissuade Vladimir Putin from military action by signalling its willingness to impose severe economic sanctions. On Sunday, foreign secretary Liz Truss said legislation to allow Britain to hit banks, energy companies and “oligarchs close to the Kremlin” will be introduced by the government this week. “We absolutely need to stop [an invasion from] happening,” Truss told the BBC. “The number one thing that will stop Vladimir Putin taking action is if he understands the cost of that action.” The British government has been accused of allowing Kremlin-linked money to flow easily through the City of London - which has been nicknamed ‘Londongrad’. Truss is travelling to Ukraine this week and has plans to travel to Moscow the week after. The US and its allies have prepared a list of Russian elites linked to Vladimir Putin’s inner circle to hit with economic sanctions should Russia invade Ukraine, a senior US administration official has said. The official, who spoke to Reuters on condition of anonymity, said the individuals “play a role in government decision-making or are at a minimum complicit in the Kremlin’s destabilising behaviour”. The sanctions will also target family members, the official said. Targeting Russian oligarchs is only one part of a plan by the US and its allies to punish Putin should he launch an invasion. Russia denies that it plans to invade Ukraine. The US official said many of the individuals are particularly vulnerable targets because of deepened financial ties with the west. “Putin’s cronies will no longer be able to use their spouses or other family members as proxies to evade sanctions. Sanctions would cut them off from the international financial system and ensure that they and their family members will no longer able to enjoy the perks of parking their money in the west and attending elite western universities,” the official added. On Sunday, a US Senate foreign relations committee said it was on the verge of approving “the mother of all sanctions”. “Putin will not stop if he believes the west will not respond,” said the panel’s Democratic chair, Bob Menendez of New Jersey. “We saw what he did in 2008 in Georgia, we saw what he did in 2014 in pursuit of Crimea. He will not stop.” Aside from the security council meeting, Joe Biden will host the Emir of Qatar at the White House today in the hopes that the gas-rich Gulf nation might offset an energy crisis if Russia invades Ukraine. Any Russian invasion into Ukraine would almost surely trigger economic sanctions from the US and its European allies. That could lead to oil and gas shortages around the world. There are also concerns Russia will cut supplies to Europe, although Moscow denies this. Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani is expected to tell the US president that his country will explore providing short-term emergency liquid gas to help replace any shortages. According to the EU’s statistics agency, Eurostat, EU countries draw roughly 40% of their gas imports from Russia. Germany is especially dependent. As the world’s second-biggest exporter of liquified natural gas – and being a close US ally – Qatar is seen as an option to avoid an energy meltdown. The United Nations security council is scheduled to meet later today for what is expected to be a testy confrontation between US and Russian diplomats over Moscow’s troop build-up on the Ukraine border. It will be the first time the global body will discuss recent threats of a Russian invasion, which has left world governments on edge. Washington called for the meeting last week. US ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, has described it in stark terms as a talk on “Russian aggression”. “We’re going to go into the council prepared to listen to Russia’s security concerns, but we’re not going to be distracted by their propaganda,” she tweeted. Russia’s deputy UN ambassador Dmitry Polyansky has been no less assertive, calling the meeting a “clear PR stunt shameful for the reputation of UN security council”. Under council rules – and adding to tensions – Ukraine will also speak. While it is possible Russia might attempt to block the meeting with a vote, it will need support from nine of the 15 members. Good morning readers. Oliver Holmes here. I’ll be your live blogger for what looks to be a lively day of diplomacy.Spotify has said it will add “content advisories” to episodes of Joe Rogan’s podcast discussing Covid after the singers Neil Young and Joni Mitchell accused the streaming service of helping to spread Covid misinformation. The musicians are critical of Rogan, who has recently sparked controversy over comments made by himself and some of his guests about the pandemic. So, what does the science say about some of Rogan’s most controversial claims? ’Healthy young people don’t need a Covid vaccine’ Rogan has claimed he isn’t anti-vaccine, but during a 23 April 2021 episode of his podcast he said: “If you’re like 21 years old, and you say to me, should I get vaccinated? I’ll go, no.” Although it’s true that older people are at greater risk of severe disease and death, younger people can and do die from Covid-19. According to the latest UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) figures, there have been 39 deaths in 20- to 29-year-olds with laboratory-confirmed Covid in England since January 2021. Among those aged 30-39, there have been 185 deaths during the same period. That’s lower than the 18,931 deaths in people aged 80+, but not insignificant. “Young people still get severe illness from Covid-19, and the benefits, directly to the young person, purely in terms of their risk of serious illness are much greater than any risks from vaccination,” said Dr Richard Tedder, a member of the UK Clinical Virology Network. Separate research on 73,197 UK adults who were admitted to hospital during the pandemic’s first wave found that 27% of 19- to 29-year-olds suffered damage to their kidneys, lungs or other organs as a result of Covid-19, while 13% left hospital with a reduced ability to care for themselves. ‘The myocarditis risk is higher from vaccines than from Covid’ In his 12 January 2022 episode, Rogan claimed the risk of myocarditis (heart muscle inflammation) among vaccinated 12- to 17-year-olds was higher than the risk associated with catching Covid. But his guest, the Australian broadcaster Josh Szeps, argued that, in fact, young males infected with the virus were up six times more likely to develop myocarditis as those who had received the vaccine. Szeps cited data from the US Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, suggesting a rate of about 450 myocarditis cases in every million Covid-19 infections among boys aged 12-17, compared with 77 cases a million after vaccination. Separate data from 38.6 million people aged 16+ who were vaccinated in England identified an extra two to six myocarditis cases in every million people in the 28 days after receiving a first dose of the AstraZeneca, Pfizer or Moderna vaccines, and an extra 10 cases a million after a second dose of the Moderna vaccine. This compared with an additional 40 cases a million people in the 28 days after a positive Covid test. “The risk of myocarditis is substantially higher following Covid infection than vaccination in the general population, but remains very infrequent following either,” said Nicholas Mills, a British Heart Foundation professor of cardiology at the University of Edinburgh, who was involved in the study. “The majority of reports suggest that when it arises following vaccination it is mild and self-limiting.” ’Ivermectin can drive this pathogen to extinction’ During his 18 June 2021 podcast, Rogan’s guest, the evolutionary biologist Bret Weinstein, claimed that “ivermectin alone, if properly utilised, is capable of driving this pathogen to extinction”. On 2 September, Rogan announced that he had tested positive for Covid-19 and was also taking the anti-parasitic drug. Although he recovered, ivermectin is unlikely to explain why: according to a recent Cochrane Review, which analysed data from multiple studies, there is no evidence to support the use of ivermectin either for preventing or treating Covid. “Because of a lack of good-quality evidence, we do not know whether ivermectin administered in hospital or in an outpatient setting leads to more or fewer deaths after one month when compared with a placebo or usual care,” its authors said. ‘mRNA vaccines are gene therapy’ In his 20 August 2021, podcast, Rogan claimed the Pfizer and Moderna Covid-19 vaccines were not really vaccines, but gene therapy. “A vaccine is where they take a dead virus, and they turn it into a vaccine, and they inject it into your body so that your body fights off [the infection],” he said. “This is really gene therapy. It’s a different thing. It’s tricking your body into producing spike protein and making these antibodies for Covid.” It’s true that mRNA vaccines persuade our own cells to manufacture the viral spike protein, which in turn prompts the production of antibodies. However, whereas gene therapy is designed to permanently alter an individual’s genes, mRNA vaccines issue instructions to protein-making machinery located in the cytoplasm, which degrade after about 72 hours. Because immune cells are able to remember pieces of virus they’ve encountered, this temporary encounter still has a lasting effect, but it doesn’t alter our genome. Other types of vaccines, such as the influenza or hepatitis B vaccine, also expose the immune system to viral proteins, albeit pre-assembled ones. “I’m not gonna get vaccinated. I have antibodies, it doesn’t make any sense.” On 24 December 2021, Rogan told the US comedian Tim Dillon that his Vancouver show had been cancelled because Canada required proof of vaccination to attend live events. Referencing his earlier Covid infection, Rogan said “I’m not gonna get vaccinated. I have antibodies, it doesn’t make any sense.” Although so-called natural immunity is likely to provide some protection against subsequent infection, vaccination would strengthen and extend the duration of that response. Tedder said: “About one in five people who get Covid do not generate a useful immune response, and those who do gain a valuable ‘booster’ effect if they are subsequently vaccinated, deepening and enhancing their immune response so that it lasts for longer, and is better able to recognise new variants.” Lockdowns ‘make things worse’ Rogan has also spoken out against lockdowns, arguing that they can perpetuate the spread of Covid-19. “It makes things worse, you know why – because people go inside. They are trapped inside and that’s where it spreads,” he said. However, according to an analysis of the impact of lockdowns and social distancing in 11 European countries, published in Nature, such measures together have a “substantial effect” on transmission. “It is true that, since the virus is airborne, transmission is more likely indoors, particularly if ventilation is poor; but the point of lockdowns is to reduce the number of contacts, and thus the likelihood of encountering somebody who is infectious,” Tedder said.