1) Swindon and City on level playing field Swindon and Manchester City were regular combatants in the 1990s, meeting in the second tier and during Swindon’s one season in the Premier League, 1993-94. Friday’s visit to the County Ground will be a first meeting in 20 years. On 5 January 2002, former Swindon man Kevin Horlock scored the second in a 2-0 home win at Maine Road. The years since have seen the clubs move in radically different trajectories, and they now operate on different planets. Swindon arrested a slump with a 5-2 defeat of Northampton on New Year’s Day, and lie in the League Two play-off positions. The club have explained price hikes for this game “due to the historical financial issues that were inherited” from the previous ownership. City, clear at the top of the Premier League, have this week been strengthening their finances further by adding an Abu Dhabi-based renewable energy company to their sponsorship portfolio. JB Swindon v Manchester City, Friday 8pm (all times GMT) 2) Terriers have history on their side As the old maxim goes, Huddersfield always win the Cup when the year ends in 22, especially if they get to visit Turf Moor along the way. They played there twice en route to lifting the trophy for the first and only time in 1922, ousting Burnley at the start of their campaign before beating Notts County at Turf Moor in the semi-final. So we can be certain that, before Saturday’s tie at Burnley, Carlos Corberán will rev his charges up with tales of heroes such as Billy Smith, the scorer of their winner at Stamford Bridge back in the day and – by the by – the first player in English football to find the net directly from a corner. With both teams beset by Covid-related problems, and Huddersfield fighting for promotion from the Championship while Burnley battle against relegation from the Premier League, it is difficult to predict the lineups of each side, but it would not be a major shock if the visitors knocked out the Clarets. PD Burnley v Huddersfield, Saturday 12.30pm 3) Boreham Wood eye another upset Boreham Wood have developed a taste for beating Football League opposition in recent years, having broken their duck by defeating Blackpool in the first round of the FA Cup in 2017-18. Last season they beat Southend on penalties in the first round of a run that ended with defeat to Millwall in the third. They have reached the stage this time without facing an EFL club, having seen off Barnet and Eastleigh, also winning a local derby with St Albans City to get this far. Wimbledon have found League One something of a struggle lately, not least due to Covid cancellations. A stern letter to authorities demanded the league “implement the strongest-possible measures to ensure that – where a club is able to fulfil a fixture – it does so”. Mark Robinson’s team looked rusty in losing to Oxford during their one Christmas assignment, but 1,200 Dons will be making the trip to the other side of the London conurbation. JB Boreham Wood v AFC Wimbledon, Saturday 3pm 4) Kidderminster sniff Royals opportunity The lowest-ranked team left in this year’s competition, Kidderminster Harriers sit fifth in the National League North and will fancy their chances of causing an upset against a Reading side more interested in Championship survival than any sort of Cup run. A capacity crowd of more than 5,000 will pack the intimate environs of Aggborough for the arrival of Veljko Paunovic’s second-tier strugglers and the Royals’ Serbian manager has said he will rest plenty of first-choice players for an encounter that precedes four league games in 12 days for his team. “We have to approach the game on Saturday in the best possible way and in our best interests,” he said, no doubt aware that what serves his best interests will also benefit those of his opposite number, Russell Penn. Having had their past three games postponed, Kidderminster’s players enjoyed a restful festive period, while the striker Ashley Hemmings will be confident of adding to goals he scored against Grimsby and Halifax in the first and second rounds. BG Kidderminster v Reading, Saturday 3pm 5) Magpies fans still on post-Ashley high That St James’ Park is a sell-out for the visit of Cambridge is not so much a tribute to Mark Bonner’s team, or perhaps a last chance to see the mercurial talents of Wes Hoolahan. Or even the chance for the Geordie nation to see Kieran Trippier unveiled on the hallowed turf. Instead, and despite the club’s lowly position in the Premier League, a fountain of optimism continues to gush on Tyneside. Whatever the providence of the Saudi Arabian cash that will fund their January recruitment drive, a not-Mike Ashley bounce continues among the club’s fans. A Covid-hit Christmas and no game since 27 December has also left the public wanting more, and there was much to get excited about in that night’s 1-1 draw with Manchester United. An FA Cup run would be a distraction for Eddie Howe but perhaps one that could help fuel the battle against relegation. JB Newcastle v Cambridge, Saturday 3pm 6) Seagulls can learn their priorities With automatic promotion back to the Premier League the club’s overriding ambition, Valérien Ismaël made no apology for practically forfeiting West Brom’s place in the Carabao Cup this season by fielding a back-up side against Arsenal, who cavorted to a 6-0 win in August. We will never know for sure whether Ismaël would have opted for a similar approach to the FA Cup, since circumstances have made the choice for him: injuries, suspension and international duty mean the Baggies could be without up to 10 first-team players when they host Brighton on Saturday. Graham Potter best make sure he picks a team strong enough to progress because there is no justification for Brighton not taking a serious tilt at the Cup this season. Last year they slumped out in the fifth round after fielding a weakened side at Leicester, who, of course, went on to lift the trophy. Hopefully Potter has learned from that. PD West Brom v Brighton, Saturday 3pm 7) Revived Chesterfield’s deserved reward The architects of one of the most mind-blowing FA Cup runs in living memory, when as a third-tier side they were robbed by poor officiating and the absence of goal-line technology in their 1997 semi-final against Middlesbrough, Chesterfield have an opportunity to recreate the magic of yore when they take on Chelsea at Stamford Bridge. The European champions are second in the Premier League, while their visitors sit 92 places below them, banging on the door of the Football League. Unbeaten in 14 games under the management of the 38-year-old James Rowe, Chesterfield were actually the first visiting team in history to win a League game at Stamford Bridge, in 1905, and will be hoping history of a sort can repeat itself in the first encounter between the clubs in 72 years. Whatever the outcome, this glamour tie and the financial windfall that comes with it is a thoroughly deserved reward for those behind the Chesterfield FC Community Trust, who have performed such sterling work since securing the purchase of the club 17 months ago. BG Chelsea v Chesterfield, Saturday 5.30pm 8) The Glovers v the Cherries, marvellous! Yeovil and Bournemouth share Alec Stock in common. The FA Cup made Stock’s name, from leading Southern League Yeovil to a famous defeat of first division Sunderland in 1949 and then taking second division Fulham to losing the final in 1975. Bournemouth was the final stop in a long managerial career for the man whose lugubrious, wistful tones inspired the Fast Show’s Ron Manager. Yeovil, back in non-league after a lengthy stay in the Football League ended in 2019, look to repeat the heroics of 1949 in toppling Bournemouth, who lead the Championship. Mid-table in the National League, it would be quite the achievement for Darren Sarll’s team, though they may be aided by a Covid outbreak that led to the postponement of Bournemouth’s match with Peterborough on Monday. Should the game go ahead, Scott Parker is likely to have his selection limited for the club’s first ever FA Cup visit to Yeovil. JB Yeovil Town v Bournemouth, Saturday 5.45pm 9) Harrogate reach milestone Harrogate Town first entered the FA Cup in 1919 but this will be their first appearance in the third round, marking another milestone in the rise of a club enjoying an impressive second season in the Football League despite a recent dip in results. The decision to turn full-time four years ago has borne sweet fruit for the club, and Simon Weaver, who is in his 13th year in charge, can now claim to be the longest-serving league manager. Weaver has already led the team to Wembley glory – they won the 2020 FA Trophy – and will be aiming to build on good wins in the previous rounds over Wrexham and Portsmouth when they travel to Luton, another enchanting first. The returns of the defenders Rory McArdle and Will Smith from injuries could boost their chances of upsetting the Championship side. PD Harrogate v Luton, Sunday 12.30pm 10) Opportunity for United and Villa The FA Cup ought to be a priority for both Manchester United and Aston Villa. In Scotland with Rangers, Steven Gerrard concentrated on winning the league. Villa are a club of considerable ambition and with the top four beyond reach and the relegation battle not too much of a concern, a run to Wembley can be considered. What of United? Roy Keane, in a late-2021 pundit-off with Jamie Carragher, suggested that Cristiano Ronaldo had been signed to win “the cups”. United are staring down five years without a trophy, the longest drought since winning this competition in 1983 followed 1977’s FA Cup win. Behind the scenes, and on the back pages, there are suggestions United’s players are struggling with Ralf Rangnick’s lack of celebrity, as well as his 4-2-2-2 formation. There is already a whiff of Roy Hodgson’s ill-suited regime at Liverpool about the German’s appointment. JB Manchester United v Aston Villa, Monday 8pm • This article was amended on 7 January 2022. Billy Smith scored Huddersfield’s 1922 FA Cup winner at Stamford Bridge, not Wembley.As one of the most extraordinary days in the history of professional tennis finally came to an end, uncertainty still reigned. Novak Djokovic had started Thursday at the beginning of what would eventually become about 10 hours of waiting and questioning at passport control in Tullamarine airport in Melbourne, before his visa was cancelled and deportation loomed. He ended the day alone in an immigration hotel in Carlton. According to reports from Serbia, Djokovic’s futile hopes of leaving the hotel to join his team were quashed, his only company the insects and the bugs beside him in his room. Outside, his fans gathered to brandish their Serbian flags and sing Balkan folk songs into the night. It is still unclear where Djokovic goes from here. He has appealed against the federal government’s ruling on his visa and he will remain in Melbourne until Monday at least, the day of his hearing, with the hope of putting this case behind him. But even if he is able to overturn the ruling and compete for his 10th Australian Open title, this has been an unwanted, emotionally draining episode that has helped nobody and has reflected terribly on all involved. On the court, Djokovic continues to pull off magical feats. Last season, every single grand slam tournament seemed to yield a new all-time record, from clinching the record number of weeks at No 1 to the astounding feat of securing every grand slam tournament and Masters 1000 event at least twice. He is the men’s player of the last 10 years by a mile. Yet his breathless ability on the court is paired with his frequent tendency to self-sabotage. It is often said about the best players that their greatest opponents are themselves but Djokovic takes it to new levels. He chases history and a record-setting 21 grand slam titles, yet he is so taken by alternative science that he was willing to complicate his chances by arriving unvaccinated at one of the world’s strictest borders. It is hubris and it is the single-minded self-belief that drives his tennis but that also so often leads him astray. The decisions he makes highlight the necessity of having the right people around giving wise counsel. It is particularly notable that while Djokovic remained stuck at the border, members of his team strolled into Melbourne. The absurdity of this whole affair was dissected by, of all people, Rafael Nadal. “I think if he wanted, he would be playing here in Australia without a problem,” he said, shrugging. It seems unlikely that Djokovic will look at this episode as an opportunity to grow. More often than not, the injustices that Djokovic is perceived to have suffered have the opposite effect, only strengthening his resolve and reaffirming the belief that he is one man up against the world. No matter how this plays out, this incident is merely setting the tone for the seasons to come. On the same day that Djokovic was flying towards his fate in Melbourne, Emmanuel Macron, the president of France, was controversially revealing his plan to “piss off” unvaccinated citizens. The French Open is, incidentally, the next grand slam, and it is likely that more vaccine mandates are to come for the travelling group of tennis players, with more decisions for Djokovic and others to make as a result. While Djokovic continues to receive scorn, all entities involved are deserving of criticism. Over the past few years it has become standard to see Craig Tiley, Tennis Australia’s chief executive, appear on TV to smooth over controversy and promote the top players. Indeed, at the same time as Djokovic was flying into Melbourne, Tiley was front and centre reassuring the public of the robustness of the medical panels that decided who received exemptions. Since the cancellation of Djokovic’s visa, Tiley has been conspicuous in his absence from the airwaves. Tiley’s silence reflects the undeniable failures of Tennis Australia and the Victorian government, those medical exemptions allowing Djokovic to enter the tournament but having no effect on federal border policy once he arrived there. Tiley revealed that of 26 applicants only a “handful” of exemptions were granted, some of which are now reportedly being examined more closely. The failures of Tennis Australia and the Victoria government do not absolve the federal government and the bickering between state and federal entities that has defined this situation. One day before Djokovic arrived in Australia, the country’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, was asked in a press conference about Djokovic’s imminent arrival; he described it as an issue for Victoria state. A day later he swiftly changed his tune. It could reasonably be concluded that it wasn’t until then that he realised the political points to be scored from being seen to act decisively. Shortly after Djokovic’s visa had been cancelled, Morrison said: “Rules are rules, especially when it comes to our borders. No one is above these rules.” Ironically, one positive aspect of the incident is the increased attention on Morrison’s cruel border policies. Even if he is banished from the country, Djokovic will ultimately be fine. He has the resources and profile to seek out representatives when most would have been on the first flight home. There are 36 refugees at Djokovic’s Park hotel. Some have been stuck in the hotel for eight years and have been treated abhorrently by the state ever since. They deserve the attention and compassion that Djokovic’s brief stay among them is generating.It’s the first week of January, so it must be time for “high pay day”, the High Pay Centre’s illuminating calculation of the moment at which the average chief executive of a FTSE 100 company will have been paid as much as the average UK worker will earn in the entire year. The imaginary gong will strike at about 9am on Friday morning. That, notably, is slightly later than normal because the thinktank has to use backward-looking data for its exercise and, relatively speaking (a crucial qualification), the FTSE 100 crew had a lean time during the first pandemic year. In 2020, their average pay fell from £3.25m to £2.7m. That was still about 86 times the median earnings of a full-time UK worker but represented a multi-year low ratio-wise. Do not, though, imagine a trend has been established. Three factors suggest normal service, as viewed from the boardroom, will be restored. First, the FTSE 100 rose 14% in 2021, which will inflate the value of share-based incentives that tend to be the biggest components of large packets. Second, those companies that accepted furlough support from the public purse, and sensibly judged it unacceptable to award boardroom bonuses while doing so, will now feel they’re off the leash. Third, remuneration committees will be under pressure from executives to apply a catchup approach after a year of relative (again) restraint. The only force pushing in the other direction is the shareholders. Here’s Andrew Ninian of the Investment Association, the fund manager’s trade body: “As we recover from the pandemic, investors will be watching to ensure [last year’s] fair approach is maintained.” That is hardly blood and thunder stuff. Prediction: high pay day will fall earlier next January. Next still the smartest operator in town This time last year, Simon Wolfson, Next’s chief executive, said it was “harder than ever to predict sales and profits for the year ahead”. He’s proved his point in spades because his first stab at a profits forecast was £670m, which has turned out to be a wild underestimate. Five upgrades later, and with only three weeks of Next’s financial year left to run, the group now says it’s on track for £822m. The last flurry was provided by a pre-Christmas rush, including in the shops, not just online. Wolfson describes the horizon-gazing challenge this time as “unusually difficult”, which could almost be regarded as an improvement in clarity versus “harder than ever”. Not by much, though. None of his “five areas of uncertainty” can be called minor. Will the release of pent-up demand, which almost certainly helped in 2021, fade during the year? Will consumers prefer to spend on holidays and going out? Will inflation in food and energy curb spending on clothes and homeware? Will Next’s own price increases, expected to be 6% by the autumn as it absorbs higher shipping costs and wage rises, depress demand? How will consumers react to a 1.25% rise in national insurance plus possible rises in mortgage costs? Yes, that’s a decent summary of the non-Covid trading worries. All would be mitigated by inflation-matching rises in workers’ pay, but therein lies another deep uncertainty. The good news for Next investors is that Wolfson is still pencilling in a 7% increase in sales and a 4.6% gain in profits, taking the latter measure to £860m. But it would be unwise for the rest of the non-food retailing sector to get too excited. Next has proved over a couple of decades that it is the smartest operator in town. It may well find 7% revenue growth within the cost-of-living squeeze; many others won’t get near. Electric truck firm hits the skids The early stock market story of 2022 is the sell-off in US tech stocks, and the best illustration is Rivian, the electric truck and van developer that listed last year at a valuation of $65bn (£48bn) despite having generated no revenues. The stock price more than doubled soon after listing last November, delivering a market value of $150bn, but on Thursday touched its starting level. A specific worry is that Amazon, Rivian’s big backer, unveiled a deal this week to buy battery-powered vans from Stellantis, the former Fiat Chrysler. Nobody should have been shocked by the appearance of competition, of course, and Rivian and Amazon cooed sweetly that their own partnership was solid. But nor, equally, is the market’s reappraisal of Rivian’s worth remotely odd. A company with no revenues was briefly valued at more than Volkswagen, a firm that made profits of €9.7bn (£8.1bn) last year. That was the truly bizarre part. If the tech sell-off gets serious, there is still room to reverse.The armed forces are being deployed to help hospitals in London deal with a surge in Covid patients because the Omicron variant is leaving so many staff sick and unable to work. Of the 200 military personnel involved, 40 are doctors who will help NHS staff look after patients. The other 160 personnel, who have no medical training, will check in patients, ensure stocks are maintained and would also be “conducting basic checks”, the Ministry of Defence said. Some have already started work and they are expected to support the NHS in the capital until the end of the month. The announcement comes two days after Boris Johnson said he hopes England can “ride out” the current wave of Covid-19 without further restrictions, but did acknowledge parts of the NHS would feel “temporarily overwhelmed” by Omicron. Health union leaders, although grateful for the help, have said this latest move means the government can no longer be “dismissive” of concerns about “delivering safe care”. Thousands of NHS staff have been off work each week in London, which last month became the first part of the country to see a huge wave of Covid cases caused by the new strain, leaving hospitals struggling to cope with unprecedented levels of staff absence. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of hospitals group NHS Providers, welcomed the assistance from personnel from what is thought to be all three armed forces. But he said that their arrival underlined the extent of NHS understaffing. “Trust leaders will welcome the support of colleagues from the armed forces during what continues to be an incredibly challenging time for the NHS in London. “The fact that we need to call upon army medics and general duty personnel at all underlines the sheer scale of the workforce challenges the NHS is facing. “The experience of the pandemic makes plain underlying issues which need resolution – the need for a national long-term plan for the health and care workforce, ongoing challenges with vacancies and recruitment pre-dating the pandemic by a number of years.” Hospitals elsewhere in England, which are seeing dramatic increases in Covid admissions, may also seek military aid, Hopson added. The news came as the UK reported a further 179,756 Covid cases on Thursday, with the number of people infected with the Omicron variant continuing to increase rapidly. The latest figures – which reflect infections picked up by testing – bring the UK total for the past seven days to 1,272,131, up 29% on the week before. The true number of infections is estimated to be substantially higher as not all infections are captured by the testing programme. The data also showed that in England there are 17,988 Covid patients in hospital, up from 15,659 the day before, with a further 231 deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test reported in the UK on Thursday. Military personnel have helped out in hospitals in previous waves of the pandemic and continue to assist the ambulance services in Wales and Scotland and have also been helping the booster programme. The Royal College of Nursing said the deployment proved that the NHS is critically short of staff and asked for assurances that those involved have the skills to help look after patients. “The government can no longer deny the staffing crisis in the NHS. The prime minister and others can no longer be dismissive of questions about the ability of NHS staff to deliver safe care,” said Patricia Marquis, its nursing director for England. “Once the military has been brought in, where does the government turn next in a bid to ‘ride out’ the wave rather than deal with it? “Nursing staff might welcome any extra help at work right now, but we need to know that the government isn’t compromising patient and professional standards in any way.” Hopson earlier said soaring infection rates in the north of England mean that one NHS trust expects to have 30% more Covid cases next week than it had at the last peak. He fears that hospitals outside the capital will not be as able to cope with the new wave of admissions as those in London. He said this was because they had deeper staffing problems, higher levels of sickness and absence, older populations and in some cases worse social care provision. Some trusts outside London have as many as 19% of their staff absent because of Covid, much higher than the 10% off sick or isolating that other NHS organisations have been reporting, he added.The bosses of Britain’s biggest companies will have made more money in 2022 by breakfast time on Friday than the average UK worker will earn in the entire year, according to analysis of the vast gap in pay between FTSE 100 chief executives and everyone else. The High Pay Centre, a thinktank that campaigns for fairer pay for workers, said that by 9am on 7 January, the fourth working day of the year, a FTSE 100 chief executive will have been paid more on an hourly basis than the UK worker’s annual salary, based on median average remuneration figures for both groups. The country’s biggest unions said it was disgraceful that “greedy executives are taking home millions while ordinary workers face yet another year of pay squeezes”, and they demanded that firms be forced to appoint a frontline worker to executive pay committees. FTSE 100 chief executives were paid £2.7m on average in 2020 (the latest full-year figures available), which works out at 86 times the £31,285 average salary for full-time UK workers, according to Office for National Statistics figures. The average CEO pay fell 17% in the 2020 financial year as many bosses took a temporary pay cut at the start of the pandemic and first national lockdown and many of their bonuses were cancelled. It means that this is the first year in a decade that CEOs have had to work into the fourth day of the working year to make the same amount as the average full-time worker in a year. Most FTSE 100 companies have not yet announced CEO pay for their financial year ending in 2021, but 57% of those that have done so have recorded an increase on 2020 levels, the High Pay Centre report said. Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, said: “The pandemic has shown us all who keeps the country going during a crisis. There are millions of hardworking people in Britain – from carers, to delivery drivers, to shop floor staff – who give more than they get back, but greedy executives are taking home millions while ordinary workers face yet another year of pay squeezes. “As we emerge from the pandemic we need to redesign the economy to make it fair, and that means big reforms to bring CEO pay back down to earth.” O’Grady said the company committees that set CEO pay must be “required to include workforce representatives who can speak up for a fair balance of pay with ordinary workers. Incentive schemes for company directors should be replaced by profit-share schemes that include the whole workforce. Too much wealth is being hoarded at the top.” Pascal Soriot, the chief executive of AstraZeneca, the pharmaceutical company that makes the Oxford Covid-19 vaccine, was the highest paid, receiving £15.5m. The other top earners were Experian’s Brian Cassin, who got £10.3m, CRH’s Albert Manifold, with £10m, and Berkeley’s Rob Perrins, who collected £8m. Gary Smith, the general secretary of the GMB union, which represents 600,000 workers, said the figures showed that bosses were paid 173 times the amount collected by carers who risked their lives on the frontline of the pandemic. “Fat cat bosses trousering 173 times more than the carers who look after our loved ones is a disgrace,” he said. “It doesn’t look very levelled up and is everything that’s wrong with our economy. All UK workers must be properly paid and valued if we want to get our post-Covid economy on track.” The Unite union’s general secretary, Sharon Graham, said: “Is it the nurse in an intensive care unit saving the lives of those struck by Covid, or an elite investment banker making millions, who contributes most to society? Which of them stood up for all of us during the pandemic?”I spent five years as the lone journalist on the remote Pacific island of Yap. During that time I was harassed, spat at, threatened with assassination and warned that I was being followed. The tyres on my car were slashed late one night. There was also pressure on the political level. The chiefs of the traditional Council of Pilung (COP) asked the state legislature to throw me out of the country as a “persona non grata” claiming that my journalism “may be disruptive to the state environment and/or to the safety and security of the state”. During a public hearing of the Yap state legislature in September 2021, 14 minutes of the 28-minute meeting was spent complaining about an article of mine that reported on the legislature’s initially unsuccessful attempt to impeach the governor. One politician then posted about me on his Facebook page, under which a member of the public posted a comment saying I should be assassinated. American Bill Jaynes, editor of the Kaselehlie Press in Pohnpei, one of Yap’s sister states in the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), has had his share of death threats over the years, too. “In the 15 or so years I’ve been at this desk I have had several death threats,” he said. “Early on in my tenure, some angry individual carved a request for me to perform an act of physical impossibility into the hood of my car which then rusted for posterity. Most of that was during the early days before I came to be trusted to view things from an FSM rather than a foreigner’s point of view and to handle things factually rather than sensationally.” Freedom of the press is included in both the FSM and the Yap State Constitution, but as Leilani Reklai, publisher and editor of the Island Times Newspaper in Palau and president of the Palau Media Council, says: “Freedom of the press in the constitution is pretty on paper but not always a reality.” These incidents are shocking, but sadly are not isolated. Journalists in the Pacific face imprisonment, loss of employment and banishment from their homes. “While there might not be assassinations, murders, gagging, torture and ‘disappearances’ of journalists in Pacific island states, threats, censorship and a climate of self-censorship are commonplace,” David Robie, founding editor of Pacific Journalism Review, wrote in a 2019 article. A Fijian journalist, who asked to remain anonymous, said that after he posed questions to a politician during a public forum, the politician replied that he knew where the reporter lived. The following day, the reporter’s car was broken into. Soon after, the reporter was told that if he didn’t stop being critical, he would be kicked out of his job “and can go bag groceries instead” and he was evicted from his housing. The reporter believes all of these incidents stemmed from the questions he asked of the politician. “Within one week my life changed completely,” he said. “I do not see a future for me or any other journalist who is curious and questioning to make a career in journalism in Fiji.” According to Reporters Without Borders’ 2021 World Press Freedom Index, Fiji is ranked as 55th out of 179. The index highlights the “draconian” Media Industry Development Decree, introduced in 2010 and turned into law in 2018. “Those who violate this law’s vaguely-worded provisions face up to two years in prison. The sedition laws, with penalties of up to seven years in prison, are also used to foster a climate of fear and self-censorship,” said Reporters Without Borders. In 2018, senior journalist Scott Waide of Papua New Guinea was suspended by EMTV after the airing of his report critical of the government for purchasing 40 luxury Maseratis and three Bentleys to drive attendees during the APEC conference. Reinstated after a public and media outcry, Waide stated during an interview on ABC’s Pacific Beat program: “Increasingly, not just EMTV, but nearly every other media organisation in Papua New Guinea has been interfered with by their boards or with politicians, or various other players in society. They’re doing it with impunity. It’s a trend that’s very dangerous for democracy.” Daniel Bastard, Asia-Pacific director of Reporters Without Borders, said the situation is complicated by how small and connected many Pacific nations are. “The fact is that political leaders are also economic bosses so there’s a nexus. It’s symptomatic of the small journalistic communities in the Pacific islands that need to deal with the political community to get access to information. They have to be careful when they criticize knowing the government can cut advertising, publicity, etc. There’s still a strong level of intimidation.” While there are particular dangers faced by local journalists, foreign reporters living in the Pacific are not safe either. Canadian Dan McGarry, former media director of the Vanuatu Daily Post and a resident of the island nation for nearly 20 years, was denied renewal of his work permit in 2019. The reason given was that his job should be held by a local citizen. But McGarry said he believes it was politically motivated due to his reporting on “Chinese influence” in the small nation. He was then denied re-entry to Vanuatu after ironically attending a forum on press freedom in Brisbane. Regional and international news organisations came to his defence and the court granted McGarry re-entry, but the newspaper’s appeal to have his work permit renewed is ongoing. I have written about some sensitive and difficult topics and like to think of myself as pretty fearless. In 2018 I wrote about illegal fishing by Chinese commercial fishing boats around the Outer Island of Fedrai. That coverage resulted in the expulsion of the fishing vessel and significant political consequences. I’ve written about issues in the customs and immigration processes in FSM, that were potentially jeopardising tourism to Yap, which is so important to so many people’s livelihoods, and also about a huge and controversial proposed resort that would have seen thousands and thousands of Chinese tourists flown in to that tiny island on charter flights. These stories matter and just because some Pacific nations are small and remote does not mean that they do not need or deserve the scrutiny of a free press. But eventually, the threats to my safety were too much to handle. I spent too much time looking over my shoulder, living behind locked doors and never going out alone after dark. In mid-2021, I moved to Guam for greater peace of mind where I am continuing to write about this largely invisible, but crucial part of the world. Joyce McClure is a freelance journalist based in GuamWe are closing this blog but you can continue to read our live coverage on a new blog here. Thank you for reading. Hello, this is Helen Livingstone bringing you the day’s pandemic news from Sydney. First thing, an update from Australia, where more than 60,000 new Covid cases have been recorded in the two most populous state of New South Wales and Victoria. Eleven people have died in NSW, and the state has recorded 38,625 new cases of Covid in the 24 hours to 8pm last night. There are 1,738 people in hospital, 134 in intensive care, and reports that more restrictions will be introduced today. Six people have died in Victoria, where 21,728 cases were recorded. 644 people are in hospital, and 58 in intensive care. Victoria now has new density limits in hospitality venues, and Victorians now have to report positive results from rapid antigen tests to the health department. Here is a round-up of the day’s leading Covid news stories: The more infectious Omicron variant appears to produce less severe disease than the globally dominant Delta, but should not be categorised as “mild”, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said on Thursday. Novak Djokovic’s family have said he is the victim of “a political agenda” aimed at “stomping on Serbia” as protesters in Belgrade called for his release and Serbia’s president insisted “the whole country” was behind him. Britain’s first wave of coronavirus raised the risk of death by more than 40% for most adults regardless of their underlying health and other factors, research suggests. Johnson &amp; Johnson has confirmed a real-world study shows that its single shot Covid vaccine produced long-lasting protection for up to six months against breakthrough infections and hospitalisations. Mexico is likely to surpass 300,000 deaths from Covid this week - the fifth highest death toll worldwide - as infections rise after the holiday season, fuelled by the Omicron variant and largely unrestricted tourism. Peru raised its pandemic alert level in numerous cities and tightened some restrictions amid a third wave of infections caused by the spread of the Omicron variant. Brazil reported 35,826 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, the highest daily number of infections since September, and 128 deaths from Covid, its health ministry said on Thursday. Nigeria is working to develop a Covid vaccine, President Muhammadu Buhari said in a televised interview on Thursday, as the country battles growing cases of the virus. Chile will begin offering a fourth shot of the Covid vaccine next week to immunocompromised people, making it the first country in Latin America and one of the first in the world to offer the extra dose. Brazil’s president Jair Bolsonaro has criticised the country’s health regulator Anvisa for authorising the vaccination of children aged five to 11 years against Covid. The Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte, has ordered the arrest of unvaccinated people who violate stay-at-home orders aimed at curbing “galloping” infections driven by the Omicron variant. That’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for today. My colleague Helen Livingstone will be along shortly to continue bringing you coronavirus news from around the world. Goodbye. Brazil reported 35,826 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, the highest daily number of infections since September, and 128 deaths from Covid, its health ministry said on Thursday. The South American country has now registered 22,386,930 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 619,641, according to ministry data. Brazil’s Covid death toll trails only the United States and Russia, according to Reuters calculations. In the United States, one of the first studies to track whether Covid vaccination might affect women’s periods found a small and temporary change. Research published Wednesday tracked nearly 4,000 women through six menstrual cycles and on average, the next period after a shot started about a day later than usual. But there was no change in the number of days of menstrual bleeding after Covid vaccination, reported the Associated Press. “This is incredibly reassuring,” said Dr. Alison Edelman of Oregon Health &amp; Science University, who led the research and said it’s important to tell women what to expect. Some women have reported irregular periods or other menstrual changes after their shots. The National Institutes of Health is funding studies to examine if there is any link. Edelman’s team analysed data from a birth control app called Natural Cycles, cleared by the Food and Drug Administration for women to track their menstrual cycles and tell when they’re most likely to become pregnant. Menstrual cycles are counted from the first day of one period to the first day of the next. Slight variations from month to month are normal, and stress, diet, even exercise can spur temporary changes. Johnson &amp; Johnson has confirmed a real-world study shows that its single shot Covid vaccine produced long-lasting protection for up to six months against breakthrough infections and hospitalisations. Nigeria is working to develop a Covid vaccine, President Muhammadu Buhari said in a televised interview on Thursday, as the country battles growing cases of the virus. Health experts say Nigeria needs to triple its vaccination drive from just over 100,000 doses a day to meet its target of inoculating more than half its population by the end of next year. The West African country has been exploring options to acquire or purchase vaccines through the COVAX facility to enable it to inoculate at least 70% of its population. It received vaccine donations some of which had a shelf life that left only weeks to administer the shots. Nigeria destroyed more than one million expired vaccines last month. “We are working very hard with the ministry of health to develop vaccines,” Buhari said on state television. “We shouldn’t make noise about it until we succeed.” Brazil’s president Jair Bolsonaro has criticised the country’s health regulator Anvisa for authorising the vaccination of children aged five to 11 years against Covid. Vaccine sceptic Bolsonaro said in a radio interview that he had not heard of children dying of Covid and repeated that his daughter Laura, 11, would not be vaccinated. Bolsonaro insinuated that vaccines could have side effects on children, but gave no evidence. Anvisa and health regulators around the world have found that Covid vaccines are safe from age five and older. “Are you going to vaccinate your child when the possibility of dying is almost zero? What is behind this? What are the interests of vaccine maniacs?” Bolsonaro stated. The Ministry of Health announced on Wednesday that it had bought 20 million paediatric vaccines developed by Pfizer and voluntary vaccination of children aged five to 11-years-old will begin by the end of the month. Mexico is likely to surpass 300,000 deaths from Covid this week - the fifth highest death toll worldwide - as infections rise after the holiday season, fuelled by the Omicron variant and largely unrestricted tourism. Infections have more than doubled to 20,000 during the last week when many tourists visited Mexico from the United States and Canada. Eleven of Mexico’s 32 states decided not to resume in-person school classes this week with cases climbing fast. The arrival of the highly contagious Omicron variant reversed a downturn in infections during the autumn, when the widespread application of vaccines provided relief, Reuters reported. Some Mexicans said people had dropped their guard as the holidays came. “Since December, a lot of people started to go out and there are many who no longer wear face masks,” said Isauro Perez, a 53-year-old taxi driver in Mexico City. “If we don’t take care of ourselves, the government won’t take care of us.” A group of passengers who filmed themselves partying without masks onboard a chartered flight from Montreal to Mexico face being stranded after three airlines refused to fly them home to Canada. Sunwing Airlines cancelled the return charter flight from Cancún that had been scheduled for Wednesday and Air Transat and Air Canada also both said they would refuse to carry the passengers. Adding insult to injury, they were branded “idiots” on Wednesday by the prime minister, Justin Trudeau. Videos of the 30 December flight shared on social media show unmasked passengers in close proximity while singing and dancing in the aisle and on seats. In one video, a large bottle of vodka appears to be passed among passengers and a woman appears to be smoking an electronic cigarette. Britain’s first wave of coronavirus raised the risk of death by more than 40% for most adults regardless of their underlying health and other factors, research suggests. Scientists examined medical records for nearly 10 million people aged 40 and over and found that, whatever a person’s risk of dying before the pandemic, it rose 1.43 times on average as the virus spread between March and May 2020. The finding means that Covid amplified people’s pre-existing risks by a similar amount, leading those most vulnerable before the pandemic to bear the brunt of the deaths. “Covid-19 seems to have multiplied the death rate by a similar amount for most adults in the UK,” said Dr Helen Strongman, an epidemiologist on the study at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. “It really exploits any frailty or health or demographic risk factor. It picks on people who are already at risk of ill health or death more than other people in the population.” The researchers compared relative rates of all-cause mortality before and during the first wave, taking into account the impact of 50 different medical conditions and other characteristics, such as where people lived, their body mass index and ethnicity. Hello. I’m Tom Ambrose and I will be bringing you all the latest Covid headlines over the next few hours. Let’s begin with the news that Chile will begin offering a fourth shot of the Covid vaccine next week to immunocompromised people, making it the first country in Latin America and one of the first in the world to offer the extra dose. “Starting next Monday, 10 January, we are going to start a new mass vaccination process with a fourth dose or a second booster dose,” said the president, Sebastián Piñera, in a press conference. Chile has one of the world’s highest vaccination rates and has been hailed as a model for its response to the pandemic, having administered two doses to more than 85% of the population. About 57% have received a third booster shot, according to Our World in Data. The announcement comes as the highly contagious Omicron variant is spreading worldwide, with several countries reporting all-time high Covid caseloads even among vaccinated populations. Cases in Mexico have more than doubled in the past week, while Peru imposed new restrictions this week [see 5.51pm.]. “The success that Chile has had in the vaccination process [...] puts us among the best countries in the world in the way we have managed to combat this pandemic,” Piñera added. “And with this fourth dose we seek to maintain this leadership position and protect the health and lives of our compatriots.” The vaccines for the fourth dose will be a combination of the same shots that have been used so far in Chile, including Pfizer, Sinovac and AstraZeneca, said the health minister, Enrique Paris. This combination of different vaccines between the first and fourth doses should allow “an improvement in the immune response”, Paris explained. Chile reported its first case of the Omicron variant at the beginning of December and has confirmed 698 cases of this variant have been reported, the vast majority corresponding to people who travelled outside the country. Novak Djokovic’s family have said he is the victim of “a political agenda” aimed at “stomping on Serbia” as protesters in Belgrade called for his release and Serbia’s president insisted “the whole country” was behind him. The 34-year-old world tennis No 1, who was born in the Serb capital, is in detention in an immigration hotel in Melbourne pending a legal challenge to Australia’s decision on Wednesday to cancel a visa that would allow him to play in the Australian Open. Demonstrators gathered outside the Serb assembly on Thursday afternoon after a call for support from Djokovic’s family. The player’s father told a press conference that he could not be defeated “by anyone, not even the Australian government”. Djokovic was being “persecuted”, Sjrdan Djokovic said. “They’re keeping him in captivity. They’re stomping all over him to stomp all over Serbia and the Serbian people. [Scott] Morrison [Australia’s prime minister] and his like have dared attack Novak to bring Serbia to its knees.” Australian officials have said the player, who has refused to reveal his Covid vaccination status but previously said he was opposed to vaccination, was refused entry because he failed to meet vaccination exemption requirements. Read the full report from Jon Henley and Milivoje Pantovic here: Djokovic father says visa row aimed at ‘stomping on Serbia’ Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Peru raised its pandemic alert level in numerous cities and tightened some restrictions amid a third wave of infections caused by the spread of the Omicron variant. The health minister, Hernando Cevallos, said that 24 provinces, including Lima, went from “moderate” to “high” alert as the average number of daily cases has increased 25% from the previous week. Among the restrictions were an extended curfew of 11pm to 5am, three hours longer than the previous curfew, and tightened capacity limits in shopping centres, banks and restaurants, Cevallos said. [see 5.51pm.]. The Stormont assembly is set to be recalled early from its Christmas recess to discuss the Omicron surge in Northern Ireland. A sitting of the assembly’s plenary is due to take place at noon on Monday so MLAs can debate a motion around the opening of schools amid the recent record-breaking wave of Covid cases. The Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte, has ordered the arrest of unvaccinated people who violate stay-at-home orders aimed at curbing “galloping” infections driven by the Omicron variant. When the government tightened restrictions in Manila and several provinces and cities this week, unvaccinated people among the capital’s 13 million people were ordered to stay home, after infection numbers tripled in the last two days. “Because it’s a national emergency, it is my position that we can restrain” people who have not got their shots, Duterte said in a pre-recorded message. “I am now giving orders to the [village chiefs] to look for those persons who are not vaccinated and just request them or order them, if you may, to stay put.” He added: “And if he refuses and goes out of the house and goes around in the community or maybe everywhere, he can be restrained. If he refuses then the [official] is empowered to arrest the recalcitrant persons.” [see 5.12pm.]. Pre-departure testing for travellers entering Scotland has been scrapped in line with the rest of the UK. The change will take effect from Friday at 4am, while those coming into the country will also be able to use a lateral flow test instead of a PCR as their post-arrival test, taken on or before the second day of their stay, from Sunday at 4am. The requirement to self-isolate until a negative PCR is returned will also come to an end. Only travellers above the age of 18 and who are fully vaccinated with two doses are impacted by the change – a booster is not required, according to Scottish government guidance. [see 5.07pm.]. The UK recorded another 179,756 Covid casesand a further 231 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest figures from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Story here. The more infectious Omicron variant appears to produce less severe disease than the globally dominant Delta, but should not be categorised as “mild”, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said. Speaking at a media briefing, the director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, also repeated his call for greater equity globally in the distribution of and access to vaccines. Based on the current rate of vaccine rollout, 109 countries will miss the WHO’s target for 70% of the world’s population to be fully vaccinated by July, Tedros added. That aim is seen as helping end the acute phase of the pandemic. Austria’s government is to roll out tighter Covid-19 rules from Saturday as the country fights a wave of infections from the Omicron variant. The new measures include shortening quarantine times to five days, requiring people to wear masks outdoors when in crowds, and limiting to six months the validity of vaccine certificates, officials said. Previously, people who tested positive had to quarantine for 14 days. From next week, stricter inspections will be in place to make sure only vaccinated or recovered people are going into shops and cultural venues. The government has also told Austrians to keep working from home if possible. Portugal will allow students to return to school from next week and nightclubs to reopen on 14 January despite a record surge in Covid cases, with hospital admissions still well below levels seen earlier in the pandemic. From Monday, only coronavirus-infected people and those who live with them need to isolate, while those who have received a booster shot – a total of about 3 million people – no longer need to do so. Students can return to school on Monday but a work-from-home order, imposed around Christmas, will stay in place until 14 January, António Costa, the prime minister, said. Nightclubs and bars can reopen on 14 January, but a negative test will be required to enter. A negative test will also continue to be requested from all air passengers travelling to Portugal. Boris Johnson criticised anti-Covid vaccine activists for spreading “nonsense” on social media, while stressing that he does not support moves to overtly pressure people into getting vaccinated. “I want to say to the anti-vax campaigners, the people who are putting this mumbo jumbo on social media: they are completely wrong,” Johnson told broadcasters on a visit to a vaccination centre. “You haven’t heard me say that before, because I think it’s important we have a voluntary approach in this country and we’re going to keep a voluntary approach.” Story here. Scottish MP Margaret Ferrier will stand trial in August accused of travelling from Glasgow to London in September 2020 knowing she had symptoms of coronavirus and wilfully exposing others to the risk of infection. Ferrier pleaded not guilty to the single charge on Thursday morning at Glasgow sheriff court. Story here. An estimated 1.3 million people in the UK – one in 50 – had long Covid in early December, the highest number since estimates began, according to figures from the ONS. That includes more than half a million people who first had Covid, or suspected they had the virus, at least one year ago. [see 12.20pm.]. Peru, which has one of the world’s highest Covid mortality rates per number of inhabitants, has raised its pandemic alert level in various cities and tightened some restrictions due to a third wave of infections caused by the spread of the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The health minister, Hernando Cevallos, said that 24 provinces, including Lima, went from “moderate” to “high” alert as the average number of daily cases has increased 25% from the previous week. Among the restrictions were an extended curfew of 11pm to 5am, three hours longer than the previous curfew, and tightened capacity limits in shopping centres, banks and restaurants, Cevallos said. The heightened restrictions come amid signs that countries across Latin America are entering another wave of Covid infections, despite South America being the world’s most-vaccinated region. “We’re at a level of infections that’s rising more and more quickly,” Cevallos said in a press conference. The minister said that in Lima, where close to a third of the country lives, “Omicron is the prominent [variant]”, accounting for half of all new cases. Cevallos also said that despite the rise in infections, the number of deaths in the country had only increased moderately, and that the majority of the deaths were among the unvaccinated. About 80% of Peru’s eligible population has received two doses of the Covid vaccine. As of Tuesday, according to the health ministry’s most recent update, the country has recorded a total number of 2.3 million infections and 202,904 deaths. The Stormont assembly is set to be recalled early from its Christmas recess to discuss the Omicron surge in Northern Ireland, PA reports. It follows a recall motion submitted by Sinn Féin MLA Pat Sheehan, which was backed by SDLP and Alliance party members. On Thursday, the speaker, Alex Maskey, confirmed that a sitting of the assembly’s plenary would take place at noon on Monday. MLAs would debate a motion around the opening of schools amid the recent record-breaking wave of Covid cases. The motion expresses “serious concern at the lack of planning” by the education minister, Michelle McIlveen. It calls for the minister to “urgently develop a plan that puts the safety of pupils and staff first, through the installation of air-monitoring and air-filtration devices in all classrooms”. It also calls for staffing shortages to be addressed by “utilising and deploying additional teaching capacity to keep schools open and safe”. Teachers’ unions have warned that the return of children to the classroom will lead to a further increase in transmission and that members had concerns about contact tracing as well as staffing levels. Earlier this week, McIlveen said her priority was to keep children in school and added that her department continued to liaise with the Department of Health as well as schools over Covid concerns. Sheehan welcomed the plenary sitting and urged McIlveen to address MLAs. He said: I welcome confirmation that the assembly will be recalled to discuss the need for schools to reopen safely and the extra pressure faced by school staff as a result of rising Covid-19 infection rates. The education minister needs to come to the assembly on Monday and set out a return-to-school plan which puts the safety of pupils, teachers and parents first. Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte, has ordered the arrest of unvaccinated people who violate stay-at-home orders aimed at curbing “galloping” infections driven by the Omicron variant, AFP reports. The government tightened restrictions in Manila and several provinces and cities this week. Unvaccinated people among the capital’s 13 million people were ordered to stay home, after infection numbers trebled in the last two days. Health officials said infections were projected to increase further in the coming days and would peak by the end of the month. “Because it’s a national emergency, it is my position that we can restrain” people who have not got their shots, Duterte said in a pre-recorded message. “I am now giving orders to the [village chiefs] to look for those persons who are not vaccinated and just request them or order them, if you may, to stay put.” He added: “And if he refuses and goes out of the house and goes around in the community or maybe everywhere, he can be restrained. If he refuses then the [official] is empowered to arrest the recalcitrant persons.” Covid vaccinations are voluntary in the nation of more than 100 million people, and less than half the population have so far been jabbed. Duterte said he was “appalled” at the large numbers of Filipinos yet to be vaccinated. “If you don’t get a jab you put everybody in jeopardy,” he said, with the virus “galloping in our community, in our country and in the world.” New infections surged to more than 17,000 on Thursday, rising more than threefold from Tuesday’s toll, according to health department data. The disease has infected 2.9 million people in the country, nearly 52,000 of whom have died. The government loosened lockdowns in October last year, after infections driven by the Delta variant peaked, in order to revive the hard-hit economy. New infections dwindled to a few hundred daily just before Christmas, but ramped up again as families and friends got together for the holidays. Health experts say the new cases are driven by the highly transmissible Omicron variant. Under the tighter restrictions, in place until mid-January, unvaccinated residents have to stay at home unless buying essentials or exercising. Restaurants, parks, churches and beauty salons will operate at lower capacity, while in-person classes and contact sports are suspended. Pre-departure testing for travellers entering Scotland has been scrapped in line with the rest of the UK, the Scottish government has said. The change will take effect from Friday at 4am, while those coming into the country will also be able to use a lateral flow test instead of a PCR as their post-arrival test, taken on or before the second day of their stay, from Sunday at 4am. The requirement to self-isolate until a negative PCR is returned will also come to an end. Only travellers above the age of 18 and who are fully vaccinated with two doses are impacted by the change – a booster is not required, according to Scottish government guidance. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, announced the same changes for travellers into England on Wednesday, “frustrating” Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, after UK-wide discussions on the issue had taken place. The Welsh health minister, Eluned Morgan, said rules there will “reluctantly” match those put in place in England. Despite the changes, Scotland’s transport secretary, Michael Matheson, urged caution over Covid as the Omicron variant spreads and the number of total cases in Scotland rose above 1m. He said: We still have significant concerns over Omicron, but we recognise that now it is the most dominant strain in Scotland and across the UK, it is sensible to review the measures currently in place. We also fully understand the impact of the restrictions on staff and businesses in the travel and aviation sectors, and these changes demonstrate our commitment not to keep measures in place any longer than necessary. However, people still need to be extremely careful when travelling and to remember that both our and other countries’ Covid-19 requirements can change at short notice as things can evolve very quickly. People should therefore ensure they have travel insurance and carefully check their booking terms and conditions, as well as ensuring compliance with the latest regulations for the country being visited. On BBC Radio Scotland’s Good Morning Scotland programme on Thursday, Yousaf said: Although we engaged in a conversation with the UK government, it is a source of frustration that if the UK government unilaterally decides to move in a certain direction we end up with potentially a double whammy if we don’t align. Not changing the rules for Scotland, Yousaf said, would have a negative impact on the travel sector north of the border, while posing no public health benefit if travellers could fly to England, follow the rules there and then drive into Scotland. Our aviation sector, which has undoubtedly been significantly affected throughout the course of the pandemic, gets a further hit and also we don’t end up realising any benefit if we have different public health measures in place, because ultimately a number of people may well travel from English airports if that is seen to be easier or cheaper. Here is my colleague Peter Walker’s story on Boris Johnson criticising anti-vaccine activists for spreading “nonsense” on social media, while stressing that he does not support moves to overtly pressure people into having Covid vaccines. Austria’s government has said it was making medical grade masks compulsory outside to ward off a new lockdown as Omicron cases rise, AFP reports. Chancellor Karl Nehammer revealed the decision on Thursday, telling reporters the situation was “very serious” with Omicron’s degree of contagion posing “a new challenge”. Austrian reported 8,853 new Covid-19 cases on Thursday, nearly three times above the daily average number of infections last week. Medical grade FFP2 face coverings had already been compulsory on Austrian public transport and in enclosed spaces since last January. FFP2 masks offer better filtration than their surgical equivalent and cover the face more effectively. Austria is also tightening its health pass controls but loosening restrictions including on self-isolation of those who test positive and those with whom they have been in contact to avoid economic paralysis. [see 3.25pm.]. Nehammer said Vienna was not ruling out a new lockdown should hospitalisations surge, the most recent one having ended on 12 December for those vaccinated. Those yet to be jabbed must stay at home except for reasons including work and buying food in a country where about one third of residents have not been jabbed – one of the highest rates in western Europe. Here is the moment the UK prime minister described anti-vaxxers’ social media messages as “mumbo jumbo”. Boris Johnson said he wanted to keep coronavirus vaccination voluntary in the UK unlike other European countries that have begun introducing mandatory vaccination. A further 179,756 Covid cases have been reported in the UK and another 231 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest figures from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Read more on this story here: UK reports 179,756 new Covid cases as Omicron surge continues Dozens of protestors have gathered outside the Serbian parliament in central Belgrade to show their support for Novak Djokovic, the BBC reports. It came after the tennis star’s father urged his fans to respond to Australia’s decision to refuse the world number one entry to the country. The chain of events has put Djokovic at the centre of a diplomatic and political furore over the validity or not of his medical exemption from vaccination rules. Shortly after arriving in Melbourne for the Australian Open, Djokovic was taken to a government detention hotel in the city, where he is being held pending a court appeal. The Australian Border Force said he had failed to provide enough evidence that he was medically exempt from coronavirus rules that all players in the Australian Open must be double-jabbed. His father Srdjan said the player was being made to suffer “terrible” hotel conditions. Several anti-vaccination protesters, many of them holding Serbia flags, have also turned up outside Djokovic’s hotel in Melbourne to rally against the treatment of the tennis star. But tennis player Rafael Nadal has shown much less sympathy over the visa debate, reports Guardian sports writer Tumaini Carayol from Melbourne: Speaking after he successfully returned to competition for the first time since August with a straight sets win over Ricardas Berankis of Lithuania, Nadal reiterated that the clearest way to ensure participation in Melbourne was through embracing vaccination and that Djokovic had known the conditions for many months. The more infectious Omicron variant appears to produce less severe disease than the globally dominant Delta, but should not be categorised as “mild”, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said on Thursday. Speaking at a media briefing, the director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, also repeated his call for greater equity globally in the distribution of and access to vaccines. Based on the current rate of vaccine rollout, 109 countries will miss the WHO’s target for 70% of the world’s population to be fully vaccinated by July, Tedros added. That aim is seen as helping end the acute phase of the pandemic. Another variant – labelled as IHU and first registered in September 2021 – is among those being monitored by the WHO but is not circulating widely, said the WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, Dr Maria van Kerkhove. There are two other categories of greater significance the WHO uses to track variants: “variant of concern”, which includes Delta and Omicron, and “variant of interest”. Speaking at the same briefing from Geneva, the WHO adviser Bruce Aylward said 36 nations had not even reached 10% vaccination cover. Among severe patients worldwide, 80% were unvaccinated, he added. Austria’s government is to roll out tighter Covid-19 rules from Saturday as the country fights a wave of infections from the new Omicron variant, reports AP. The new measures include shortening quarantine times to five days, requiring people to wear masks outdoors when in crowds, and limiting to six months the validity of vaccine certificates, officials said. Previously, people who tested positive had to quarantine for 14 days. From next week, stricter inspections will be in place to make sure only vaccinated or recovered people are going into shops and cultural venues. The government has also told Austrians to keep working from home if possible. “We have to adjust to the fact that the infection numbers will increase quickly,” the chancellor, Karl Nehammer, told a news conference in Vienna. Austria reported 8,853 new Covid-19 cases on Thursday, nearly three times above the daily average number of infections last week. “Every single person in Austria can help to slow down the speed of the spread of the disease,” the health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein, said. First up, a little light relief to brighten your day. To encourage people to get their Covid-19 jabs, a campaigner in Germany has filmed a flock of sheep forming the shape of a syringe from the air, reports Reuters. Here is some marvellous footage of the wooly creatures’ performance. “Sheep are popular with people and carry positive emotional connotations. So perhaps they can reach many people emotionally when logic and scientific reasoning don’t do the job,” the organiser of the campaign, Hanspeter Etzold, told Reuters. “I have noticed how enthusiastically the sheep are received and that it simply reaches people deep inside, which is perhaps not possible rationally, with rational arguments,” he said. The sheep, which belong to the shepherd Steffen Schmidt and his wife, followed pieces of bread laid on the ground to create the 100-metre-long syringe shape as they were filmed from the air. Good afternoon. I’m Georgina Quach, taking over from Lucy Campbell while she takes a lunch break. I’ll be updating the blog with more global coronavirus news as it develops. Please feel free to contact me if you have a story or tips to share. You can reach me on: Email: georgina.quach@theguardian.com Twitter: @georginaquach Hospitals outside London could end up treating even more Covid patients than at the peak of the pandemic last January, a senior NHS leader has said. Soaring infection rates in the north of England mean that one NHS trust expects to have 30% more Covid cases next week than it had at the last peak, the chief executive of NHS Providers said. Chris Hopson said he fears that hospitals outside the capital will not be as able to cope with the new wave of admissions as those in London. This was because they had deeper staffing problems, higher levels of sickness absence, older populations and in some cases worse social care provision, he said. NHS Providers represents all the 213 NHS trusts in England. Drawing a contrast between the ability of trusts in London and the rest of England to withstand the intense pressures of Omicron, Hopson said in a series of tweets that in the bulk of the country, “overall Covid cases v previous peaks could be much higher”. He added: “London currently [circa] 50% of Jan 2021 peak Covid hospital load. One northern trust already at 70% of Jan 2021 peak and predicting [circa] 130% next week.” Some trusts outside London had as many as 19% of their staff absent because of Covid, much higher than the 10% off sick or isolating that other NHS organisations had been reporting, he added. Hopson said he had spoken to chief executives of more than a dozen trusts outside London over the previous 24 hours. They all, unanimously, challenged the assumption that the rest of the country will automatically follow London on the shape and scale of, and ability to ‘cope’ with, pressure. CEOs outside London gave a number of reasons why their local system may be less able to cope with pressures than London has done. Demographics, patterns of infection, hospitalisation and sickness absence will be different. So we are likely to see a very varied pattern emerging over next days and weeks, with some trusts finding it easier to ‘cope’ than others. With London trusts at ‘more able to cope’ end? Hence why some trusts now declaring critical incidents – around two dozen now. More on this story here: Hospitals outside London ‘expect more Covid patients than last January’ Portugal has said it will allow students to return to school from next week and nightclubs to reopen on 14 January despite a record surge in Covid cases, with hospital admissions still well below levels seen earlier in the pandemic, Reuters reports. “It is evident that the Omicron variant is less severe ... vaccination has been effective against [it],” the prime minister, António Costa, told a news conference on Thursday, referring to the fast-spreading variant that emerged in late 2021. “That’s why we have a much lower number of hospitalisations, fewer people in ICU and deaths,” he added. The variant hit Portugal – one of the world’s most vaccinated nations, with 89% of its people fully inoculated – in November, leading to an increase in cases. These reached a record on Wednesday of close to 40,000 new infections. Authorities registered 14 fatalities on Wednesday, far lower than the more than 300 daily deaths in the previous peak of the pandemic in late January, when the vaccination campaign had just kicked off. Hospitals had 1,251 patients with Covid compared with a peak of 6,869 on 1 February. From Monday, only coronavirus-infected people and those who live with them need to isolate, while those who have received a booster shot – a total of about 3 million people – no longer need to do so. Students can return to school on Monday but a work-from-home order, imposed around Christmas, will stay in place until 14 January, Costa said. Nightclubs and bars can reopen on 14 January, but a negative test will be required to enter. A negative test will also continue to be requested from all air passengers travelling to Portugal. The surge in cases comes three weeks before a snap general election on 30 January, and Costa said authorities would do everything in their power to ensure all people, including those in isolation, can cast their ballots. The president, Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa, said on Wednesday isolation could be temporarily suspended on election day. Boris Johnson has hit out at anti-vaxxers, declaring they are “completely wrong” and spreading “mumbo jumbo” and “nonsense”. The prime minister said he wanted to keep a “voluntary approach” to vaccination, noting that other European countries were “going for coercion”. Speaking to broadcasters during a visit to a vaccination centre in Moulton Park, Northampton, Johnson said: I want to say to the anti-vax campaigners, the people who are putting this mumbo jumbo on social media: they are completely wrong. You haven’t heard me say that before, because I think it’s important we have a voluntary approach in this country and we’re going to keep a voluntary approach. It was a “tragedy” that there was “all this pressure” on the NHS due to Omicron, he said, adding that 30-40% of those in hospital in this current wave are unvaccinated, and: “You’ve got people out there spouting complete nonsense about vaccination.” What a tragedy that we’ve got all this pressure on the NHS, all the difficulties that our doctors and nurses are experiencing and we’ve got people out there spouting complete nonsense about vaccination. They are totally wrong, and I think it’s time that I, the government, call them out on what they’re doing. It’s absolutely wrong, it’s totally counterproductive, and the stuff they’re putting out on social media is complete mumbo jumbo. The prime minister also urged Britons to get jabbed: The saddest words in the English language are ‘too late’. When you’re in ICU and you haven’t been vaccinated, sadly it’s too late to get vaccinated, so get boosted now. It comes as the environment secretary, George Eustice, predicted the country would get past the Omicron peak of infections “relatively soon”, with NHS struggles set to be “quite short lived”. He told Sky News: This is a difficult situation. It will be quite short lived because obviously we will get past this peak of infections relatively soon, but in the meantime we’ve taken that step to reduce the isolation period and we’re doing all we can to make sure we can redeploy resources [in the NHS]. A Hong Kong cabinet minister was sent to a quarantine camp on Thursday after he was deemed a close contact of a preliminary coronavirus case at a large party attended by other government officials and lawmakers, AFP reports. The home affairs minister Caspar Tsui was among more than 100 guests at a birthday celebration on Monday evening that was also attended by city police chief Raymond Siu and head of immigration Au Ka-wang. Tsui was classified as a close contact because he was there after 9.30pm, when a person suspected to have been carrying the virus attended. Siu had left beforehand and officials said they were still trying to work out when Au left. City leader Carrie Lam told reporters she was “very disappointed” senior officials attended the party just three days after health officials had advised the public to avoid large gatherings. “My colleagues apparently have not taken the advice of the secretary for food and health, so how could they set a good example for the people of Hong Kong?” Lam asked. Tsui issued an apology on Facebook. Like China, Hong Kong has maintained some of the world’s strictest quarantine measures and travel curbs, which have kept the city mostly coronavirus-free but internationally isolated for some 22 months. A small local outbreak of the Omicron variant which began with airline crew from Cathay Pacific has been detected in recent days sparking warnings, new social distancing measures and flight bans on eight countries. At the time of Monday night’s party, banquets of up to 240 were still permitted but Lam said government officials should have “led by example” and heeded calls to avoid such gatherings. She said an investigation by her office discovered 10 government officials attended the party - eight of whom could prove they had left before 9.30pm and therefore did not need to be sent to quarantine. Local media reported three city legislators also attended the party, held for a member of China’s top lawmaking body. Lam did not comment on those reports but confirmed the city’s legislature and main government offices were being disinfected. Twenty lawmakers met Xia Baolong, Beijing’s Hong Kong and Macau affairs chief in Shenzhen, on Wednesday but it was unclear if the three who attended the party were among that group. A day earlier Lam had lambasted the leadership of Cathay Pacific, saying they should take responsibility for attendants who had breached home-quarantine rules. She said society was “paying a huge price” for the Omicron outbreak and even hinted that the city might look at legal options against the carrier. Last year immigration head Au was among three government officials who were fined after they broke social distancing rules to eat at a luxury clubhouse. Ukraine is offering booster vaccines to all adults as the Omicron variant spreads and is likely to lead to a surge in infections next month, the health minister Viktor Lyashko has said. After several periods of strict restrictions, the average daily number of coronavirus cases in Ukraine fell in early January to about 4,000 from above 10,000 in early December. “The medical system is preparing for another increase in the number of Covid-19 cases in Ukraine,” Lyashko said in a post on Facebook on Thursday. “We call on all Ukrainians to make a conscious choice in favour of vaccination against coronavirus disease and help us overcome the epidemic,” he said. He added that all vaccinated citizens aged over 18 will be eligible for a booster shot of either the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines. In the country of 41 million people, only 13.9 million have received two doses. The country has officially recorded 97,000 deaths from Covid since the pandemic began. The former Scottish National party MP Margaret Ferrier will stand trial in August accused of travelling from Glasgow to London in September 2020 knowing she had symptoms of coronavirus and wilfully exposing others to the risk of infection. Ferrier pleaded not guilty to the single charge on Thursday morning at Glasgow sheriff court. The Rutherglen and Hamilton West MP, who referred herself to the police and the parliamentary commissioner for standards , was immediately suspended from her party after the alleged rule-breaking came to light. She has clung to her position despite vociferous and ongoing calls for her to quit, including from the first minister and SNP leader, Nicola Sturgeon. Prosecutors allege Ferrier “culpably and recklessly” put people at risk, making several journeys after having been told to self-isolate between 26 and 29 September 2020. The charge claims she wilfully exposed people to “the risk of infection, illness and death”, travelling throughout Glasgow and the surrounding areas as well as making journeys to and from London. Over three days, the 61-year-old is alleged to have visited a variety of local businesses and other locations within her constituency and beyond, including Lifestyle Leisure Centre, Vanilla Salon and Sweet P Boutique in Rutherglen, South Lanarkshire, St Mungo’s church in Glasgow and Vic’s bar in Prestwick, Ayrshire. The trial date was set for 15 August, with the case expected to last for four or five days, and a pre-trial hearing set for June. Read the full story here: Ex-SNP MP Margaret Ferrier to stand trial over alleged Covid breach An estimated 1.3 million people in the UK – one in 50 – had long Covid in early December, the highest number since estimates began, PA Media reports. This includes more than half a million people who first had Covid-19, or suspected they had the virus, at least one year ago. The figures, from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), are based on self-reported long Covid from a representative sample of people in private households. Responses were collected in the four weeks to 6 December – before the recent surge in infections driven by the Omicron variant. The estimate of 1.3 million people is up from 1.2 million at the end of October and 945,000 at the start of July. Of the 1.3 million, 892,000 people (70%) first had – or suspected they had – Covid at least 12 weeks previously, while 506,000 (40%) first had the virus at least a year earlier. Long Covid is estimated to be adversely affecting the day-to-day activities of 809,000 people – nearly two-thirds of those with self-reported long Covid – with 247,000 saying their ability to undertake day-to-day activities has been “limited a lot”, the ONS found. Fatigue continues to be the most common symptom (experienced by 51% of those with self-reported long Covid), followed by loss of smell (37%), shortness of breath (36%) and difficulty concentrating (28%). People working in teaching and education showed a greater prevalence of self-reported long Covid than other professions, and also saw the biggest month-on-month increase, from 2.7% to 3.1%. For people working in healthcare, the figure dropped from 3.3% to 3.0%, and for people in social care it fell from 3.6% to 3.4%. Among different age groups, the biggest jumps were for children aged 12 to 16, where prevalence rose month-on-month from 1.4% to 1.9%, and for 35- to 49-year-olds, up from 2.6% to 2.8%. Self-reported long Covid is defined as symptoms persisting for more than four weeks after the first suspected coronavirus infection which could not be explained by something else. Data from Israel on Thursday supports growing evidence worldwide that Omicron causes milder illness than previous coronavirus, even as the country grapples with a record number of daily infections, Reuters reports. Total hospitalisations on Wednesday stood at 363 patients, after the health ministry reported more than 16,000 new cases – a record high in Israel since the start of the pandemic – with a daily increase of 34 people falling severely ill. During the height of Israel’s Delta variant wave, the record number of people infected topped 11,000, with the number of those being severely ill increasing daily by around 100, and 1,300 people hospitalised. “Our initial data, which is not yet entirely accurate, points to seven to eight people hospitalised for 1,000 infected, two of whom will fall severely ill or worse,” Sharon Alroy-Preis, the ministry’s head of public health, told Army Radio. “This is a significant change from Delta which saw far more – at least 10 severely ill for every 1,000 infections,” she said. A World Health Organization official said on Tuesday that more evidence was emerging of Omicron affecting the upper respiratory tract, causing milder symptoms than previous variants and resulting in a “decoupling” in some places between soaring case numbers and low death rates. With infections rising fast, Israel’s testing centres have come under intense pressure, prompting health officials to prioritise risk groups and to trust younger, vaccinated populations to test at home if exposed to a carrier. Risk groups have also been given the green light for a fourth dose of a Covid vaccine and for Pfizer’s and Merck’s antiviral Covid medications. A week into a fourth dose trial at a major Israeli hospital, researchers saw participants’ antibody levels increase five-fold. But Gili Regev-Yochay, who is leading Sheba medical centre’s study, said that while the jump restored protection provided by a third dose, it was lower than what she had hoped for. “I expect to see it continue rising, the peak of antibodies usually occurs two to four weeks in,” she told Army Radio. Malaysia has granted conditional approval for the use of Pfizer’s Covid vaccine for children aged between five and 11, the health ministry said on Thursday. The country’s drugs regulator has also cleared a vaccine made by Chinese firm CanSino Biologics to be used as a booster shot for adults over the age of 18, health minister Khairy Jamaluddin said in a statement. Malaysia, which has one of the highest vaccination rates in south-east Asia, last week cut waiting times to encourage more people to take a booster jab, in a bid to stem the spread of the highly infectious Omicron variant. Most of the country’s population has received two doses of the vaccine, including nearly 98% of adults and 88% of those aged between 12 and 17, government statistics show. Malaysia has reported 245 Omicron cases, the majority of which were Muslim pilgrims returning from Saudi Arabia, Khairy said. The country will temporarily suspend all religious trips to Saudi Arabia for a month from Saturday, he added. Election rallies were cancelled in India’s heartland on Thursday as authorities fret over a sudden Covid surge driven by the Omicron variant, which has seen confirmed infections nearly triple in two days, AFP reports. Teeming crowds have thronged campaign events for next month’s poll in Uttar Pradesh - the country’s most populous state with over 200 million people and a pillar of support for the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). The prime minister, Narendra Modi, has traversed key cities to cut the ribbon on infrastructure projects and partake in Hindu religious rituals to boost the state government’s prospects. But with several cities imposing Covid curfews and health experts warning of exponential infection growth, several parties have brought their public campaigns to a halt. “Owing to concerns over the growing number of Covid cases, all... rallies of the party have been cancelled,” Ashok Singh, a spokesperson for the opposition Congress, told AFP. Another opposition group said it had switched to virtual campaigning while the BJP cancelled a rally planned for Thursday in Noida, a satellite city of the capital New Delhi that has seen a spate of new cases. Party spokesman Manish Shukla denied the virus was the reason for calling off the Noida event - where chief minister Yogi Adityanath, seen as a potential Modi successor, was set to appear. “It was cancelled due to some other technical reason,” he told AFP, without giving further detail. But recent electioneering has sparked concern in some quarters of the BJP. “Imposing curfew in the night and calling [hundreds of thousands] of people in rallies during the day - this is beyond the comprehension of the common man,” party lawmaker Varun Gandhi tweeted last week. More than 200,000 people across India died last year in a huge spring Covid wave, driven by the Delta variant, that overwhelmed hospitals and crematoriums - an outbreak partly blamed on infections spread through election rallies. Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal this week announced he had tested positive for Covid, days after appearing at campaign events for municipal polls in the city of Chandigarh. Health experts advising the government say the Omicron variant - India’s first case of which was detected five weeks ago - is causing a huge upsurge in urban centres. “There is no room for complacency,” V.K. Paul, a doctor working with the government on its coronavirus response, told a press conference Wednesday. “Systems will be overwhelmed, your house will be overwhelmed.” India recorded more than 90,000 new infections overnight while financial capital Mumbai saw its highest daily count yet in the pandemic. In Amritsar, the Sikh faith’s holy city near the Pakistan border, 125 passengers on a charter flight from Italy tested positive on arrival, local media reported. Delhi has ordered all residents outside of essential workers to stay home this weekend. India began rolling out vaccinations to those aged 15-18 on Monday, with more than 12 million newly eligible teens receiving their initial doses in the first three days, according to government data. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ France’s Assemblée Nationale has passed a controversial “vaccine pass” act in the early hours of this morning after debate was held up by angry reaction to Emmanuel Macron’s warning towards unvaccinated people. The law now goes to the Sénat, which will examine it before any further approval. Polls are showing that about half of French people agree with what Macron said yesterday, but half did not like the way he said it. Prime Minister Jean Castex has said France is ready to deploy a fourth Covid vaccine dose or second booster shot as soon as health authorities gave their green light to such a move. John Nkengasong, the director of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), has told a news conference: “We are very encouraged with what we saw in South Africa in this period. The period where we are using severe lockdowns as a tool is over, we should actually be looking at how we use public health and social measures more carefully and in a balanced way as the vaccination increases.” Pfizer has said it expects the latest results from its Covid vaccine clinical trial for children under the age of five – which will include booster shots – by April. Dr Alejandra Gurtman, a Pfizer vaccine researcher, said the company could even have data for the age group by the end of March. Italy has made it obligatory for people aged 50 or above to be vaccinated against Covid-19 as the country scrambles to ease pressure on hospitals and reduce deaths amid a dramatic surge in infections. Thailand has reported its biggest rise in coronavirus cases in weeks, after a holiday season in which people travelled and gathered in large numbers. The Ministry of Public Health raised the official warning level to 4 on a scale of 5. More than 85% of Indonesia’s population has antibodies against Covid, a government-commissioned survey showed, but epidemiologists warned it was not clear whether this immunity could help contain a fresh wave of coronavirus infections. US troops in Okinawa prefecture have been ordered to wear masks off base amid criticism that military authorities failed to tackle a fresh Covid-19 outbreak among service personnel that has taken hold among the local civilian population in Japan. Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata in India are experiencing a surge in Covid cases, although without a corresponding rise in hospitalisations, but fears are growing about a spread to rural areas in coming days, where health service provision is weaker. Chinese hospital officials have been fired after a pregnant woman lost her baby after she was denied entry at a Xi’an hospital due to coronavirus lockdown restrictions. Australia is reporting another record day for case numbers, with more than 72,000 logged so far on Thursday. The country’s most populous state, New South Wales, recorded around half of those with 31% of those tested given a positive result. Tennis player Novak Djokovic remains unable to enter Australia, with his visa cancellation over his vaccination status now the subject of a court challenge. The trial of two politicians and two hoteliers over their alleged breach of Covid restrictions in organising a golf society dinner is to begin later today in County Galway in Ireland. Our Science Weekly podcast today is asking why are so many people getting reinfected with Covid-19? That is it from me. I am off to host our increasingly silly Thursday quiz. Andrew Sparrow has our UK Covid live blog. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to continue bringing you the latest coronavirus news from around the globe. Thailand reported its biggest rise in coronavirus cases in weeks on Thursday after a holiday season in which people travelled and gathered in large numbers amid the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. Officials recorded 5,775 new cases, prompting the Ministry of Public Health to raise the official warning level to 4 on a scale of 5, permanent secretary Kiatiphume Wongrajit said. The warning level had been at 3 since the end of December. Under level 4, the ministry recommends closing high-risk venues, including those with poor ventilation, increasing restrictions on interprovincial travel, limiting group sizes in public places and lengthening quarantine requirements for travellers entering Thailand. Associated Press report that the ministry has submitted a proposal to the Center for Covid-19 Situation Administration, chaired by Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha, to ramp up virus restrictions due to the jump in cases. The CCSA is to meet on Friday and is expected to make a decision on the new measures. Madalitso Kateta is a freelance journalist based in Lilongwe, Malawi. He writes for us today about how corruption in Malawi has left hospitals desperately short of vital equipment: In January 2021, the Malawian rights activist Paul Msoma wrote that he was in Kamuzu central hospital, struggling to breathe. The hospital had oxygen cylinders but no flowmeters – the necessary instrument to connect him to them. I was left wondering where the funds that had been released for the country’s Covid-19 response were going. “My situation is getting bad and l desperately need oxygen,” Msoma wrote on Facebook. “Anyone who can urgently help out there please help by donating this very gadget.” Tragically, Msoma died a few days later. His call for help opened a can of worms and caused many to realise that funds were being misused. An eventual report by the country’s office of the ombudsman following Nsoma’s comments indicated that 79.8% of the Covid funds were misused, including money spent on non-Covid items like allowances for government officers. But, to date, none of the officers involved in the abuse of the funds have been charged. Read more here: Madalitso Kateta – Funds misused, too few vaccines – we are fighting Covid and corruption in Malawi While Florida has experienced a record number of Covid-19 cases and sharp increase in hospitalizations in recent weeks, there is disagreement between Republicans and Democrats over whether the Omicron surge has actually overwhelmed the state’s healthcare system. For example, Florida Republican senator Marco Rubio posted on Twitter that there “is no Omicron hospital ‘surge’ in Florida. People admitted for non-Covid reasons get tested. If they test positive they get counted as a ‘Covid patient.’” Infectious disease experts and Florida hospital leaders say that – while there is some validity to the assessment that data showing an increase in Covid hospitalizations and cases can in part be attributed to increased testing – the state’s hospitals still face potentially serious staffing shortages. One hospital in the state had to close its maternity ward because of a Covid outbreak among staff. But in short, Florida has become a focal point of the often politicized debate over whether the Omicron variant is dangerous enough to overwhelm hospital systems and requires precautions taken earlier in the pandemic. Read more of Eric Berger’s report here: Crisis, what crisis? Florida Republicans deny Omicron is straining hospitals A quick reports from Reuters from Johannesburg here, that Africa’s top public health official said he was encouraged by the way that South Africa had handled its latest infection wave, adding that severe lockdowns were no longer a tool to contain the coronavirus. “We are very encouraged with what we saw in South Africa in this period,” John Nkengasong, director of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), told a news conference. “The period where we are using severe lockdowns as a tool is over, we should actually be looking at how we use public health and social measures more carefully and in a balanced way as the vaccination increases.” Rafael Nadal appears to have said the quiet part out loud. He said he felt sorry that Novak Djokovic was denied entry into Australia, but there his sympathy ended, as the Spaniard pointedly added that if players were vaccinated, they could play in the Australian Open. Nadal, who revealed he was fully vaccinated when he contracted Covid recently, said that the world No 1 had known for months he could potentially face problems if he arrived in Australia without being vaccinated against Covid-19. There’s more here: ‘If you are vaccinated you can play’: Rafael Nadal short on sympathy for Djokovic My colleague Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK Covid live blog for the day. He is leading on plans to tackle the 5.8m NHS backlog being in doubt as Omicron cases rise. You can follow that here: I’ll be continuing here with the latest coronavirus developments from around the world. US troops in Okinawa prefecture have been ordered to wear masks off base amid criticism that military authorities failed to tackle a fresh Covid-19 outbreak among service personnel that has taken hold among the local civilian population in Japan. Okinawa is at the centre of the country’s latest outbreak, with cases surging in recent days from 51 on Saturday to at least 980 on Thursday – a record daily caseload for the southern island. Those figures omit infections among American troops but include those among Japanese citizens who work at US bases. The mask requirement came after the foreign minister, Yoshimasa Hayashi, called for US personnel to be confined to their bases in a telephone call with the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken. Read more of Justin McCurry’s report from Tokyo here: US troops in Okinawa ordered to wear masks as Covid cases rise Novak Djokovic’s Australian Open journey started in comfort, and excitement. But it ended with him trapped in an immigration hotel infamous for detaining refugees, caught in the middle of a diplomatic spat between Serbia and Australia and a fight over his deportation playing out in the federal court. After touching down in Melbourne about 11.30pm local time, Djokovic never made it through arrivals. My colleague Cait Kelly explains where we are now, as the court wrangle ensues. Read more here: ‘We await the champion’: how Novak Djokovic’s Australian Open trip went from elation to detention The trial of two politicians and two hoteliers over their alleged breach of Covid restrictions in organising a golf society dinner is to begin later today in County Galway in Ireland. The four men face a single charge that on 19 August 2020 they organised an event that contravened the Health Act 1947, as amended, to prevent, limit, minimise or slow the spread of Covid-19. The dinner was attended by 81 people, and the public backlash over the event led to the resignation of then agriculture minister Dara Calleary, while a number of other Fianna Fail and Fine Gael senators lost the party whip. PA Media report that the Oireachtas Golf Society has since been disbanded. The trial is expected to take up to five days with more than 50 prosecution witnesses set to be called. In the UK, Prof Martin Marshall, chairman of the Royal College of GPs, has told Sky News that a growing number of doctors and support staff are isolating or have Covid. PA Media quote him saying: “We’ve got very significant pressures in general practice, which are long-standing of course but are made considerably worse by the Covid pandemic, and particularly by this Omicron variant. “We’ve got a growing number of clinicians and administrative staff in general practice who are either unwell or who are isolating, and are unable to contribute to the growing number of consultations that we’re providing and the vaccination programme that we’re contributing to as well. So we’ve got a significant crisis on top of a long-standing one.” He said there is a need to communicate to the general public “the pressure that general practice is under and explain why it isn’t possible to provide the service, the access and the quality of care that we would expect and want to be able to provide.” More than 85% of Indonesia’s population has antibodies against Covid, a government-commissioned survey showed, but epidemiologists warned it was not clear whether this immunity could help contain a fresh wave of coronavirus infections. Stanley Widianto reports for Reuters from Jakarta that the survey, conducted between October and December by researchers at the University of Indonesia, found Indonesians had developed antibodies from a combination of Covid infections and vaccinations. Pandu Riono, an epidemiologist involved in the survey that covered some 22,000 respondents, said the level of immunity could explain why there had not been a significant jump in infections since the middle of 2021. The antibodies may provide some protection against new variants, including the highly contagious Omicron, Pandu said, though adding it would take months for this to become clear. Omicron has infected more than 250 people in Indonesia, but most cases have been imported and a handful of local cases have not so far brought the type of surge recorded in many countries. Pandu said the survey did not negate a need for more people to be vaccinated, even those that had already been infected. “The point is to have the majority of people develop a hybrid immunity to control the pandemic.” Here is a reminder, should you need it, that our Science Weekly podcast is this week spending thirteen minutes asking the question: Why are so many people getting re-infected with Covid-19? You can listen to it here: Reuters are carrying a couple of interesting quotes from France’s prime minister Jean Castex. He has told BFM TV and RMC Radio that France was ready to deploy a fourth Covid vaccination or second booster shot as soon as health authorities gave their green light to such a move. “When the health authorities will give us the go-ahead, we’ll go for it,” he is quoted as saying. Castex also noted that countries which had moved towards compulsory vaccinations, such as Italy and Austria, had lower vaccination rates than France. Japan’s foreign minister, Yoshimasa Hayashi, has urged his US counterpart to consider restricting American troop movement in the country after a surge in Covid cases on bases and surrounding communities, AFP reports. The request to US Secretary of State Antony Blinken comes as virus cases surge in Okinawa, which hosts most of the US forces in Japan and is now seeing a rise in community infections. The region’s governor has blamed the rise in local cases on the clusters first seen among US troops. Okinawa will request that the central government authorise new virus restrictions, its governor said, after the southern island region reported 623 cases on Wednesday – nearly triple the previous day’s figure. In a call with Blinken, Hayashi “strongly requested the strengthening of measures to prevent an expansion in infections”, Japan’s foreign ministry said in a statement. Hayashi called on Blinken to “consider restricting outings (by US troops) to ease worries among local residents, given the situation of coronavirus infections among US forces in Japan”, the statement added. There were more than 400 Covid cases reported on US bases in Okinawa on 4 January, Japan’s government said Wednesday. Okinawa governor Denny Tamaki has criticised the US military for failing to adhere to Japan’s strict measures for overseas arrivals, and last month Hayashi expressed “strong regret” to the commander of US forces in Japan over the growing number of virus cases. In the UK former health secretary Jeremy Hunt, a member of the cross-party Health and Social Care Committee, has old BBC Radio 4’s Today programme a new report will look at how the pandemic has caused a backlog for the NHS. PA Media report he said: The one thing people are not talking about is a shortage of funding. What they’re talking about is not being able to find the staff to do the work. And that’s why we say in this report the biggest gap at the moment in the government’s plans to deal with this huge six million waiting list is a lack of doctors and nurses and a lack of a plan to find those doctors and nurses. But the trouble is that the number of doctors and nurses training, it takes seven years to train a doctor, 10 years actually to train a GP, and so it’s always low in the priorities for health sectors. Hunt said short-term measures are also needed to tackle the backlog caused by the coronavirus pandemic: We need to go a lot further. We’ve got six million people on the waiting list, we’ve got a crisis in our A&amp;E department, record number of 999 calls, double the referrals to children and young people’s mental health in some areas. If we’re going to tackle all of that we need a lot of short-term measures as well, and what we don’t have is a workforce plan that says how we are going to get these 4,000 doctors, and unless we do that, we’re going to find this incredible frustration from taxpayers’ point of view, that they’re putting the money in, but they’re not getting the results out that they were promised. If you’ve been struggling to follow the rule changes recently introduced in Scotland, here’s a quick recap of the main changes: Self-isolation after a positive Covid test is reduced to seven days if you have no fever and can produce a negative lateral flow test on the sixth and seventh days. You no longer need to confirm a positive lateral flow test by taking an additional PCR test if you have no symptoms. Household contacts of people testing positive do not need to self-isolate, instead they can take daily lateral flow tests for a week to check if they become positive. If you are a close contact of a positive case, and are not vaccinated, you are required to self-isolate for ten days and take a PCR test. Secondary school children are being asked to take a lateral flow test twice a week, but whole classes will no longer have to self-isolate if there is a positive result among them – only close contacts will be affected. India’s Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata are experiencing a surge in Covid cases, although without a corresponding rise in hospitalisations, but fears are growing about a spread to rural areas in coming days. India reported 90,928 new daily Covid-19 cases on Thursday, up nearly four-fold since the start of the year, mostly from cities where health officials say the Omicron variant has overtaken Delta. The bulk of those infected have shown no or only mild symptoms and have recovered quickly at home, officials said. The federal health ministry on Wednesday identified Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Bengaluru as some of the main regions of concern, although state officials worry the disease will soon spread to the countryside where health facilities are weaker. “We are watching the situation in the districts and rural belts where the numbers are also growing,” said Ajay Chakraborty, director of the West Bengal health services who has isolated himself at home after contracting the virus. Reuters report that Many Covid beds in Kolkata were still empty. Chakraborty said that in the government-run Infectious Diseases and Beliaghata General Hospital, only 75 admissions were recorded on Tuesday, despite more than 9,000 new cases, he added. After 18 years of living in the UK, Guardian Australia’s Jacqueline Housden moved back to her home country. Not everything went to plan: Oddly, my dreams of our new life had not included my mother bursting into work meetings holding a kilo of raw chicken and launching into a raft of complicated cooking options, or my dad rushing past to use the spare fridge as I attempted to look vaguely professional on a Zoom call. In his early morning interview with Sky News, the UK transport secretary Grant Shapps has justified dropping some advance testing requirements for travellers arriving in the UK. He said: This was always brought in on a temporary basis. Since bringing in the red list, and then these additional tests, we managed to get 13m extra booster jabs in people’s arms, so it served a purpose. Obviously Omicron is global, worldwide, everybody has it now. The proportion that comes in from overseas is minuscule by comparison with the numbers that are actually here. So it’s now widespread, and in a sense testing has outlived its usefulness, and we’re able to withdraw it from international travel. The decision has drawn some criticism from devolved national authorities, but Shapps said he believed all of the UK nations would be moving together on this. He reminded viewers that there is still some testing to be done if you travel: If you get a positive lateral flow test, after you’ve travelled – and that is the one test that remains – you must take a lateral flow test by day two. And if you do get a positive, then that needs to be [followed by] a PCR test on the NHS and sequenced. So you’ve still got that protection in place, but we think this is proportionate. He also gave an indication of the UK government’s priorities, adding: A lot of jobs depend on travel, a lot of jobs depend on tourism. We need to keep the measures in line with actually what’s going on. There was controversy yesterday over the way French president Emmanuel Macron had described his strategy towards the unvaccinated. It led to the debate on France’s new Covid laws being held up in parliament. Kim Willsher reports for us from France that the “vaccine pass” act was voted through its first reading in the Assemblée Nationale at around 5am. It was approved by 214 members of parliament, versus 93 who voted against it, while there were 27 abstentions. It now goes to the Sénat, which will examine it before any further approval. Willsher says that polls are showing that around half of French people agree with what Macron said yesterday, but half didn’t like the way he said it. Grant Shapps, the UK transport minister, is the government representative doing the media round this morning. I’ll have the key lines from his first interviews shortly. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London taking over from my colleague Helen Livingstone. Here is a quick summary of the latest Covid numbers in the UK according to the government’s dashboard. Over the last seven days there have been 1.28m new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 40% week-on-week. There have been 1,195 deaths recorded in the last week. That would mean that deaths have increased by 131% week-on-week. However, there is a caveat around that figure, as the dashboard says there is a lag on recording some deaths, which would increase the number, but the holiday period is likely to have made week-by-week comparisons unreliable. Hospital admissions have increased by 58% week-on-week. At the latest count, there were 17,276 people in hospital in total, of whom 911 are in ventilation beds. According to the government’s figures, the peak of hospitalisations during the pandemic was in January 2021, with 39,254 patients in hospital. Chinese hospital officials have been fired after a pregnant woman lost her baby after she was denied entry at a Xi’an hospital due to coronavirus lockdown restrictions. On the night of 1 January a woman in labour was denied entry to the Xi’an Gaoxin hospital because her negative test result was four hours too old. She began bleeding heavily while waiting outside, and was eventually admitted but the baby died. The woman’s story and an accompanying video went viral on social media, and was reported by local Chinese media. On Wednesday, the Shaanxi Province and Xi’an Municipal Health Commission said it had launched an investigation and determined the baby’s death was an “accident caused by negligence”. Two hospital officials were fired and a manager suspended. The decision to deport tennis star Novak Djokovic has sparked diplomatic fallout, with the prime minister, Scott Morrison, dismissing pleas from the Serbian government for Australia to reconsider the move. Speaking after the Australian Border Force decision on Thursday, Morrison revealed that diplomats from the Serbian embassy in Canberra had made formal representations to Australia about the decision to deport Djokovic for failing to meet vaccine exemption requirements. Under Australia’s border restrictions, an unvaccinated person can only enter the country if they have a valid medical exemption. It is understood that Djokovic was relying on a previous Covid infection to claim the exemption, but this is not recognised as a grounds for an exception by the Australian government. Morrison said he understood the Serbian government’s position, but the rules “apply to all those who enter”. Morrison also read part of a letter sent by the health minister, Greg Hunt, to Tennis Australia in November making clear that a previous infection was not grounds for quarantine-free entry into Australia. Here’s more from Guardian Australia’s chief political correspondent, Sarah Martin. Leaders of Chicago public schools have cancelled classes for a second consecutive day on Thursday after failing to reach an agreement with the teachers’ union over Covid-19 safety protocols. The cancellation marks the latest development in an escalating battle over pandemic safety measures in the US’s third-largest school district. The Chicago Teachers Union sought to revert to remote instruction during the latest surge of Covid infections and while both sides hammer out a deal. Chicago public school leaders have said remote learning didn’t work and schools can safely remain open with protocols in place. The move to cancel classes and activities on Thursday affects roughly 350,000 students and came after closed-door negotiations on Wednesday failed to produce a deal. “We have no choice but to cancel classes tomorrow,” said Pedro Martinez, CEO of Chicago public schools, at a Wednesday evening news conference. Here’s more from our correspondent Gloria Oladipo: That’s it from me, Helen Livingstone, for today. Before I go, here’s a quick round up of the main events of the past 24 hours: Pfizer has said it expects the latest results from its Covid vaccine clinical trial for children under the age of 5 – which will include booster shots – by April. Dr Alejandra Gurtman, a Pfizer vaccine researcher, said the company could even have data for the age group by the end of March. Italy has made it obligatory for people aged 50 or more to be vaccinated against Covid-19 as the country scrambles to ease pressure on hospitals and reduce deaths amid a dramatic surge in infections. Novak Djokovic, who was due to defend his Australian Open title this month, is challenging the rejection of his visa and impending deportation from Melbourne in a court of law. There had been an outcry over the controversial “medical exemption” he received from the tournament’s organisers. Australia is reporting another record day for case numbers, with more than 72,000 logged so far on Thursday. The country’s most populous state, New South Wales, recorded around half of those with 31% of those tested given a positive result. The French parliament suspended debate on a new Covid law as opposition lawmakers demanded explanations from President Emmanuel Macron about comments in which he said he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people. A day after Hong Kong announced a two-week ban on flights from eight countries with rising Omicron cases, neighbouring Macau has gone a step further; the autonomous region has banned all civilian flights other than those coming from mainland China. Only two months after introducing quarantine-free entry for vaccinated tourists, Thailand has now suspended the scheme everywhere except in the island of Phuket. With nearly 4,000 cases reported on Wednesday, mostly local transmissions, health officials warned the country could soon be facing “tens of thousands” of new cases per day. Rather than closing borders, Singapore has declared that people won’t be considered fully vaccinated unless they have received a booster within nine months of their second dose. The policy comes into effect in February. This year’s Grammy awards, set to take place on 31 January, have been postponed as a result of the pandemic. In a statement, organisers said: “The health and safety of those in our music community, the live audience and the hundreds of people who work tirelessly to produce our show remains our top priority.” Germany is considering shortening self-isolation periods over fears that critical services could grind to a halt, according to health ministry plan. Workers in critical sectors, such as hospitals or electricity suppliers, would be able to end their isolation after five days, provided they get a negative PCR test, under the draft proposals. The president of Poland has tested positive for coronavirus for a second time, after several people around him were infected. Andrzej Duda previously caught Covid in October 2020. Mozambique president Filipe Nyusi’s PCR results came back negative for Covid-19 after Nyusi and his wife Isaura tested positive via rapid tests days earlier, the president’s office said on Wednesday. Pre-departure tests for people travelling to England are to be scrapped. Boris Johnson announced that the requirement would be lifted from 4am on Friday, along with the need for travellers to self-isolate on arrival until they receive a negative PCR test result. The president of Israel, Isaac Herzog, has become the first world leader to get a fourth Covid jab. On Monday Israel became the first country in the world to embark on a fourth Covid-19 vaccination campaign starting with those over 60. If you’re doing the dishes or on your daily commute and you need something to listen to, check out our Science Weekly podcast, which this week looks at why reinfection rates are so high for Omicron and what that means for public health measures: The matter of Novak Djokovic’s attempts to have his deportation reversed has been adjourned until 6pm, when we will continue our coverage. An interesting tidbit at the end was a discussion on the scope of the hearing, with parties agreeing that a visa was actually issued, and that the matter at hand was the cancellation of the visa, not the requirements of the visa itself. It’s a small difference that I’m sure will matter once the hearing begins properly. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is expanding the eligibility of Pfizer Inc and BioNTech SE’s booster doses to those 12 to 15 years old, Reuters reports. The move came after a panel of outside experts advising the CDC voted earlier to recommend booster shots of the COVID-19 vaccine be made available for ages 12 to 15. The CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) voted 13 to 1 to recommend that the US health agency support booster shots for those aged 12 to 15 at least five months after their second dose. The panel also said the CDC should strengthen its recommendation for boosters for ages 16 and 17. The agency had previously made the shots available to those teenagers, but had stopped short of suggesting that all of them should receive the additional jab. The CDC said in a statement it now recommended that adolescents age 12 to 17 years old should receive a booster shot five months after their initial Pfizer/BioNTech vaccination series. Covid-19 cases in the United States have hit record levels in recent days due to the fast spreading Omicron variant of the virus. Infection rates are surging as many workers and school children return from holiday vacations, raising the prospect of overwhelmed health systems as well as closed businesses and schools. “Covid is overwhelming our hospitals and our children’s hospitals,” said panel member Dr Katherine Poehling, a professor at Wake Forest School of Medicine. “This is a tool we need to use, and help our children through this pandemic.” Data from Israel’s Health Ministry presented at the meeting suggested that vaccinated children aged 12 to 15 who were five to six months past their second dose were being infected at the same rate as unvaccinated kids by the Omicron variant of the virus. After receiving a booster shot, the infection rate dropped sharply, according to the data. Some more details on Novak Djokovic’s impending court case. The news agency AAP reports there was a brief hearing at 3pm today but that there was no formal application or supporting evidence filed. Justice Anthony Kelly (who confessed to not knowing a lot about tennis) said: I need to know a little more than I presently do about the conditions of the applicant. I don’t think it’s unreasonable to ask for the court to ask, as an open question, whether the particular hotel in which the applicant is staying or may be able to stay might have available to him tennis practising facilities. Another update on Djokovic’s case – for non-locals, 4pm is in half an hour. India’s new Covid-19 cases have soared to 90,928 in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said on Thursday, Reuters reports, from 58,097 a day earlier. Daily deaths rose by 325, taking the total to 482,876. Total infections are at 35.11 million. Novak Djokovic’s father, Srdjan, has compared his son to Spartacus after Australia cancelled the visa of the world’s No.1 tennis player despite his receipt of a medical exemption from coronavirus vaccination rules. “Tonight they can throw him in a dungeon, tomorrow they can put him in chains. The truth is he is like water and water paves its own path. Novak is the Spartacus of the new world which won’t tolerate injustice, colonialism and hypocrisy,” Srdjan told Russian media. Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić has also accused Australia of “harassment” – a claim which was rejected by Australian prime minister Scott Morrison – and told Djokovic that “the whole of Serbia is with him”. Our correspondent Helen Davidson has more: A small crowd has now gathered outside the Melbourne hotel where Novak Djokovic is being held as he awaits deportation. About 10 supporters, some draped in flags are playing Serbian music and singing. There is also dancing: As the Omicron variant makes its way through Southeast Asia, countries are introducing new restrictions after tentative attempts at reopening, our correspondent Andrew Nachemson reports. Only two months after introducing quarantine-free entry for vaccinated tourists, Thailand has now suspended the scheme everywhere except in the island of Phuket. With nearly 4,000 cases reported on Wednesday, mostly local transmissions, health officials warned the country could soon be facing “tens of thousands” of new cases per day. Authorities reportedly plan to meet tomorrow, with the Health Ministry recommending keeping the ban in place until at least the end of January. It’s a dramatic reversal for a country that had hoped to restart its tourism industry, which provided around 22% of its GDP in 2019. In the Philippines, authorities cancelled one of the country’s most popular religious events, a Christian parade that typically draws millions of revellers. It’s the second year in a row the procession has been cancelled, and comes as the Philippines reported nearly 11,000 cases on Wednesday, its largest daily surge since 10 October. Rather than closing borders, Singapore has declared that people won’t be considered fully vaccinated unless they have received a booster within nine months of their second dose. The policy comes into effect in February. “Given the higher transmissibility of the Omicron variant, we are likely to experience an infection wave that is greater than that of Delta,” read a government press release, warning that even if the variant is milder it could still put a strain on the healthcare system. According to government data, the city-state is one of the most vaccinated countries in the region, with 87% of the population fully vaccinated and over 40% already boosted. More than 71,000 new cases have been recorded in Australia so far today, from New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania. NSW had 34,994 new cases and six deaths – and about 31% of those tested were positive, which is an alarming proportion. Six people died, and there are now 1,609 people in hospital, and 131 in intensive care units. In Victoria there were also six deaths, and 21,997 new cases. Victoria also has a positivity rate from testing of about one in three. 631 people are in hospital with 51 in intensive care. Queensland has recorded 10,332 new Covid cases, and one person has died. There are 284 people in hospital, and 12 in intensive care, including two on ventilators. Tasmania has reported 751 new Covid cases, which is a drop from the record 867 cases reported yesterday. One person has been admitted to hospital. South Australia has recorded 3,070 cases, with 123 people currently in hospital and 12 in ICU. Novak Djokovic flew into Melbourne airport on Wednesday night planning to defend his Australian Open title. Instead, the World No 1 is being held in a quarantine hotel and is set to be deported tonight after a remarkable series of events led to his visa being cancelled. So how on earth did it get to this point? Royce Kurmelovs has the answers: A day after Hong Kong announced a two-week ban on flights from eight countries with rising Omicron cases, neighbouring Macau has gone a step further and banned all civilian flights other than those coming from mainland China. The ban is in place until 23 January. Hong Kong’s leader Carrie Lam announced the city’s ban on flights on Wednesday, over fears the region was on the verge of a fifth wave of Covid-19. Three community cases were recorded on Wednesday in Hong Kong, prompting a raft of new restrictions on dining and other leisure activities. The eight countries banned from sending planes into Hong Kong are Australia, Canada, France, India, Pakistan, the Philippines, Britain and the US, including stopovers and transfers. A woman accused by her ex-husband of kidnapping their two boys to prevent them from being vaccinated against Covid-19 has turned herself into the authorities, AFP reports. The 46-year-old woman was wanted for “kidnapping minors” after her ex-husband, who lives near the southern city of Seville, filed a complaint with police in mid-December accusing her of taking the boys aged 14 and 12 without authorisation, a judicial source told the news agency. The man said he had not seen the boys since 4 November when he received a letter from his former wife saying she planned to remove them from their school just days after a court ruled he had the right to decide whether the children should be vaccinated. The woman turned herself into the authorities on Wednesday morning in Seville with the two boys and a judge ordered her to be remanded in custody pending charges, the source said. The two minors were handed over to their father on Wednesday afternoon, a spokesman for Spain’s Guardia Civil police force said. Spain, along with several other European nations, began vaccinating children aged five to 11 against Covid-19 on 15 December. The country has no significant anti-vaccine movement. With 90% of over-12s in the country fully vaccinated against Covid-19, Spain has one of the highest shares of fully immunised people in Europe. China has reported 189 confirmed coronavirus cases for 5 January, versus 91 a day earlier, its health authority has said according to Reuters. Of the new infections, 132 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission on Thursday, up from 41 a day earlier. Most of the new local cases were in Henan and Shaanxi provinces. Zhejiang also reported new cases. China reported 45 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, compared with 71 a day earlier. There were no new fatalities, leaving the death toll unchanged at 4,636. Mainland China had 103,121 confirmed cases as of 5 January. Italy has made it obligatory for people aged 50 or more to be vaccinated against Covid-19 as the country scrambles to ease pressure on hospitals and reduce deaths amid a dramatic surge in infections. The measure is among the toughest vaccine mandates in Europe and takes effect immediately. The move was unanimously supported by ministers despite divisions between the parties that make up prime minister Mario Draghi’s broad coalition before the cabinet meeting on Wednesday. Italy also tightened its workplace vaccine rules and from 15 February, people aged over 50 who are in jobs, either in the public or private sector, will have to present a health pass proving immunisation or recovery from Covid-19. Hospitals are under increasing pressure because of the Omicron variant. Italy registered 189,109 new infections on Wednesday and 231 fatalities, bringing the death toll to 138,276, the highest in Europe after the UK. Australian prime minister Scott Morrison is holding a press conference, at which he’s given more details on the case of the world’s No.1 ranked male tennis player, Novak Djokovic, who is due to be deported after his visa was rejected. Morrison told reporters: On the issue of Mr Djokovic, rules are rules. And there are no special cases, rules are rules. It is what I said yesterday, that is the policy of the government ... stronger border protection policies, and particularly in relation to the pandemic. He also said Djokovic could not prove the medical exemption he claimed he had: It is on them to have the proof to show why they would not have to be vaccinated. He was unable to furnish that proof to Border Force officers at the airport last night and they are the rules and it happens on many occasions and that is what has now happened. He also denied that Djokovic had been subjected to harassment (Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić claimed earlier that he was). For more on Morrison and Djokovic, head over to our Australian live news blog, where Tory Shepherd has more: Pfizer Inc expects the latest results from a clinical trial for kids under the age of five of the Covid-19 vaccine it developed with Germany’s BioNTech SE by April, a top company scientist has said according to Reuters. “The study has been amended to give a third dose to everybody who’s less than five at least eight weeks after their last vaccination,” Dr Alejandra Gurtman, a Pfizer vaccine researcher said at a meeting of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). She said the company aims to have data for the age group by the end of March or the beginning of April. In December, Pfizer said it was changing the design of the trial because children between the ages of two and four who were given two 3-microgram doses of the vaccine did not have the same immune response that a larger dose of the vaccine generated in older children. Gurtman also said the company was studying a third dose of its vaccine in children ages five to 11, six months after their second dose. The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine is authorised in the United States for people aged five and older. On Wednesday, ACIP backed booster shots of the vaccine for ages 12 to 15. Good morning and welcome to the Guardian’s rolling coverage of the coronavirus pandemic with me, Helen Livingstone. Pfizer has said it expects the latest results from its Covid vaccine clinical trial for children under the age of 5 – which will include booster shots – by April. Dr Alejandra Gurtman, a Pfizer vaccine researcher, said the company could even have data for the age group by the end of March. Italy has made it obligatory for people aged 50 or more to be vaccinated against Covid-19 as the country scrambles to ease pressure on hospitals and reduce deaths amid a dramatic surge in infections. Novak Djokovic’s attempts to compete at the Australian Open this month are over after the No 1-ranked male tennis player was told his visa has been rejected. He is due to be flown out of Melbourne on Thursday amid a spiralling outcry over his controversial “medical exemption” agreed by the tournament’s organisers. Here’s what else has been happening over the past 24 hours: Record rises in daily Covid cases were reported in at least seven countries on Wednesday as the Omicron variant continues to spread. They were: France - 332,252; Portugal - 39,570; Turkey - 66,467; Italy - 189,109; Sweden - 17,320; the Netherlands - 24,000 and Israel - 11,978. The French parliament suspended debate on a new Covid law as opposition lawmakers demanded explanations from President Emmanuel Macron about comments in which he said he wanted to “piss off” unvaccinated people. This year’s Grammy awards, set to take place on 31 January, have been postponed as a result of the pandemic. In a statement, organisers said: “The health and safety of those in our music community, the live audience and the hundreds of people who work tirelessly to produce our show remains our top priority.” Germany is considering shortening self-isolation periods over fears that critical services could grind to a halt, according to health ministry plan. Workers in critical sectors, such as hospitals or electricity suppliers, would be able to end their isolation after five days, provided they get a negative PCR test, under the draft proposals. The Czech government has shortened the quarantine period for Covid positive people from seven days to five. The government also approved blanket testing in companies, effective from 17 January. The president of Poland has tested positive for coronavirus for a second time, after several people around him were infected. Andrzej Duda previously caught Covid in October 2020. Mozambique president Filipe Nyusi’s PCR results came back negative for Covid-19 after Nyusi and his wife Isaura tested positive via rapid tests days earlier, the president’s office said on Wednesday. Pre-departure tests for people travelling to England are to be scrapped. Boris Johnson announced that the requirement would be lifted from 4am on Friday, along with the need for travellers to self-isolate on arrival until they receive a negative PCR test result. The president of Israel, Isaac Herzog, has become the first world leader to get a fourth Covid jab. On Monday Israel became the first country in the world to embark on a fourth Covid-19 vaccination campaign starting with those over 60.Nine. Nine birthdays in detention. Mehdi reels them off : “Sixteen, 17, 18, 19 …” “I’m 24 now,” he says in resignation. “I’m still here.” The days he spends now, forcibly restricted to a spartan room in a hotel commandeered by the government to detain refugees, are as hard as any. There is no ranking, no categorising the compartments of indefinite detention. “I just tried to figure out how to fill my days: I have to survive them. If I can sleep, I sleep as much as I can, otherwise I just go for a smoke, watch movies, read books. But usually, I don’t do anything, I just lay down on the bed. I just lie here.” The situation in Carlton’s Park hotel took an absurdist turn on the eve of Mehdi’s birthday. He gained a new downstairs neighbour: the world No 1 tennis player, Novak Djokovic. He can’t see the defending Australian Open champion because of the isolation protocols and guards marshalled on every floor. “There is a disappointment: everyone wants to ask me about Novak, what the hotel is like for him. But they don’t ask about us: we have been locked up in this place for months, for years. “I’ve never seen so many cameras, so much attention. I hope Novak Djokovic learns about our situation here, and I hope he speaks about it.” Mehdi – he uses only one name – was a child of 15 when he arrived by boat in Australia seeking sanctuary. A member of the persecuted Ahwazi Arab minority in his homeland Iran, his family urged him to flee, and arranged for his fraught passage, hoping he might find freedom on the other side of the world. Mehdi’s claim for protection was swiftly recognised – Australia is legally obliged to protect him and cannot return him to harm. But the formality of refugee status has not brought Mehdi safety, or a new start in life: he has been held, in some way or another, in some place or another – Nauru, Brisbane, and now Melbourne’s notorious Park hotel – every day since. He has watched boatmates he arrived alongside leave detention to begin lives, careers and families in Australia; he has watched others in detention burn themselves to death in despair. He has been beaten, abused, incarcerated without reason. Mehdi has never been charged with a crime, nor has any wrongdoing been alleged against him, yet still he has not known a day of freedom in Australia. Friday is his ninth birthday in detention. “I’m getting older; it’s really sad that my youth, my teenage time – that’s been wasted. I don’t want to leave here as a middle-aged man, all those years lost.” The connection he can find to the outside world only exacerbates that pain. “Young people, I see them having a fun time, posting on Instagram and all that. And I am so far, far away from that. I’m still here. Every single day. “The birthdays,” he says, “are the saddest days. They are supposed to be the happiest, but during my time in detention, they are always the heaviest days. I spend the whole day thinking about all the years I’ve lost.” Each day is a question of self-preservation, Mehdi says. He is close with a cousin, Adnan, who arrived on the same boat and is also in the Park hotel. But sometimes, enduring means withdrawing. “I have to come up with the best method for surviving. Sometimes, I feel like if I communicate with other people in the same situation, their frustrations could affect my mental health.” Counterintuitively, defiantly drawing public attention to his plight serves the same existential purpose. “This is also a method of my survival: to speak out. It’s a way to exist. You are doing something, not just sitting invisible or forgotten.” Mehdi has been approved for resettlement in the US under Australia’s swap arrangement with the US, the 2016 deal under which America agreed to resettle refugees held offshore by Australia, in exchange for Australia accepting Central American refugees from US-run camps. The deal has seen nearly 1,000 refugees resettled, but it has been painfully slow, and the allocation of places appears capricious to those waiting, sometimes for years, for a spot that may never come. Mehdi is losing faith his day will ever arrive. “There are no updates, no deadlines. I cannot rely on it, I don’t feel it’s going to happen soon, and there is no guarantee it is going to happen at all.” Mehdi has watched friends, including other refugees who arrived as children, walk out of detention bound for an airport and a flight to freedom. “It’s good to see people get out of here but the other side of the coin is, ‘Why not me, why not the rest of these people?’ I don’t see any particular reason that they keep me here.” Mehdi says he finds the inconsistencies in the government’s purportedly consistent policy on boat arrivals infuriating. The government continues to say that no person who arrives seeking asylum by boat will be resettled in Australia but Mehdi says he knows of dozens who have been. The government refuses to accept New Zealand’s offer to resettle refugees from Australia’s “offshore cohort”, arguing it would act as a “pull factor”, an incentive for people to come to Australia by boat. But if New Zealand is an incentive, why is the US not? On the bad days, Mehdi finds himself going in circles. “It’s hard when you don’t have answers to your questions: why should I spend nine years in detention; why there is no deadline; what is my crime? “Why has the government released thousands of people who come by boat, but kept a handful of the refugees in detention. Why? Are we a sacrifice for the sake of policy?” Nauru was a brutality, often deliberate, it seemed, Mehdi says. The school, the one bright light of the refugee children’s existence in that place, was shut down. Mehdi was thrown in jail for protesting his conditions in detention. A guard threatened to kill him. Brisbane’s immigration transit accommodation was chaotic and angry, Mehdi says. Conversely, Melbourne’s Park hotel has been nothing but solitude. Mehdi spends all of his days, save for a precious few minutes smoking, in the loneliness of his austere hotel room. Even the tiny smoking balcony, once a chance “to see the sky, to feel the fresh air”, has been boarded up. In October and November, a Covid outbreak swept through the refugees and asylum seekers held inside the hotel. At one stage 22 of the 46 people then detained there had Covid. One refugee took federal court action to ensure an ambulance crew was allowed access to the hotel to assess and treat him. Before it was a detention centre, under its former name, Rydges, the hotel was used for quarantine and was the centre of Victoria’s second Covid wave. It was responsible for 90% of Covid cases in the state because of “insufficient … prevention and control standards [and] concerns regarding matters including: access to fresh air; access to good quality food; the state of cleanliness of the facility”. After the devastating second wave, the hotel was dropped from the quarantine regime, sold, renamed, and then commandeered by the government as an “alternative place of detention” for refugees and asylum seekers, mostly those who had come from Nauru and Papua New Guinea suffering serious illnesses. The windows in the hotel’s rooms were drilled shut to stop them opening at all. On 27 December, refugees held in the Park hotel posted pictures of maggots found in the food they were served in their rooms. A week earlier, a fire broke out in the upper levels of the hotel. When refugees fled to the ground floor lobby they were stopped from leaving by guards. Some were hyperventilating with anxiety; others were forced to urinate in bottles because there were no toilets. Mehdi’s childhood home in Iran was razed in a fire, “and it kind of traumatised me … so when this fire happened, I was anxious, I had breathing problems. “There were alarms ringing, there was smoke also, and it was so chaotic. People were screaming, guards were yelling and we were so frustrated. We could see the park and the street, the fire trucks, and police, but they just kept us there for hours.” The Department of Home Affairs did not respond to a detailed series of questions from Guardian Australia about Mehdi’s ongoing indefinite detention. In the stasis of indefinite detention, there are no new year resolutions. Each day is the same as the last. “I don’t think you’d call it a wish, but I think I just need to get free. To enjoy my youth. It is being wasted in detention. I don’t see any reason for that. Why? Why should I stay any longer here?”Speaking on the anniversary of the 6 January insurrection led by supporters of Donald Trump, Joe Biden denounced his predecessor for spreading a “web of lies” about the legitimacy of the 2020 election. Biden said that “for the first time in our history, the president had not just lost an election, he tried to prevent the peaceful transfer of power as a violent mob reached the Capitol”. As Democrats led a day of events to commemorate the deadly insurrections, Republicans largely stayed out of sight – with many attending the funeral of former senator Johnny Isakson in Georgia. However, Liz Cheney, the co-chair of the House select committee investigating the insurrection, and Dick Cheney, her father and the former vice-president, attended remarks by House speaker Nancy Pelosi. Far-right extremists Matt Gaetz and Majorie Taylor Greene hosted an event during which they put forth unfounded conspiracy theories. They baselessly blamed Democrats and the Capitol Police for the deadly attack. Kamala Harris was inside the Democratic National Committee building on this day last year, when a pipe bomb was discovered outside, Politico reported. Harris’s evacuation from the DNC building was not previously known and raises questions about the then-vice-president-elect’s security on the day of the insurrection. – Maanvi Singh The US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has warned of an increase in extremist content and threats against US lawmakers in the days leading up to the anniversary of the 6 January insurrection, according to a memo obtained by the Guardian. The memo, sent on Thursday to state and local law enforcement, said that DHS had no indication of a specific and credible plot, but that the agency and the FBI had “identified new content online that could inspire violence, particularly by lone offenders, and could be directed against political and other government officials, including members of Congress, state and local officials, and high-profile members of political parties, including in locations outside of [Washington DC]”. John Cohen, the head of DHS’s office of intelligence and analysis, outlined a range of content on “extremist related platforms” that was concerning. In one instance, an “unknown individual” posted a video online listing 95 members of Congress who, the video claimed, were involved in voting to certify the “fraudulent” presidential election, echoing far-right misinformation that has spread since last year. The video called for the Congress members to be hanged in front of the White House and was posted on a forum that hosts QAnon conspiracy theories and was reposted by Telegram users and on blogs. The video was viewed more than 60,000 times across platforms, the memo said. Cohen also warned of a separate posting that referenced 6 January “as an appropriate day to conduct assassinations against named Democratic political figures, including [the president], because of the perceived fraudulent election”. The US Secret Service, the Capitol Police and the DC Metropolitan Police agencies were aware of the online activity and have initiated investigations “as appropriate”, Cohen wrote in the memo, adding that the Federal Protective Service had also expanded patrols in and around federal facilities across the US. The memo comes amid reports of a sharp rise in threats against lawmakers over the last year. Earlier on Thursday, Joe Biden denounced Donald Trump for spreading a “web of lies” about the 2020 election and accused Trump and his allies of holding a “dagger at the throat of American democracy”. Last year, a photo of New Jersey representative Andy Kim crouched down, cleaning up at the Capitol rotunda following the insurrection went viral. One year later, Kim has shared an ode to the building that was rampaged by supporters of Donald Trump on 6 January 2021. “This building, the Capitol, it belongs to you. To all of us. It’s our job to take care of it,” he wrote. “We prayerfully mark one year since the insurrection and patriotically honor the heroes who defended the Capitol and our democracy that day,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said at the brief vigil. “Let us all here join in a moment of silence in memory of those who lost their lives and sacrificed so much for our democracy that day.” “We come before you because we need your help. We need your help in these troubled times. We need your help for this beloved nation,” Presiding Bishop Michael Curry of the Episcopal Church said. “We need your help for those who have been traumatized and troubled by the painful events of one year ago and all that has continued since.” Members of Congress are now speaking outside the Capitol, ahead of a candlelit vigil to commemorate the deadly insurrection. Last year, a Senate investigation found that the deadly insurrection was “planned in plain sight” but intelligence failures left lawmakers, staff and police officers vulnerable on 6 January. Despite gathering online data about plots to storm the capitol since December 2020, poor planning and a lack of coordination ahead of 6 January meant that the warnings went unheeded. It is still unclear who planted the live, potentially deadly pipe bombs at the DNC and RNC that day. Kamala Harris was inside the Democratic National Committee building on this day last year, when a pipe bomb was discovered outside, Politico reports. From Politico: Capitol Police began investigating the pipe bomb at 1:07 p.m., according to an official Capitol Police timeline of events obtained by POLITICO. The timeline says that Capitol Police and the Secret Service evacuated an unnamed “protectee” at approximately 1:14 p.m, seven minutes later. The four people, among them a White House official and a former law enforcement official, confirmed that Harris was the Secret Service protectee identified in the timeline, which has circulated on Capitol Hill. Harris’ presence inside the building while a bomb was right outside raises sobering questions about her security that day. It also raises the chilling prospect that the riots could have been far more destructive than they already were, with the incoming vice president’s life directly endangered. Federal law enforcement officials have faced harsh criticism for failing to anticipate the chaotic scene around the Electoral College certification one year ago, despite receiving a host of warnings about possible chaos. Harris’s evacuation from the DNC building has not been previously reported, though she has alluded to her absence from the Capitol during the insurrection. Some of America’s most prominent historians gave an urgent warning about the state of American democracy as they gathered on Capitol Hill on Thursday to commemorate the 6 January insurrection. Doris Kearns Goodwin and Jon Meacham condemned the attack on the Capitol, which was carried out by a group of former president Donald Trump’s supporters to disrupt the certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 election. They warned that the US remained at a crucial turning point amid ongoing threats to its democratic systems. “What you saw a year ago today was the worst instincts of both human nature and American politics,” Meacham said. “And it’s either a step on the way to the abyss or it is a call to arms figuratively for citizens to engage.” Echoing Meacham’s message, Goodwin argued that this moment represents an opportunity for Americans to rededicate themselves to the cause of democracy, citing the example set by those who fought for the Union in the civil war and marched for civil rights in the 1960’s. “We’ve come through these really tough times before,” Goodwin said. “We’ve had lots of people who were willing to step up and put their public lives against their private lives. And that’s what we’ve got to depend on today. That’s what we need in these years and months ahead.” The historians’ comments came as many Americans, particularly those who support Trump, continue to deny the dark reality of the Capitol insurrection. Only about 4 in 10 Republicans describe the 6 January attack as very violent or extremely violent, according to a recent AP-NORC poll. About 30% of Republicans say the insurrection was not violent at all, while another 30% say it was only somewhat violent. Read more: It was a visceral cry at the moment of maximum peril for American democracy. A furious mob had overrun police and was nearly at the door of the House of Representatives. Inside the chamber, Republican Paul Gosar was launching a spurious challenge to Joe Biden’s election victory in Arizona. Then, at the back of the gallery on the second floor, Democrat Dean Phillips rose to his feet and screamed at the top of his lungs at Gosar: “This is because of you!” The outburst was out of character for a “Minnesota nice” congressman with a reputation for moderation and working across the aisle. But a year later, Phillips remains convinced it was an urgent and necessary response to the deadly insurrection inspired by then president Donald Trump. “It’s not my style to break decorum and to scream,” he told the Guardian, “but I have to say at that moment I felt the way that tens of millions of Americans did, which is there were people responsible for what was about to transpire and there are moments where you do what you got to do, and I had to do it. I don’t regret it one bit because it’s true.” Phillips, 52, comes from a business background. He led a family-owned distillery – producing vodka, gin, rum and other liquors – and ice cream company. He was elected to Congress in 2018, representing Minnesota’s third congressional district, and is vice chair of the bipartisan Problem Solvers Caucus. “I never imagined I’d be doing this,” he admits. “I woke up the morning after the 2016 election, saw the reaction of my daughters, who were 18 and 16 at that time – their fear, their tears – and I promised them right then and there I would do something, and here I am.” Read more: Joe Biden spoke forcefully on the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, blaming the insurrection on Donald Trump and his “web of lies”. But it’s up to the justice department to determine any actual consequences for the former president, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said.Donald Trump issued a number of responses to Biden’s speech, to which Psaki replied, “Well, it looks like he saw the speech. I guess that’s good news. Maybe he learned something.” Very few Republicans made appearances at commemoration events today - many were attending the funeral of former senator Johnny Isakson in Georgia. But congresswoman Liz Cheney and her father, former vice-president Dick Cheney, were the exception when they attended House speaker Nancy Pelosi’s remarks. Far-right extremists Matt Gaetz and Majorie Taylor Greene were the only Republicans to actually host an event today. It was only to put forth unfounded conspiracy theories. Far-right congresswoman Majorie Taylor Greene appears to have changed her tune - once again - about the events of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. At the press conference with congressman Matt Gaetz to announce unfounded conspiracy theories, she said she was “very upset with what happened that day”. Previously, Greene referred to 6 January as the Republicans’ “1776 moment” in reference to the American revolution. In October, while talking about the 6 January attack, she said, “If you think about what our Declaration of Independence says, it says to overthrow tyrants.” The only Republican event commemorating the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol was hosted by far-right extremists Matt Gaetz and Marjorie Taylor Greene. Big disclaimer: none of the following is backed by evidence or facts. Speaking to Librarian of Congress Carla Hayden in a conversation on Capitol Hill, historians Doris Kearns Goodwin and Jon Meacham argued that the 6 January insurrection demonstrated the need for Americans to defend their democracy. Meacham described the events of 6 January as “the worst instincts of both human nature and American politics”. “The reality of American life is that we have to defend this experiment,” Meacham said. Goodwin expressed hope that pro-democracy Americans will have the opportunity to “write the chapter of our story,” citing the example set by those who fought for the Union in the Civil War and marched for civil rights in the 1960’s. “We’ve come through these really tough times before,” Goodwin said. “We’ve had lots of people who were willing to step up and put their public lives against their private lives. And that’s what we’ve got to depend on today. That’s what we need in these years and months ahead.” A group of historians is now holding a conversation on Capitol Hill about the significance of the 6 January insurrection and the importance of preserving American democracy. The conversation is moderated by Librarian of Congress Carla Hayden, and she is joined by prominent historians Doris Kearns Goodwin and Jon Meacham. Introducing the three experts, House speaker Nancy Pelosi underscored the need to set the record straight about the violent insurrection, which resulted in the deaths of five people. “One year later, it is essential that we do not allow anyone to rewrite history or whitewash the gravity of what took place,” the Democratic speaker said. “It is our duty to find the facts of January 6 to ensure that such an assault on our democracy cannot happen again.” White House press secretary Jen Psaki was questioned about the lack of Republicans participating in today’s commemorations for the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. She responded that the question would be better asked of the Republicans. “We’re talking about some Republicans in Congress - not all, but many, far too many, in our view and in the president’s view - who need to take a look at themselves and what role they want to play in the history books,” she said. “When their children and grandchildren look at the history books, do they want to be perpetuating the big lie? Do they want to be walking like silent lemmings behind the former president, who fomented an insurrection? Or do they want to be part of saving our democracy?” White House press secretary Jen Psaki was asked what Joe Biden’s forceful speech means for the justice department investigation into the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Critics have been unhappy with attorney general Merrick Garland - in particular, many had been hoping Garland’s speech yesterday would have been more like the president’s speech today in clearly laying blame for the attack at the feet of Donald Trump. Psaki made clear that any criminal consequences that Trump may face will be up to the justice department, which acts independently of the Biden administration. No matter what Biden said today, “the president wants the justice department and the attorney general to act independently, as the attorney general demanded when he accepted the job and as the president expected and demanded from any attorney general he was going to select,” Psaki said. Vice-president Kamala Harris has drawn some criticism from conservatives for naming the 6 January attack on the US Capitol along with the attack on Pearl Harbor and 9/11 as some of the darkest days for American democracy. White House press secretary Jen Psaki responded today that even on the darkest days in US history, “there were no Confederate flags being waved in the Capitol” - members of the mob proudly waved a Confederate flag in the Capitol after they breached the gates, something even Confederate soldiers weren’t ever able to do during the American civil war. “In very dark moments in our history, there were not people storming our nation’s Capitol, trying to take over the office and threatening the speaker of the House,” Psaki said. “For those who are being critics of the vice president’s remark, instead of focusing or analyzing comparisons of moments in history, I would suggest they be a part of solving the threat to democracy that is happening today.” Joe Biden will speak about voter rights next week, an issue that Democrats say is our the next great challenge facing our democracy. Lawmakers like senate majority leader Chuck Schumer have tied the events of the 6 January attack to the attack on voter rights across the country. A big hurdle for passing nationalized voter rights protections is the filibuster, a parliamentary tool that Republicans have used repeatedly to block legislation. Schumer has set a deadline of 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, for holding a vote to change the rules of the filibuster, but has yet to detail exactly what that would mean. White House press secretary Jen Psaki said Thursday that Biden will speak more on the issue on Tuesday, but has already stated his support for changing filibuster rules “if that is a change that needs to happen”. White House press secretary Jen Psaki fielded a question about how Joe Biden never referred to Donald Trump by name in his forceful speech laying blame on his predecessor for the events of the 6 January attack of the US Capitol. “There’s only one president in the history of this country that fomented an insurrection which prompted the seizing of our nation’s Capitol. I think everybody knew who he was referring to,” Psaki said. “But as the president said today this day and the work we need to do moving forward is not about one person. It’s about the country reflecting on who we are in this moment, who we want to be moving forward, and what steps we need to take to protect our own democracy.” When asked for comment on Trump’s response to the speech, Psaki responded, “Well, it looks like he saw the speech. I guess that’s good news. Maybe he learned something.” White House press secretary Jen Psaki has taken the podium for today’s press briefing, and is immediately asked why now Joe Biden is going so hard at Donald Trump. This briefing is taking place mere hours after Biden squarely blamed Trump and his debunked lies about election fraud for the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. “The president launched his campaign on the idea that the former president posed a unique threat to our country,” Psaki said. “We’d argue that he never shied away from making clear that his predecessor posed a threat to democracy throughout the course of his presidency.” Psaki continued: “We are at an inflection point, in order to protect our democracy, to preserve it going forward, there is more we need to do. He made very clear that the risk we have at stake here is our democracy, burying what happened on January 6 and not taking action to protect people’s fundamental rights.” On the one-year anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, Joe Biden accused his predecessor, Donald Trump, of being the first president in US history to try to “prevent a peaceful transfer of power as a violent mob breached the Capitol.” Wyoming congresswoman Liz Cheney has had a tumultuous year in the Republican party following the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. She was ousted from her leadership position in the Republican caucus over her refusal to stop blaming Donald Trump for inciting the mob that stormed the Capitol, and the Wyoming Republican party stopped recognizing her as a member after she voted to impeach him because of 6 January. It appears it got tense with her party even earlier though - the day of the 6 January attack. Cheney has now confirmed to the New York Times one infamous tidbit from that day: when she told her Republican colleague and staunch Trump ally congressman Jim Jordan that he “fucking did this”. Jordan had been standing in the aisle as members of Congress were being escorted away from the mob and he said to Cheney: “We need to get the ladies away from the aisle. Let me help you.” To which she sharply replied: “Get away from me. You fucking did this.” Donald Trump has issued another statement in response to the speech that Joe Biden gave today commemorating the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Once again, much of the statement is the former president repeating the disproven claims that the 2020 presidential election was rigged and that “they’re the ones who tried to stop the peaceful transfer with a rigged election” - a statement that is not only false, because once again, all allegations that the election was rigged have been disproven, but makes no sense because had Trump won like he wanted to happen, there would not have been a transfer of power? He also does not specify who means by “they”. “To watch Biden speaking is very hurtful to many people,” he said. Nancy Pelosi commented on the large amount of Republicans that did not show up to remarks on the Capitol attacks of 6 January 2021. While speaking to a reporter from Business Insider about the lack of Republican attendance at today’s remarks, the House speaker said: “I think the message was very clear, by the president of the United States.” Wyoming representative Liz Cheney and her father, former vice-president Dick Cheney, were the only Republicans present for Pelosi’s speech compared with about 32 Democrats. Pelosi acknowledged during her speech that Covid-19 greatly reduced the number of Congress members attending her remarks in-person. Nancy Pelosi has just finished delivering remarks on the events of 6 January 2021. The House speaker’s remarks began with a prayer from the House chaplain, Margaret Kibben, who spoke on the political turmoil following 6 January. “On this anniversary of national discord and despair, send your healing spirit among us and tend to the dispiritedness and disagreement here within and around the people’s house,” said Kibben. Pelosi then gave remarks, honoring personnel on the ground who helped protect members of Congress during the attack. “As we acknowledge the horror of that day, in the face of extreme danger, they all risked their safety for our democracy by protecting the Capitol complex, members, staff, press, etc,” said Pelosi. Pelosi also conducted a moment of silence to remember those who died on 6 January. A live stream is available at the top of the blog. On the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, Joe Biden placed the blame for the day’s events on Donald Trump. Donald Trump responded by saying Biden “used my name today to try to further divide America”. The House select committee tasked with investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol believes former vice-president Mike Pence will cooperate with their inquiry. House speaker Nancy Pelosi will be delivering remarks commemorating the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol today at 12pm local time. We’ll have a livestream here. Joe Biden answered the question on why he never called Donald Trump by name in his speech on the anniversary of the 6 January attack of the US Capitol, despite having very strong words to say about him in blaming him for the attack. “It’s not about me. It’s not about the vice-president. That’s what bothers me most about the attitude that’s emerging in American politics,” Biden told reporters. “It’s not about whether I’m president, or she’s vice-president. It’s about the system, and about if somebody decides to put himself above everything.” Meanwhile, Ron DeSantis, governor of Florida, said the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol was like “Christmas” for New York and Washington-based media. “The DC-New York media, I mean, this is their Christmas, January 6, OK?” he told New York Times reporter Patricia Mazzei. “They are going to take this and milk this for anything they could to try and to try to be able to smear anyone anyone who ever supported Donald Trump.” Reminder that many members of the DC press corps were in the Capitol when the mob stormed the gates and had to hide for their lives. Journalists were assaulted and harassed that day, with insurrectionists making nooses out of camera cords and scratching “Murder the Media” into a door at the Capitol. Donald Trump has responded to Joe Biden and his strong words blaming him for the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Biden “used my name today to try to further divide America,” Trump said - even though Biden did not once mention Trump by name in his speech. “The Democrats want to own this day of January 6th so they can stoke fears and divide America. I say, let them have it because America sees through theirs [sic] lies and polarizations.” The Associated Press has collected a sampling of what some of the insurrectionists who stormed the US Capitol in the 6 January attack are saying as they face prison time or are pleading guilty. Some, like Robert Palmer of Florida, directly blame Donald Trump for misleading them, while others remain defiant. “I have realized that we, meaning Trump supporters, were lied to by those that at the time had great power, meaning the then sitting President, as well as those acting on his behalf,” Palmer wrote in a handwritten letter. “They kept spitting out the false narrative about a stolen election and how it was ‘our duty’ to stand up to tyranny. Little did I realize that they were the tyrannical ones desperate to hold on to power at any cost, even by creating the chaos they knew would happen with such rhetoric.” Palmer was sentenced to more than five years in prison for throwing a fire extinguisher and attacking police officers. “My conservative creed still remains the same. However, the system of governance, a constitutional republic, and the processes in place for deciding who sits in the Oval Office behind the Resolute Desk transcends any one candidate or party,” wrote Devlyn Thompson in a handwritten letter. “That peaceful transfer of power and the method set out for achieving it are worthy of protection. My message to fellow conservatives, or any American dissenting with the current administration, is that we must continue our work within the confines of the system and condemn the actions on January 6th as atrocious.” Thompson, of Seattle, pleaded guilty to assaulting a police officer with a baton and was sentenced to nearly four years in prison. “The only plan I had was to go to the White House Ellipse to listen to President Trump’s speech. He said during his speech that he would be going to the capitol after he spoke and he asked us to walk there together after his speech,” Valerie Elaine Ehrke wrote in a letter to the court. “I left his speech early to walk back to my hotel room because I was cold. Once back in my room, I saw on the news that people where (sic) at the capitol building. ... Having travelled a long way to attend this rally, I decided to put on an extra layer of clothing and walk to the capitol.” Trump never went to the Capitol that day. Ehrke, of California, was sentenced to three years’ probation. Former president Barack Obama issued a statement on the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol to warn that “our democracy is at greater risk today than it was back then”. “Although initially rejected by many Republicans, the claims that fanned the flames of violence on January 6th have since been embraced by a sizeable portion of voters and elected officials – many of whom know better,” Obama said in the statement. “State legislatures across the country have not only made it harder to vote, but some have tried to assert power over core election processes including the ability to certify election results. And those remaining Republican officials and thought leaders who have courageously stood their ground and rejected such anti-democratic efforts have been ostracized, primaried, and driven from the party.” Joe Biden ended his speech on the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol with an oft-repeated phrase of his: that we are in a “battle for the soul of America”. “We are in a battle for the soul of America, a battle that by the grace of God and the goodness and greatness of this nation, we will win,” he said. “I know how difficult democracy is. I’m crystal clear about the threats that America faces. But I also know that our darkest days can lead to light and hope.” Joe Biden called the actions of the insurrectionists and Donald Trump “un-American”. “They want to rule or they will ruin, ruin what our country fought for at Lexington and Concord, at Gettysburg, and Omaha Beach, Seneca Falls and Selma, Alabama, and what we’re fighting for now: The right to vote. The right to govern ourselves. The right to determine our own destiny,” Biden said. “With rights come responsibilities. The responsibility to see each other as neighbors. Maybe we disagree with that neighbor, but they’re not an adversary. The responsibility to accept defeat, and then get back in the arena and try again the next time to make your case. The responsibility to see that America is an idea, an idea that requires vigilant stewardship.” Joe Biden is hammering hard on Donald Trump in his speech on the one-year anniversary of the 6 January attack of the US Capitol, but it may be necessary. In going hard at Trump, he is going hard at the “big lie” of widespread election fraud and that Biden didn’t really win the election - which has been disproven time and time again. But even though this lie has been disproven time and time again, more than 40% of Americans still do not believe that Biden legitimately won the 2020 presidential election. “He’s not just the former president,” Biden said of Trump. “He’s the defeated former president, defeated by more than 7m of your votes, in a full and free and fair election. There is simply zero proof the election results were inaccurate. In fact, in every venue where evidence had to be produced, where oaths of truth had to be taken, the former president failed to make his case. Biden continued: “Just think about this: the former president and his supporters have never been able to explain how they accept as accurate the other election results on November 3, elections for governor, United states senator, House of Representatives, elections where they closed the gap in the house. They challenged none of that.” Joe Biden continued to go strong against Donald Trump in his speech on the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol: “The former president of the United States of America has created and spread a web of lies about the 2020 election,” Biden said. “He has done so because he values power over principle, because he sees his own interests as more important than his country’s interests. Because his bruised ego matters more to him than our democracy or our constitution. “He can’t accept he lost, even though that’s what 93 United States senators, his own attorney general, his own vice-president, governors and state officials in every battleground state have said: he lost. That’s what 81 million of you did when you voted for a new way forward.” Joe Biden has taken the podium to speak on the anniversary of the 6 January attack of the US Capitol, and he immediately comes out strong in laying the responsibility of the mob’s actions on Donald Trump. “One year ago today in this sacred place, democracy was attacked,” Biden said. “The will of the people was under assault. The constitution, our constitution, faced the gravest of threats.” Biden continued: “For the first time in our history, a president had not just lost an election, he tried to prevent a peaceful transfer of power as a violent mob breached the Capitol”. Vice-president Kamala Harris said she tells young people that she meets that the 6 January attack “reflects the dual nature of democracy: its fragility and its strength”. “You see, the strength of democracy is the rule of law,” she said. “The strength of democracy is the principle that everybody is to be treated equally, that elections should be free and fair, that corruption should be given no order. The strength of democracy is that it empowers the people. The fragility of democracy is this: if we are not vigilant, if we don’t defend it, democracy will not stand. It will falter. And it will fall.” Vice-president Kamala Harris has taken the podium to speak about the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Harris was vice-president-elect on that day, but she was also a senator. Though she had left the building at the time the mob breeched the gates, she spoke of how her staff was forced to convert “filing cabinets into barricades.” Harris said the day now lives on as one of the worst days in American history along with attack on Pearl Harbor and 9/11. “What the extremists who roamed these halls targeted was not just the lives of elected leaders,” Harris said. “What they sought to degrade and destroy was not only a building, hallowed as it is. What they were assaulting were the institutions, the values, the ideas that generations of Americans have marched, picketed and shed blood to establish and defend.” Joe Biden and vice-president Kamala Harris are preparing to speak to the American public from National Statuary Hall, just south of the rotunda that was invaded and besmirched by rioters during the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. We’ll have a livestream for you here on this blog. Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell has used his statement on the 6 January attack on the US Capitol - “was a dark day for Congress and our country” - to throw a potshot at the Democrats. “It has been stunning to see some Washington Democrats try to exploit this anniversary to advance partisan policy goals that long predated this event,” McConnell said in a statement. “It is especially jaw-dropping to hear some Senate Democrats invoke the mob’s attempt to disrupt our country’s norms, rules, and institutions as a justification to discard our norms, rules, and institutions themselves.” Democrats like senate majority leader Chuck Schumer have been tying the insurrection - in which supporters of Donald Trump stormed the Capitol in an attempt to disrupt the certification of the 2020 election result of Joe Biden’s victory - to the Republican attack on voter rights across the country. The Guardian’s Sam Levine has more on what Republicans have done across the country in terms of voting restrictions: Meanwhile, here is what McConnell said about the insurrection, one year ago: Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer was on CBS reflecting on the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, when he was “within 30ft of those rioters”. He recounted how a Capitol police officer in bulletproof vest, carrying a sub-machine gun, grabbed him by the collar and said: “Senator, we are in danger”. “When democracy is in danger, it often starts with a mob,” Schumer said. “Not everyone is part of the mob, but people excuse the mob. People egg on the mob. Donald Trump is still doing it, and we’re seeing violence still right now, threats of violence, against election workers, poll workers, across the country.” An interesting tidbit coming out of the Today Show interview with Liz Cheney, the vice-chair of the special House committee investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, is that she said she is looking forward to former vice-president Mike Pence cooperating with the committee – as well as continuing the cooperation the committee has been having with Pence’s team. “Former vice-president Pence was a hero on January 6,” Cheney said. “He refused the pressures of the former president, he did his duty and the nation should be very grateful for the actions he took that day. We look forward to continuing the cooperation we’ve had from members of the former vice president’s team and look forward to his cooperation.” As former vice-president, Pence was serving as president of the Senate one year ago when the insurrectionists stormed the Capitol. He had been unwilling to go along with Donald Trump and his plan to commandeer Pence’s largely ceremonial role at the joint session of Congress for the certification of the 2020 presidential election result of Joe Biden’s victory. That day, Trump supporters chanted, “Hang Mike Pence!” and Pence was evacuated along with other high-ranking members of Congress. But later, Pence has done his best to not talk about the attack – or speak ill of Trump whatsoever, staying consistent along party lines. Here’s more from Liz Cheney, the vice chair of the special House committee investigating the 6 January attack on the US Capitol, who was on the Today Show this morning. She told Savannah Guthrie that our institutions “only held because of people who were willing to stand up against the pressure from former president Trump, people in his own Department of Justice ... elected officials at the state level who stood up to him and the law enforcement officers here at the Capitol.” “We came very close, and we need to recognize how important it is that the system depends on individuals and that it never happens again,” Cheney said. Guthrie asked Cheney if she thought our democracy was still in a fragile state. Cheney replied, “The threat continues.” “Donald Trump continues to make the same claims that he knows caused violence on January 6 and it’s very important, if you look at what’s happening in my own party, the Republican party, rather than reject what happened on the 6th, reject the lies about the election and make clear that a president who engaged in those activities can never be president again – unfortunately, too many in my own party are embracing the former president, looking the other way and refusing to minimize the danger,” Cheney said. “That’s how democracies die and we simply cannot let that happen.” Hello, live blog readers. Today marks the one-year anniversary of one of the worst days in US history: the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. The day a mob of Donald Trump supporters stormed the Capitol in an attempt to stop Congress from certifying the 2020 presidential election result of Joe Biden’s victory – clashing with police, destroying property and leaving five people dead. In his remarks from the Capitol steps today, Biden is expected to lay out the “singular responsibility” that Trump has for the “chaos and carnage” of that day, according to the White House. Though his attorney general, Merrick Garland, may have disappointed some critics calling for swifter and harsher justice – in particular for the former president – with his speech yesterday detailing the justice department investigation, Biden’s strong stance against Trump is sure to draw him favors. Biden has been “clear-eyed” about the “threat the former president represents to our democracy”, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said in a briefing on Wednesday. The Guardian’s David Smith has more here: Meanwhile, Liz Cheney, the vice-chair of the special House committee investigating the 6 January insurrection said live this morning that the committee looks forward to the cooperation of former vice-president Mike Pence – who had to be evacuated from the chambers that day, as many in the mob were chanting, “Hang Mike Pence”. She also said said Trump’s conduct on the day was “a supreme dereliction of duty”.Kiss frontman Gene Simmons, Australian musician Deborah Conway, and film-maker Nancy Spielberg are among 120 entertainment industry figures to sign an open letter against the boycott of Sydney festival, after more than 30 acts and individuals withdrew over the festival’s $20,000 sponsorship deal with the Israeli embassy. In the letter, published on Thursday by Creative Community for Peace, the signatories described the boycott as “an affront to both Palestinians and Israelis who are working to advance peace through compromise, exchange, and mutual recognition”. “While we all may have differing opinions on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the best path to peace, we all agree that a cultural boycott is not the answer,” it continued. The letter quoted comments made by Nick Cave in 2018, when he said: “The cultural boycott of Israel is cowardly and shameful. Israel is a real, vibrant, functioning democracy – yes, with Arab members of parliament – and so engaging with Israelis, who vote, may be more helpful than scaring off artists or shutting down means of engagement.” Nick Cave has not signed the 2022 open letter. Sydney festival opened on Thursday night hours after the withdrawal of another of its program highlights, Tropical Fuck Storm. Late on Thursday, the Gareth Liddiard-led band posted a strongly worded statement about what it called the festival’s failure to “fix the problem they created”, which led to “online harassment” and “smear campaigns” aimed at the festival’s billed artists. “Sydney festival [took] on a sponsor so dodgy, pointless and controversial it would inevitably mean that hundreds of unwitting artists (who are having a rough enough time with the pandemic as it is) would become the targets of online harassment, bullying, smear campaigns, ridiculous accusations, misrepresentations and abuse from total strangers who have no idea what’s actually going on behind the scenes, what any artist’s position is or even what they’re talking about,” the statement read. The band has joined more than 30 companies, individual artists and panel members of the festival’s the Reckoning series by either cancelling their gigs, or going ahead without the sponsorship or support of the official festival program. In the past 24 hours, comedian Tom Walker, singer/songwriter Hope D and artist Gerwyn Davies have also joined the boycott. In their statement, Tropical Fuck Storm said the band had been in discussion with the Sydney festival over the past 48 hours about the possibility of refunding the Israeli embassy’s $20,000 sponsorship of Decadance, a performance devised by Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin and Tel Aviv’s Batsheva Dance Company, and co-presented by Sydney Dance Company. “Sydney festival has stated they have no intention to refund the money or sever the sponsorship relationship, even though the shit sandwich they’ve landed every billed artist in is blatantly obvious to them,” they said. “Due to this complete lack of respect and integrity towards the artists billed from Sydney Festival and its partners, we have decided to cancel our two appearances.” All references to the Tropical Fuck Storm’s two Sydney festival concerts had been removed online by the festival by Thursday evening. ‘We feel immense empathy with the situation’ At the Sydney festival’s official media launch earlier on Thursday, artistic director Olivia Ansell told journalists that festival management and the board remained concerned about the controversy. On Tuesday, the board issued its second statement reaffirming its position that it would not be terminating its sponsorship with the Israeli embassy. “We’re always surprised by anything that disrupts the festival … it’s sensitive, something being created to bring artists together, so we can see a myriad of perspectives,” Ansell said. “We feel immense empathy with the situation.” Co-launching the festival with newly appointed New South Wales arts minister Ben Franklin, Sydney’s lord mayor Clover Moore said she was following the boycott debate closely. “The artists who are performing may or may not support the policies of their government, but they need to get funding from the government so that they can perform,” she said. “I just think about the Sydney Symphony and the Sydney Theatre Company who go overseas and perform,” she continued. “And it may very well be that there are people overseas who are angry about our inaction on climate change. They’re really concerned about our refugee policy, or our First Nations policy, but we wouldn’t want to see our Sydney Symphony or our Sydney Theatre Company boycotted for those reasons, because probably many people in both those institutions would not be supporting those policies either. “So I think it’s a matter for people to make up their own minds. But I think we should really keep in mind that this is about our artists and giving them an opportunity to perform.” Late on Thursday, the president of the Zionist Federation of Australia, Jeremy Leibler, sent Guardian Australia an extensive statement that included excerpts from a letter he wrote to the Sydney festival, in which he described claims by boycott organisers, that by including an Israeli act the festival is excluding Palestinians and other Arabs, as “errant nonsense and worrying proof that the objective of those calling for a boycott is not a peaceful future for Israelis and Palestinians, but a future without Israel.” The letter from the federation went on to state: “The Sydney festival should be a safe space to celebrate the artistry and gifts of all peoples, including Israelis and Palestinians. Instead, the boycott organisers have attempted to make the festival culturally unsafe for anyone who believes in freedom of speech, and the freedom to have differences of opinion. It is appalling behaviour and the Jewish community condemns it outright. “If vitally important civil society organisations such as the Sydney festival cave into campaigns from these extremist groups, it will only encourage them to continue this behaviour. We have seen throughout history that while these campaigns start with Israel and the Jewish people, they very rarely end there.” According to a statement released on 22 December by the Palestinian Justice Movement Sydney, the sponsorship deal was sealed in May, the same month Israeli armed forces launched a series of air attacks on Gaza, killing a number of Palestinian civilians. “Palestine advocates call on all opponents of apartheid to boycott the 2022 Sydney Festival,” that statement said. The campaign is in line with the Palestinian Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions (BDS) movement, modelled on the boycott of apartheid South Africa. “The BDS campaign states that ‘refraining from participating in cultural events in Israel or in Israel-funded activities around the world is the most important expression of support for the Palestinian call for a cultural boycott of Israel’,” the statement continued. “By partnering with Israel, Sydney festival will … contribute to the normalisation of an apartheid state.”Novak Djokovic flew into Melbourne planning to defend his Australian Open title. Instead he is being held in an immigration hotel and, pending a court challenge, is set to be deported after a remarkable series of events led to his visa being cancelled. How did it get to this point? What happened at Melbourne airport? Djokovic arrived at Tullamarine airport in Melbourne at 11.30pm on Wednesday night after a 15-hour flight from Dubai. He was held under armed guard for several hours over concerns with his visa and exemption from vaccine requirements before the Australian Border Force announced his visa had been cancelled. In a statement, ABF said the tennis star had “failed to provide appropriate evidence” to support his exemption from a requirement to be double vaccinated against Covid. “The Australian Border Force will continue to ensure that those who arrive at our border comply with our laws and entry requirements,” it said. “The ABF can confirm that Mr Djokovic failed to provide appropriate evidence to meet the entry requirements to Australia, and his visa has been subsequently cancelled.“Non-citizens who do not hold a valid visa on entry or who have had their visa cancelled will be detained and removed from Australia.” But wasn’t this sorted out before Djokovic got on the plane? Djokovic, who has refused to reveal his Covid vaccination status, said on Tuesday that he had secured a medical exemption. Tennis Australia and the Victorian government confirmed the exemption had been issued after a two-step process, seemingly clearing the way for him to compete. What is a medical exemption? In December, Tennis Australia released its Covid-19 vaccination policy for Melbourne’s grand slam, which included a process for players seeking medical exemptions to enter Victoria without having to undergo a 14-day quarantine. If an exemption was deemed valid in line with the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) guidelines, the medical exemption would be submitted to the Australian Immunisation Register. As the determining panel was blind, no panellists would ever know the identity of any player seeking an exemption. Criteria listed by Atagi as acceptable reasons for a medical exemption range from acute major medical conditions to any serious adverse event attributed to a previous dose of Covid-19 vaccine. For those who have recently tested positive, that can be a temporary exemption from vaccination for six months. The reason for Djokovic’s exemption is unclear. Why did Djokovic apply? We do not know the details of Djokovic’s application and he has not made his vaccination status public. However, Djokovic previously confirmed he tested positive to Covid in May 2020. So what was the problem with his visa? Although we don’t know the basis for Djokovic’s medical exemption application, the Guardian understands that Tennis Australia was told by the federal government in writing more than once that a recent Covid infection was not an acceptable reason not to be fully vaccinated if you want quarantine-free entry into Australia. A letter from the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, to Tennis Australia in late November made this clear, stating: “People must be fully vaccinated, as defined by Atagi, to gain quarantine-free entry into Australia.” “This means that people who do not meet the Atagi definition of fully vaccinated will not be approved for quarantine-free entry, regardless of whether they have received foreign vaccination exemptions,” Hunt wrote. “In relation to your specific question, I can confirm that people who contracted Covid within six months and seek to enter Australia from overseas, and have not received two doses of a TGA approved or recognised vaccine … are not considered fully vaccinated.” An earlier letter was also sent to Tennis Australia from the federal health department. Atagi did not endorse the process that Tennis Australia and the Victorian government put in place, the Guardian has been told. A travel exemption from the border force was not requested and the commonwealth was not engaged. So even though Djokovic had a medical exemption to compete, the actual visa application was a matter for the federal government. This meant the decision fell to the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, or the prime minister, Scott Morrison. “There should be no special rules for Novak Djokovic at all. None whatsoever,” Morrison had said. Has anyone else applied for an exemption? On Wednesday, the Tennis Australia chief executive, Craig Tiley, said 26 players and staff had applied for medical exemptions but only a “handful” had been granted. It’s been reported that three other players with the same type of visa and exemption were allowed into the country. What has Djokovic said about vaccination? While he has not made his vaccination status known, Djokovic said in April 2020 he is “opposed to vaccination”. “I wouldn’t want to be forced by someone to take a vaccine in order to be able to travel,” he said. “But if it becomes compulsory, what will happen? I will have to make a decision.” What happens now? Novak Djokovic has been moved from a room at the airport to a hotel in Melbourne run by the immigration department. His support staff, including coach Goran Ivanišević, who were travelling with him, were allowed in without any problems. Djokovic has instructed his lawyers to appeal against the visa cancellation. An urgent hearing was held on Thursday evening. Djokovic’s lawyers succeeded in a bid to stop him from being deported on Thursday with a full hearing in the federal court now scheduled for Monday What has been the political reaction? Djokovic has become something of a flashpoint among the Australian public over the sense that different sets of rules apply to powerful or famous people. Despite previously saying it was a matter for the Victorian government, Morrison was quick to claim credit for the decision on Twitter. At a press conference on Thursday, Morrison also said it was the obligation of the traveller to provide the correct information when they arrived at the border. The president of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, said he had spoken to the country’s star. “I told our Novak that the whole of Serbia is with him and that our bodies are doing everything to see that the harassment of the world’s best tennis player is brought to an end immediately. In line with all norms of international law, Serbia will fight for Novak, truth and justice.” Djokovic’s father, Srdjan Djokovic, said his son was being “persecuted” and that the Australian government was “stomping on Serbia”. “They’re keeping him in captivity. They’re stomping all over him to stomp all over Serbia and the Serbian people,” he said. “Morrison and his like have dared attack Novak to bring Serbia to its knees.” Morrison said he understood the Serbian government’s position but the rules “apply to all those who enter”. The episode recalls other dramatic confrontations between visiting celebrities and Australia’s border control regime. In 2015, Barnaby Joyce, then agricultural minister, gave Johnny Depp 50 hours to remove his dogs, Pistol and Boo, from Australia or warned they would be put down. The Hollywood star had brought them into the country on a private jet while filming on the Gold Coast. Barnaby Joyce went on to threaten the actor with a perjury investigation for smuggling the dogs into the country. It has also drawn renewed attention to the plight of refugees and asylum seekers stuck for months, and years, at the Park hotel, where Djokovic is being held. Detainees have described it as a “torture cell”. Mehdi, a refugee who has spent nine years in detention, told Guardian Australia: “There is a disappointment: everyone wants to ask me about Novak, what the hotel is like for him. But they don’t ask about us: we have been locked up in this place for months, for years. How has the tennis world reacted? Like the Australian public, the decision has split opinion. There was already limited sympathy for Djokovic, but the way the announcement has been handled has not been well received. Australia’s world No 1 Ash Barty responded to the Australian Open’s decision to grant him an exemption with this: “It’s a tough one … I know how hard it has been for Australians … but in particular Victorians have had a real rough trot over the last 18 months and two years. I totally understand why they may be frustrated with the decision.” Rafael Nadal, who is currently tied with Djokovic and Roger Federer with 20 career Grand Slam titles, also spoke to reporters on Thursday. He said: “I think if he wanted, he would be playing here in Australia without a problem. He made his own decisions, and everybody is free to take their own decisions. But then there are some consequences.” “Of course, I don’t like the situation that is happening. In some way I feel sorry for him. But at the same time, he knew the conditions since a lot of months ago, so he makes his own decision,” Nadal said.The furious public reaction to what many perceived as special treatment afforded to tennis star Novak Djokovic comes after two years of mounting resentment, fuelled by stories of very wealthy people and celebrities being granted exemptions from coronavirus rules. Djokovic travelled to Australia on Wednesday only to have his visa cancelled on arrival over what the Australian Border Force said was failure to provide appropriate evidence to support his exemption from a requirement to be double vaccinated against Covid. It is not known on what grounds Djokovic, who has previously expressed scepticism about covid vaccines, had sought an exemption. From the beginning of the pandemic in 2020 the refrain of governments asking for public cooperation has been “we are all in this together”, and most Australians took the slogan to heart, dutifully following instructions. Yet people began to see evidence that some of those with wealth and influence did not appear to behave as if they were “in this” with everyone else. Sceptics referred to the unity refrain as “a fantasy narrative” that ignored social inequalities that were, in fact, exacerbated by the crisis. For example, in May 2021, a news story in the Sydney Morning Herald began: “Elite sportspeople and their families are being granted special exemptions to travel into Australia while thousands of citizens remain stranded, sparking claims of unfair treatment for the rich and famous.” The story attracted scores of reader comments complaining of the unfairness of the system, including a number along the lines of: “You don’t become super wealthy so you can hang around in queues with poor people.” Many other stories have been published about people with wealth and influence avoiding lockdowns, quarantine requirements, or vaccine queues. Reactions to these stories indicate a public perception that elites have been enjoying freedoms denied to the vast majority who do not share their privileged status. Resentment is widespread, but how widespread? To find out, we commissioned a national survey of a representative sample of Australian adults. Conducted by Omnipoll in early December 2021, the results shed new light on public beliefs about the fairness of the implementation of Covid-related rules. When we asked whether wealthy people and celebrities found ways to get around Covid lockdown rules, four out of five (80%) agreed, with 40% strongly agreeing and only 12% disagreeing. Younger adults were more likely to agree (87%). We then asked whether it’s OK to use one’s connections to get around Covid lockdown rules. 82% disagreed (66% strongly). Older people (those over 50) are significantly more likely to object to people exploiting their connections (about 90% versus 75% of those under 35). Resentment, the feeling that some people are getting an undeserved advantage, has long been recognised as a powerful political emotion. In recent times, its dangers have received a great deal of attention in the United States. A popular view that elites are getting special treatment can be politically volatile and bring social fracturing, with long-lasting effects. The strong public reaction to Novak Djokovic’s perceived “special treatment” seems to have spooked both the federal and Victorian governments into reversing their positions and taking a harder line. And well they might. Our survey asked Australians whether they feel angry or resentful when wealthy people and celebrities receive special treatment. Four out of five (80%) report that they do feel angry or resentful at times, with 21% feeling it often, 28% sometimes, and 31% occasionally. It has frequently, perhaps too frequently, been said that Australia is an egalitarian society that gives a fair go to all. A leading symbol of that egalitarianism is Australian’s universal healthcare system. Social attitudes research consistently shows strong support for equal access for all when it comes to health services. Public faith in universal access appears to have taken a battering as a result of the elastic application of rules and restrictions during the Covid health crisis. We asked our survey respondents which one of the following two statements better reflects their opinion on the application of rules in general: “In Australia, there’s one rule for the rich and another rule for the rest,” or “Overall, the rules are applied fairly in Australia.” 51% chose the first and 37% nominated the second, while 12% couldn’t say. Male, university-educated, fully employed people with higher incomes living in capital cities are somewhat more likely to believe that, overall, the rules are applied fairly in Australia. In other words, those who are beneficiaries of the system are somewhat more likely to say the rules are applied fairly, while women, lower-income people and those who did not go to university are more inclined to believe that there’s one rule for the rich and another rule for the rest. The Djokovic case has again brought this resentment to the surface, and it appears to cross political and demographic boundaries. A typical reader response to reports of the exemption was, “This is an absolute insult to every single vaccinated person in Australia.” Comments and polls in several major news outlets suggest overwhelming support for the cancellation of Djokovic’s visa. When Australians are struggling to get through hard times, it’s galling for a wealthy sports star to be exempted from the country’s vaccination rules – more so for the many Australians still separated from loved ones abroad due to vaccination-based visa regulations. Resentment, perhaps “the dominant mood of our age,” can have corrosive political effects. If the pathway out of the pandemic depends on the commitment of Australians to the collective enterprise, then perceptions that a wealthy few are exempted from the rules can only erode personal commitment to the public good. Governments seen to sanction violations of the social contract can expect to be punished at polling time. Tin ears lose elections. Clive Hamilton is professor of public ethics, Charles Sturt University in Canberra Myra Hamilton is an associate professor at the Centre of Excellence in Population Ageing Research, University of SydneyA “technical glitch” has forced the mass cancellation of children’s vaccinations at two vaccine hubs in New South Wales, prompting an apology from the state government, while notifications of shipment delays to general practitioners have caused chaos at a number of clinics. The rollout of the vaccine to children aged five to 11 is due to start on Monday but is facing early problems including low dose allocations for vaccine providers, a reduced health workforce due to Covid cases, booking problems, and delivery issues. Guardian Australia can reveal that two vaccination hubs in Sydney – at Mona Vale and Royal North Shore hospitals – were erroneously listed for weeks on NSW’s vaccine booking website as being available for appointments for children’s vaccinations. Mona Vale was listed on the government’s website as “Mona Vale Hospital Vaccination Hub KIDS Pfizer” and allowed users to book appointments for “First” and “Second Dose of Paediatric Pfizer”. Parents booked in their children at the two hubs as far back as December but were contacted this week and told their appointments had been cancelled. The hubs, they were told, were not actually vaccinating children. That forced families into a scramble to secure a booking prior to the return to school – a difficult prospect given the heightened demand and short time window. In a statement to the Guardian on Friday, NSW Health apologised for the error, which had been fixed. “Any family who booked at either clinic is being offered a priority appointment at Hornsby, as close to their child’s original booking date and time as possible,” a spokesperson said. “NSW Health apologises sincerely for any inconvenience and encourages parents to please book their children in for a vaccination as soon as possible.” The state government encouraged families affected by the error to book at Hornsby hospital, which had “ample supply” of the Pfizer paediatric vaccine. One of those affected was Prof Alexandra Martiniuk, an epidemiologist at the University of Sydney, who booked in two of her children at Mona Vale at the earliest opportunity last month. “We are in a chaotic state, we all know that, with Omicron, on so many fronts, and this is one more front,” she said. “But the thing is we knew child vaccinations were coming – we’ve known it for months.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Meanwhile, general practitioners are facing their own last-minute difficulties ahead of the rollout’s commencement on Monday. Just before Christmas, a number of GP clinics were told that deliveries scheduled to arrive this week have been delayed for some clinics until sometime next week. That forced clinics to cancel bookings made for the first days of the rollout. Dr Elysia Thornton-Benko, a GP with Bondi Road Doctors, said her clinic received an email from the federal government’s vaccine operations centre on 23 December, advising that the first shipments would be delayed until sometime next week due to “unprecedented demand”. She said that had forced the clinic to cancel bookings made in the expectation shipments would arrive on time. “It’s really hard when you’ve already made bookings. Our practice and multiple other practices received that email on 23 December, so they were scrambling around, moving bookings on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, trying to sort things out, not actually knowing when the shipment was going to arrive,” Thornton-Benko said. Its affiliate practice, East Sydney Doctors in Darlinghurst, received the same message and had to cancel appointments. “Parents are frustrated, because they’re wondering why they’ve been told it starts on the 10th, and then they don’t understand why they have to be cancelled and moved around,” Thornton-Benko said. “They’re concerned because the return to school is looming.” The Sydney Morning Herald also reported that The Children’s Doctor at Castle Hill and Doctors on Darling in Balmain received the same email delaying their shipments. Later on Friday, Thornton-Benko said she had learned some clinics that had received the 23 December email had received their shipments on Friday afternoon, without the delay. Her clinic’s shipment arrived unexpectedly late Friday. That required her clinic to make more amendments to bookings but at least gave hope that vaccinations could begin on 10 January. The Guardian asked the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, about the issue on Thursday. In response, a spokesperson slammed the media for attempting to publish “unverified claims” about delivery delays and denied any such problems existed. “Operation Covid Shield advises all orders are on track to be delivered as scheduled and advised to providers,” a spokesperson said. The email from the commonwealth’s vaccine operations centre told clinics: “Due to unprecedented demand for the new paediatric formulation of Pfizer and orders to support booster doses, your delivery will arrive early in the week commencing 10 January.” A spokesperson for Greg Hunt’s office said: “All orders are on track to be delivered as confirmed last month when the order was placed.” The spokesperson said the delivery to Bondi Road Doctors delivery “was due this week is being made today” and that the delivery to East Sydney doctors was scheduled next week and was being made next week. “As the orders are being delivered on the confirmed day, there should be no reason for bookings to be cancelled, indeed hundreds of thousands of bookings have already been made,” the spokesperson said.The US Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has warned of an increase in extremist content and threats against US lawmakers in the days leading up to the anniversary of the 6 January insurrection, according to a memo obtained by the Guardian. The memo, sent on Thursday to state and local law enforcement, said that DHS had no indication of a specific and credible plot, but that the agency and the FBI had “identified new content online that could inspire violence, particularly by lone offenders, and could be directed against political and other government officials, including members of Congress, state and local officials, and high-profile members of political parties, including in locations outside of [Washington DC]”. John Cohen, the head of DHS’s office of intelligence and analysis, outlined a range of content on “extremist related platforms” that was concerning. In one instance, an “unknown individual” posted a video online listing 95 members of Congress who, the video claimed, were involved in voting to certify the “fraudulent” presidential election, echoing far-right misinformation that has spread since last year. The video called for the Congress members to be hanged in front of the White House and was posted on a forum that hosts QAnon conspiracy theories and was reposted by Telegram users and on blogs. The video was viewed more than 60,000 times across platforms, the memo said. Cohen also warned of a separate posting that referenced 6 January “as an appropriate day to conduct assassinations against named Democratic political figures, including [the president], because of the perceived fraudulent election”. The US Secret Service, the Capitol police and the DC Metropolitan police agencies were aware of the online activity and have initiated investigations “as appropriate”, Cohen wrote in the memo, adding that the Federal Protective Service had also expanded patrols in and around federal facilities across the US. The memo comes amid reports of a sharp rise in threats against lawmakers over the last year. DHS had recently warned that the US was facing a heightened threat environment across the country, as threat actors “continue to exploit online forums to influence and spread violent extremist narratives and promote violent activity”. The agency said it would continue to monitor the uptick in threats in the coming days. After federal authorities were criticized last year for failing to act on warning signs on social media before the 6 January attack, DHS established a new domestic terrorism branch in its intelligence office, which has been focused on expanded tracking of online threats. Earlier on Thursday, Joe Biden denounced Donald Trump for spreading a “web of lies” about the 2020 election and accused Trump and his allies of holding a “dagger at the throat of American democracy”.They thought it couldn’t happen here. But so did many other nations before America. Walking the halls of the snowbound US Capitol on Thursday afternoon, a year to the hour since it was breached by a fascist impulse, it was hard to imagine the mob running riot – pummeling police, flaunting the Confederate flag and abusing a Black officer with the N-word. But yes, it did happen here. The cathedral of American democracy was scarcely attended and hauntingly hushed for the anniversary, in part because the coronavirus is rampant in Washington. Walk up a staircase and you might see a solitary reporter fetching coffee. Turn down a marbled corridor and you might spot a lone Capitol police officer – was he among those that fought and bled that day? Republicans were particularly hard to find, their absence illustrating the radically different interpretations of what happened on 6 January 2021, or as one headline put it, “a national day of infamy, half remembered”. It was clear that America could not decide whether this was a political scrap or a national tragedy, a moment for angry polarisation or unified mourning. It did not feel like catharsis. The vice-president, Kamala Harris, kicked it off just after 9am by pointing to “dates that occupy not only a place on our calendars, but a place in our collective memory”, citing 7 December 1941, 11 September 2001 – and 6 January 2021. But whereas the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor brought Americans together to fight the second world war, and the terrorist strikes on New York and Washington conjured rare solidarity, the deadly siege of the Capitol turns out to be just another wedge in the divided states of America. And unlike those previous calamities, the more than 220-year-old Capitol bears few visible scars of the day that windows were smashed, congressional offices ransacked and faeces left on the floor. Without a tangible reminder, it is easier to deny reality or forget. Instead, the scars are psychological and institutional; the bleeding is internal. Harris was followed by Joe Biden, whose barnstorming speech offered his most vivid critique yet of his predecessor Donald Trump’s big lie about the 2020 election and incitement of the mob. It was an I-don’t-negotiate-with-terrorists epiphany for the president about the limits of bipartisanship. “I did not seek this fight brought to this Capitol one year ago today, but I will not shrink from it either,” said Biden, unexpectedly at 79 discovering his inner Henry V and previewing his 2024 election campaign. “I will stand in this breach. I will defend this nation. And I will allow no one to place a dagger at the throat of our democracy.” But it was the details of that day – the sound of gunfire, the narrow escapes, the messages to loved ones – that struck a chord and stuck. They were bulwarks against the attempts to rewrite history and supplant it with a false narrative. These details were recalled by senators speaking in the chamber that had been overrun by the rioters such as Jacob Chansley who, wearing a horned headdress and carrying a six-foot spear, scaled the dais and took the seat that Mike Pence had occupied an hour earlier, proclaiming, “Mike Pence is a fucking traitor” and writing, “It’s Only A Matter of Time. Justice Is Coming!” There was Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, who had only been in the chamber for 45 minutes, watching the start of the counting of ballots, when an armed police officer in a big flak jacket grabbed him firmly by the collar. “I’ll never forget that grip.” he said. “And said to me, ‘Senator, we got to get out of here, you’re in danger.’” Schumer was within 30ft of “these nasty, racist, bigoted insurrectionists”, he recounted. “Had someone had a gun, had two of them blocked off the door, who knows what would have happened. I was told later that one of them reportedly said, ‘There’s the big Jew. Let’s get him.’ Bigotry against one is bigotry against all.” Senator Amy Klobuchar also had indelible memories of being evacuated from the chamber. “I remember the words of one staff member who yelled out, ‘Take the boxes. Take the boxes.’ She was talking about the mahogany boxes that were filled with the electoral ballots, because we knew they would be destroyed if they were left behind.” She remembered how her staff hid in a closet with only forks to protect themselves, next to the doors where the insurrectionists had invaded. She remembered the cuts on the faces of police officers. And she remembered officer Harry Dunn, who was called the N-word multiple times, looked at his friend as they collapsed in the Rotunda and asked, “Is this America? Is this America?” Over in the House of Representatives, where 20 members had to take cover in the gallery that day, Speaker Nancy Pelosi presided over a moment of silence. Tellingly, there were only two Republicans on the floor: the former vice-president Dick Cheney and his daughter, congresswoman Liz Cheney, dying embers of the party’s anti-Trump resistance. Dick Cheney said in a statement that he is “deeply disappointed at the failure of many members of my party to recognize the grave nature of the January 6 attacks and the ongoing threat to our nation”. That failure was manifest in the decision of Republican leaders Mitch McConnell and Kevin McCarthy to stay well away from Washington. Minority whip Steve Scalise’s office did have a sign that said, “Thank you, US Capitol police heroes”, but it opened to reveal a staffer and a TV showing replays of the riot, but no sign of the congressman himself. Trump had cancelled a press conference but there were two Republicans who could not resist the limelight. In a tiny room (for which they inevitably blamed Pelosi), Trump acolytes Matt Gaetz and Marjorie Taylor Greene spun baseless conspiracy theories about FBI involvement in the deadly attack. Gaetz insisted: “We did not want the Republican voice to go unheard today.” Greene played the all too familiar whataboutism card. Don’t forget, she said, that Senator Bernie Sanders thinks the 2016 Democratic primary was stolen from him, and Hillary Clinton thinks the 2016 general election was stolen from her. “If Democrats cared about riots, they would have cared about the Antifa-BLM riots all over the country in 2020.” When one reporter challenged Gaetz about Biden’s memorable image of a dagger being held at the throat of democracy, the Florida congressman insisted: “We are here to vindicate our democracy.” That is the twist: the mass delusion behind Trump’s big lie is that his followers believe they are saving democracy rather than destroying it. Republicans are imposing voter restriction laws and seeking to put Trump loyalists in charge of running elections. The next assault on the republic is unlikely to be as clumsy or crude as 6 January. Thursday’s commemorations ended with a prayer vigil on the US Capitol steps. Two decades ago on 9/11, Democrats and Republicans stood side by side here and sang God Bless America. This time, holding candles and wearing masks as the US marine band played, Democrats again stood and sang God Bless America. This time, there were no Republicans.Mariah Bell delivered a dazzling short program at the US figure skating championships on Thursday night, putting her in position to not only earn her first national title but also her first spot on an Olympic team. The 25-year-old Bell landed the triple flip-triple toe loop that had been causing her problems all week in practice, and then ramped up the energy inside frigid Bridgestone Arena. By the time she spun to a finish, Bell had her coach Adam Rippon leaping in the air and the masked fans circling the ice standing in ovation. Bell’s score of 75.55 points put her one point ahead of Karen Chen, the 2017 champion and 2018 Olympian, and more than four points ahead of two-time champion Alysa Liu, who is also aiming for her first spot on an Olympic team and has won two US titles. Should Bell make it, she would become the oldest US Olympic women’s singles skater in 94 years. Earlier in the day, Ashley Cain-Gribble and Timothy LeDuc upstaged a brilliant performance by Jessica Calalang and Brian Johnson to take the lead after the pairs short program. Audrey Lu and Misha Mitrofanov are in third place. Bell was the silver medalist in 2020 and twice has earned bronze at nationals, but her flawless technical routine and strong performance in Nashville put her in Friday night’s free skate with a strong shot at the top step of the podium. She knew it, too, smiling ear to ear after landing her triple lutz and pumping her fist after her final spin. “Honestly, I’m just so happy to be here. I’m so fortunate I get to skate in front of people and so much of my family is here,” Bell said. “I had chills. I just feel extremely grateful right now.” Chen was next on the ice and put together a performance nearly as good. She landed a triple lutz-triple toe loop right at the start, breezed through a double axel and landed a perfect triple loop to score 74.55 for her short program. Hard to believe it was the same skater who, dragged down by injuries, nearly retired two years ago. Liu, 16, didn’t do anything to harm her chances of competing in Beijing next month, though a fall on her opening triple axel left her playing catch-up. She rallied to land her triple lutz-triple toe loop and is well within range of one of the three spots that the US women have for Beijing. The biggest ovation might have come for crowd favorite Gracie Gold, whose well-known story of overcoming anxiety and an eating disorder has been an inspiration for so many. She buried her face in her hands at the finish to prevent the crowd from seeing what she called her “ugly cry”, but she was all smiles when her score of 67.61 was posted. Gold is sixth heading into Friday night’s free skate. Cain-Gribble and LeDuc, skating last among the eight teams at Bridgestone Arena, were near-flawless in their pairs program set to music from the 2018 biographical drama film The White Crow. It was highlighted by a soaring triple loop and net 79.39 points, a score that would have been third best in the world during the Grand Prix season. More importantly, it put the 2019 national champions in first place heading into Saturday’s free skate. “Without giving away too much of what works for us away, we’ve prepared in every way possible to be prepared for anything that could happen,” Cain-Gribble said. “We set ourselves up in practice to not be surprised by anything.” Even the performance of their lives. “We said at the end, ‘Check that off,’” Cain-Gribble said, “and move forward.” The US has two pairs spots for the Beijing Games, and one of those could go to defending US champions Alexa Knierim and Brandon Frazier. They were forced withdraw Wednesday night following his positive Covd-19 test, but they plan to petition US Figure Skating for one of the spots based on their exemplary scope of work. If they are successful, that would leave just one spot up for grabs. “Every day is a new day,” Johnson said. “Go out there, enjoy, have fun and whatever happens, happens.”Beijing has fined and issued a warning to 7-Eleven over its website listing Taiwan as a country and displaying maps it said contained erroneous borders for Xinjiang and Tibet. The Beijing municipal government fined the company 50,000 yuan ($7,842) for the “errors” including “wrongful act of assigning Taiwan province as an independent country”. It said the 7-Eleven website also failed to use China’s names for some disputed islands in the South China Sea, including the Japanese-administered Senkakus which China calls the Diaoyu islands. The punishment was issued in December, but was first reported on Friday by Asia Nikkei. The convenience store chain is prolific across Asia, and the Beijing stores are owned by a domestic outpost of Seven-Eleven Japan, a subsidiary of Japanese firm 7 &amp; i Holdings. The Chinese government claims Taiwan as a province and is hypersensitive to any act or reference which appears to support Taiwan’s position that it is a sovereign nation. High profile instances in recent years have sparked nationalistic backlash and boycotts, which have in turn prompted some profuse apologies. In May, John Cena, a co-star of blockbuster film Fast &amp; Furious 9, uploaded a filmed apology given in Mandarin for any offence caused to Chinese people after he referred to Taiwan as a country while promoting the film. According to Nikkei Asia, Seven &amp; i Holdings acknowledged the complaint and said it would “do our best to prevent a recurrence”. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu“Technically, I would guess that 80% of people are criminals according to that law since most of us have downloaded porn before, or if you’ve ever sent a dirty pic to your partner, that too is a crime.” One OnlyFans content creator, who goes by the online handle LucyToday, is among the many in Singapore who fear what the future holds after police decided to charge fellow creator and influencer Titus Low Kaide with transmitting what the police alleged were “obscene materials”. It is the first time an OnlyFans creator has faced prosecution in Singapore for sharing such content via the platform, according to local media. It’s had a chilling effect on the OnlyFans community, says LucyToday, whose posts include nude images and those of a sexual nature. “Myself and other content creators are worried.” OnlyFans is a content subscription service that allows creators to post original material of any genre – including music, art, food as well as adult content – while fans pay a monthly subscription to access it. Launched in 2016, it has more than 150 million registered users, some of whom were part of an influx seen amid the pandemic as people looked for alternative ways to make money. Lucy was posting similar content on other sites free but joined OnlyFans in August last year to monetise it. She says she’ll continue to use the platform for now, hoping the government will change its “outdated and draconian laws”. Jadasaur, a content creator from Canada who previously lived in Singapore, fears the stance taken by authorities could cut off a significant income stream for many users. She joined OnlyFans at the start of the pandemic and says the income from posting nude photos and sexting will help put her through acting school. “It’s super scary because I think a lot of people are going to stop making OnlyFans content,” she says, adding that others might take steps to hide their identities on the site to avoid prosecution. Jadasaur wonders if the reason Low, 22, was targeted when many others use the site is because of his creation of “guy-on-guy content”. Homosexuality remains illegal in Singapore. A matter of consent Low faced a district court on 30 December last year, charged under the country’s Penal Code and Criminal Procedure Code, which makes it illegal to transmit any obscene materials by electronic means. He was accused of sharing explicit photos and videos as well as failing to comply with a police order not to access his account. If found guilty, Low could face prison time as well as multiple fines. In a video posted to his YouTube on Thursday, Low described his initial arrest, saying five police officers turned up at his house and confiscated his phone and all his online details. OnlyFans was his main source of income before the investigation, he says, and that it helped him escape a difficult background. Without that income, he says he’s in “a tight spot”. Low doesn’t know who filed the police report that led to the the charges but hopes the incident will “get people thinking about how inclusive our society is in 2022”. Some, including Low, have questioned the premise of the charges. “We don’t force you to watch our content,” Low says. “It’s not open for public consumption.” “I create specific content for specific adults. We are both willing buyer and seller,” he adds. Shailey Hingorani, head of research and advocacy at women’s rights and gender equality group Aware, agrees, given the images were being shared consensually. “An informed and enthusiastic exchange is taking place, and nobody is being hurt,” she says. During the next Penal Code review, Hingorani suggests “laws pertaining to sexual activity of any nature should be relooked at to keep up with society and technology, with the principle of consent as a basis to determine legality.” Until then, Project X, a nonprofit supporting sex workers in Singapore, says the move “has struck fear and panic in many adult content creators, who now worry that their livelihoods will be completely upended and their personal liberty threatened.”Fred Chin fumbles with the combination lock on an old metal gate, the bright turquoise marred by rust spots and grime. On the other side is a long dark corridor and rows of cells. It was here that Chin was detained, tried and sentenced to 12 years in an offshore jail by the totalitarian regime that ruled Taiwan for almost 40 years. “In one and a half years I left this room four times,” says the now 72-year-old, gesturing to the whitewashed walls. “Three times for court, and the last time when I was sent to Green Island. 365 days a year, 24 hours a day, the door was closed.” Taiwan transitioned to a democracy in the late 1980s and is now one of Asia’s freest and most vibrant, but it is still reckoning with its history – still very much in living memory – and how to remember the man who oversaw it. Chin is a survivor of the White Terror period, the decades of martial law under Kuomintang (KMT) leader Chiang Kai-shek and his son. It began in 1947 with tens of thousands of civilians massacred for protesting against his rule, in what is now known as the 228 Incident. By the time it ended in 1987, it was estimated that as many as 140,000 people had been imprisoned and another 3,000-4,000 executed for actual or perceived opposition to the KMT. Chiang’s legacy is complicated. Some in Taiwan – even those who suffered directly – say he wasn’t all bad, and that successes like leading Taiwan to prosperity, and fighting the Japanese and the Chinese communists, must be weighed against his crimes. “A lot of Taiwanese people still pay their respect to this particular person,” says Chin. “We didn’t deny he’d done something wrong, and you can’t deny that he also has done something good.” In 2018 the DPP-led government established the transitional justice commission to investigate the decades of KMT acts against its people and work towards redress. A major focus of current discussions are thousands of Chiang statues across Taiwan, especially the island’s biggest at the generalissimo’s eponymous memorial park in the capital, Taipei. The 25-hectare park contains a huge open square, manicured gardens and two palatial performance halls, but its centrepiece is a towering monument housing a seated statue of Chiang more than six metres high, under guard. In September the commission formally proposed removing the giant statue, in a move “dismissing the legitimacy of the authoritarian rule and remembering historical lessons”. But it only fuelled division. The Kuomintang opposition – the party of Chiang which has taken steps to atone for its history – likened its potential destruction to the buddhas of Bamiyan, and the DPP to the Taliban. Some want the statue torn down, saying the reverential context is painful to the survivors and families of White Terror victims. Others, like Chin, say to destroy it is to forget history. “If you demolish everything, people can make no comparisons, people can’t know how or why the Taiwanese people hate him, why many people still adore him,” he says. Yang Zhenlong, chief executive of the 228 Memorial Foundation, established to support victims and families, suggests adding in statues of other Taiwanese leaders, to dilute the impact. His grandfather, father and uncle were killed during the White Terror and he says the park in its current form pains him. But he recognises that it is not straightforward. He says by western standards there is no doubt Chiang was the symbol of authoritarianism in Taiwan, even a murderer. “But people always fear to face the truth so they’ll find some excuse for themselves,” says Yang, while adding the debate “isn’t a bad thing” and is an opportunity to find common ground. One potential solution is a picturesque park surrounding Chiang’s mausoleum in Taoyuan, incongruously home to hundreds of stone and plaster Chiangs gradually relocated from across Taiwan. At the popular attraction, tourists amble around a lakeside path, lined with Chiang busts, and stop to examine groups of larger Chiangs, different colours and sizes but all smiling, positioned so they appear to be chatting with each other. Huang Kwei-bo, a professor of diplomacy at the National Chengchi University, says the statue should not be removed until Chiang’s legacy is reviewed “in a fair and balanced way”. Huang, who is a former deputy director of the modern KMT, says the DPP government’s transitional justice process is overly focused on Chiang for “political gain”. He questions why Chiang is such a big focus of the process compared with 50 years of brutal Japanese colonial rule prior to the KMT. The commission’s Yeh Hung-ling told Taiwan Plus in November that there were many ideas for what to do with the memorial hall but “the main point is that it needs to be transformed”. The government, which will make a decision on the commission’s recommendation in April, does not appear to be in a hurry. Culture minister Lee Yung-te told reporters last year that “what to do with the statues isn’t the top priority”. In the meantime, the reckoning continues. Chin now volunteers as a guide in the military court complex where he was held, converted in 1997 into the Jing-mei White Terror Memorial park and museum. “Our dredging of our stories, publicly … the main purpose is to let the younger generations learn from the history so they can know what they want from the future and what, if they neglect it, could happen to them,” he says.March 2020 seems like an age ago. And also like it was yesterday. The month begun more or less like any other March in New Zealand. The weather was typically warm and dry, most people were back in the office or on site, and parliament was sitting after its generous summer recess. In most respects you could mistake March 2020 for March 2019. Except, on 4 March, the country recorded its second coronavirus case after a woman returning from northern Italy, where this strange virus had taken hold, presented with the infection at the border. The number of infections increased again and again as the month unfolded with 647 come 1 April. In the early days of March, government advisers and prime minister Jacinda Ardern were aiming, like the rest of the world, for either “herd immunity” or “flattening the curve”. But when the government’s chief science adviser presented advice on precisely what this meant for the health system – a quick collapse, essentially – Ardern went for the approach her advisers at the universities of Otago and Auckland were advocating: elimination. On 25 March the prime minister made her way to parliament’s debating chamber and in a historic speech announced a national state of emergency and a move to an alert level 4 lockdown. The speech helped generate unprecedented national solidarity. More importantly, the lockdown announced didn’t just flatten the curve. It absolutely smashed it. But in 2022, as Omicron threatens to wreak as much, if not more, damage than any previous Covid-19 variant ever could have, the lockdown course of action is probably off the table. That seems counterintuitive. But 2022 is (obviously) a different year. Shortsighted business owners in Auckland are unlikely to tolerate another round of restricted trading or slightly slower supply chains. Pathetic anti-vaxxer activists are more organised than ever before, corralling the tiny rump of unvaccinated New Zealanders in a way that makes them appear more significant than their numbers justify. And some segments of the media continue to platform anti-science, anti-lockdown views. With the lockdown option probably off the table, New Zealand is likely to catch up with the rest of the world. When the Omicron outbreak happens, the health system will begin buckling under the pressure of Covid-19 admissions and politics will become increasingly polarised after two years of near consensus. When the first lockdown happened, activists and political commentators were arguing that things couldn’t go back to how they were. The prime minister had implemented a successful wage subsidy, helping keep thousands of people in work, a freeze on rent increases was implemented, and the government brought forward millions in infrastructure investment. This was a social democratic programme that many people wanted to stay. Why? Because it worked. New Zealand enjoyed exceptional GDP growth, historically low unemployment levels, and a year like any other. Schools and businesses were open, concerts and mass gatherings were happening, and people were generally happy with their lot. But underneath this apparent success story were the same inequalities as before. House prices were still through the roof, defying policies aimed at slowing their growth. The house market is now worth far more than the country’s annual GDP with that wealth accumulating overwhelmingly in the hands of baby boomers. Uncharacteristically high inflation is also eating away at the purchasing power (and the already minimal savings) of the working and middle classes. This brings us to perhaps the good news for 2022. The government can no longer ignore the inequality crisis. The prime minister, who in one of her historic mistakes, ruled out a capital gains tax in 2019, must now implement other policies to arrest house price rises. The central bank must grab inflation by the neck. And historically low unemployment must translate to wage growth, perhaps with the assistance of the government’s Fair Pay Agreement (FPA) legislation. Under FPA’s, an industry-wide floor will be set for wages and conditions – meaning, for example, that supermarket or security workers must be paid at a minimum level. When this legislation passes in late 2022 it will have wide reaching effects, including making housing more affordable for previously underpaid workers and helping offset some of the worst impacts of relatively high inflation. And so in a social and political sense, 2022 has much to commend it. But in a health sense it is, of course, scary. It’s difficult to predict what an Omicron outbreak might bring. But we can take some comfort in that the government and New Zealanders have eliminated outbreaks before. We’re tantalisingly close to eliminating the recent Delta outbreak. And because of this, we’re more cognisant of the inequalities each outbreak exposes. Now, we must tackle those inequalities before Omicron makes them any worse.Due to the unseasonably mild temperatures we’ve been experiencing, hedgehogs are still sporadically visiting the garden feeding station, and it’s not unusual to find a variety of other creatures sheltering inside – the odd blood-engorged tick that has dropped off its hedgehog host, rabbit hutch spiders (Steatoda bipunctata), garden (Arion hortensis) and leopard (Limax maximus) slugs, and several species of woodlouse. Common rough woodlice (Porcellio scaber) are most prevalent. There are usually a dozen or more congregating in the damp crevices between the lid and walls, or searching for food – while their diet consists largely of decomposing plant material, they are also partial to biscuit crumbs, hedgehog faeces and the degrading chipboard floor. As I opened the box one evening, a horde of woodlice erupted, cascading down the walls and scrambling over each other as they fled from the light. Clusters of 2mm-long white juveniles surrounded several of the light grey, dimple-backed adults. Females breed up to three times a year, producing between 12 and 36 eggs. They hatch their offspring in a marsupium – a brood pouch similar to that of a kangaroo. Juveniles emerge after their first moult, but remain with their mother for several months, until they reach maturity. As terrestrial isopods don’t have a waxy cuticle, they are susceptible to drying out, particularly the vulnerable young. Research suggests that aggregation is a mechanism of resistance to desiccation, reducing the rate of water loss due to a decrease in the surface area/volume ratio of the group. A faint scent reminiscent of rotting fish and stale sweat emanated from the colony. Woodlice don’t urinate; instead they excrete waste through their exoskeleton in the form of ammonia gas, and it’s this unpleasant odour that inspired vernacular names including stinky pigs, pissibeds, pishamares, and cheesy bugs/bobs. While most of the woodlice retreated, a few individuals froze. As I set down the food bowl, I gently nudged them out of the way. Rather than relying on their armour-plated shells for protection, they rolled on to their backs and played dead. Once they had determined that the danger had passed, they flailed their 14 legs, flipped over, and scurried into the shadows. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryGB News was accused of prejudicing the trial of the Colston Four after it published opinion pieces criticising the defendants midway through court proceedings. The rightwing news channel was summoned to Bristol crown court halfway through the trial in relation to an article and video monologue by the presenter Mercy Muroki titled “I’m in favour of white people calling out racism … but the Colston saga reeks of white guilt”. In the piece Muroki commented on the ongoing trial and suggested that Bristol council and local police officers might have colluded with a “bunch of anarchic protesters” to tear down the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston. She added: “I don’t need a bunch of white hippies crippled by white guilt to throw a largely irrelevant statue in a river to prove they’re not racist.” Although journalists can report on most court proceedings, there are tough legal restrictions on what the media can publish before the end of a trial in case it prejudices the jury. At a hearing on 23 December – which can only now be reported – Judge Peter Blair QC considered whether GB News’ decision to air the monologue constituted contempt of court. “The most pressing matter from my court’s perspective is to ensure that the safety of my trial process is maintained and that I don’t have the risk of jurors coming across this sort of material and the trial being prejudiced by them being influenced,” he said. The judge read out GB News’ editorial guidelines in court and expressed dismay at Muroki’s opinion piece, saying: “I am struggling to see how, as in GB News’ charter, that this article is ‘respectful’ or ‘sets an example by treating others in a way that they would wish to be treated’.” However, the judge ultimately decided not to pursue a contempt of court charge. The four defendants – Rhian Graham, 30, Milo Ponsford, 26, Sage Willoughby, 22, and Jake Skuse, 33 – had argued GB News had created a substantial risk of serious prejudice by publishing the material. Graham’s lawyer Blinne Ní Ghrálaigh argued the GB News monologue “pours scorn on the defendants and it pours scorn on my client in particular”. She said the decision to publish the article during an active trial was “not only contempt, it is entirely uninformed contempt based on fundamental ignorance of what has occurred in these proceedings”. GB News’ representative, Claire Overman, told the court there had been a “breakdown in communication” at GB News on the day the article and video was published. She said the senior producer on duty at the channel only had a few minutes to look at it while also reviewing other on-air content. “[The staff member] accepts that by any view on his part he did not appreciate the concern arising from the contents in the time he had,” she said. She added that GB News had put in place “immediate steps to ensure something like this does not happen again” and would send its staff on media law training to ensure they understand contempt of court law. A local blog called Alternative Bristol was also separately summoned to court for a potential contempt of court during the trial. They were let off with a warning after apologetically telling the judge they were “more a group of activists than journalists” and in any case “the site only has about 150 hits a day”. In a statement, Judge Blair said he had decided not refer GB News to the attorney general over the potential contempt of court: “The swift response of GB News in seeking to remedy the position when my concerns came to their attention, the promise of undertaking further focused training of journalists on matters of ‘contempt of court’ and their frank acknowledgment of their errors are, in my view, sufficient and proportionate steps to reflect their culpability on this occasion.” All four defendants in the case were found not guilty of causing criminal damage by the jury on Wednesday afternoon. • This article was amended on 14 January 2022 to clarify that it was a senior producer not a duty lawyer who had the job of reviewing the content before publication.Ah, the heady 00s heyday of the Wag. This was the decade when football players’ wives and girlfriends outshone their pig’s bladder-kicking partners. The golden era of Victoria Beckham, Cheryl Tweedy, Coleen Rooney, Louise Redknapp and their pouting, perma-tanned pals. They shopped hard, they partied harder, they were somehow blamed when England lost. And maybe it was all inspired by one infamous TV drama. Riding high from the ratings success of its schlocky prison series Bad Girls, production company Shed – co-founded by Corrie alumni – decided to bring a bit of filth to the beautiful game. Glossy ITV romp Footballers’ Wives debuted 20 years ago this weekend, and instantly became a seminal slice of TV trash. Early scripts were loosely based on Footballers’ Wives Tell Their Tales, a book of candid interviews by Shelley Webb, the wife of former Manchester United and England midfielder Neil. Except the resulting TV show was so salaciously over the top it made its source material look like Enid Blyton by comparison. It shot. It scored. It celebrated with a fishbowl cocktail and a lapdance. Gaudily glamorous, shamelessly steamy and knowingly camp, Footballers’ Wives was modelled on 80s US supersoaps Dallas and Dynasty. Its scheming anti-heroine Tanya Turner (a role written with actor Zöe Lucker in mind) was JR Ewing and Alexis Colby rolled into one bodycon-frocked, bling-draped package. Set at the fictional Premier League club Earls Park FC, nicknamed Sparks, the story initially focused on three contrasting couples. First came the sweet, sympathetic pair: new Sparks signing Ian Walmsley (Nathan Constance) struggled to find his feet in the first XI, while his wife, Donna (Katherine Monaghan), tried to track down the child they were forced to give up for adoption in their teens. Next came the Posh-and-Becks avatars. Gloriously named glamour model Chardonnay Lane (Susie Amy) and resident heart-throb Kyle Pascoe (Gary Lucy) were busy planning their Snow White-themed wedding – a fairytale bonanza of bad taste with matching pink thrones, sponsored by a glossy magazine. Remind you of anyone? However, the most compelling couple by far were villainous team captain Jason Turner (Christian Solimeno) and his wife, Tanya, AKA Lady Macbeth in a mock-Tudor mansion. This alpha tigress sashayed across the screen with her peroxide power-bob, trademark long talons and rattling jewellery, ruthlessly plotting her way to the top. Lucker admitted she based her portrayal not on any specific real-life Wag but on Sharon Stone’s performance as gangster’s moll Ginger in Martin Scorsese’s Casino. The production’s makeup artist apparently went through 22 tubes of mascara per series on Tanya alone. Action unfolded in boardrooms and bedrooms, rather than on the boring old football pitch. Outrageous plotlines took in child kidnapping, cocaine-snorting, psychotic stalkers, sexually abusive nurses, deadly drunken brawls, megabucks match-fixing and high-profile court cases. And you thought the “Wagatha Christie” scandal was daft. Kyle’s meddling mother, Jackie (ageless EastEnders stalwart Gillian Taylforth), had graphic sex with love rat Jason on a snooker table. Cue insalubrious “potting the pink” headlines and Tanya accusing him of “shagging Old Mother Hubbard”. Series two climaxed with a Who shot JR?-style cliffhanger when Jason fell from a rooftop to his death after an unseen assailant walloped him with (what else?) a champagne bottle. It duly became one of the most talked-about dramas on TV, albeit not always for the right reasons. Ratings reached an impressive 7m. Sky’s long-running but relatively pedestrian soccer drama Dream Team had topped the TV league table until Footballers’ Wives swaggered on to the scene and snapped up all the silverware like a glory-seeking club with a new billionaire owner. Characters lived in Essex mansions with swimming pools and ponies. “We’ve got it, so spend it!” went the wives’ motto. Stadium sequences were filmed at Crystal Palace’s Selhurst Park ground and the now-demolished White Hart Lane, the former home of Tottenham Hotspur. The show’s logo was a glitterball/football hybrid, with the programme title styled as “footballers wive$” – all lower case with no apostrophe, which only irritated the snobs even more. It spawned late-night spin-off Footballers’ Wives: Extra Time and even a mockumentary chatshow, Footballers’ Wives TV. The series was remade in Germany, Italy, the US and Canada (where the sport was tweaked to feature the wives of ice hockey stars). Celebrity cameos added to the in-jokey cheesiness. Among the familiar faces popping up were footballers, obviously (Sol Campbell, David Seaman, Teddy Sheringham) plus a ragtag selection of random C-listers (Katie Price, Peter Stringfellow, Rula Lenska, Peter Andre, Lionel Blair, Tara Palmer-Tomkinson, Richard and Judy). Earls Park started to resemble a provincial panto. From the third series onwards, the action revolved even more around its MVP, the newly widowed Tanya – notably her love triangle with Amber and Conrad Gates, the club’s bisexual new skipper and his violently possessive wife (played by Laila Rouass and Ben Price). The two women had a designer handbag-swinging catfight in clear tribute to Dynasty’s Krystle v Alexis fisticuffs. Shark-eyed players’ agent Hazel Bailey (Alison Newman) arrived to stir up trouble (and sleep with Tanya). Chardonnay died from anorexia. A baby was swapped for another, then smothered by a jealous pet pug. Tanya literally shagged a rich old man to death for money. Between the third and fourth series, the demonic diva “crossed over” into Bad Girls for three episodes after she was jailed for drug possession. Naturally, Tanya soon poisoned her fellow HMP Larkhall inmates and blagged her way out. Casting became a revolving door. Storylines disappeared up their own players’ tunnel (suicide pacts, Chinese Triad gangs and intersex babies ahoy). Viewership dwindled to 3.7m. The final series was graced by former Dynasty super-bitch Joan Collins, one of Tanya’s touchstones, but not even the doyenne of melodrama could halt the ratings slump. The final whistle was blown after five series and 42 episodes. At least it got a suitably ludicrous send-off. The 2006 Sport Relief telethon featured a spoof mini-episode titled The Last Ever, Ever Footballers’ Wives, with Graham Norton playing Earls Park’s latest signing, the tastefully named Brendan Spunk. The show is now regarded as something of a kitsch cult classic, regularly appearing in meme form on social media. A nostalgic fanbase means it does brisk business on streaming service BritBox. There are periodic rumours of a reboot. Its influence can also still be felt today, in the likes of Apple TV+’s breakout hit Ted Lasso – a more comedic, transatlantic take on the same material. Richmond FC and Earls Parks FC are both suburban London teams who wear blue kits. With her blond mane and power-frocks, club owner Rebecca Welton even bears a visual resemblance to Tanya – perhaps inspired by actor Hannah Waddingham’s brief stint on Footballers’ Wives back in the day. Meanwhile, Keeley (Juno Temple), the model girlfriend of coach Roy Kent, is a Wag straight out of the Earls Park VIP lounge. Unlike folksy Coach Lasso and co, Footballers’ Wives might not have bagged Emmys nor Golden Globes. Heck, it barely earned any TV Quick Awards. But it was huge fun while it lasted and now it’s turning 20. We’ll raise a glass of vintage Chardonnay to that.Tilda Swinton is waiting for me when I land at Inverness airport. She’s smiling, and says she’s got a surprise. We head off towards her car, Swinton marching ahead imperiously. In the car there are four springer spaniels in the back and a fifth, the eldest, Rosy, is in the front passenger seat. Last time I interviewed Swinton at home in the Scottish Highlands it was 2008, Rosy was a puppy and she spent the whole time sitting on my knee. Swinton lifts her out of the front passenger seat of the Volvo to make way for me – then plonks her on my knee. In the 14 years since, quite a lot has changed. Rosy has had puppies of her own and become an award-winning film star – at Cannes, she and her sister Dora and grandson Snowbear (both of them sitting in the back with two of Rosy’s puppis, Louie and Dot), won the Palm Dog for their appearances in The Souvenir Part II, the follow-up to Joanna Hogg’s semi-autobiographical coming-of-age drama. As for Swinton, at 61 she is freakishly unchanged – still gorgeous and unearthly; a doppelganger for David Bowie circa 1976. In The Souvenir films, she is the privileged mother of Julie, an aspiring film-maker (Swinton’s daughter Honor Swinton Byrne, giving a lovely guileless performance). In the first film, Julie falls in love with Anthony, a mysterious older man who proves to be a heroin addict and compulsive liar. In the sequel, Julie investigates her former relationship with Anthony while grieving for her lost love. Swinton’s supportive but emotionally repressed mother looks old enough to be Julie’s grandmother. In real life, she could pass as Honor’s rebellious older sister. We’re here to talk about the films, but Swinton doesn’t like interviews and rarely does them. She’d rather chat with journalists than talk at them so she’s planned a road trip to Loch Ness (she lives on the other side of Inverness, in Nairn). It’s weird, she says, how people assume that you have something profound to say just because you’ve been in a few movies. “I don’t have anything to say. I don’t know anything. One thing I do know is I don’t want to even pretend I know anything. So let’s go for a walk with the dogs instead.” Swinton is an extraordinary shape-shifter – smouldering in A Bigger Splash, drab in We Need to Talk About Kevin, ancient in The Grand Budapest Hotel, grotesque in Snowpiercer. As the eponymous Orlando, in Sally Potter’s film, she shifts between sexes and centuries. Perhaps most audacious of all is the distinguished elderly Dr Klemperer in Suspiria. She occupies a unique place in cinema, sprinkling mainstream films with indie credibility, and indie films with mainstream viability. Swinton is the queen of indie-stream. Her films tend to come in batches, often labours of love that take an eternity to realise. Next week Memoria is released, 15 years after it was first discussed by Swinton and the brilliant Thai film-maker Apichatpong Weerasethakul. An eerie meditation about a woman haunted by a sound that only she can hear, Memoria is at times so slow you think you’re looking at a photograph; the next minute you’re jumping out of your seat. It’s like nothing else – a neo-realist, time-travelling thriller that leaves you with a heightened sense of sound and a diminished sense of life’s certainties. It’s 36 years since Swinton made her film debut in Derek Jarman’s Caravaggio. She became Jarman’s muse, and he her mentor. Jarman’s work was experimental, collective and challenging – perfect for the young Swinton, who had no formal training, and felt technically disadvantaged for much of her career. Sometimes Jarman used her more as a model or presence than a conventional actor, which she loved. Swinton certainly never wanted to be a star. “I only ever intended to do one film,” she says. Really? She nods. “I like seeing people for the first time in a film. It’s one of the reasons I love documentary. I love seeing people, I’m not interested in seeing actors at all. And the best way if you’re an actor to avoid that annoyance for the audience is just to do one film; then they’ve seen you, they’ve met you, you were interesting and new and they never have to see you again.” She ended up making nine films with Jarman, and since then has won an Oscar for her dyspeptic lawyer in Michael Clayton and has worked regularly with the world’s most gifted directors – four films each with Jim Jarmusch and Wes Anderson (including the upcoming Asteroid City), on to her third with Joanna Hogg, and two each with Bong Joon-ho and the Coen brothers. She says it’s like having different families, and that working consistently with different people is a way of keeping herself fresh. Last year, the great Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar made his first English-language film – a half-hour, one-woman adaptation of Jean Cocteau’s The Human Voice, starring Swinton. She first met Almodóvar at a pre-Oscar party in 2008. They bonded, she says, because they were outsiders having the time of their lives. “He and I have this lovely long history of meeting at Hollywood events and being the two shy ones – both shy and tickled pink and pinching ourselves and looking forward to telling people at home, but not confident enough to step in and talk to, say, Angelina Jolie.” We reach Loch Ness. Rosy and Dora hobble out of the car to stretch their legs. Neither are up for a full walk, so they get back in the car while Dot, Louie and Snowbear jump out. The air is fresh, the leaves are crunchy, the dogs ecstatic. Katherine Matilda Swinton was born in London to an aristocratic Anglo-Scots military family that can trace its lineage to the middle ages. At 10, she was sent to boarding school; a year ahead of her peer group, she was bullied for her brains and barely talked for five years. She went to Cambridge University with the intention of becoming a poet, then never wrote another poem once she got there. “This is the shame of my life,” she says. “I am a proper capital F failure.” I assume she’s joking, but she means it. “I was supposed to go for one thing and dropped the ball immediately. There is a real dark shame attached to it.” Did she really never write poems again? “Very, very sporadically and privately.” After giving up poetry, she began to perform with fellow students who were more driven than her. It made her feel a fraud. “I was embarrassed about my lack of ambition. As a child, my ambition was always about having a house by the sea, a kitchen garden, children, some dogs and lots of friends. I wanted to make work with friends. It didn’t matter what, it could be a wool shop. Those were my ambitions and they still are, and I just want all of that to keep going.” Why did she find that embarrassing? “Because it felt like such a dilettante thing to want. One of the reasons I say I find it difficult to describe myself as an actor is because at university the first people I met who wanted to be actors were very serious about it and some of them went on to do very well.” One of her peers was Simon Russell Beale. “They were focused and professional, very clear about taking part in a tradition and a profession. I was very aware I was not like that.” For Swinton there is still a link between stopping writing poetry and starting to perform. “I’ve got a hunch that I’ve got to stop performing and then I’ll write again.” She pauses. “Let’s go and have some lunch.” Does she want to stop performing? “Yeah. Oh yeah. I’ve always wanted to stop.” I bet most people would rather have your career than be a poet, I say. “Well, possibly, which makes me even dumber in that I don’t know a good thing when I see it.” We pass a man with three poodles. Swinton stops to chat. Dot starts barking at one of the dogs. “Dot! Don’t use that language!” she chides in disappointed-mother mode. “I’m so sorry,” she says to the poodle owner. This is why Dot is the only one of the five springers not to have a movie career so far, she says. “Dot is a free radical. She’s not inclined to do take after take of anything. She is above all this. She is much too evolved.” As we stroll on, she looks around in awe – at the skyline, the loch, the trees. “This is why I live here.” She opens her arms wide. “Because of this. And to have a blether with a man with some poodles!” She leads me to the Dores Inn on the edge of Loch Ness. Haggis, neeps and tatties for me, five-bean curry for Swinton. She tells me she’s entering a new stage of her life. The twins have now left home – Xavier is working in film props, Honor is in her third year at university in Edinburgh. Over lunch, Swinton talks about how her first family of film will always be the Jarman gang with whom she made nine films in nine years. It was a fantastic time – she made so many friends, discovered so much about herself, lived in a squat in Chelsea’s World’s End, and went on demos every weekend, whether in support of the miners or against clause 28 and the Gulf war. But it also left terrible scars. Like most of her friends back then, she identified as queer, but for Swinton it was more about her place in the universe than her sexuality. “I lived through my 20s in a whole queer environment and it was just at the point when queer was being reclaimed because it had always been a term of abuse. It just so happened I’d also been a queer kid – not in terms of my sexual life, just odd. People said I was queer, like she’s a queer fish.” She had never quite fitted in anywhere, and for the first time she felt she did. But there was a traumatic postscript to the Jarman years. “Derek died in 1994 and that year I went to 43 funerals, all Aids-related deaths. The one person who really understood what I was going through was my grandmother, who lived through two world wars, and she said: ‘This is your generation’s war.’” She mentions Russell T Davies’s It’s a Sin, about a group of young male friends caught in the Aids epidemic. In the series, the character Jill, who lives with the boys, visits them in hospital. She holds their hands as they are dying, a surrogate for absent parents who are ashamed of their children’s illness. “I was that girl,” Swinton says. “That was very much my experience. That was the atmosphere of my late 20s and early 30s. What was so tragic was the breakdown of the blood family support. Lots of people couldn’t go home so they stayed with us and we looked after everyone as best we could.” By the end, London and its association with lost friends became too painful, and she left. “The collective way we lived broke down because of people getting ill and dying or going home or leaving the country. I came up here to the Highlands when my babies were born and never went back. I still find it difficult to go back to London. I can count on three hands the times I’ve spent longer than a night there.” At the same time as the Aids epidemic, British culture was being eviscerated by Thatcherism, she says – a topic that is addressed in The Souvenir Part II. “The way in which films were funded were changed. If you wanted to make a film you had to write five pages of forms saying this is how I can prove my film will make a profit.” At times, the tabloids have depicted Swinton living a life of swinging decadence in the Highlands. The father of her 24-year-old twins is her former partner, the artist and writer John Byrne. Back in 2008, she was the subject of lubricious stories about a menage a trois with Byrne and her artist lover Sandro Kopp, who is 39 years younger than Byrne. The truth was more mundane, Swinton says – she and Byrne had separated but were happily co-parenting, while Kopp was her partner (and remains so today). Over the past decade she has experienced another prolonged period of grief. In 2018, Swinton’s father died, seven years after her mother. “My experience of grief is a kind of emptying,” she says. “All the stories stop, there is no road in front of you. It all just goes black, and it takes a long time to get over it.” Swinton says her brain has also emptied in another scary way. She is still recovering from long Covid. For three weeks in August, she couldn’t get out of bed. “I was coughing like an old gentleman who smoked a pipe for 70 years, and had nasty vertigo. I got off relatively lightly, but the worst thing is how it affected my brain. “I did two films that I had to learn a lot of text for. One was the Wes Anderson and he likes you to speak like a speeding train. I’m normally quite quick at studying, and picking stuff up, but this was like chewing a really big piece of gum. I couldn’t remember my lines.” Is she coping now? “More or less, but I’m still forgetting things. I have to work my brain.” But, she says, there has also been a positive emptying that has resulted from bringing all sorts of long-term projects to fruition, ranging from the all-consuming (seeing her children grow into “kind, connected and engaged” adults) to the mere 15 years she spent on Memoria. Swinton mentions another project that has been particularly important to her. “We had this campaign to buy Derek’s cottage in Dungeness and turn it into an artists’ retreat, which we managed to do in lockdown. Just before lockdown, a lot of us kids from Jarmania came together to raise funds for Prospect Cottage. All of us coming together was so wonderful.” I ask if she’s planning to slow down. “No, if anything I feel like expanding into something different.” Is she serious about wanting to stop stopping acting? “Yes, I’m thinking of retraining as a palliative carer,” she says out of the blue. She talks about witnessing the loving support her parents received from professional carers at the end of their lives, and the impact it had on her. The idea of Tilda Swinton as a palliative carer sounds so unlikely, but then so many of the things she has done have been. When the twins graduated from their Steiner school at 14, she co-founded a secondary school based on the same principles to complete their education. (Every one of the students who applied to further education was accepted without having taken exams.) When she thought the Highlands would benefit from a film festival, she created a travelling one with the film-maker Mark Cousins. It’s the kind of quixotic fantasy you might find in a Werner Herzog movie, but they made it a reality. Has she looked into palliative care as a career option? “I have a bit, because during lockdown there were all sorts of people in our village who needed looking out for, not only in the care homes but the sheltered housing and those living by themselves. There’s a lady who hasn’t been over the door for two years. It’s not that she’s unable to move, it’s that she’s frightened and she’s become detached from the possibility.” Swinton is aware she couldn’t do something like this on a whim. “I’ve looked into retraining and I would need a good two to three years clear and I haven’t got that yet.” It’s late afternoon and getting dark. The skyline has turned a magnificent silver-black. Swinton points out the sights as she drives me back to the airport. “This is where they have the RockNess music festival,” she says. “Isn’t that a great name? Can you imagine RockNess in this field? I love festivals.” She tells me about a charity in Inverness called Spokes for Folks that provides bikes with double buggies for elderly and disabled people. “It’s like a rickshaw, and they go around to the care homes and give people a spin. I want to see if they’ll come to Nairn just to get some of the people over the door and out to the sea.” It would be great for the woman who hasn’t been out for two years, I say. “Exactly! That’s what I was thinking.” She looks at Rosy. “I can tell she is very comfortable with you. She’s sunk into you like melted cheese.” I tell her I’d be happy with all five dogs on my knee. “When Sandro is not here, I sleep with all of them in bed. It is the most indulgent thing. Such hugs.” I’m thinking about her plans for the bike rides for the elderly, films such as Memoria that wouldn’t get made without her tenacity, the school she built for her kids, the mobile film festival, and it strikes me that Swinton is one of life’s great hands-on doers. She laughs. “If we’re going to find a word for it, I have actually been producing always, and I love producing. I’ll always want to go on producing; not necessarily being in the film, but being at the side of the ring with a sponge and a bucket and a towel round my neck. I’ve done that from the beginning.” It’s not just film I’m thinking of. She may well be producing in an entirely different arena in future. The one thing we can be sure of is that she will still have the sponge in her hand and the towel around her neck. • Memoria is released in the UK on 14 January, The Souvenir Part II on 4 February.The head of the UK Health Security Agency raised concerns about low-paid workers being disadvantaged by changes to the Covid testing regime in England, as they would still need a PCR test to access financial support for isolation, a leaked internal memo shows. The memo from Dame Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UKHSA, also highlighted a greater risk of false negatives for those on lower incomes forced to go to a testing centre to ensure they received the £500 Covid test-and-trace support payments. Under the changes made this week, most people who are asymptomatic can rely on positive lateral flow results to self-isolate, without having to take a confirmatory PCR test. But those seeking £500 Covid support payments for isolation will still need to get PCR tests because of government concerns about potential fraudulent claims if people are allowed to claim the support payments based on self-reported lateral flows. In the note written before Christmas, Harries flagged concerns that low-paid workers seeking access to financial support payments would have a higher chance of falsely being told they were negative for Covid. Harries wrote: “In higher prevalence periods, the abandonment of confirmatory PCR would mean that the people most likely to receive a false negative and therefore potentially become ill and then seek hospital care later and therefore more likely to die would be more likely to be those from lower socioeconomic groups who also have higher risk of underlying health conditions as additional risk factors.” The government made the changes this week, partly to ease pressure on the PCR testing system while Covid case numbers are at an unprecedented level, and to allow people to start the clock on isolation periods earlier. However, there were also concerns among public health officials that a confirmatory PCR was counterproductive because of the risks of false negatives. Some experts have previously highlighted that there is still a reasonable chance of a person having Covid if they have a positive lateral flow followed by a negative PCR, with the PCR missing a positive result around one in 20 times. It is understood that data prepared for the health secretary, Sajid Javid, this month contained estimates that about 9,000 out of 195,000 confirmatory PCR tests taken in November in England were false negatives. This suggested that 45% of all 20,000 negative PCR results after a positive lateral flow result were false. Because of concerns about potentially fraudulent claims, the decision was made by the government to continue to ask for a confirmatory PCR from those who want to claim a test-and-trace support payment, currently worth £500 per isolation. However, the UKHSA flagged worries that this put lower socioeconomic groups at higher risk of false negatives than the general population, particularly when there is high prevalence of Covid in the community. This means those people are potentially being wrongly told not to isolate and not getting support payments, and are at risk of false reassurance and passing it on to contacts. In Wales, support payments are given out for self-reported tests without the need for a confirmatory PCR. It is difficult to quantify the number of people affected, but the House of Commons Library found about 370,000 support payments had been made by November. Around 1 million applications are likely to have have been made because, based on previous data, the success rate is estimated to be about a third. The level of payments is also likely to have risen again substantially during the latest wave of Covid. The UKHSA declined to comment on the leaked memo. • This article was amended on 10 January 2022 to add, for clarity, that the estimated number of negative PCR results after a positive lateral flow result is 20,000.Irene Wu, 28, and Dillon Tang, 24, hadn’t been together a year when they first started couples therapy. The couple, from Los Angeles, started seeing each other in the early days of lockdown, when severe growing pains set in. They found themselves constantly arguing, and their differing communication styles left both of them confused. Specifically, says Wu: “Dillon appeared to “not give a fuck about anything, while I give a lot of fucks. “We were almost going to call it,” Wu remembers. But then, something changed. “I was telling Dillon about my therapy appointment one day, and he asked, ‘So when are we going to do couples counselling?’” Wu and Tang didn’t share a child, a pet, or even a bedroom. The length of their commitment itself could have easily allowed for a clean break, yet instead, they self-prescribed couples counselling. A decade ago the young couple might have been considered an anomaly, but Wu and Tang represent the millions of millennials for whom professional help has become fundamental to mental health maintenance. The American Psychiatric Association recently reported 37% of Gen Z have sought counseling, followed closely by millennials at 35%, and therapists believe the shift to viewing mental health as something that needs to be maintained – rather than only attended to in a crisis – has changed the way younger people view their relationships, too. “In general, younger generations tend to feel less shame around seeing a therapist and are into self-improvement and sharing feelings,” says Simone Bose, a couples counsellor for Relate, a UK couples counselling charity. “Often one of them has had individual therapy before and suggests attending relationship counselling together,” she says. Lisa Hochberger’s clientele’s reasons for therapy vary, but recently, almost all have shared one commonality: like Hochberger herself, they’re under 35. “Young people don’t want to turn to alcohol, food, drugs or partying to keep them calm any more,” she says. “These young people want to prevent themselves from living a life like their parents who may have not had access to their unconscious pain and trauma.” That is borne out by the numbers: one 2017 survey by MidAmerica Nazarene University put the number of millennials aged 23 to 38 who had attended couples counseling at 51%, with couples aged 25 to 30 making up the majority of those attending therapy. And in 2018, the counseling charity Relate revealed a 30% increase in UK clients under 40-years-old in four years. But while married couples usually take at least six years to seek professional help with issues in their relationships, the pandemic may have sped things up, forcing couples into early cohabitation and quarantine with one another. Missourians Emily, 28, and Katie, 31 (surnames have been omitted for privacy), were dating for two years and living separately when they first sought therapy. Faced with the prospect of moving in together during the pandemic, the two couldn’t come to an agreement. Emily thought moving in was the natural next phase of their relationship (plus, it would bring cheaper living expenses), while Katie pulled back. Upon reaching an impasse, Emily gave Katie three options: prove you love me and live with me, break up or solicit external advice. They chose option three. “The issue that brought us in turned out to be connected to a whole slew of other ‘issues’, as most trauma responses are,” says Emily. “A lot of things have arisen that I wouldn’t have ever predicted we’d be talking through, which is really terrifying and intimate.” The pair were forced to address the disparities in their approaches to monogamy, finances and even friendships. Emily needed stability and control, while Katie closely guarded her freedom. “We were kind of at this fork in the road that if something didn’t change between us, we were definitely heading towards breaking up,” adds Katie. After Katie and Emily’s first session, a sense of relief set in. “To have someone there to help us feel validated and to be there for our relationship, felt great,” Emily explains. “It’s like how yoga instructors always say, ‘Thank yourself for making it to the mat today.’ I feel just committing to showing up for the therapy process was such a huge turning point for us.” Couples therapy has also become more visible in popular culture over the last five years – with a growing number of wildly popular books, podcasts and television shows that allow viewers to see the therapeutic process as real couples go through it. From Esther Perel’s Where Should We Begin to Couples Therapy and Love, Sex, Goop, these shows provide a nuanced depiction of therapy; who needs it; and what for – breaking the taboo over doing it. That is in stark contrast to the romantic beliefs that many millennials grew up with. Between Victorian literature and the modern Hollywood romcom, the concept that our significant other should be “ideal in every way” has been sold to us for centuries. Now recognizing these beliefs as unrealistic, young people are recruiting outside help to reset their expectations. “All relationships begin with fantasy,” says Laura Day, author of the bestselling self-help book Welcome to Your Crisis. The fantasies include how the relationship will change us, how the other will make us feel, how couplehood will ease our individual vulnerabilities and challenges – and all of that lasts only as long as the fantasy does.” For our ancestors, that fantasy gave way to a resigned discontent. “Older generations think of therapy as a treatment to mental illness, you must have some issue and be mentally ill to seek a therapist,” explains relationships counsellor Lia Holmgren. “Now, couples who are in love are worried it might end and can learn communication techniques and understand each other better at the beginning.” Chelsea, a 31-year-old communications consultant based in New York, was happy in her relationship when she decided to go into therapy. But with marriage on the cards, she and her partner wanted to put their “best foot forward”. “As well as we know each other, we don’t typically have a forum to talk about how we feel, how we were raised or what specific issues we’d like to work on in our relationship,” she says. “I feel like couples therapy has an unfair reputation for being a last resort, but if you’re going to therapy with your partner as a last resort it might be too late.” One year into therapy, Wu admits she and Tang are “very different people” than when they started dating. Their therapist frequently pushed the pair to unravel any past arguments from the week prior and identify its catalyst. Within the first few sessions, Irene says they reverted back into the “honeymoon phase”. While at times, Dillon may feel unappreciated and Irene misunderstood, therapy has given the couple with the tools to articulate these emotions. Chelsea believes therapy to be the “best investment” she and her husband have made to their partnership. “What started as a premarital project with a finite timeline turned into something that’s been fully integrated into our everyday lives.” Emily and Katie have continued with therapy, and are now approaching the six month mark with their therapist. Commitment anxiety has dissipated and the pair have since moved in together. “I feel closer to Katie than I ever have felt,” says Emily. “I don’t want to say it feels invincible but it definitely makes me feel a lot more present and loving.” After 12 sessions, the initial lack of communication that plagued Irene Wu’s relationship has greatly improved. She has learned her triggers, how to prevent past trauma from informing her behavior, and that her boyfriend’s nonchalance should not be confused with lack of interest. “We accept and love each other for our differences,” Wu explains. “I’ve been more patient and he’s been learning how to empathize with my emotions more. At the end of the day, we both want the same thing.”The Hunterston B nuclear power station will shut down for ever at noon on Friday after 46 years of service, reducing the UK’s nuclear capacity by one-eighth and prompting calls from the industry for greater government backing for the sector. The plant, on the west coast of Scotland, provided one gigawatt of the UK’s 7.9GW nuclear capacity, enough to power to 1.7m homes. But Hunterston B has lasted 20 years beyond its initial planned shutdown date and is one of several nuclear power plants being taken out of commission within several years of each other. The rapid pace of the decommissioning schedule has raised concerns about maintaining electricity generation. About 20% of Britain’s supply is provided by nuclear power from 15 reactors, which help provide a constant baseload to make up for shortfalls when electricity generation from renewables drops on windless days or when the sun is not shining. Almost half of the country’s nuclear capacity is scheduled for retirement by 2025 with the closure of Hunterston B, Hinkley Point B, Hartlepool 1 and Heysham 1. While more renewable energy will have been brought online by then and other fuel sources such as gas can fill in the gaps, the remaining 3.6GW of nuclear capacity would only be able to meet 6% of peak demand forecast for this winter. At its peak between 1995 and 1999, nuclear capacity hit nearly 13GW, about a quarter of the UK’s electricity needs. EDF is due to finish its 3.2GW plant Hinkley Point C, Britain’s first new nuclear power station in 20 years, by 2027. The first of its two reactors is scheduled to come online a year before that. The Nuclear Industry Association, which represents companies across the civil nuclear supply chain, estimates that the national capacity could reach 14.25GW by 2035, depending on whether £1.7bn in funding for the proposed Sizewell C plant is confirmed and the Wylfa Newydd project on Anglesey can attract investors. Development is likely to hinge upon government plans for a new financial framework, known as a regulated asset base (RAB) model, which would lock in higher returns for institutions funding nuclear plants and transfer risk to taxpayers. The NIA’s projection for the growth of nuclear also depends on the scale of the rollout of Rolls-Royce’s small modular reactors (SMRs), which have received £210m of government funds and £280m from private capital. The association criticised a decision by the Scottish government to bar new nuclear projects in Scotland, saying the gap left by Hunterston B would have to be filled in part with imported gas sourced from volatile global markets. This would drive up consumer bills, hamper emissions reduction plans and threaten Scotland’s energy security, it added. Tom Greatrex, the chief executive of the NIA, said: “Hunterston B has shown the best of what nuclear can provide for Scotland – clean, reliable power to keep the lights on and save our planet, and long-term, skilled jobs on which people can build a life and a family. “The dedicated staff who have helped keep Scottish homes warm and light for 46 years deserve our gratitude. As the current energy crisis demonstrates, without nuclear the cost of the electricity we rely on is higher, causes pollution and leaves us reliant on burning imported fossil fuels. That’s why we need new nuclear – to get to net zero and provide the reliable, secure and clean power to live our lives.”The Taliban sparked outrage this week by announcing that women in northern Afghanistan would no longer be allowed to use communal bathhouses. The use of bathhouses, or hammams, is an ancient tradition that remains for many people the only chance for a warm wash during the country’s bitterly cold winters. Women, who regularly use the bathhouses for ritual cleaning and purification required under Islamic law, said this was another example of the Taliban tightening its grip and infringing their basic rights. They fear the ban will be extended to other parts of the country. On Monday, Sardar Mohammad Heydari, from the provincial branch of the Taliban’s Ministry for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice, said women would be banned from bathhouses in Balkh and Herat provinces. However, another Taliban commander, who spoke on condition of anonymity, told the Guardian that he did not support the decision, adding that Afghanistan’s new leaders should focus on “bigger struggles”. The Taliban’s takeover in August has plunged Afghanistan into a humanitarian crisis. Millions of people are facing hunger and most are unable to afford firewood or coal for heating during the colder months. The majority of households do not have direct access to water, instead having to rely on public pumps or water trucks. The UN predicts that 97% of Afghans could be living below the poverty line by the middle of the year. Even the 40 afghani (about 30p) entrance fee to the hammam is difficult to find, but many women have been scrambling to do so anyway. Women in the north-western city of Herat, where only 39% of neighbourhoods have adequate access to water and sanitation, reported that some bathhouses had already closed. Winuss Azizi, from the non-profit organisation Visions for Children in Afghanistan, said most households in Herat and Mazar-i-Sharif did not have the capacity or the facilities to heat large quantities of water. “That’s why people rely on hammams in winter,” she said, adding: “Islam requires religious cleansing after menstruation, giving birth and sexual intercourse, which many visit bathhouses for. I have regularly seen women performing their purification prayer rituals at the hammam.” Lina Ebrahimi, 26, who lives in Herat, said: “We have a small house with no space for a full bathroom with heated water; that’s why I used to go to the hammam. Other families might have no bathing facilities at all and fully depend on public bathhouses for cleaning. This opportunity is now taken from them.” Women were barred from using public hammams during the Taliban’s 1996-2001 rule. Many of the ancient bathhouses were neglected for years and revived only after the 2001 US-led invasion. Heather Barr, Human Rights Watch’s associate director of women’s rights, said she was “enraged” at “the cruelty of denying women the only relief from the cold for no reason at all”. She said: “They seem to have the intention to want to meddle in every aspect of women’s lives. We heard warnings from Afghan women from the start, saying that the situation will get worse. Today, we’re seeing evidence that they were right. “Why are they thinking of [stopping] women going to the hammam when people are starving?” said Barr. This week, the Taliban also ordered shopkeepers to remove the heads of all mannequins, calling them unIslamic.Rather more than half of the population of Afghanistan is facing levels of food shortage not seen for decades. Just under 1,500 people died in the Mediterranean during 2021, attempting to flee to a safer environment. The likelihood of wildfires is predicted as a risk comparable to severe flooding in parts of the UK in the coming decades. About one person in 1,000 in the Democratic Republic of Congo has received full vaccination against Covid-19. And the challenge of the pandemic worldwide, the continuing background of loss and fear, still casts an enormous shadow. Statistics – not simply unconnected – that give a little flesh to the overall sense of 2021 having been a sombre year – on top of the low-level anxiety, the unexpected personal losses and the sheer confusion experienced by everyone caught up in the pandemic. The human story is not looking much like a smooth record of upward progress just now. We are more fragile than we had been led to assume. And this means that we are also less different from our ancestors than we normally like to think – and that the more secure and prosperous members of the human race are less different from their fellow-human beings than they find comfortable. Our ancestors, right up to the modern age, knew they were fragile. A brief period of dazzling technological achievement combined with the absence of any major global war produced the belief that fragility was on the retreat and that making our global environment lastingly secure or controllable was within reach. But the same technical achievements that had generated this belief turned out to be among the major destabilising influences in the material environment. And the absence of major global conflict sat alongside the proliferation of bitter and vicious local struggles, often civil wars that trailed on for decades. But perhaps it is only in the past two decades that we have quite caught up with the realisation that global crises are indifferent to national boundaries, political convictions and economic performance. The vulnerability cannot be neatly cordoned off. For the foreseeable future, we shall have to get used to this fragility; and we are going to need considerable imaginative resources to cope with it. In the past, people have found resources like this in art and religion. Today it is crucial to learn to see the sciences as a resource and not a threat or a rival to what these older elements offer. It is more than high time to forget the phoney war between faith and science or art and technology. Belittling the imaginative inspiration of authentic science is as fatuous as the view that sees the arts as just a pleasant extra in human life, or religion as an outdated kind of scientific explanation. Just because inflated claims are made for science, and unrealistic hopes are raised, it is dangerously easy to forget why and how it matters, and to be lured into the bizarre world in which the minority report in science (about climate, pandemics or whatever) is given inflated importance just because we have been disappointed about the utterly unqualified certainty that we thought we had been promised. And what matters about scientific research is that it is not undertaken to prove an existing view correct, and so to reinforce the existing power or advantage of some over others. People rightly look with deep scepticism at research purporting to show that racial, social or sexual privilege is somehow grounded in the natural order. Ideally, what scientific discourse offers is not the guarantee of indisputable results that will simply tell us what to do, but a method of meeting each other in a shared exploratory conversation that will not be derailed by the presence in the room of non-negotiable convictions about the natural world that would make discussion on an equal footing impossible. Science helps us live with our fragility by giving us a way of connecting with each other, recognising that it is the same world that we all live in. We have to forget our self-protective habits in order to discover our shared challenges. But what science alone does not do is build the motivation for a deeper level of connection. We act effectively not just when we find a language in common to identify problems, but when we recognise that those who share these challenges are profoundly like us, to the extent that we can to some degree feel their frailty as if it were ours – or at least, feel their frailty impacting directly on our own, so that we cannot be secure while they remain at risk. This is where art comes in. Like the sciences, it makes us shelve our self-oriented habits for a bit. Listening to music, looking at an exhibition, reading a novel, watching a theatre or television drama, we open doors to experiences that are not our own. If science helps us discover that there are things to talk about that are not determined just by the self-interest of the people talking, art opens us up to how the stranger feels, uncovering connections where we had not expected them. What religion adds to this is a further level of motivation. The very diverse vocabularies of different religious traditions claim not only that the Other is someone we can recognise but that they are someone we must look at with something like reverence. The person before us has a claim on our attention, even our contemplation, and on our active generosity. The religions of south and east Asia question the very idea of a safe and stable self with a territory to protect against others; while for Judaism, Christianity and Islam, the claim of the stranger is grounded in the conviction that every human beings is a vehicle of God’s presence and God’s glory – “made in God’s image”. Being more deeply connected will not take away the fragility of our condition, but it will help us see that it is worth parking the obsessions of tribes and echo chambers so that we can actually learn from and with each other; that it is worth making what local difference can be made, so as to let the dignity of the human person be seen with greater clarity. “Our life and death are with our neighbour,” said one of the saints of early Christian monasticism. That is the humanism we need if we are not to be paralysed by the fragility we cannot escape. Rowan Williams is a former archbishop of CanterburyThe deadline for the decommissioning of the International Space Station (ISS) is worryingly close, and there is a danger that the commercial replacements the US was hoping for will not be ready to launch in time. With that in mind, on New Year’s Eve, Nasa announced that the Biden-Harris administration wanted to extend the operation of the ISS by six years to 2030. Nasa must liaise with its international partners, Europe, Japan, Canada and Russia, to agree their participation. The ESA’s director general, Josef Aschbacher, has already tweeted his support. Keeping Russia as a full partner may prove more challenging. The Russian news agency Tass reported in April 2021 that a research and power module originally intended for the ISS would now become the first part of a national space station. On 2 December, Nasa awarded grants to three private companies to develop commercial space station designs. But they will not be ready for launch by 2024, so an ISS extension to 2030 will give those companies more time to build and launch. Also in the running is an earlier proposal by Axiom Space, which is building a commercial module for ISS that could be detached to become a private space station. If successful, when the ISS is decommissioned Nasa will be able to seamlessly continue its space station research programme by simply switching their crews to the commercial stations.Picks of the week Desperately Seeking Wisdom With Craig Oliver If your life has “hit the buffers” in the pandemic, as it did for David Cameron’s former Remain right-hand man Craig Oliver, this 12-part interview series might inspire you to at least try to look at things differently. Oliver speaks candidly with outwardly privileged, successful people such as Ruth Davidson and Richard Curtis – all living with trauma or tragedy, and sharing their unseen, deep cuts. Episode one sees him interview George Alagiah on his battle with bowel cancer. Hollie Richardson Cover Story: Power Trip As psychedelics become Goop-mainstream, New York Magazine investigates the big business of underground practices that surround them. Host iO Tillett Wright uncovers the stories of shamans, guides and cults preying on vulnerable people, along with ketamine drips that claim to heal just about anything. Hannah Verdier Now You’re Asking With Marian and Tara This oddly soothing agony aunt-style podcast sees author Marian Keyes discuss listeners’ problems with actor friend Tara Flynn. Their “virtual kitchen table with virtual cups of tea” sees them ponder issues such as being cut out of a will, and how to deal with a neighbour who’s installed a pink flamingo in a communal garden. Alexi Duggins Bad People Comedian Sofie Hagen and criminal psychologist Dr Julia Shaw’s clever and funny look at criminal cases isn’t new, but they’ve just launched two specials themed round two new BBC dramas: A Very British Scandal and The Tourist. They use guest stars and clips as jumping-off points to discuss issues such as body positivity and coercive relationships. AD Families Who Kill: The Donut Shop Murders The McCrary family were a Texas clan who robbed, assaulted and killed time after time in the early 1970s. Doughnut shops may make this deep dive sound like a comedy, but it is at the more hardcore end of true crime, including chilling taped confessions that come with a warning. HV Producer pick: The Coming Storm Chosen by Danielle Stephens A year ago this week, Trump supporters stormed the Capitol in Washington DC. Most who were interviewed that day believed they had a right to take back their country after they felt the presidential election had been stolen by Joe Biden and the Democrats. BBC journalist, Gabriel Gatehouse, decided to find out why so many people had been completely convinced of a different reality. In his BBC Radio 4 series, The Coming Storm, he journeys across the United States, talking to several people who provide insight into what – or who – was responsible for spreading one of the biggest mistruths US democracy will ever experience. You might think you’ve heard the story– QAnon, social media, disaffected voters – but Gabriel gets access to voices that shed a different light on a story commonly told. As he truly tries to understand why two Americans living on the same street could believe wildly different things, Gabriel comes across as less patronising than fellow journalists who have gone down a similar path. Scoring is sometimes overused, but overall, this is a must listen in order to understand what led to 6 January 2021. Talking points It’s quite a week for podcasts and last year’s Capitol Riots. As well as audio attempts to dissect the events from above-mentioned Coming Storm and The Assault on America, a new study has been released, analysing nearly 1,500 episodes from 20 of the most popular political podcasts. Half of the episodes released between the election and the 6 January riot were found to contain election misinformation. We knew that picking your pods wisely was important, but now the question lingers: could it potentially prevent insurrection? Why not try: London Pub Reviews | Whistle Through the Shamrocks Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureSchools in England are “teetering on the edge” with more than a third (36%) struggling with staff absence rates in excess of 10%, according to a snap poll by a headteachers’ union. Almost one in 10 heads (9%) who took part in the survey said more than 20% of their teaching staff were absent on the first day of term for Covid-related reasons. The staffing situation is already so critical in some schools that 4% of heads have had to send classes or year groups home for online learning, while almost 7% have combined classes or year groups in response to teacher absence. Half of school leaders said they were already dependent on supply teachers to cover classes, and more than a third (37%) were unable to source the supply staff they need, even via agencies – almost certainly because of high demand. Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT), said the results of the poll painted a worrying picture. The findings are based on nearly 2,000 headteachers’ experiences on the first day of term this week. The vast majority who took part were primary school leaders (76%), 5% were from secondary schools and the rest were made up of nursery, infant, all-through and middle schools. More than a quarter (27%) had in excess of 10% of their teachers off on the first day of term for Covid-related reasons. Nearly all of those surveyed (95%) reported pupil absences, and three in 10 (29%) were missing 10% of their pupils. “Staff absence on the first day of term was considerable and school leaders have been doing what they can to redeploy teachers and other support staff to avoid being forced to combine classes or send groups home,” Whiteman said. “Given that this is a snapshot of just the first day of term, this is a very worrying picture. Infection rates – and therefore absence due to illness – could very likely rise as the term progresses, and already half of schools are having to turn to supply staff, with many finding they cannot secure suitable cover. “Many schools are teetering on the edge and the next few weeks at least will undoubtedly continue to be an incredibly challenging time.” The shadow education secretary, Bridget Phillipson, said: “These stark figures reveal the extent of the government’s failure to plan for school staff absences this term. “Again and again our children have been treated as an afterthought by Conservative ministers, seemingly unable to act until it’s too late. It is incompetent, complacent and inadequate.” Elsewhere, there were reports of resistance among some pupils to masks and lateral flow testing. Damien McNulty, a national executive member of the NASUWT teaching union, told the BBC that in one Lancashire school, just 67 out of 1,300 pupils had agreed to have a lateral flow test and wear a mask. Teachers also remain concerned about ventilation in schools. In a separate NASUWT survey, more than half (56%) of the 2,000 who responded said they did not have access to a CO2 monitor in their classroom, despite government promises that all schools and colleges would be provided with monitors from the start of the current academic year. Of those who do have a monitor, 9% said it was not working properly. The government has said it wants schools to remain fully open despite soaring infection rates. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, conceded in the Commons on Wednesday that schools were already seeing staff absences and these were likely to get worse in the coming weeks, exceeding last term’s 8% peak. A Department for Education spokesperson said: “We’ve supported schools to continue classroom learning for pupils through encouraging former teachers to step in and extending the Covid workforce fund for schools that are facing the greatest staffing and funding pressures. “We’ve also asked schools to have contingency plans to maximise attendance and minimise disruption to learning, should they have high rates of staff absence, and are working with the sector to share case studies of flexible learning models to support the development of those plans.”New South Wales and Victoria have reintroduced some Covid restrictions as the Omicron variant spreads rapidly. With both states routinely breaking records for daily new cases, and with state leaders warning the situation is expected to get worse, both states have reinstated some measures aimed at slowing the spread. New South Wales These are the changes in NSW which come into effect from 8 January 2022 and are expected to be lifted by 27 January: Singing and dancing banned Singing and dancing will be prohibited at hospitality venues, entertainment facilities and major recreation facilities. This includes pubs, clubs, nightclubs, bars and restaurants. However, this does not apply to weddings, to performers, or to students and instructors. Rapid antigen test reporting system The NSW government is introducing a new reporting system for rapid antigen tests. The system will be launched on the Service NSW app and website, and will allow people to log their rapid antigen test results, so that they can count towards daily case numbers. The system will be made available from “next week.” Elective surgeries reduced Non-urgent surgeries have been suspended until mid-February, to ease the pressure on the health system. These include category three surgeries. Boosters mandated for some workers The NSW vaccine mandate for high-risk workers will “soon” include a requirement to have had a booster shot. Although it is not clear when that mandate will be introduced, it will cover frontline health workers and essential workers, as previous mandates have. Major events assessed NSW Health will conduct risk assessments of major events planned for the next few weeks, with premier Dominic Perrottet indicating they may be postponed. These changes are on top of previous restrictions introduced late last month, including a density limit of one person per two square metres and a mask mandate for indoor areas. Victoria And here are the new restrictions in Victoria which took effect at 11.59pm on Thursday, 6 January: Density limits reintroduced Hospitality and entertainment venues are subject to tighter density limits again, with businesses subject to the one person per two square metre rules. The restriction applies to restaurants, cafes, pubs, nightclubs, arcades, amusement parks, casinos and gaming venues. Cinemas and theatres are currently exempt, where attenders are seated and masked. Mandatory rapid antigen test reporting The Victorian government has made changes to the testing regime, with those that test positive on rapid antigen tests now considered “probable cases.” That means they must isolate immediately for seven days, as well as having to notify their contacts. It will be mandatory to report the positive results to the Department of Health through an online registry or by phone. The system is set to go live on Friday. Strong recommendations The Victorian government also now “strongly recommends” people take a rapid antigen test before visiting aged care facilities and hospitals. The government also recommends working from home until late January. Non-urgent elective surgery paused The government has also paused all non-urgent elective surgeries, to help reduce the pressure on the health system. These restrictions join previous restrictions in place in Victoria, including an indoor mask mandate and limitations on visitations to hospitals and aged care facilities.A Discovery of Witches 9pm, Sky Max In the intense opener of the final season of Deborah Harkness’s fantasy trilogy, Matthew (Matthew Goode) and Diana (Teresa Palmer) return from the past to find that Peter Knox (Owen Teale) has attempted to steal a page from the Book of Life and Aunt Em is dead. The rest of the series will focus on Diana attempting to reassemble the Book of Life and crack open its tantalising mysteries. Hollie Richardson Monty Don’s Adriatic Gardens 8pm, BBC Two A new three-parter in which Monty Don “looks for gardens where you mightn’t expect to find them”. He starts with the hidden horticultural treasures of Venice, such as a rejuvenated public garden with a secret passageway leading to St Mark’s Square. Next up: Croatia. Ali Catterall Would I Lie to You? 8.30pm, BBC One Did John Cooper Clarke spend three months sharing a flat with a monkey? Was Judi Love dumped after a lover found a list of pros and cons she had made about him? And how has an exercise in trying to spot celebrities’ lies managed to be so consistently entertaining for 15 series? All will be answered at the start of this latest run. Alexi Duggins Death in Paradise 9pm, BBC One As series 11 of this Caribbean crime caper opens, it is all distorted voices on phones demanding ransom money. A businessman has been murdered – and the killer has considerately restrained the blood spatter to the victim’s hands, for a family audience. DCI Neville Parker (Ralf Little) is soon on the case to do his thoughtful, occasionally comic best – even if he is distracted by writing a pub quiz for his boss. AD 8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown 9pm, Channel 4 Jimmy Carr – the man no Channel 4 panel show can escape – returns with the 22nd season of Cats. Jon Richardson and Rob Beckett take on Kiri Pritchard-McLean and Roisin Conaty, while Huge Davies is in Dictionary Corner with Susie Dent. Rachel Riley provides those all-important numbers and letters. HR The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One It is the first Graham Norton of the year – and he is kicking things off with another impressive lineup of celebrity guests, including Martin Freeman – who is starring in the upcoming BBC police drama The Responder – and the Last Leg comedian Josh Widdicombe. HR Film choices A Quiet Place Part II (John Krasinski, 2020), 12.40pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Here is more of the same horror from director John Krasinski and star Emily Blunt – but the first film’s triumph of nerve-tingling tension is worth repeating. After a flashback to the origins of the alien invasion, we take up with Blunt’s newly widowed Evelyn and her children, Regan (Millicent Simmonds), Marcus (Noah Jupe) and that crying baby. Cillian Murphy’s lone wolf, Emmett, mixes up the family dynamic a bit, but silence is still golden – and Regan remains the key to survival – as the group discover signs of human life amid the sound-sensitive ETs. Simon Wardell The Trial (Orson Welles, 1963), 10.50pm, Talking Pictures TV A convincing adaptation by Orson Welles of Franz Kafka’s novel about an office worker accused of an unnamed offence who becomes lost in a nightmare of bureaucracy as he tries to clear his name. Anthony Perkins brings the nervous energy of Norman Bates to the role of Josef K, while Welles uses his usual limited budget to great effect (not least by dubbing most of the actors himself. He throws Perkins into a disconcerting world of pan-European architecture and people – Jeanne Moreau and Romy Schneider among them. SW Live sport FA Cup football: Swindon Town v Man City 7.30pm, ITV. Third-round tie at the County Ground.The Omicron variant is hitting Australia much harder than previous Covid outbreaks and data from state health departments shows it is also more geographically spread. Several Australian states are now seeing some of the highest case numbers in the world on a per capita basis, with some of the hardest hit local government areas (LGAs) outside of major metropolitan areas. This is true in regional New South Wales and Victoria, and is trending that way in Queensland. Here we have brought together the number of cases per LGA from NSW, Victoria, Queensland and South Australia. We have excluded overseas, interstate and cases where the origin is unknown. Due to the rising number of cases and differing reporting periods for each jurisdiction the most recent day’s data may not be complete.Bridgnorth has one of England’s oldest cliff railways, a holiday cottage with a hidden cave and a tower that leans more than Pisa’s. But I’ve been drawn to south-east Shropshire by the prospect of bracing winter hikes, friendly pubs and a trip to the sights of Shrewsbury. I arrive in Bridgnorth by bus from Wolverhampton (£3.90). The steep, atmospheric cliff railway (£2 return) carries me up to the High Town just as a rainbow arcs across the valley below. There are views across the River Severn to wooded red cliffs from nearby Castle Walk, which leads to the 18th-century church of Saint Mary Magdalen, designed by bridge-builder and engineer Thomas Telford. The sandstone castle next to it was blown up by Roundheads and now leans at 15 degrees – four times the angle of the tower of Pisa – among bright beds of begonias. The impression of colour and eccentric angles continues as I step off steep, curving Railway Street into the Alice-in-Wonderland sitting room of Dracup’s Cottage, where I’m staying. There’s a patchwork sofa, a crooked mirror and a clock that runs backwards, but this room is merely quirky. The rest of the cottage is a masterclass in idiosyncrasy, from the steampunk bathroom to the surreal murals in one upstairs room: it’s a Hieronymus-Bosch-style Bridgnorth landscape with contortionists, naked hot-air ballooners and a giant carnivorous chameleon. The artist Antony Dracup lived in this old railway cottage for decades; Karolina and Jason Harte bought it in 2019 and have spent two years doing it up. I open a door at the back of the cottage to find medieval music playing in a gothic pillared vault lit by flickering candles. Dracup chiselled this space out of the sandstone hillside and used the excavated sand to create bricks for the supporting arches. The station-themed kitchen is inspired by the Severn Valley Railway, a few steps down the hill. The full-size, mostly steam-hauled line runs for 16 miles between Bridgnorth and Kidderminster. It’s great for linear walks along the long-distance Severn Way. I’ve hit a seasonal lull in the train timetable so catch bus 297 instead, passing through the woods around Dudmaston Hall. I get off in the village of Alveley and walk down Chapel Lane into the Severn Valley country park. There are clear views of the Clee Hills, including Shropshire’s highest peaks, topped with iron age forts or radar scanners. Until 1969, the park was a mine, producing 300,000 tons of coal a year at its height. A new history trail, opened in 2020, passes traces of ropeways, spoil heaps and miners’ cottages. Today the wooded paths are thick with birds and berries: I spot a rust-red-slate-grey chaffinch and a flock of long-tailed tits. There are wreaths of orange bryony twisted through yellow hedges spangled with neon-pink spindle berries. I follow the trails to a footbridge over the rain-swollen Severn. Bridgnorth is eight miles upstream and the riverside path is grassy and inviting, with mossy hawthorn trees and huge gaggles of mallards. There are signs of fierce flooding: bundles of reeds are lodged in upper branches, and snagged and ragged sheets of polythene flap in the racing current like Halloween ghosts. At the hamlet of Lower Forge, halfway to Bridgnorth, you can leave the river and catch bus 125, passing Eardington nature reserve, once a sand and gravel quarry, and Daniel’s Mill, a working 18th-century watermill near the Severn Valley Railway viaduct. For supper, I go to the Royle, a half-timbered pub and restaurant on Bridgnorth’s High Street. It’s a weeknight but the place is buzzing. Landlords Chris and Anna Walsh built up a following during their years at the King’s Head over the road. At the Royle, Chris is both affable pub landlord and knowledgable restaurant host. The food is hard to fault: three crisp and delicate bhajis under cucumber ribbons and coriander leaves and a rich salmon wellington with a layer of shallots and mushrooms. Bridgnorth’s friendliness is remarkable. As I’m having breakfast outside Coffee at d’Arcy’s next morning, several passing strangers say hello. I meet Sally Themans, founder of community group Love Bridgnorth, to talk about the town’s thriving high street. She’s just come from the opening of a new artisan jewellery shop. The streets nearby are fizzing with eco-friendly, independent shops: you can fill your own pot with nuts or lentils at Room for Refills, or head to Roobarb over the road for a bobble hat with its fleecy lining recycled from old plastic bottles. I catch bus 436 to Much Wenlock (£2.70 single) and spend the day striding on ancient stony tracks along the limestone cliff of Wenlock Edge through flaming gold beeches and yellowing hazel trees. The same bus, next morning, carries me all the way to Shrewsbury past views of the isolated Wrekin. Shropshire’s river-circled county town has lots of options for all-weather sightseeing, including a good market. You can stash bags at the Premier Inn near the station for £6. Simon Jenkins names three Shrewsbury churches in his England’s Thousand Best Churches and I duly admire the octagonal tower and circular nave of Georgian Saint Chads and the Norman doorway of the red sandstone abbey with its mix of windows above. “Seven lights rise to Perpendicular panel tracery, fracturing into Decorated reticulation,” Jenkins writes. Sure, but is there a cafe? Saint Mary’s, a soaring town-centre beauty, caters for both soul and body. I have a coffee and watch multicoloured light pour through six centuries of stained glass on to Victorian floor tiles under a carved oak ceiling. Next up is the town’s free museum and art gallery, a neoclassical former concert hall that counts Telford’s measuring wheel among its treasures. Natural images recur through the millennia: flowers on a silver Roman mirror, ravens on a carved Tudor four-poster, butterflies on fine Caughley porcelain. Nearby Okra, a vegan cafe opened in October 2019, does salads and noodle bowls. My warm flatbread (£7) is sliced through, revealing a fresh rainbow of green leaves, carrot, red cabbage, roasted aubergine, chickpeas and chutney. After lunch, I walk through the Dingle, a bench-lined garden in a former quarry, down an avenue of lime trees, and over the disconcertingly bouncy Port Hill suspension footbridge. The Boathouse pub, on the far side of the Severn, serves Darwin’s Origin copper ale from the Salopian Brewery. (Charles Darwin was born in Shrewsbury). It takes 15 minutes to stagger from here along the river to the station, past a Darwin-inspired riverside archway called Quantum Leap. The trains home run smoothly while a pink sunset glows and fades to black outside the windows. Train travel to Wolverhampton was provided by Avanti West Coast (advance tickets from £10.80). Accommodation was provided by Dracup’s Cottage (sleeps two from £125 a night, two-nights minimum, dracupscottage.co.uk). More information at visitshropshire.co.ukTop story: ‘Get Lulu to call me and we’ll get it sorted ASAP!’ Hello, Warren Murray returning to you with Friday’s briefing. Other briefings may be available – but why take the risk? Boris Johnson has been accused of potential corruption by Labour as it emerged he sought funds for his flat refurbishment from a Conservative donor while promising to consider plans for a “great exhibition”. WhatsApp messages with the Tory peer David Brownlow show Johnson called parts of his Downing Street residence a “tip” and asked for “approvals” so his decor designer, Lulu Lytle, could “get on with it” in November 2020. He signed off the message by saying: “Ps am on the great exhibition plan Will revert.” Lord Brownlow replied: “Of course, get Lulu to call me and we’ll get it sorted ASAP! Thanks for thinking about GE2.” Plans for a “Great Exhibition 2.0” were discussed by Brownlow and the then culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, weeks after the WhatsApp exchanges, official records show. On Thursday, Johnson was forced to make a “humble and sincere” apology for the texts not being given to his independent ethics adviser, Lord Geidt, during an initial inquiry last spring. Johnson said he had not remembered them and did not have access to his phone due to “security issues” – thought to relate to when his mobile number was discovered online. In thinly veiled frustration, Geidt said the saga “shook my confidence” and added that if he had seen the evidence when writing his first report, he may not have ruled that Johnson tried to make the correct declaration and seek advice at the first opportunity. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said it appeared Brownlow had access to Johnson and Dowden “because he was paying” for the refurbishments. She said if true, it would constitute “corruption, plain and simple … No one should be able to buy access or exchange wallpaper for festivals”. The WhatsApp messages were published as part of letters exchanged by Johnson and Geidt. For a second time, Geidt found the prime minister did not break the ministerial code over payments for the Downing Street flat refurbishment, but Johnson was criticised for acting “unwisely”. No 10 denied there was anything untoward about Brownlow’s meeting with Dowden and stressed the peer had acted with integrity since first being approached to chair the Downing Street trust. Brownlow was contacted for comment. * * * Kazakhstan roils – Dozens of protesters and at least 12 police have died in the violence in Kazakhstan, authorities have said, as demonstrators said peaceful protests over fuel price rises had turned violent after a heavy-handed government response. “Peacekeepers” led by Russia have arrived in the country at the request of president Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, who declared a state of emergency and accepted the resignation of the government. Ahead of a national address today, Tokayev is claiming this morning that constitutional order has largely been restored. Witnesses in Almaty, Kazakhstan’s largest city, described scenes of chaos on Thursday, with government buildings being stormed or set on fire and widespread looting. The interior ministry said 2,298 people had been arrested during the unrest, while the police spokesperson Saltanat Azirbek told the state news channel Khabar-24 that “dozens of attackers were liquidated”. Video footage showed violent clashes between protesters and authorities in a number of cities. * * * ‘The lies have not abated’ – One year after the 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol, Joe Biden has denounced Donald Trump for spreading a “web of lies” about the legitimacy of the 2020 election and holding a “dagger at the throat of American democracy”. Biden called Trump a “defeated former president” whose “bruised ego matters more to him than our democracy or constitution … For the first time in our history, the president had not just lost an election, he tried to prevent the peaceful transfer of power as a violent mob reached the Capitol. But they failed.” Biden asked Americans to recommit to the protection of the nation’s 200-year-old system of government. “The lies that drove the anger and madness we saw in this place, they have not abated.” The Republican minority leader in the Senate, Mitch McConnell, called the attack “antithetical to the rule of law” and said he supported efforts to hold perpetrators accountable. But he did not denounce Trump, as he and many Republicans did in the aftermath of the attack. Presiding over the House floor on Thursday, Speaker Nancy Pelosi declared that democracy had prevailed when members returned to the Capitol after the riot to ratify Biden’s electoral victory. “The Congress, because of the courage of all of you, rose to honour our oath and protect our democracy,” she said, before leading members – all of them Democrats, with the exception of congresswoman Liz Cheney – in a moment of silence. * * * School scramble for fill-in staff – Schools in England are “teetering on the edge” with more than a third (36%) struggling with staff absence rates in excess of 10%, according to a snap poll by a headteachers’ union. Some heads had more than 20% of their teaching staff absent on the first day of term for Covid-related reasons. In some schools, heads have had to send classes or year groups home for online learning, or combine classes or year groups. More than a third (37%) needing supply teachers were unable to obtain them. Elsewhere, there have been reports of resistance among some pupils to masks and lateral flow testing. More Covid news from home and abroad at our live blog. * * * Final shutdown – The Hunterston B nuclear power station in Scotland will shut down for ever at noon today after 46 years of service, reducing the UK’s nuclear capacity by one-eighth and prompting calls from the industry for greater government backing. It lasted 20 years beyond its initial planned shutdown date. About 20% of Britain’s supply comes from 15 reactors, and almost half of this capacity is scheduled for retirement by 2025 with the closure of Hunterston B, Hinkley Point B, Hartlepool 1 and Heysham 1. EDF is due to finish its new 3.2GW plant Hinkley Point C by 2027, with the first of its two reactors coming online a year before that. The Nuclear Industry Association estimates the national capacity could reach 14.25GW by 2035, depending on whether £1.7bn in funding for the proposed Sizewell C plant is confirmed and the Wylfa Newydd project on Anglesey can attract investors. * * * Don’t choke on your cereal – The bosses of Britain’s biggest companies will have made more money in 2022 by breakfast time today than the average UK worker will earn in the entire year, according to analysis of the vast gap in pay between FTSE 100 chief executives and everyone else. Level up, Britain … Today in Focus podcast: 2022 in culture Guardian critics Charlotte Northedge, Ben Beaumont-Thomas and Simran Hans look ahead to the best of the year in culture. Lunchtime read: ‘Something wrong, something good’ Taiwan transitioned to a democracy in the late 1980s and is now one of Asia’s freest and most vibrant, but continues to reckon with its history – still very much in living memory – and how to remember the man who oversaw it. Memorials to the dictator Chiang Kai-shek are contentious, but also defended even by those who suffered; they want new generations to know he fostered the island’s prosperity and independence. Sport Novak Djokovic’s relegation to a hotel run by Australia’s immigration department continues to dominate the sporting agenda. The government has said Djokovic is not being held “captive” and is free to leave the country. The issue is becoming a diplomatic incident between Australia and Serbia as the full story is pieced together and responsibility established for the chain of events. The visa status of other players who have arrived to compete in the Australian Open is also now being investigated. England made a disastrous reply to Australia’s 416-8d on day three of the fourth Ashes Test in Sydney. The tourists slumped to 36-4 at lunch, including a 53-ball spell where three wickets fell but no runs were scored. Ben Stokes and Jonny Bairstow mounted a spirited fightback before tea. Business Asian shares have been climbing today, with a 1.2% gain in the Australian benchmark, though Japan’s Nikkei made gains then fell back. China and Hong Kong stocks have tracked other Asian shares higher. US jobs data is due later in the day. Futures trading indicates the FTSE will open higher. The pound is worth $1.354 and €1.198 at time of writing. The papers “Tory peer secretly involved in firm given PPE contracts” – our Guardian lead story today. “Prisoner Cell Djokh H” – the Metro’s play on Novak Djokovic’s waylaying in Australia. The Financial Times splashes with the anniversary of the Congress attack: “Biden fears threat to democracy one year on from Capitol assault”. The Express says “Cost of living squeeze will hit over-65s hardest” – their energy bills could rise by £340 a year. The Telegraph is on the cost of living crisis too, with “One million to be pulled into higher rate of tax”. The Colston statue verdict is met with outrage in the Daily Mail, which has “PM: vandals can’t change our history”. The Times’ top story is “Second Maxwell juror was abused”. The Mirror reports on “Desperate Andrew’s £17m ski chalet sale” – because of his legal costs, the paper says. And the Sun has “Piers troll arrested over death threats”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.On 6 January 2021, it seemed like the stitching holding America’s democracy together might finally collapse. As armed supporters of a defeated president laid siege to the Capitol, the US Congress did something extraordinary – it suspended the official procedure to certify the winner of a presidential election. The attack was eventually put down and Congress returned to officially certify Joe Biden’s victory. “They tried to disrupt our democracy. They failed,” Senator Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader in the Senate, said when the Senate came back into session. But the effort to disrupt and undermine American democracy didn’t end on 6 January. In fact, it has speeded up over the 12 months since then. Working in state legislatures across the US, Republicans have launched a methodical effort to undermine the post-election processing of votes and the people who count them. One year after the effort to steal the 2020 election for Donald Trump failed, Republicans have put in place machinery to ensure future attempts could be successful. The potential for a stolen election in the US is higher than ever. In recent years there has been growing alarm over the way the Republican party has eagerly embraced voter suppression – efforts to change election rules to make it harder to vote. But what’s happening now, experts say, is new – an effort to take control of the administration of elections and vote counting itself. “What we’re seeing is an unprecedented, multi-pronged assault on the foundations of our democracy,” said Wendy Weiser, who directs the democracy program at the Brennan Center for Justice. “We’re really seeing an all-out effort to undermine election administration in America.” Republicans have built this attack around three pillars. First, they have encouraged and fomented doubt about the results of the 2020 election. Second, they have passed new laws that inject more partisanship into election administration. And third, they have sought to take over key election offices from which they could exert enormous unilateral power over vote-counting and post-election certification. Republicans have taken the idea of a stolen election from the fringes of political discourse and made it party orthodoxy. Senior Republicans have castigated fellow members who have contested claims the election was illegitimate. At the state level, Republicans have continued to spread false accusations about the 2020 vote and embraced unusual and partisan reviews of the 2020 election that have used shoddy methodology to question the results. In Arizona, Republicans hired Cyber Ninjas, a firm with no election experience to lead a widely panned review of the election results in the state’s largest county. The final report affirmed Biden’s win, but also suggested there were irregularities. The claims were immediately explained and debunked. In Wisconsin, Republican legislators authorized their own post-election inquiry, led by a former state supreme court justice who has hired partisan staffers, threatened to jail mayors of some of the state’s biggest cities and said he doesn’t know how elections work. In 2020, Trump allies pushed state lawmakers in Georgia and Arizona to reject the popular vote in their state and choose their own electors. That effort was unsuccessful. But the focus on undermining the 2020 results now appears to be laying the groundwork to allow lawmakers to successfully do this in 2024 and beyond, said Jessica Marsden, a lawyer at Protect Democracy who is tracking election subversion efforts. “In both Arizona and Georgia, you had the governors not willing to go along with that game, they would have been doing that quite explicitly to throw out the vote of their own constituents,” Marsden said. “What the disinformation campaign does is try to lower the political cost of throwing out election results by creating a lot of uncertainty about what the true results were.” The effort appears to be working – 71% of Republicans believe Biden’s victory was not legitimate, according to a recent UMass Amherst poll. There was also a surge of bills last year that sought to interfere with election administration in 2021. As of mid-December last year, 262 election interference bills had been introduced in 41 states, according to the States United Democracy Center. Thirty-two of those bills have become law in 17 states. Among them is a new law in Georgia that gives state lawmakers the authority to review local election boards and replace them if the state election board determines they are underperforming. Separate from that law, Georgia Republicans have also quietly acted to remove Democrats from their positions on county election boards. A new Arkansas law allows state officials to investigate irregularities and remove local election officials from their posts if needed. In Wisconsin, Ron Johnson, a Republican US senator, has suggested that the Republican-controlled legislature should unilaterally assert control of federal elections, eliminating the six-member bipartisan commission that runs elections in the state. Republicans in the state legislature have also called for criminal punishment for members of the commission as well as its non-partisan administrator. “What’s going in Wisconsin is sort of the canary in the coalmine of what is spreading across the United States,” said Ann Jacobs, a Democrat who chairs the six-person panel that oversees elections in Wisconsin. “There is a faction of the Republican party that is openly embracing the idea that people’s votes should not count.” Beyond laws, Republicans who believe the election was stolen have also launched an aggressive effort to win elections for secretary of state, the top election official in many places. They are targeting offices in Michigan, Georgia, Nevada and Wisconsin, all key swing states where secretaries played a key role in ensuring a fair vote count in 2020. In Michigan, Republicans have also tapped election deniers to serve on local canvassing boards, responsible for local election certification, in several counties, a role from which they could cause significant damage in future elections. That effort comes as a flood of election officials have left their jobs in the last year facing a flood of harassment and other threats, opening up opportunities for inexperienced and partisan workers to fill the void. It has raised fears over what might happen in 2024’s presidential election, especially if Trump runs again. Democrats are still seeking a way to block this kind of subversion. The Freedom to Vote Act, one of two sweeping voting rights bills stalled in Congress, would prohibit the removal of election officials without cause and strengthens protections for election workers. It also requires the use of paper ballots, creating a paper trail to verify after an election, and sets minimum election standards around election rules. But even though Democrats have pledged they will find a way to pass the bill, they have yet to find a way around the filibuster to do so. While Democrats try to find a way forward, Weiser, the Brennan Center expert, noted the Republicans campaign already appeared to be succeeding. “We have vote suppression measures in place. We have qualified, professional election administrators across the country having left their positions,” she said. “We have candidates for election office at the gubernatorial level saying that they would refuse to certify election results if it didn’t turn out a certain way. “We already have significant damage to our electoral system that’s already in place. That we’re already going to be living with.”Boris Johnson should bar Bain &amp; Company from lucrative government contracts in light of a judicial commission’s findings about the management consultancy’s “despicable” role in state corruption in South Africa, Peter Hain has said. In a letter shared with the Guardian, the former Labour minister and anti-apartheid campaigner urged Johnson to “immediately freeze all government contracts with Bain” and to advise all public bodies to do the same. Lord Hain said the measure should be taken unless Bain fully cooperates with South African prosecutors and investigators, who are investigating alleged corruption under the former president Jacob Zuma. Hain’s demand comes after a South African judicial commission investigating state capture and corruption concluded there had been “collusion” between Bain and Zuma to reshape entire sectors of the economy. In the first of three reports, the commission found that between 2012 and 2015 Bain helped draw up plans to “seize and restructure” the South African Revenue Service (Sars) and centralise procurement procedures – changes that the report said would facilitate corruption. Bain allegedly first established connections in South African politics via two artists, who were paid R3.6m (£170,000) a year as part of an arrangement that made little business sense but opened doors to senior lawmakers. According to emails reviewed by the commission, a finance director in Bain’s London office, Geoff Smout, raised concerns that the relationship “seems very dodgy”, while Wendy Miller, the head of marketing, said it might not pass the “sunshine test”, meaning the reaction if it were known about publicly. Bain allegedly knew in advance that a new Sars chief was due to be appointed and provided him with a “first 100 days” plan to overhaul the service, despite it being highly rated by independent assessments of efficiency. In 2014 Bain benefited from the extension of a six-week contract into a R164m (£8m) contract to advise Sars over 27 months, responding to a tender document that the company had helped to draft, according to the report. The commission cited internal emails that suggest Bain knew that it did not have the expertise to perform the work but went ahead anyway. A section of its proposals published by the commission included advice to “identify individuals to neutralise” within Sars. In evidence to the commission, Bain said this did not mean that opponents of its plans for the revenue service should face any kind of punishment but that they should be persuaded to be “neutral” towards its proposals. The commission relied in part upon evidence from a former Bain employee, Athol Williams, who was hired by the management consultancy to look into what had happened but resigned because he felt the company was not being transparent with him. Bain made numerous attempts to offer Williams “large sums of money in return for his silence”, according to the commission’s report. In Hain’s letter to Johnson, the peer wrote that Bain’s actions were “despicable”. He said South Africa “had its tax collection and enforcement capabilities massively and systematically damaged during the Zuma administration, rendering it ineffective in enforcing tax compliance. “Shamefully, the commission found that this serious damage to Sars’s tax raising capacity resulted directly from deliberate actions, including by a prominent global corporation operating in the UK, Bain &amp; Company.” The letter continued: “That a multinational company such as Bain would act as a willing and knowing accomplice to corruption by those intent on undermining the South African state and its democracy, is outrageous. I therefore find it completely unacceptable that Bain &amp; Co is licensed to operate commercially in the UK and is endorsed by your government by contracting for work with government departments and public sector bodies.” Bain, which is based in Boston, Massachusetts, is a leading global management consultancy that frequently benefits from multimillion pound contracts with the UK government. They include a £30m contract to provide consultancy services to the Cabinet Office for the year ending August 2021, and £25m advising the same department on Brexit between 2018 and 2020. It has also worked for NHS England, the Department for Digital, Culture, Media &amp; Sport, the energy regulator Ofgem and the Ministry of Defence. Bain was founded in 1973 by Bill Bain, a former group vice-president of Boston Consulting Group. Bain was later led by Mitt Romney, who went on to be the Republican party’s presidential nominee in 2012, losing out to Barack Obama. Bain &amp; Co also spawned the $150bn private equity group Bain Capital, which was co-founded by Romney and which recently failed in a £530m bid to buy LV= after members of the British mutual rebelled against the deal. In a statement, Bain said: “We accept that through various lapses in leadership and governance, Bain South Africa became an unwitting participant in a process that inflicted serious damage on Sars, for which we apologise. “While the commission highlighted mistakes on our part and made a number of recommendations, we remain confident that we did not in any way wilfully or knowingly support state capture at Sars. We have offered full cooperation to enforcement authorities and will continue to do so. We have since taken comprehensive action to ensure that we do not repeat our past mistakes.” The company said it had paid back the money it made from the Sars contract. Zuma has denied wrongdoing and refused to cooperate with the inquiry, leading to his imprisonment in July for contempt of court. • This article was amended on 10 January 2022. Bain Capital is a private equity group, not a hedge fund as an earlier version said.Pick of the week After Life The lack of closure at the end of season two of Ricky Gervais’s tragicomic study of bereavement felt deliberate – after all, grief never really ends. The challenge for this final season is to combine narrative progression with something psychologically plausible. In the opening episode, local newspaper reporter Tony (Gervais) is sent to interview an author and medium, which feels like Gervais pondering his frequently proclaimed atheism. As a writer, he still lurches violently between saccharine sentimentality and snark. But the show does communicate the baby steps of recovery from loss and the sense of getting by without really living. PH Netflix, from Friday 14 January *** Twenties “My life ain’t that messy. Well, it’s a little messy but I’m in the process of trying to clean it up.” The second season of Lena Waithe’s brisk, sparky LA-set drama, which puts Black LGBTQ+ characters front and centre, sees Hattie (Jonica T Gibbs) continuing to try to navigate young adulthood. After her seduction by Sophina Brown’s beguiling Ida B, Hattie is working on a new relationship with a different power dynamic. She’s also trying to move her film script into the next phase. Elsewhere, Mari (Christina Elmore) and Nia (Gabrielle Graham) are facing dilemmas of their own. PH BBC iPlayer, from Sunday 9 January *** The Journalist “Can one journalist really change anything?” The recent furore over partying politicians has demonstrated the impact that good journalism can have – and this Japanese series is an attempt to reposition journalists as glamorous, truth-telling heroes. Anna Matsuda (Ryoko Yonekura) has a similar TV presence to a maverick, rule-breaking cop as she digs into a high-stakes corruption case that no one else wants to touch. Before long, she’s following a trail leading to the very top and, inevitably, giving her editor considerable pause for thought in the process. PH Netflix, from Thursday 13 January *** The Real Queens of Hip-Hop: The Women Who Changed the Game Through wordplay, storytelling and a lot of catchy beats, female rappers have been saying it like it is since the first pioneers shook things up in 70s America. Cheryl Renee James (Salt of Salt-N-Pepa) narrates this one-off special celebrating the legacy of female rap and speaking with its legends such as MC Lyte – a lyrical genius who confidently responded to the oppression of women, and the first female MC to release a solo album on a major label. HR Disney+, from Friday 14 January *** Dark Woods The never-ending small-screen European crime wave continues, this time with a drama based on real-life events that took place in northern Germany in the summer of 1989. It’s a patient affair – this murder investigation spans 30 years and was triggered by the disappearance of the sister of a high-ranking police officer from Hamburg. The officer, Thomas Bethge (played by Matthias Brandt), was on holiday in the area at the time and, inevitably, found himself dragged into the case. A drama that gives up its secrets slowly but rewardingly. PH All 4, from Friday 14 January *** Archive 81 Equal parts supernatural horror and doomed, time-hopping romance, this new series takes the “found footage” trope used in films such as The Blair Witch Project and gives it a twist. Dina Shihabi plays Melody Pendras, a documentary film-maker whose investigation into a mysterious cult in 1994 ended suddenly. Dan Turner (Mamoudou Athie) is the modern-day video archivist who becomes emotionally invested in her fate after taking on the job of piecing together her recordings. But what will he discover about the cult and Melody’s connection to them? PH Netflix, from Friday 14 January *** The House This wild, stop-motion animated miniseries is arguably Netflix’s freakiest endeavour to date. It’s a long way from Wallace and Gromit, as within the spooky old pile of the title, three surreal stories jostle for space – seemingly separate and yet tangentially connected. However, the real fun is found in the gratuitously strange visual flourishes: this is a world of dancing cockroaches, anthropomorphic cats and spooky, blank-faced puppets coming to life. Matthew Goode and Helena Bonham Carter are among the actors lending their voices to these abominations. PH Netflix, from Friday 14 JanuaryThe government’s failure to enable local politicians to meet virtually is hampering councils, worrying older councillors and shutting out new participants, according to Jackie Weaver, who shot to fame thanks to a video clip of an ill-tempered council meeting 10 months ago. Weaver, who became one of the most unlikely breakout stars of 2021 after footage from the Handforth parish council meeting she was attending went viral, has issued the rallying cry amid fears that current high infection rates could hit participation in local politics hard. In April the high court ruled that from May council meetings in England must take place in person – after coronavirus restrictions which allowed virtual meetings lapsed. “It is completely unreasonable that we are having to cancel council meetings or hold them only in emergencies for goodness knows how long. Where is democracy?” said Weaver in an interview conducted, inevitably, over Zoom. This week Lawyers in Local Governmentthe Association of Democratic Services Officers (ADSO) launched a petition calling for councils to be allowed to meet remotely because “they know best” what type of meetings work in their area. After a tumultuous 10 months in which Weaver, the chief officer of the Cheshire Association of Local Councils, has played herself in the Archers, opened the Brit awards as “Weaver the Cleaver” and featured on Celebrity Mastermind, she is also calling for legislation that will, once again, allow council meetings to be held online. The public can only hope that it will lead to more filmed exchanges like the Handforth meeting that gripped the nation in the dark days of last February’s lockdown, when Weaver was commanded by Aled’s iPad to: “Read the standing orders, read them and understand them!” Weaver said: “Despite everyone and their cat and dog saying it should be local councils that are able to determine how they hold meetings, that legislation has lapsed and the impact is quite profound. “Because of the demographics of many of our parish councils, we have a lot of parish councillors still very reluctant to attend. And should we even be encouraging attendance?” She said the lack of virtual meetings was a blow to the government’s “levelling up” agenda, making democratic participation more difficult for those with caring responsibilities and disabilities. A recent Local Government Association (LGA) survey of councils, conducted before the emergence of Omicron, found that 72% had recorded a drop in councillor attendance at statutory council meetings and 73% had reported a fall in public attendance. The LGA has called on the government to urgently bring forward emergency legislation, saying the gathering of up to 200 people in one room is an “unnecessary public health risk”. James Jamieson, the chair of the LGA, said emergency legislation would help curb the spread of the virus and make sure “councils can continue to make democratic decisions, even during times of emergency”. A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said it was considering a call for evidence on the matter, which closed on 17 June, and would be responding shortly. Reflecting on the year that made her a particularly British type of hero, Weaver said that while she relished being given the “opportunity on a plate” to spread the word about the importance of local government, the line between Jackie the local government champion and Jackie Weaver the viral star had become blurred in recent months. “I can’t say it annoys me, that just would be ungrateful,” she said. “But at the same time, it costs.” But with the no-nonsense good humour that saw her booting several Handforth parish councillors out of the meeting during the infamous fracas – two have since stepped down – she brushed off any suggestion she was indulging in a “pity party”, expressing her dislike of moaners and admiration for people who get stuck in. “People feel like the only way you effect change is from the top, and I don’t subscribe to that at all,” she said. “I think often we end up doing nothing, because we can’t change the world.” As for her own future, after writing a book, You Do Have the Authority Here, based on her own wisdom, she “doesn’t have a plan as such” for this year beyond calmly carrying out her day job and continuing to bang the drum for local government. “I hope that every time we’re coming up to elections, there is something that helps us capture ordinary people’s imaginations and makes them feel that they actually can make a difference,” she said. “For me, that is always the most important thing.”When is the NHS overwhelmed? When the army is called in. The military has been summoned to deal with chronic staff shortages. Some will be doctors; others will greet patients and keep stocks maintained. But this is only the latest distress flare from our austerity-stricken and staff-starved health service. Is it “overwhelmed” now the NHS is running out of lateral flow tests for its own staff, the latest government procurement disaster? Boris Johnson wisely says: “I won’t provide a definition of what being overwhelmed would constitute”. But for Alastair McLellan, editor of the Health Service Journal, the NHS is long past the point where words can describe the state it’s in. “We’ve run out of language,” he says. “We’ve exhausted the adverbs and adjectives. The thesaurus has run dry.” TV news may need images of stretchers laid out on winter pavements, but ambulances were already queueing for hours outside A&amp;Es before the pandemic. We hear of ambulance services telling patients with heart attacks and strokes to get a lift to hospital. Even during the winters before Covid, we’d grown used to trolleys lined up in corridors and 12-hour admission waits. GP appointments had long grown scarce. Cancer delays are the longest on record. Expect no tipping points: “This is the new normal,” a London teaching hospital medical director warns me. The admirable NHS “copes”. It triages and triages again, treating people according to available beds and who is nearest to death. That’s rationing, a word politicians shun. Waiting used to be the traditional rationing mechanism in a financially capped system. There’s no mystery as to why this is happening: waiting lists rise and fall according to the level of funding. Seasoned observers used to assume queueing was a permanent function, until New Labour all but abolished waiting times, ensuring everyone was treated within 18 weeks from GP to hospital. During the post-2010 austerity years, funding increases fell behind the country’s growing, ageing population. By 2017, waiting lists had risen to just over 4 million. Let’s hope that despite the record infection rates we’ve seen in recent days, hospitalisations stay low enough so that the NHS still “copes”. If so, Johnson will get away with his high-risk plan B, with its new year pubbing and clubbing in the face of scientists’ concerns. But you wouldn’t praise someone for surviving a dash across the M1 with their eyes shut, especially if we all had to run across with him. Covid may calm to a low permanency within months, but what then for the NHS? In the trail of the pandemic is a fast-rising, 6 million-strong waiting list – Sajid Javid even warns of far higher. Nigel Edwards, the Nuffield Trust’s chief executive, along with anyone else you ask, warns of exhausted staff and rising vacancies, with people quitting and retiring early, while long Covid and untreated illnesses add to the burden. According to the Royal College of Nursing, half of nurses are over 50, one in five leaves during training, one in three in their first year, while social care is even more bereft. A new report from the health and social care select committee blames the government for refusing to build a future workforce strategy. Perversely, former health secretary Jeremy Hunt’s amendment to the health and care bill, calling for a regular independent assessment on workforce estimates, was knocked down by the government in November, and Hunt’s demand for one kicked away again at PMQs this week. Staffing costs take up 70% of the NHS budget, so the Treasury knows that putting numbers on the needs of the next decade will expose severe underfunding. It takes 10 years to train a consultant and four years to train a nurse, but their training was one of the first things to be cut in 2010: more nursing places have been added since, but entire cohorts are still missing. The NHS England (NHSE) People Plan last year offered kindly advice on retaining staff, but the Treasury banned it from adding hard numbers for future needs. Health Education England held out for training funds, a sum that has still not been fixed, but the body has been punished and demoted, merged into NHSE and losing its voice to speak out. On Christmas Eve, NHSE produced 10 goals for the year, a wish list to send up the chimney asking for everything: “outstanding care”, “tackling the elective backlog”, “growth” in mental and community services – and much more. (There was no mention of Covid lessons or the need for permanent emergency preparation for the next contagion.) There will be no money for anything but bare-bones “coping”. The Financial Times’ annual poll of 100 economists predicts we will trail other rich countries in economic recovery this year. John Appleby, chief economist at the Nuffield Trust, warns that although the government promises the NHS £5.4bn in extra funding, hospitals have already overspent by £4-5bn, so much of that funding will vanish in repaying debts. Covid emergency money stops in April. The big question – for government and voters – is how much more they want to spend on health. Labour proved it’s not a “bottomless pit”, but you get what you pay for. Forget the groundswell of calls for “reform” from ignoramus Tory voices who imagine French and German “insurance” schemes magic up more private money. The only major difference from our national insurance is that they pay more and get more per head – beds, doctors, nurses and results. In this forever undertaxed country the tax revenue is 33% of GDP, while the 14 EU states pay an average 39%, according to the IFS. Would we pay that EU average? A bigger question: should we really spend such a high proportion on the NHS and care, weighted towards the last years of people my age, while education suffers? Teachers have seen their pay cut by 8% since 2007, while FE and schools are miserably threadbare, denuded of arts and sports. The unavoidable answer is yes, voters will put the NHS first: once the emergency passes the government will face angry patients. The sobering experience of Labour’s years, says Ben Page of Ipsos Mori, is that people waiting for hip and knee surgery notice no cut in waiting times until they drop right down to three months; anything above is unacceptable. But after the years of underfunding, restoring the NHS to its 2010 state is unthinkable: that’s another 10-year project that requires high funding. The government itself may feel “overwhelmed” when public complaints at its decade of damage swell into an NHS political crisis, too late for any easy solutions. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistThe business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, is considering how to reduce the impact of rising energy costs on Britain’s households. Since October the market price for natural gas has jumped from £2.50 a therm to £4.50 before dropping back to £1.70. In recent days it has begun to tick up again and on Wednesday it hit £2.23 a therm. To give a measure of the shock to the economy from rising energy prices, in January 2021 the price was about 50p a therm. The last price cap increase, in October, pushed bills to an average of £1,277 a year for a dual-fuel bill. The next review is expected to push bills up by 50% to nearer £2,000. Kwarteng said he wanted to ease the pain on businesses and households, but he is up against a chancellor keen to maintain a tight hold on public finances. The government has options, but all have political and financial costs. VAT cut At a cost of £2bn, Rishi Sunak could cut the 5% VAT rate on household energy. It was a move promised in the Brexit campaign by Boris Johnson among others as a mark of independence from EU VAT rules, and would help about 20m to 23m households. But the cut would offset only £75 to £100 of the expected £700 rise in bills. Labour has supported calls for a cut as a first move to supporting all those affected by the rising cost of living. Johnson has recently distanced himself from making the change, calling it a “blunt instrument”. Reversing the national insurance hike A 1.25% rise in national insurance contributions for employees and employers from April, labelled the health and social care levy, will raise £14bn for the exchequer. The leader of the House of Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, a low-tax campaigner, told his cabinet colleagues this week it would be bad politics to impose such a large burden on the workforce at a time of rising living costs. But a decision to scrap the reduction would benefit the better off as well as those on lower incomes, making it another blunt instrument. Tighter energy price cap The regulator Ofgem could limit the rise in the energy price cap when it conducts a six-month review in April. If the government comes forward with a loan scheme for the industry, it would allow energy suppliers to smooth out the recent rise in costs over several years. The suppliers could borrow cheaply from the Treasury over the coming months and then repay loans from bills over subsequent years. It would mean that retail prices do not fall when wholesale prices drop, and would bake in higher energy prices for years to come. Expanding warm homes/winter fuel allowance The warm homes discount (WHD) will need an overhaul if it is to come close to filling the expected £700-a-year increase in domestic gas and electricity bills due in April. Currently, households on a low income and in receipt of certain benefits receive £140 off their electricity bill, a sum that has not increased in nine years. Pensioners in receipt of pension credit automatically receive the money paid directly to their supplier. In December the charity AgeUK said more than 900,000 eligible pensioners were missing out on pension credit payments because they had not applied. Another group – those on low incomes and in receipt of a small number of benefits mostly open to people with disabilities or a child under five – are also eligible for WHD, but they have to apply for the money and hope their energy supplier is still accepting applications. Only suppliers with at least 250,000 customers are required to make the payments, and a number of the big firms including EDF, Scottish Power and Utility Warehouse have now closed their schemes for 2021-22. It leaves applicants having to switch suppliers to receive the money. Universal credit Last year the government cut universal credit payments by £20 a week, saving the Treasury £6bn. The move took payments back to their pre-pandemic level and was offset by a lower marginal taper rate that allowed 2 million of the 6 million claimants on higher, though still modest, incomes to keep more of their benefits, at a cost of £2bn. A reinstatement of £10 a week would boost the incomes of the lowest paid by £600 a year at a cost of around £3bn to the Treasury. Windfall tax on oil and gas profits A windfall tax would aim to recoup some of the estimated £20bn spent by energy retailers on buying oil and gas at higher prices over the last year. But which firms should be targeted when so much oil and gas is sourced from overseas? If the 40% provided by North Sea gas producers fills the Treasury’s vision, some also play a part in government-backed carbon capture projects, probably triggering a backlash. When prices are volatile, determining the size of tax could also prove difficult.Australians may be unable to buy fresh produce at supermarkets while fruit and vegetables are left to rot on farms unless staff shortages caused by the coronavirus pandemic are fixed, the industry’s peak body has warned. Michael Rogers, the chief executive of the Australian Fresh Produce Alliance, said there was a “significant risk” of such a situation. The industry is calling for seven-day isolation times for close contacts who test negative to be done away with so that workers who are cleared of the disease can immediately return to work. He said the pandemic had halved the workforce available to some companies, with transport and distribution hubs worst hit so far. However, he said he expected that if nothing was done to address the staff shortage it would soon follow the spread of Covid-19 across Australia and hit farms and packing businesses in rural Australia. “Through all of Covid, the food supply chain was continuing to operate,” he said. “So we’re very realistic and pragmatic about the way forward. But what we’re trying to say is we’re in the worst position that we have been through Covid.” Exploding coronavirus numbers, which reached close to 80,000 on Friday, due to the highly infectious Omicron variant and the opening up of the economy, have kept people away from work as they either await a hard-to-find test, isolate because they have been a close contact or are sick. The lack of staff has pummelled businesses across the Australian economy, leading to cancelled flights, empty supermarket shelves and warnings that the meat supply is in danger. “We need to find a way to keep food moving through to supermarkets and keep food on shelves for Australians,” Rogers said. “We don’t want to get to a stage where we’re destroying food in a farm, at a paddock, because we can’t get it to the supermarket and Australians go to the supermarket and there’s not food on shelves.” Rogers said highly perishable vegetables including leafy greens and soft fruits were most in danger of disappearing from shops. “Anything that’s highly perishable is going to be the most vulnerable to disruption. So that’s why it’s important for us to make sure that the transport and logistics is operating and functioning because it takes pressure off the growing.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Small business and unions have repeatedly called for rapid antigen tests to be made free for small and medium-sized companies – something Rogers said was “on the table” but stopped short of endorsing. “My understanding from where we’re standing right now, is that: are there any tests available? I think that’s the first hurdle,” he said. “In an ideal world, yes, government would provide RAT tests free of charge to supply chain but that’s a lot of people, a lot of tests, a lot of different places.” Innes Willox, the chief executive of the Australian Industry Group, also said people should be allowed to return to work immediately after getting a negative Covid test. “Businesses will face significant costs to provide rapid tests for their staff once supply ramps up over the coming months,” he said. “Consideration needs to be given on how to reduce or reimburse these costs for businesses trying to keep their operations going.” Earlier this week, the prime minister acknowledged staff shortages caused by Covid isolation rules were taking a toll and said the federal government was considering how to address the problem. The prime minister has asked the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, to meet with state governments to discuss potential changes to workplace health and safety laws. A spokesman for Cash said on Thursday that the Morrison government “will work with state and territory governments to provide clarity to employers on rapid antigen testing requirements under WHS [work health and safety] laws”. “The attorney general is reaching out to WHS ministers to progress this work.”A new trove of secret royal correspondence further highlights the inappropriateness of John Kerr’s interactions with the Queen’s private secretary in the lead-up to Gough Whitlam’s dismissal, according to historian Jenny Hocking. Almost two years ago, Hocking won a monumental legal battle to secure the release of correspondence between then governor general Kerr, and the Queen and her private secretary, Martin Charteris. The letters showed the extent to which the palace was drawn into Kerr’s 1975 plans to remove the Labor leader from office. They also raised questions about Kerr’s actions as governor general, a role marked by its requirement for political neutrality. The letters showed he was privately railing against the Whitlam government, attacking their policy decisions, querying appointments, revealing details of confidential meetings of the executive government, and asking for advice and assurances from the monarchy about the potential use of reserve powers to dissolve government during the 1975 crisis. On Friday, the National Archives of Australia released a huge volume of additional correspondence, spanning five governors general and 36 years, including that between Charteris and Kerr’s predecessor Paul Hasluck in 1974, the year before the dismissal. The additional documents were reclassified and released in the wake of the high court’s 2020 decision that the Kerr letters were not “personal” correspondence, a classification that exempted them from the usual 30-year public release provisions applying to commonwealth records. An early analysis of the documents by Hocking shows a remarkably different approach taken by Hasluck, a former Liberal member, in his correspondence with the crown. Hasluck wrote roughly one letter a month. His correspondence was much rarer than Kerr, who wrote constantly to Charteris, asking his advice regularly, including on mundane matters, like what he should wear to his swearing in ceremony. The difference is so stark that the Kerr letters, which span three years, are as voluminous as the combined correspondence of five governor-generals across 36 years. In Hasluck’s correspondence about the 1974 double dissolution, he merely informs Charteris that he has dissolved parliament, rather than discussing political possibilities or seeking advice or input from the crown beforehand, as Kerr did. On 22 April 1974, he wrote to inform the crown he had dissolved parliament ten days earlier. “Although there had been much talk for some months past about the possibility of a double dissolution, the political crisis developed quickly and unexpectedly,” Hasluck wrote. “Ever since he came to office and faced a non-Labour majority in the Senate, the prime minister had taken some care to build up evidence to support a case for a double dissolution in case he ever found it advantageous to seek one. I doubt, however, whether he planned to make a submission at this time.” Hocking said that the “contrast could not be stronger” between Hasluck and Kerr’s letters. “[The letters] are just so different from Kerr’s – it’s really quite remarkable,” Hocking said. “He writes when he needs to and, most importantly, he reports on decisions after he has made them.” The newly released material is partly redacted. Hocking, who was still working her way through the documents late Friday, said the redactions were disappointing. • The headline of this article was amended on 17 January 2022 better reflect the content of the article.Almost all of the 12,500 beds across public and private hospitals in New South Wales will be occupied – by both Covid cases and regular patients – when pressure from the state’s Omicron outbreak peaks in late January, if worst-case scenario modelling is realised. On Friday, after NSW’s chief health officer, Kerry Chant, acknowledged that the 38,625 new cases recorded were an “underestimate” of the actual total, health authorities released fresh hospitalisation modelling, alongside the announcement of a pause on elective surgeries and new restrictions to slow the speed of Omicron. Pressure on the state’s health system will peak in the third or fourth week of January, the modelling based on vaccination coverage, general health and outbreak data from NSW and abroad predicts, with beds in intensive care and other wards likely to be stretched. “By the middle of February we will be certainly well past the peak of this,” NSW Health deputy secretary Susan Pearce said. Under the most realistic scenario, which is based on NSW’s infection data and current parameters, 4,700 patients with Covid will be hospitalised at the peak, with 273 Covid patients in intensive care. Under the worst-case scenario, which is consistent with what has been seen in New York, 6,000 people are predicted to be hospitalised with Covid at the peak and 600 ICU beds to be occupied by Covid patients. If the best-case scenario eventuates, the modelling – which is consistent with outbreaks seen in London and the South African province of Gauteng – predicts there will be 3,158 Covid patients hospitalised at the peak, with 270 of those people in ICU. NSW’s public hospital bed capacity is about 9,500, and on Thursday, 8,000 of these beds were occupied by 1,600 patients with Covid and 6,400 people receiving treatment for other illnesses. Should demand for hospital beds exceed 9,500, the government will be able to access at least 3,000 beds in private hospitals across NSW, taking the state’s total hospital bed capacity to 12,500. Under the worst-case scenario, 6,000 people with Covid will require beds, in addition to the baseline figure of more than 6,000 people in hospital for treatment of illnesses that aren’t Covid. NSW’s ICU capacity is 1,000 beds, and on Thursday, 467 of these beds were occupied, including by 134 patients with Covid and a baseline of 333 non-Covid patients requiring intensive care. Under the worst-case scenario, whereby 600 ICU beds will be occupied by Covid patients, the state’s intensive care capacity would be hovering just under capacity. The modelling predictions are in stark contrast to the way in which the Delta outbreak placed pressure on the state’s hospital system in 2021, when Covid hospitalisations peaked at just 1,266 but ICU admissions with Covid were 244. This pressure on ICUs experienced during the Delta outbreak is comparable with the most realistic and best-case scenarios predicted for the upcoming Omicron peak, despite different overall hospitalisation figures – a prediction in line with evidence that the Omicron strain is milder. Pearce noted that the state’s ICU bed capacity had been “quite significantly” revised down from the planned surge capacity during the Delta outbreak, as authorities are conscious that the number of health staff available to care for those patients will be affected by isolation requirements. “We obviously consider very carefully our workforce,” Pearce said, encouraging registered health professionals not currently working to rejoin the workforce. “If I need to put on a uniform myself and go and work I will.” The premier, Dominic Perrottet, acknowledged that while there was already “significant pressure” on the health system, the modelling showed that “even on a worst-case scenario, we have the capacity in our health system right now”. However Danielle McMullen, the NSW president of the Australian Medical Association, said that “aside from the worst case, even in the most realistic scenario, there will be a serious strain on our health system and workers”. “These are pretty shocking predictions for people in the health system. The next six to eight weeks will be a big challenge.” McMullen believes health workers will “rise to the occasion” and cope with the peak, but warned that “it’s not going to be a fun time to work in the health system”. “At no other stage of the pandemic have we needed that volume of private hospital capacity,” she said. “We’ve mostly leaned on it for staffing and elective surgeries, but to have the level of overflow of patients even under the most realistic prediction will be unprecedented.” McMullen also cautioned that the modelling only illustrates hospital bed capacity and doesn’t show likely emergency room levels, which continue to bear the brunt of the pressure. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She also said “there’ll be a multitude of that pressure affecting general practice”, especially as health workers are also tied up administering booster shots and initial Covid vaccine doses to children. McMullen warned people in NSW to have different expectations for health care in coming months. “To reach the capacities in the model, the threshold for entering hospital will have to adjust,” she said. “Some infections, such as urinary, skin and chest infections, can be managed at home, and so for borderline cases, those people will instead have to receive care in their home.” This week, Guardian Australia has revealed the pressure that Omicron spread has placed on hospitals, including multiple claims of Covid-positive nurses being asked to work shifts in breach of health protocols and overworked staff at a regional hospital quitting.The word Demerara probably means nothing to you, other than being the name of a large-grained golden brown sugar. But Demerara is a place, or it was. Part of what is now called Guyana, Demerara was a British territory rich in sugar plantations. It was one of the most lucrative colonies, owing to the high yield of the land and high productivity of the enslaved people who worked on it, productivity extracted via exceptional brutality. The enslaved outnumbered the white colonists significantly, so it was thought that their treatment needed to be particularly harsh, so as not to encourage rebellion. That came anyway, in 1823. Thomas Harding tells the story of one of the lesser known uprisings of the colonial era, but his book is not just a work of narrative nonfiction, it is an attempt to illustrate that Britain needs to acknowledge the country’s “white debt”, how much of its greatness it owes to the exploitation of enslaved people. For Harding, it’s personal. His ancestors, through trade in tobacco and other commodities grown on plantations, benefited from slavery. But Harding is also Jewish, and descended from Germans who either perished in the Holocaust or were forced to flee and had their property stolen. Harding received a sum in restitution from the German government, and these reparations compelled him to examine the other part of his family’s legacy. “If I was willing to identify as a victim in my father’s family, to receive reparations from the German government, then surely I had better understand Britain’s role in slavery,” he writes. Harding understands how much of Britain’s history is skewed towards narratives that portray it as the virtuous protagonist in the account of slavery because the actual protagonists, the enslaved themselves, were never the centre of their own stories. He corrects this by carefully researching the characters of those enslaved on Demerara, and paying attention to how they are described. He replaces “slave” with “enslaved men and women”, as well as putting in quotation marks all markers of ownership – “purchased”, “belonged”, “owned”. Those who participated in the uprising he refers to as “abolitionists” – the term “rebels” implies that they were challenging a legitimate system. The effect is striking, demonstrating that slavery was not just the way things were, but a daily aberration in which one class actively suppressed another. With these small but considered edits, Harding delivers a masterclass in how authors of history can play an active role, for good and for bad, in how these moral questions are framed. The account of the uprising itself centres on its participants, their shattered bodies and shattered dreams, their domestic lives and stirring hopes for emancipation. As the uprising surges and then is violently suppressed, I found myself asking: why didn’t I know about this? Why are we so familiar (as Harding himself observes) with the drawl of the American slaveowner and the caricatures of slavery in movies such as Django Unchained, but not with the large cast of British characters? The answer is that it is those characters who got to write British history. And through slavery, they amassed such wealth and influence that, like John Gladstone, the largest slave “owner” in Demerara and a fierce anti-abolitionist, they managed to launch themselves from relatively humble beginnings into the ranks of landed gentry and political aristocracy. Gladstone’s fortune from slavery sent his sons to Eton, and one of them was prime minister William Gladstone. White Debt is written sparingly – there are no sanctimonious lectures on the evils of slavery or chastisements of the British establishment for promoting a false version of history. Harding is almost apologetic in his entreaties to consider reparations, which he believes are due both in financial terms, and as formal acknowledgment of the injustices of slavery. But the book is nonetheless infuriating for its wealth of information that should be common knowledge yet is not, buried under the celebratory propaganda of Britain’s abolition of the transatlantic slave trade. The uprising happened after that abolition, because despite the fact that the British parliament passed a law in 1807 prohibiting the Atlantic slave trade, the shipping and selling of enslaved people between British colonies was still permitted and Demerara became a thriving market. Harding argues that the Demerara uprising played a larger role than it is given in changing British attitudes towards slavery. But more broadly, the whitewashing of the violent suppression of the uprising at the time, in the British press and parliament, feels sickeningly contemporary. White Debt is full of details that will send a chill down your spine. Michael M’Turk, one of the most brutal slave “owners” in Demerara, who executed one of the abolitionists during the uprisings and strung up his body as a warning to others, cleverly anticipated when the tide against slavery would turn. He presented fake testimonials of his care for the enslaved to Queen Victoria, and managed to secure a knighthood and a place in the history books as someone who was on the right side of history. In his actions, there is no more fitting metaphor for the country as a whole. Britain not only expunged its own record of brutality towards the enslaved, it cast itself as their saviour. • White Debt by Thomas Harding is published by W&amp;N (£20, $32.99 in Australia). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.That is where we will leave the live blog for Friday. We will be back again tomorrow morning. Here’s what made the news today: Australia reported a one-day record for Covid-19 cases, with 78,166 new cases reported across the country including: 38,625 in NSW, 21,728 in Victoria, 10,953 in Queensland, 3,707 in South Australia, 1,489 in Tasmania, 1,246 in the ACT, 412 in the Northern Territory, and six in Western Australia (in hotel quarantine). The national death toll is 2321: Victoria 1,565 (+6), NSW 702 (+11), ACT 15, Tasmania 13, WA nine, SA 10 (+2), Queensland eight and the NT one. New South Wales reintroduced restrictions banning singing and dancing in hospitality venues, cancelling elective surgery until February, and mandating booster shots for frontline workers. NSW will however still forge ahead with returning children to school from 1 February, despite many of them not being able to be fully vaccinated prior to the return to school. The Tamworth country music festival was delayed until mid-April in response to the change of rules on singing and dancing. Victoria launched its new portal for people who test positive on a rapid antigen test to register with the Victorian government to be counted as a “probable case” of Covid-19, and therefore required to isolate for seven days and be eligible for support and payments if needed. NSW is developing a similar system due to be launched next week, and will count positive RAT results as official cases. Queenslanders are being urged to work from home and limit socialising as the state considers suspending elective surgery and delaying the return to primary school in response to the high number of Covid-19 cases. Supporters of mens tennis world number 1 Novak Djokovic held a rally outside the Park Hotel in Melbourne’s north where he is being held ahead of an injunction hearing on Monday over the cancellation of his visa. The Serbian government has suggested the Serbian public believe Djokovic is “a victim of a political game against his will and that he was lured to travel to Australia in order to be humiliated.” Western Australia recorded zero new locally-acquired cases of Covid-19 as mask use was eased to just high-risk venues and events, and public transport or ride share. Until tomorrow, stay safe. Just before Christmas, appointment booking company FlexBooker reported its Amazon AWS account had been compromised, which ultimately resulted in the personal information of 3.7 million people who used the service being leaked. In Australia, hardware store giant Bunnings uses FlexBooker for its click and collect service, where customers book a time slot to go collect products. Guardian Australia asked how Bunnings was affected by the breach, and Leah Balter, Bunnings’ chief information officer, said it was only a person’s name and email address that had potentially been breached, because that was all Bunnings was collecting through the service. The customer information shared through this third party provider is limited to full name and email address only. Bunnings’ customers are not required to enter sensitive personal information through this provider, such as passwords, mobile numbers, or credit card information, so we are confident that none of these categories of customer data have been compromised. We’re working with the third party provider to further understand the details of how this security breach occurred, and the extent of the impact. We will be reaching out to customers whose data may have been accessed with further information shortly. Bunnings takes the security of our customers’ and team members’ personal information very seriously, and will carry out a thorough investigation into this incident. The vulnerability that led to the breach has been contained. A little early, but noted. The weather in Victoria today has been this followed by sun, more or less. I regret to inform you the Ruby Princess is at it again. After the debacle of the cruise ship’s arrival in Sydney in March 2020 led to over 900 cases of Covid-19 and 28 deaths, the ship appears to be in another Covid-19 outbreak situation in San Francisco. The cruise ended its 10-day trip in San Francisco, but according to reports there is an outbreak on board. SFist reports around 25% of passengers on board were tested and 12 came back positive, amid suggestions the outbreak may be much larger than just among those tested, with entertainment cancelled as performers had reportedly tested positive for Covid-19. According to NBC, one passenger said they were not going to get tested and “the Bay Area is getting us as is”. In a statement to NBC, Princess Cruises said a small number of Covid-19 cases were detected among vaccinated guests who are all asymptomatic, and will either return home in their own cars, or be taken to hotels to be quarantined. The NSW Labor leader, Chris Minns, has told radio station 2GB there is a suite of measures the state government could have implemented over the past month to limit the spread of the Omicron variant. He says instead the government took an all-in approach and “we are ruing that day now”. He says if he were premier and the chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, advised for a lockdown, he would lock down, given the pressure on the hospital system. “Her expertise and leadership over the last two years guiding NSW with the former premier Gladys Berejikilan were expert,” he says. He says he doesn’t think Berejiklian would have made the same mistakes as the new premier Dominic Perrottet. He says the decision ultimately isn’t lockdown or no lockdown. There are other measures that can be brought in. It feels like a lifetime or two ago, but the hotel Novak Djokovic is now being held at was previously used as a Covid quarantine hotel for returning travellers. It became the focus of attention in mid-2020 because it was the source of a number of transmissions of Covid-19 that ultimately led to the second wave of cases in Victoria, and the marathon lockdown Melbourne endured in 2020. The inquiry into hotel quarantine concluded around 90% of cases of Covid-19 in Victorian between late May and the end of the year could be attributed to the outbreak at the then Rydges Hotel, which was being run by the state government as a “hot hotel” where people who were Covid positive were being held. A number of the returning travellers who stayed there told the inquiry of how the hotel lacked open windows, and in some instances that the rooms themselves were not clean. There have been a lot of changes since that report was handed down, and also two new variants, and our understanding of how Covid-19 is transmitted has changed, and our daily case numbers are now more than the total of that second wave ... but it’s an interesting bit of history. The Tamworth country music festival, which was due to hold its 50th festival from next Friday, has been delayed until mid-April due to the new restrictions announced in New South Wales today banning dancing and singing at hospitality venues. The organisers held a crisis meeting this afternoon and said there was just too much uncertainty around the running of the event, which will now be run between 18 and 24 April. The Tamworth mayor, Russell Webb, said: It was with a very heavy heart that we made that decision, and I think that it was not one person in this organisation that is happy about it. We are really in a situation where the best outcome for the city, the best outcome for the country music industry as a whole and the best outcome for the residents of our city was to postpone. I’m very sorry to those people that will be impacted on that in a negative way, but I think this is probably the best way forward to get the best result moving into the future. Australian tennis star Nick Kyrgios has weighed in on the Novak Djokovic saga, and says he got vaccinated for others and his mum, but he thinks Australia’s response to the whole thing has been bad. Like these memes, headlines, this is one of our great champions but at the end of the day, he is human. Do better. An 18-year old man has been shot in the legs in Brisbane’s west, with three men on the run from police, AAP reports. Emergency services responded to reports of the shooting at Zerlotti Close in Richlands on Friday morning, and the victim was taken to hospital in a stable condition. Police believe he was known to the offenders, who are described as being in their 20s. It is believed the three men fled using an alley to reach the major thoroughfare of Archerfield Road. Detectives are appealing for witnesses and those with dashcam or CCTV footage to come forward. Here’s a bit more info on the daily cases and vaccination rate in Victoria from the Victorian Health Department. There are 644 Covid-19 cases in hospital in Victoria – 58 active cases in ICU, with 24 of those on a ventilator. There are an additional 48 cleared cases in ICU. Some 94.5% of Victorians aged 12 and over have now had at least one dose of a vaccine and 93% have had two doses. 13% of Victorians aged 12 and over have had three doses. The 10 LGAs with the highest number of new cases are Casey, Melbourne, Brimbank, Melton, Hume, Greater Dandenong, Moreland, Port Phillip, Stonnington and Wyndham. There are 69,680 active cases in Victoria. The total number of confirmed cases in Victoria since the beginning of the pandemic is 274,123. There were six deaths yesterday of people aged in their 70s, 80s and 90s. This brings the total number of deaths in Victoria since the pandemic began to 1,565. Here’s Serbia’s response to the whole Novak Djokovic kerfuffle from AAP’s Andrew Brown. Serbia’s foreign affairs ministry has hit out at Australia’s decision to cancel the visa of tennis star Novak Djokovic, saying the world No.1 was a victim of a political game. Australia’s ambassador to Belgrade, Daniel Emery, was summoned to the ministry and urged to make personal efforts to assist Djokovic. The federal government on Thursday cancelled Djokovic’s visa to enter the country for the Australian Open due to him not meeting vaccination requirements needed for entry. The Serbian ministry said Australia had acted in bad faith towards the tennis star. “Starovic emphasised that the Serbian public has a strong impression that Djokovic is a victim of a political game against his will, and that he was lured to travel to Australia in order to be humiliated,” the ministry statement said. “Novak Djokovic is not a criminal, terrorist or illegal migrant, but he was treated that way by the Australian authorities, which causes understandable indignation of his fans and citizens of Serbia.” A protest note was also sent by the Serbian government to its embassy in Canberra, following the visa decision. Djokovic is being held in an inner north Melbourne hotel while he awaits a court challenge to his visa cancellation on Monday The hotel is also used to house asylum seekers, and Serbia’s foreign ministry has called on the federal government to give Djokovic better accommodation. “Serbia does not want to influence the upcoming decision of the Australian judiciary in any way,” the statement. “(Serbia) expects that the authorities of the country, in the spirit of good bilateral relations between Australia and Serbia ... allow Djokovic to spend (time) in better accommodation.” Acting WA premier Roger Cook announces from 6pm WA time tonight, masks will not be required for indoor venues or other outdoor events where it has been mandated. They will only be required in high risk venues and events, and public transport/taxis/ubers. It means we massively reduce the risk of another Perth Mess Hall-type event. Of the WA hotel quarantine security guard who tested positive for Covid-19, WA acting premier Roger Cook says he has the Omicron variant, so his household contact is the first case of Omicron transmission in WA. The guard’s other close contacts have tested negative, and are quarantined. WA acting premier Roger Cook is holding a press conference. He says there were no new local cases, with six new travel cases including three domestic and three international arrivals who are all in quarantine. He says yesterday 33,009 people came forward to get vaccinated. WA now has a first dose rate of 93.5% for over 12. The two dose rate is rapidly approaching 90%, and the third dose is now 12.2%. Those thunderstorms in Melbourne are moving quickly. It’s gone from pouring rain in the inner north to sunny and clear again. As someone who isn’t particularly into sports, my attempts to shoehorn in sports analogies often feel strained. But then there’s this from prime minister Scott Morrison. He was giving commentary in the box for the Ashes and he said Australians are “taking wickets in the virus”. At the end of 2021, the expectation was that the opened-up economies and the hundreds of billions of dollars stashed by households and businesses would turbo-charge the economy. And then along came Omicron. The ANZ bank has been the main source in recent days of data that shows how the Omicron Covid variant is sapping some of that confidence. Today it released weekly spending data,finding outlays during the week to January 5th were at the lowest level since the Delta lockdowns. How much of that is post-Christmas shopping fatigue is not clear. However, ANZ said “caution about being in public places is being compounded by staff shortages to stifle spending across dining, retail and travel”, with spending in Sydney and Melbourne “now near levels typical of lockdown conditions”. Worse: for Sydney, spending is the lowest since the start of Covid, in part because interstate travel is down. “ANZ-observed spending has also fallen sharply in Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia since the Christmas trading period, with spending in all states a little lower than 2021’s out-of-lockdown levels,” the bank said. Asked about this downturn at the recent media event, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet took a defensive stance about whether the state opened up too early. “Opening out is the best thing we can do for our economy,” he said. “The approach we’ve taken is the right approach. Keep society open as we move through, and we’ll get through these next few difficult weeks.” Still, with a host of restrictions on large gathering (excluding weddings) and non-urgent elective surgery suspended until February, we will have to see whether consumer sentiment sours further. Despite the pouring rain, Novak Djokovic supporters are still singing loudly and dancing across the road from the Park Hotel, where the tennis star is being kept. The crowd is a lot smaller today, with Djokovic protesters now mixed in with refugee activists and a comparatively strong anti-vax contingent. While some anti-vax protesters are yelling out at passing pedestrians, they are largely drowned out by Djokovic’s supporters. They have brought a large banner with the tennis star’s face on it and are chanting “Novak” in between songs. Many are draped in Serbian flags or colours. The rain has meant the crowd is under shelter, huddling together. Inside the hotel, some of the 33 men who are detained there have put banners on the windows. “I’m looking for my freedom” reads one, while another says “Nine years too long”. That’s all from me for now, I’m going to hand you over to Josh Taylor – he’ll take you through the rest of the afternoon. NSW Health deputy secretary Susan Pearce says the modelling they have released looks at hospitalisation rates as well as the length of hospital stays. She says the most likely scenario is that the outbreak will peak in the third or fourth week of January, and by mid-February, NSW will be “well past” the peak of the outbreak. She is talking here about the graph that is further down the blog, in the tweet from Chris O’Keefe: What you will see is there are three different scenarios. The scenario which we consider the worst-case scenario, at present, on the information available to us, has been modelled on the experience in New York. The middle line is the line that we think is the most realistic of the three at the moment. And that takes into account our own experience here in NSW. It considers factors such as the health of our population, our vaccination rates, and a lot of inputs to result in that curve. And as I mentioned earlier this week, what we see in these curves is that they rise sharply and there is also a relatively sharp decline. Based on this information at the moment – and again, it is a model, and we will need to continue to monitor it – we believe, by the middle of February, we will be certainly well past the peak of this. And we expect that peak to occur in around the third to the last week of January. Scott Morrison is in the Fox commentary box at the Sydney Cricket Ground for the Ashes. Cringe, I know. Things didn’t get off to a great start for Morrison. He was introduced, then almost as soon as he began to speak, he was cut off as Australia took their fourth wicket. Morrison joked that he must be good luck. After the highlights, and a slightly awkward pause during which the commentators asked him no questions, Morrison launched into a spiel about his government’s support for Jane McGrath Day. “It’s great to be here on this special day, Gilly ...” Some more details from that Victorian press conference first: The Victorian government says it hasn’t seen correspondence between the federal government and Tennis Australia that stipulated Novak Djokovic would not be allowed to enter the country if he did not meet Atagi criteria. Since the tennis star landed in Australia on Wednesday night the federal and Victorian governments have played handball over the incident, which has sparked an international stoush between Serbia and Australia. On Friday morning, it emerged that the federal government had written twice to Tennis Australia boss Craig Tiley in November, saying people who were unvaccinated would not be granted an exemption to travel, even if they had had Covid in the last 6 months. It is believed Djokovic sought the medical exemption on these grounds. On Friday, the acting premier, Jacinta Allan, said the state government had not seen the correspondence, even though he was given an exemption by the Victorian government and Tennis Australia to play in the Australian Open. She said: I’m advised that members of the Victorian government hadn’t seen that correspondence. We wouldn’t necessarily see it ... but it reinforces that point that it is the commonwealth government ... that’s responsible for issuing visas and how they engage in that dialogue with Tennis Australia is a matter for them. The state government has previously said Djokovic’s entry was a two-step process, the first of which was obtaining a visa from the Commonwealth government. The second was him being provided with an exemption to play, which was decided by the medical panel. Allan downplayed the role of the Victorian government, saying that the state medical panel was to access the medical documentation, not his eligibility for a visa. “The role of the panel was to assess the medical documentation, not to assess their eligibility for a visa,” she said. There are still pressing questions about whether the state government should have liaised with federal colleagues or Atagi before granting the exception and why he was granted the visa in the first place, only to be detained on his arrival. The health minister, Greg Hunt, told 2GB on Thursday he had been surprised Djokovic had been given the exemption. “I hadn’t realised that was going through the works. And then obviously saw some media reports a couple of nights ago,” Hunt said. Hunt sent the second letter to Tennis Australia in November, reiterating that the Australian Border Force would not permit anyone to enter who did not meet Atagi’s criteria. On Wednesday, acting Victorian sports minister, Jaala Pulford, said border force officials contacted the state government hours before he landed, asking if they would sponsor Djokovic’s visa. She tweeted on Wednesday evening that the Victorian government rejected this request. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, and border force have denied this, saying they did not request the support of the Victorian government. Djokovic is currently being kept in a quarantine hotel, and will fight the deportation in court on Monday morning. The debacle has enraged both his fans, who feel he has been humiliated, and the Victorian public, who are angry that an unvaccinated tennis star was granted entry after two years of lockdowns. 412 new Covid cases have been recorded in the Northern Territory – more details to come. Chant is giving some more details on the rapid antigen tests: In terms of rapid antigen testing, what we’re saying is if you’re positive with symptoms, then treat yourself as a case. In this current setting of such high case numbers, if you got symptoms, and you got a positive RAT test, then you’re a case ... If you have had no exposures to anyone [and] it’s really unusual that you have got a positive test, under those circumstances, you might get a PCR to validate it, or test again with the RAT, but at any time you have had a positive test and develop symptoms, you should act as if it is a positive test. We’re also asking you, and this is not covered in a public health order, that you [and your household] would actually isolate for the seven days. Now, currently we are working with our partners in Service NSW to establish a mechanism so you can actually register your positive RAT. And then we will change the orders so there’s a requirement where ... you will then be required to isolate as if you had a PCR positive test. Chant also speaks about the importance of linking more at-risk patients to care: We do know that there’s some groups, particularly those with underlying chronic health conditions, people that are pregnant – and chronic health conditions also encompasses obesity, people that are unvaccinated, people that have particular conditions that suppress their immune system or are taking drugs that actually actively suppress their immune system, we know that they may have a high risk of hospitalisation and admission to ICU. It’s important that those individuals are linked to care, and in those circumstances, we will be reaching out to those individuals. ... If you have got any of those chronic health conditions or [belong to] those risk categories I spoke about, we do want to link you to care because there may be some therapies that we can administer that will reduce your risk of going into hospital or requiring ICU. NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, has explained why the new restrictions are necessary: In the last seven days... almost 50% of the cases are aged between 20 and 39 years. So there’s 29% between 20 and 29, and 30 and 39 account for 19% of the cases. The transmission is happening in a variety of settings. Obviously in those household and social gatherings that people are having, and also in places like pubs, clubs, nightclubs. The concern around the behaviour of dancing and singing ... is the fact that when people are in those environments and dancing, you’re actually encountering and bringing together people from very different social networks. So when you go and sit down with your five friends in a restaurant and you’re just sitting down, the only people that you’re really coming into contact with with our mask-wearing rules ... is that group you’re with. But when you’re actually dancing on a dance floor, when you’re energised and singing in a group and moving around, then you’re actually risking exposing people that you would normally not come into contact with. So with this time, we’re really just trying to slow the spread, reduce the introduction to new social networks as a mechanism of slowing the spread ... to reduce the impact we’re seeing on our hospital and those other critical services in the community. As suspected, new restrictions on singing and dancing have been announced for NSW. They will come into force and continue until 27 January. Perrottet said: There’ll be no singing and dancing in hospitality venues. That does not include weddings or performers or classes that people may be conducting. In addition to that [the] overwhelming majority of major events across NSW will proceed. Health is currently reviewing those and if there is deemed to be a high-risk venue, New South Wales Health along with the Department of Premier and Cabinet will work closely with organisers in adjusting those COVID-safe plans. So if you have a major event planned, throughout January, continue as planned ... They are continuing as planned. Only in circumstances where NSW Health deems that event to be a high-risk event, then we will contact those organisers and work through the current Covid-safe plans with you. There are also new mandates on the way – where vaccinations are mandatory, they will have to include boosters: [For those workers with mandated vaccinations] we will be moving to those mandates including a booster shot. ... whether it’s our teachers, nurses, our frontline health and disability workers, where NSW Health has previously required mandatory vaccination ... we will move to boosters being included as part of that fully vaccinated determination. Perrottet says non-urgent elective surgery will be suspended until February. In order to assist the health system during this period of time, just like we did during the Alpha outbreak and the Delta outbreak, today we’re announcing that we will continue to suspend elective surgery for non-urgent surgeries ... until mid-February. ... We’ll be engaging with private hospital systems to help with capacity constraints over this period of time. Anyone who records a positive rapid antigen test will need to register with the health department – it will be treated the same as a positive PCR test. Perrottet also says he will release new Covid modelling for NSW, and says there is still capacity in the health system: What is encouraging from this model is that even on a worst-case scenario, we have the capacity in our health system right now. So obviously around the country, around the world, during this pandemic, we are seeing significant pressure on our health system, but our health system is strong, we invested significantly, we have the best health system here in NSW in the country, if not around the world. The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, is speaking now, and has started by thanking healthcare workers: It has been an incredibly challenging two years, many people are tired, but our health system remains strong because of the efforts and the tireless work of our health staff right across NSW. And he’s encouraging people to get their five to 11 year old children vaccinated, which they can do from Monday. South Australia has recorded 3,707 new cases. 144 are in hospital and 16 are in intensive care, with one on a ventilator. Queensland may delay the beginning of the school year as it waits for the virus to peak. The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said she would not allow unvaccinated children to return to school during the peak of the Omicron variant. The state government has commissioned modelling on when the peak will hit. Palaszczuk said: I just want to assure parents that we will not send primary school students back during the first week of school if we are heading towards a peak. So we are looking at a one to two week delay ... to the return to school. We will give you more concrete decisions on this over the coming days. Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, says they are looking at suspending elective surgery as the virus is set to peak in the state at the end of the month. She said people should stay at home if they are unwell, even if they have a negative rapid antigen test. And they should wear masks indoors, socially distance, and get vaccinated or, if fully vaccinated, get a booster. Annastacia Palaszczuk says people should minimise their outings for the next six weeks. Queensland has recorded 10,953 new Covid cases. There are 313 people in hospital, and 14 in intensive care. The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said it would be a “short, sharp wave”: This is a very difficult time for Queensland at the moment, probably the likes [of which] we haven’t seen before. Australian Medical Association president Omar Khorshid has let rip about ... well, about New South Wales letting it rip. “Having decided weeks ago to let it rip, Dominic Perrottet is now seeing the results of that decision,” he said. He said new restrictions (reportedly coming in later today) might “slightly slow the spread”: But there’s no way they’re going to turn this curve around ... it’s going to take some weeks to reach this peak, and therefore, we just have to brace ourselves. We’ve got to cancel elective surgery. That’s coming. We’ve got to make sure that as many health staff are available as possible, and we’ve got to make sure that everybody in the community knows how to best look after their health when they catch Covid, because it’s not going to be going to a hospital ED unless you’re really quite sick. If you’re moderately sick, you probably need to be in touch with your GP. But for the majority of people who have a mild illness, you don’t need a doctor. You just need to go to the HealthDirect website, look at the symptom checker, manage your own health, so that the medical resources are there for those who are ... struggling with more severe symptoms. The reality is our hospitals are under extraordinary pressure, and those long-suffering staff who’ve had a very difficult couple of years, instead of having a break over Christmas, they’ve had their leave cancelled and they’re facing huge demand at the front door of the ED whilst their colleagues, their co-workers, other doctors, other nurses, are falling sick, having to stay at home and look after sick children. And you’re hearing stories of wards with half or even less than half of their normal number of nurses available ... So it’s almost a perfect storm of pressure. And it’s just not true to say our health system is so resilient it can cope with anything. There are limits, unfortunately. Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein is giving a press conference in Hobart. He said the current wave “while mild for most people”, is presenting challenges for others, and that the hospital system has room for up to 100 people in intensive care. Tasmanians can now use rapid antigen tests to diagnose Covid – Taswegians can register online or call the public health hotline on 1800 671 738 to register for free tests. (PCR tests are still available). Those who test positive must notify public health. “If you don’t do that, we can’t reach out and provide Covid at Home (kits), we can’t assist you financially,” he said. Tasmania is using the household or “household-like” rule for working out who close contacts are. Victoria’s acting premier Jacinta Allan is back up now. She has been asked about the Novak Djokovic debacle and letters from the federal government to Tennis Australia about the visa process. She said: I’m advised that members of the Victorian government hadn’t seen that correspondence. We wouldn’t necessarily see it ... but it reinforces that point that it is the commonwealth government ... that’s responsible for issuing visas and how they engage in that dialogue with Tennis Australia is a matter for them. The role of the Victorian government here as the city and the state that hosts the Australian Open is to run a safe event. That has been the primary focus ... having all the arrangements in place for the event to be run successfully and safely. How people who participate in that event get into the country is a matter for the commonwealth government who are responsible for issuing visas. The state government’s panel to assess medical exemptions was a separate process, she said. “The role of the panel was to assess the medical documentation, not to assess their eligibility for a visa,” she said. Allan also spoke about the effect of increasing Covid cases in the state: The health system as a whole is preparing for an increased number of hospital admissions. And a huge amount of work has already gone on as it has throughout the entire course of this pandemic to ensure that our hospitals are equipped and staffed. She talked about the pressures on workforces, with many people forced to isolate with illness or because they are close contacts. There’s no doubt that with the increasing numbers of case numbers ... that is putting pressure not just on the health and hospital system, but also on a range of workforces, critical industry workforces in health and in other industries more broadly. Victoria’s Covid response commander Jeroen Weimar says there are “really simple questions” on the form for people who record a positive rapid antigen test result – the details are all here. He said the paediatric doses for children aged five to 11 are ready to be rolled out via 14 state clinics from Monday. He said: The key (is) to get as many people vaccinated as possible (and) if you haven’t booked your booster dose yet or booked your children yet, then please do so. Acting premier Jacinta Allan said: It’s important to remember that turning up positive on a rapid antigen test is the equivalent of turning up positive on a PCR test. We’ll be asking Victorians who turn positive on a rapid antigen test to isolate for the seven days, and to tell your contacts that you had turned positive. A negative test will mean people can return more quickly to life as normal, she said. Victoria’s Covid commander Jeroen Weimar and acting premier Jacinta Allan are giving a press conference now. Allan has spoken about the latest figures (see below) and said 25,000 children aged five to 11 had already booked in to get their vaccinations after the rollout was extended to that age group. Victorians can now self-report a positive rapid antigen test result – Allan says an online form is now live. A few people were surprised to learn in the Sydney Morning Herald this morning that the NSW government was about to reintroduce some restrictions in a bid to curb the explosion in Covid cases - and the inevitable rise in hospitalisations ahead. Within the medical fraternity, the health system in the state is seen as already in crisis and the main wave of hospital admissions is still weeks ahead, as we noted here today. Whether the government will try to limit gatherings – presumably after the 4th test at the SCG concludes – or nightclubs or dancing or whatever, the virus is very much out in the community, with today’s count of 38,625 new cases in the state likely to be a fraction of the true number given testing limits and more. Anyway, the reported restrictions surprised senior NSW government members, and will do nothing to help coherence within a cabinet that was only reshuffled a few weeks ago. Some of those surprised include state political reporters such as Chris O’Keefe, from Nine, who is also doing 2GB stints over summer. He didn’t hold back this morning on radio, telling Mark Levy: I’ve had a chat to a few ministers. Now. Mark, a lot of them are in isolation because they’ve either got Covid themselves or their family members have got Covid. So they’re sitting there for seven days trying to isolate themselves too. So there’s a few that are out of the loop. But I can tell you now, they are furious, and I’m talking about senior, senior ministers. One in particular told me that their view was that this is terminal for (premier) Dominic Perrottet. They can kiss the next election [due in March 2023] goodbye because he refused to listen to his colleagues, to Dr Kerry Chant back before December 15, in keeping unvaccinated people out of society, and just keeping a modicum of some restrictions on masks, QR codes all that stuff. Apparently, according to the two on 2GB, the government’s efforts not only fail the pub test, they also fail the hospital test. Doctors have told the Guardian that their deliveries of the paediatric formula of Pfizer for the children’s rollout are already being delayed, forcing them to cancel bookings. The rollout for those aged 5–11 is due to commence on Monday and the government says that all children will be able to have a first dose by the end of January or in early February, when school returns for the year. Shipments of the paediatric formula were due to begin arriving at GP clinics on Thursday and Friday this week. But a number of GP clinics are already reporting delays. Dr Elysia Thornton-Benko, a GP with Bondi Road Doctors, said her clinic received an email from the federal government’s vaccine operations centre on 23 December, advising that the first shipments would be delayed until sometime next week due to “unprecedented demand”. She said that had forced the clinic to cancel bookings made in expectation that the shipments would arrive on time: It’s really hard because when you’ve already made bookings. Our practice and multiple other practices received that email on 23 December, so they were scrambling around, moving bookings on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, trying to sort things out, not actually knowing when the shipment was going to arrive. Its affiliate practice, East Sydney Doctors in Darlinghurst, received the same message and had to cancel appointments. “Parents are frustrated, because they’re wondering why they’ve been told it starts on the 10th, and then they don’t understand why they have to be cancelled and moved around,” Dr Elysia said. “And I think they’re concerned, because the return to school is looming.” The Sydney Morning Herald has also reported that The Children’s Doctor at Castle Hill and Doctors on Darling in Balmain received the same email delaying their shipments. The Guardian asked the health minister Greg Hunt about this issue on Thursday. In response, a spokesperson slammed the media for attempting to publish “unverified claims” about delivery delays and denied any such problem existed. “Operation COVID Shield advises all orders are on track to be delivered as scheduled and advised to providers,” a spokesperson said. The scene at the Park Hotel where tennis star Novak Djokovic is staying is very quiet this morning. There are a small number of refugee activists setting up for today’s protest, including representatives from Amnesty International and Tamil Refugee Council. The two groups crossed over yesterday, with some Djokovic supporters calling on more help for the refugees, and refugee advocates calling on the tennis star to help them raise awareness of the 33 men detained indefinitely inside. “We are here to stand vigil, to make sure the men detained know that we are here,” national campaign manager for Amnesty International Australia Shankar Kasynathan told Guardian Australia: We’re hoping that Novak, who is inside there today as well, knows the world is watching him, that he has the opportunity today to bring an end to this madness. To shine a light on the cruelty in this country. The game that is being played with lives must end. It’s game over. Serbian Australians came out in force yesterday, mixing their protest of Djokovic’s detainment with celebrations of their Christmas Eve. They lit candles, sung and danced into the evening, yelling “Free Novak” up at the hotel. There was a small skirmish between police and refugee activists as they arrested two women who had been protesting on the awning about the old hotel entrance. Today’s protests are expected to be bigger for the refugee activists, but many of Australia’s Serbian community will be enjoying Christmas Day. Djokovic is expected to stay inside the hotel until the court hearing on Monday, when he will fight the deportation. Tasmania has recorded 1,489 new cases. Eight people are in hospital, none of them in intensive care. Woolworths chief executive Brad Banducci has emailed customers about “gaps” on the supermarket chain’s shelves due to the Omicron surge that’s pummelling the economy and kept more than one in five of the group’s distribution centre workers at home. “Unlike the surge buying of early 2020 (who could forget the toilet paper), this is because of the number of people in our supply chain in isolation – from suppliers to truck drivers and distribution centre team members – which in turn is causing material delays to store deliveries,” Banducci said in the email. “To give you a sense of the magnitude of the challenge, we are experiencing Covid-driven absences of 20%+ in our distribution centres and 10%+ in our stores. “NSW is currently the most affected, although we are seeing impacts across the whole country, and it’s not yet clear how soon the system will come back into balance as we move through the Omicron wave.” He told customers Woolworths has “more than enough stock in the system and plenty more coming” but for the time being customers might not be able to get their favourite brands of particular categories of goods. The chain has also turned on substitution of unavailable items as the default option for online shoppers. “We understand how frustrating it is when you can’t find the product you’re looking for and, together with our suppliers and supply chain partners, we’re working hard to get all products back on shelf as quickly as we can (including rapid antigen tests),” he said. You can read our wrap of the cascading chaos caused by Omicron driven staff shortages here. Prime minister Scott Morrison rejected the suggestion the federal government was unprepared for this outbreak ... meanwhile, as Sarah Martin reports, the government was warned a year ago that the testing system could be overwhelmed and that rapid antigen tests could help: Finance minister Simon Birmingham has been on Channel Nine this morning talking about the Novak Djokovic debacle, saying there was a mistake or perhaps “people have acted in misleading ways”: Look, there’s clearly been a mistake in terms of what Novak Djokovic or his team understood in terms of the entry requirements, or indeed people have acted in misleading ways. They are matters that frankly aren’t particularly relevant to the facts of the case, which are that the Government has always been clear around what is necessary in terms of the entry requirements into Australia. We made that clear to Tennis Australia. It’s been publicly clear for a long time, you’ve got to be double vaccinated if you are not an Australian citizen, to enter Australia if we’ve reopened the borders. These border controls have been incredibly important right throughout COVID in terms of protecting Australia. Yes, we have taken the steps of reopening, but being double vaccinated has clearly always been a requirement and the medical exemption requirements have been clearly explained to those tennis authorities. And of course it is up to our Border Force officials to uphold those entry requirements. Labor leader Anthony Albanese is set to hold a press conference at 10.15. Empty supermarket shelves are certain to be a focus – his treasury spokesman Jim Chalmers is referring to shortages as the “Hunger Games”. Update: That’s 10.15 Queensland time, sorry! Here’s me sitting patiently waiting for him to start. Australian Medical Association vice president Dr Chris Moy has something he would like to say to the government ... More than 78,000 new Covid cases have been recorded in New South Wales, Tasmania, Queensland, Northern Territory, South Australia, the Australian Capital Territory and Victoria. We’ll bring you results from the other states and territories as they come in. Eleven people have died in NSW, and the state has recorded 38,625 new cases of Covid in the 24 hours to 8pm last night. There are 1,738 people in hospital, 134 in intensive care, and reports that more restrictions will be introduced today. Six people have died in Victoria, where 21,728 cases were recorded. 644 people are in hospital, and 58 in intensive care. Victoria now has new density limits in hospitality venues, and Victorians now have to report positive results from rapid antigen tests to the health department. Tasmania has recorded 1,489 new cases. Eight people are in hospital, none of them in intensive care. There are 1,246 new Covid cases in the ACT, with 24 in hospital. Queensland has recorded 10,953 new Covid cases. There are 313 people in hospital, and 14 in intensive care. SA has recorded 3,707 new cases. 144 are in hospital and 16 are in intensive care, with one on a ventilator. 412 cases were recorded in the NT. More struggles for GPs who don’t have enough vaccines for kids. Christopher Knaus has taken a look at the frontline: General practice is at “breaking point”, doctors say, and they’re fed up with hearing about policy changes through press conferences. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners is worried about a lack of support as Australia moves to rapid antigen tests. College president Dr Karen Price said positive results needed to be recorded, but that there was no system to manage that: As things currently stand, positive rapid antigen test results are not being recorded or counted as part of the official case numbers as there is no formal notification process. Patients contacting their GP with a positive rapid antigen test result does not equate to the health system having an aggregate view of the number of positive cases in the community. General practices simply do not have the administrative capacity to officially lodge all COVID-19 cases, so we need governments to step up and set up a system so that all cases are recorded and everyone has access to Covid-19-positive care pathways. There needs to be a triage system designed to assist many thousands of people across Australia because GPs can only shoulder the burden of so much responsibility and we certainly can’t manage this process on our own. We are ready to work with government as needed to resolve this issue and ensure there is a system that works for general practice and their patients. General practice teams are exhausted, and we need to ensure that any Government-initiated changes to managing patients in the pandemic have undergone careful planning so that general practice teams can immediately adapt. When general practice teams learn information via a press conference or, even worse, from their patients – it does make our vital role in the vaccine rollout much more difficult. From someone who’d know: In better (?) Covid news, all-round good guy Hugh Jackman has recovered from his bout and popped up in Los Angeles to heap praise on healthcare workers. The Greatest Showman star posted a video to Instagram of his first trip outside. It looked cold but he had his dog with him so everything was fine. “The mental and physical toll this pandemic must be taking on you and your families is unimaginable. Your dedication to help those in need is next level. I am grateful for all of you,” he said. Malcolm Farr on prime minister Scott Morrison: His problem is that even insulting and exploiting the world’s best tennis player will not be sufficient distraction from the growing confusion over the response to Omicron as it overwhelms towns and cities. Even the record number of Covid cases being reported don’t tell the true story of the scale of infections – and the hospitals are bracing for that reality. Peter Hannam reports: An insider has told the ABC that the Australian Border Force took a closer look at Novak Djokovic’s visa after he declared on social media that he was “heading Down Under with an exemption permission”. On that question (below) to home affairs minister Karen Andrews, Mostafa Rachwani and Ben Doherty spoke to asylum seekers about the “torture” of the infamous detention hotel: Parallels (or contrasts?) are being drawn between Novak Djokovic and the asylum seekers who are in the same hotel as him. The reporter asked: “Novak Djokovic’s family say he’s being kept a prisoner in a prison-like situation there. What does this say to the world about how Australia treats asylum seekers?” Home affairs minister Karen Andrews says Djokovic is free to leave and that everyone in detention is treated the same: (Djokovic) is not being held captive in Australia. He is free to leave at any time that he chooses to do so and Border Force will actually facilitate that. In relation to other people who are in immigration detention, whether it be in a hotel in Melbourne or whether it be elsewhere in Australia, those people are there because they don’t have a valid visa or they are illegally here in Australia for maybe a number of reasons. We treat all people who are in immigration detention fairly, equitably. For those people who are protesting, all I can say is people in Australia do have the right to voice their opinions and to protest, they just need to do that lawfully. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews has been quizzed on the ABC. She confirmed two other people are in similar situations to Novak Djokovic (although it’s not clear where they are): I’m aware of investigations in relation to two individuals by the Australian Border Force. They’re going through their processes of investigation. And at some time, they will brief me, but all I can absolutely assure you and the rest of Australia of is that the Australian Border Force will take absolutely the appropriate action. So, they’re conducting their investigations and they will take the appropriate action. Andrews was asked why these two other people were let through customs, when Djokovic was detained. She said: Any person who comes through our border can, at any time, be asked to provide evidence that they have the appropriate documentation and they meet Australia’s entry requirements. It is a multi-layered approach to be able to get into Australia, and at any point in that process you can be asked to provide the evidence that is necessary to prove that you are eligible to enter Australia. So, that can be at the border, which is what happened in the case of Mr Djokovic. It could be earlier in the process as well, it could be at the point of boarding the aircraft to come into Australia. But ... you are still required to have valid proof that you are able to be in Australia, and that’s why Border Force is investigating two other individuals that I am aware of in relation to whether or not they have the evidence to prove that they are eligible to be in Australia. It looks set to be another big day (isn’t this meant to be a quiet time of year?!). As case numbers continue to surge in New South Wales, we’re hearing restrictions could be coming back in that state. The Sydney Morning Herald reports nightclubs, major events and dancing and singing in pubs will soon be out. Some elective surgery is also likely to be stopped. We’ll bring you all the details as they emerge. There are still many questions about the handling of Novak Djokovic’s visa. The world No 1 is now at the Park Hotel in Melbourne, alongside refugees and asylum seekers that have, in some cases, spent years in immigration detention. That’s brought together refugee advocates and Serbian tennis fans out the front. There have been more protests in his home country, where his family have been rallying support. In an extraordinary press conference, his father Srdjan compared him to Jesus, saying: They’re trying to crucify him. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews has been on television this morning defending the government’s handling of the situation. “I know there is a lot of chatter about the visa. The visa, on my understanding, is not the issue, it is the entry requirement,” she told the Nine Network. “The (Australian) Border Force has been very clear that he was not able to meet the requirement to provide the evidence he needed for entry to Australia.” Now other players who entered the country in similar circumstances could be in trouble. She confirmed ABF are investigating those matters, but wouldn’t say how many.The Ashes are settled and the contest barely flickered en route but none of the 28,000 spectators who watched Jonny Bairstow’s unbeaten century cap a raucous, freewheeling third day in Sydney could claim to have been short-changed. Finally the smattering of England supporters among them had something to savour too. It came moments before stumps – not quite Steve Waugh’s last-ball century here in 2003 but close enough – as Bairstow, on 99, stepped to leg and carved the fourth ball of Pat Cummins’ final over beyond backward point and to the rope. It was the seventh inof his Test career, but also a first in three years of increasing frustration, and the Yorkshireman’s guttural roar in the direction of his teammates in the old pavilion was a moment of pure catharsis. As the two sets of players made their way off the field, the cold ones waiting for them in the eskies inside were very much well-earned. Over the course of 65 overs, once morning rain relented, they had delivered a memorable display of punch and counterpunch on what was an increasingly capricious pitch. Some 245 runs were scored, seven wickets fell, seven sixes landed in the crowd and three catches went down. Throw in the sight of batters regularly being struck on hand or body and a remarkable slice of fortune for Ben Stokes, and it made for rollicking fun. Crucially for England, who closed on 258 for seven in reply to Australia’s 416 for eight declared, the follow-on had been swerved in a match with further bad weather forecast. Given they sat at 36 for four at lunch, the top order once again evaporating in meek fashion as Australia swarmed, this was no mean feat either, with Stokes initially kickstarting the fightback in a fifth-wicket stand of 128 alongside Bairstow. As they walked off for tea after a wicketless afternoon session of 99, a fiery exchange of words with a subsequently ejected supporter said plenty about their mindset. England’s two redheads both battled through the pain barrier too. Stokes grimaced with every boundary struck during a 91-ball 66 due to the side strain he suffered on day two, his treatment of Mitchell Starc particularly disdainful. And shortly after the all-rounder’s demise post-tea, pinned lbw on the back foot by the otherwise manhandled Nathan Lyon, Bairstow required strapping and a couple of magic beans from the physio following a nasty blow to the right thumb from Cummins that looked worse with every replay. Jos Buttler came and went for a duck, his largely sorry series rolling on when he chipped Cummins to a smartly placed short cover. But Bairstow found an ally in Mark Wood and was even happy to play second fiddle as the No 8 crashed a 41-ball 39 during which he cleared the rope three times and his smile was broad. This was Bairstow’s day, however, his tightened defence providing a platform from which to deliver the best of his white-ball repertoire. Like Usman Khawaja’s emotional century 24 hours earlier, it prompted thoughts of what could have been but also raised a few as to what might yet follow. If there was a sliding doors moment to all this chaos, it came shortly after lunch when Stokes, already put down by Cummins on nine, was given out lbw to Cameron Green when shouldering arms on 16 in frankly bizarre fashion. Stokes did not hesitate to review and burst out laughing when the replays showed that the ball had in fact glanced his off-stump without dislodging the bail. Paul Reiffel, the on-field umpire, was seeing things. Thoughts of promoting this defiant stump to open the batting in England’s second innings swirled in light of a bleak morning for the tourists. Australia surged impressively, the ball zipping around under the floodlights and the surface was already throwing up nasty rising shock balls; par-boiled to the tune of 134 overs in the field over the previous two days, England’s batters were suddenly back on the hotplate. Quite where Haseeb Hameed goes after his latest single-figure score remains to be seen, although forward would be a start. The right-hander has retreated into his crease over the course of this series, inviting Australia’s seamers to go fuller and fuller. And though a reprieve came in the third over of the day thanks to Alex Carey’s latest mix-up with first slip, Starc soon exploited this, and a yawning gate, to rearrange his stumps. The early strike meant England fell one run short of their best opening partnership of the series – 23 runs at the Gabba – and Zak Crawley similarly could not cash in on good fortune. Bowled off a no-ball the previous evening, Crawley survived a sharp chance at short-leg on seven and unfurled a couple of assertive retorts, only for Scott Boland to replace Starc at the Randwick End, dry up the runs and beat an ambitious drive. This was the start of a relentless spell of pressure in tandem with Green that delivered 53 dot balls before lunch and the wickets of Joe Root and Dawid Malan. Root played the shot of a drained captain, fencing Boland to slip for a duck – making it eight wickets for seven runs for the right-armer going back to his remarkable final day in Melbourne – while Malan, shaken by a blow to the gloves, tickled Green to leg slip on three. The suffocation rolled on after lunch, with 11 maidens chalked up either side of the interval before a Stokes single finally set England free and began a show of defiance alongside Bairstow which, while coming too late to change the destiny of the series, made for a welcome change to the narrative, nonetheless.David Howell scored a rare English victory in high-class international competition this week when the three-times British champion won chess.com’s weekly Titled Tuesday. The Sussex 31-year-old had just returned from Warsaw, where he performed well in the World Rapid with 8/13, but faded in the World Blitz with 10/21. Titled Tuesday is free to enter for all Fide titled players, right down to 2200-rated Candidate Masters, and regularly attracts hundreds of entries, who play an 11-round Swiss with a three-minutes-per-game time limit plus a one-second increment. This week’s top seeds were the blitz No 1 and five-time US champion, Hikaru Nakamura, plus the Russians Ian Nepomniachtchi and Alexander Grischuk. Nakamura is Titled Tuesday’s most prolific winner, and competed despite still being stuck in Warsaw after testing positive and withdrawing from the World Blitz. Howell’s shrewdest move on Tuesday turned out to be his unintentional third-round loss to an outsider, creating for himself a “Swiss gambit” where a player is behind the pack on points but gets the benefit of weaker opponents while his rivals are paired together. The crunch came in the final round where Howell met the No 5 seed, Jeffery Xiong, in a sharp Scotch Game where Black chose the ambitious 12…Qg6? instead of the safe 12…f6. The queen looked active but Harry the h pawn and a white rook trapped it in just six moves and Howell soon wrapped up the game. His web handle is howitzer14, and he is believed to be the first English winner in all the years of Titled Tuesday, which began as a monthly event in 2014 and has since become weekly. It has been an unusual week for Nigel Short, who last month was in hospital with coronavirus and Tweeted a selfie from his hospital bed with the caption: “Good morning everyone. How is your day?” This week Short felt recovered enough to accept an invitation to the Vergani Cup at Cattolica, Italy (Beniamino Vergani is best known for finishing 22nd and last with 3/21 in the great tournament of Hastings 1895). The 1993 world title challenger’s uncertain start could have been much worse: in round two he overlooked a tactic and was losing to a lowly rated 14-year-old, Lorenzo Candian, escaping only because the teenager’s mobile phone rang, triggering an automatic default under Fide tournament rules. Back in the 2008 European Union championship in Liverpool Short had himself dropped a point to his mobile. He had switched it off at the start of the game and put it on the table in view of his opponent, Keti Arakhamia-Grant, but the low battery warning overrode the switched-off status. Next round at Cattolica was better and Short gained the point when his opponent, under pressure from both position and clock at move 36, missed that he could draw by Kg8 or Rf5 and instead blundered into defeat. Another win came in Thursday’s sixth round, which, despite a few inaccuracies, was played in the simple yet elegant style of Short’s best years. As a result, he jumped into a multiple tie for second on 4.5/6, behind Iran’s No 2, Amin Tatatabaei, on 5/6. Before his seventh-round game on Friday, Short tweeted: “This tournament is an experiment as to whether I am suffering from brain fog”. His energetic attacking victory over the 10-time Greek champion, Vasilios Kotronias, was anything but an indicator of long Covid as the 56-year-old’s pieces pounded the exposed white king, although Short missed the possible brilliant finale 24...Qxf2+ 25 Re2 Bf8! 26 Rxf2? Bb4 mate. Kotronias is Greece’s best known player and Short’s home is in Athens, so this was a significant victory. The final two rounds, with Short now in a six-way tie for the lead on 5.5/7, will be tense and testing. Round eight, starting at 3pm on Saturday, and round nine, at 9.30am on Sunday, should be interesting to watch, especially for English chess fans. Hastings is cancelled, the London Classic had no Open, next weekend’s 4NCL league weekend is postponed, and England’s other 2600+ grandmasters have been inactive in major competitions. It seems like an echo of a century ago in the 1920s when the Bradford bank clerk Fred Yates and the badminton baronet Sir George Thomas were virtually alone as regulars on the European tournament circuit. In the latest Titled Tuesday, GM Gawain Jones (handle VerdeNotte), who normally does well, retired after starting with 1/4; and otherwise there were just two IMs and a CM from England. Yet Titled Tuesday is clearly an invaluable free training tool for some of the world’s fast rising stars. It has been suggested that English players dislike the event because of its 6pm GMT start and late-night finish, but time zone problems are far greater for Russian and Asian GMs and IMs, who compete in large numbers. It ought to be possible to encourage many more titled English players to take part in Titled Tuesday. ECF prizes for the best scores by English juniors and female players, groups for whom the national federation has dedicated funds; a requirement that the 2600-plus GMs should play at the event as part of their preparation for Olympiads and European team championships; awards for the highest placed sub-2600s – some or all of these could work. There would also be a knock-on effect as strong players without Fide titles would have an incentive to qualify for them. Some time in the near or distant future, when Covid-19 is a distant memory, there will be better alternatives for strong English players.than a masters online tournament. But for now Titled Tuesday is an inexpensive, available and useful experience which the ECF should be doing much more to support. If the event had been around in the 1970s, the golden English generation would have jumped at it. The new World Rapid Champion, Nodirbek Abdusattorov, helped hone the skills which defeated Carlsen et al by competing in Titled Tuesday most weeks for many months, This week, the 17-year-old was honoured in Uzbekistan with a €20,000 cash prize and the keys to a two-room apartment, at a ceremony held at the National Olympic Committee in Tashkent. 3797: 1 Nxf4! Kxf4 2 Kd3 (stops Bd4) Bh4 (planning Bf2) 3 g3+! Bxg3 4 Ke2 (stops Bf2) Bh2 5 Kf1! (stops Bg1) and the a5 pawn queens.During five years of breastfeeding, I have fed my babies on buses, trains and park benches, in cinemas, cafes and restaurants. I have a vivid memory of feeding my son, perched like an Elizabethan lady riding sidesaddle, on a fallen log in Richmond Park in London while my dad stood beside me, his eyes respectfully skyward, as I felt all the feelings known to humankind. A few years later, I breastfed my one-month-old daughter on stage at a book festival in Scotland while discussing Anne of Green Gables, which was like some divine coalescence of all my favourite things. Afterwards, the audience, mostly made up of women of a certain age, lined up to congratulate me and shake the newborn’s tiny hand. They would never have been able to do such a thing in their day, they said. What progress we have made. I look back on all this now and feel lucky that no one took a photo of my breasts mid-feed. At least not as far as I know. This is a strong indicator of how low the bar remains for us undervalued and oversexualised mothers: that one is genuinely pleased not to have been sexually harassed while feeding one’s baby. Had someone taken out an SLR camera, attached a telephoto lens, taken closeup photos, and, when approached, refused to delete them on the grounds that it’s a public place and therefore his right, I wouldn’t have been able to do a thing about it. This is exactly what happened to Julia Cooper when she breastfed her baby in a Manchester park. She reported the incident to the police and was told no crime had been committed. The Voyeurism Act, passed in 2019, banned the taking of non-consensual photographs of genitals or buttocks (upskirting) but did not cover photographs of the upper body. Which itself tells a short, grim story about how the law, and the world it enshrines, delineates women’s bodies. Bit by bit. First buttocks, then breasts. Thanks to Cooper, who took the matter to her Labour MP, Jeff Smith, as well as Labour MP for Walthamstow Stella Creasy, people who photograph or film women breastfeeding without consent now face being put on the sex offender register and jailed for up to two years. This is welcome and, like most incremental changes, bigger than it looks. In a more reasonable world you might even think the home secretary, Priti Patel, would thus be inclined, for the sake of consistency if nothing else, to take another look at, say, her nationality and borders bill, which will have a devastating impact on female survivors of violence. But this is not the world in which we live, nor the direction Tory U-turns tend to take. The proposed change to the law around breastfeeding in public follows a reform campaign led by Creasy and Smith to criminalise the behaviour under the slogan Stop The Breast Pest. Breast pest, unfortunately, is one of those catchphrases that the warped British brain can’t help but visualise as a mildly titillating tabloid headline. I don’t need a trivialising end-of-the-pier rhyme to give a damn about breastfeeding voyeurism. Can’t we just stop objectifying breasts instead? Creasy was also photographed while breastfeeding her baby, in her case by a “laughing” teenage boy on a train in north London. She spoke about the “horror” of it months before she was reprimanded for bringing her baby in a sling to a parliamentary debate. The two incidents together form a perfect microcosm of how mothers and their babies are treated in this country. Not welcome in the mother of parliaments. Not safe on a train. Or, for that matter, a plane. (Yes, KLM, I’m looking at you.) For those who haven’t experienced the joys and hardships of breastfeeding, it’s like riding a bike: really hard until it’s really easy. Mostly, the stage at which we do it out and about is when the baby is small, needs feeding at least every two hours (or is that two minutes?), and we’re still learning on the job. Going on a bus is an exploit of Everest-sized proportions. Nipple shields, creams and soul-destroying wrestles with muslins in an attempt at “discretion” might be involved, not to mention the baby in her infernal nest of buckles and straps. Then there’s the worst pain of all: the scorn of society, should your milk project on to the back of a stranger’s neck or, worse, your baby cry. The vulnerability factor is off the scale. For all this to coincide with the possibility of being stared at, laughed at, photographed and harassed, can be stressful to the point of off-putting. For some it means feeding in a toilet cubicle while trying not to bang your baby’s head on the loo roll holder. For others, it means not going out at all. The unending fetishisation of breasts, in whatever context they happen to be, is the mark of a misogynistic society that still hasn’t got to grips with the most basic facts of life. Babies need to be fed. And a woman’s breasts are, like the rest of her body, her own. Chitra Ramaswamy is a freelance journalist based in Edinburgh. She is the author of Expecting: The Inner Life of PregnancyThe King of the Chitlin’ Circuit. The Hardest Working Man in Showbiz. The Funkiest Man Alive. These are just three honorary titles bestowed on Bobby Rush, and he wears them all with joyous pride. Rush had planned to start the new year with two performances in London until Omicron cancelled his entire European tour, but relaxing at home in Jackson, Mississippi, the 88-year old exudes bonhomie. Covid-19 has already disrupted his life plenty, forcing a man who, until 2020, spent the past five decades working over 200 nights a year, to take time out. Did he relax? Rush laughs: “Sure I did. I got busy in my home studio cutting new material.” This was after he recovered from coronavirus. “I was the first person in Mississippi to get Covid,” says Rush. “It was before they had the vaccines and I got real ill, hospitalised for five weeks. I survived through God’s grace and the fact that I’ve always kept fit, never touched drugs or alcohol. But it sure beat up on me like nothing else before.” Rush’s 2021 autobiography I Aint Studdin’ Ya details this and many other scrapes in an epic American life. Considering he started performing aged 13 and released his first record in 1964, what’s most remarkable is a work ethic that has seen him win wider acclaim and audiences in recent years – picking up Grammys in 2017 and 2020, appearing in the Eddie Murphy movie Dolemite Is My Name and joining Queens of the Stone Age on stage – than ever before. Unlike John Lee Hooker and Johnny Cash, who were both successfully repositioned in their twilight years, Rush never enjoyed early fame. Instead, his growing audience is due purely to his skill as an entertainer. “People love my show cos I emphasise good times,” he says. “I encourage people to wear a smile, not a frown.” Rush describes his show (or “revue”) as “Black vaudeville” – song, dance, storytelling, often bawdy humour – and these elements provided the key to his breakthrough: The Road to Memphis, the 2003 documentary that was easily the strongest effort in Martin Scorsese’s The Blues series, and followed Rush as he worked, his personality and performances winning over new listeners. Add to this a new manager with a vision of how to take Rush forward and he entered his 80s doing better business than ever. “I didn’t want anyone to read the book and feel sorry for me,” says Rush of a life that has seen him get shot, jailed, badly injured when his tour bus crashed and, most punishingly, lose three of his children to sickle cell anaemia. Musicians helped him on the hard road to success but James Brown, both when Rush was a junior and later a veteran, left him out of pocket when he offered largesse. “Some men behave like dogs,” says Rush. “My thing has always been to not give up, to keep on pushing – as Curtis Mayfield sang. All those hills and valleys I’ve climbed, well, someone always came through and lifted me out. Life is so short that I take the good as the overlap of the bad.” Born Emmet Ellis Jr in Homer, Louisiana, to sharecropping parents, segregation overshadowed a dirt poor upbringing. “We didn’t have no electricity in our home,” says Rush. “Only an outside toilet. Grew up picking cotton and got little schooling. But Daddy and Momma loved us and raised us right and, even if they had very little money, made sure we got the essentials. It’s Black folks’ oldest blues song in America – making a way out of no way.” Emmet Jr decided to make his own way aged 13, leaving home to work full time as a farm labourer. Determined to perform, and being tall and confident, he began sitting in with blues musicians playing local juke joints (shanty bars often built on plantations). Aged 15, he joined the Rabbit’s Foot Minstrels troupe as a singer and dancer, dabbing burnt cork on his face (as was then expected of minstrels) before performing. “Bessie Smith and Louis Jordan and many others started out with minstrels,” he states. “Minstrels also created Black vaudeville, and Sammy Davis Jr and others came out of that. I’m not defending minstrels, I’m just saying it was a bridge for a lot of us to enter the entertainment industry.” He changed his name to Bobby Rush – out of respect for his father, who was now a preacher and blues was considered the devil’s music – and worked juke joints where sharecroppers would drink and dance. Shifting to Memphis, Rush was befriended and schooled in the basics of the music industry by Rufus Thomas and Albert King, then, in 1953, joined the great migration of African Americans northwards. In Chicago, he built himself a reputation as an entertaining performer but little else – he worked a hotdog stand, opened a barbecue outlet, collected scrap metal, grafting hard to support his family. Releasing seven 45s on six different independent record labels between 1964 and 1971, he finally clicked when Chicken Heads reached No 34 on the US R&amp;B charts. “Folk funk” is how Rush described his sound and his hit became a staple on southern jukeboxes, selling a million copies. A bad deal meant he saw no royalties but it brought him more bookings and audiences loved him. “We in the entertainment business,” he says, “so I strive to do that: entertain.” Philadelphia International Records signed Rush and, in 1979, released his debut album Rush Hour, but it won scant attention. Aged 46, he refused to quit and kept working the clubs. An underground star, Rush soon became known as “the King of the Chitlin’ Circuit” and to many Black Americans, that is royalty indeed. “The chitlin’ circuit ain’t nothin’ but a place where we Negroes could go and have a good time,” he says of a loose network of African American clubs that provided loyal audiences for the likes of Denise LaSalle, Latimore, ZZ Hill, Shirley Brown and other noted soul/blues artists who never managed to crossover to white audiences as Al Green, Buddy Guy and Aretha Franklin did. Chitlings are fried pigs’ intestines: slaves were often given them by slavemasters after a pig had been slaughtered and developed this into a staple of “soul food”. Rush notes that they cleaned up the shit-filled pig’s colon and seasoned it into a delicacy, “just as we would take run-down old theatres and turn them into an oasis for Black people to escape all the shit we were taking from the outside world”. While the chitlin’ circuit extends across the US, its stronghold is in the south and, in 1983, Rush relocated from Chicago to Jackson, Mississippi, to work it. Rush’s folk funk ensures his songs are laden with country homilies, broad wit and lusty innuendos: She Caught Me With My Pants Down, Santa Claus Wants Some Too and What’s Good For the Goose Is Good for the Gander are funky and lascivious. One number, Big Fat Woman, became a comedy trope in Rush’s show and he has long employed “shake” dancers – amply proportioned Black women who shake their rears while he sings. The shake dancers go down a storm on the chitlin’ circuit but are less welcome in Europe: he was booed at a Dutch festival, while his 2005 performance at London’s Barbican Hall had this paper’s reviewer damning Rush as “simply pathetic”. A year before his Barbican debut, where the predominantly white audience exuded silent discomfort, I had seen Rush perform in Mississippi to an almost entirely Black audience who whooped, dirty danced and sang along. It’s a cultural conundrum: there’s nothing nasty in his celebratory shows but, inevitably, humour doesn’t always travel well. I mention European criticism of his dancers and Rush’s reply contains tempered fury. “Shake dancers are from Africa,” he states. “It’s what Black people do. Booty is part of our Blackness and I’m not ashamed of who I am or where I come from.” Twerking, I suggest, comes from shake dancers. “You got it,” he replies. “Rappers love what I do cos I’m swift with the lyrics.” This noted, Rush has toned down his act: his 2019 performance at London’s Jazz Cafe found him accompanied by one somewhat restrained shake dancer. He’s also remodelled his sound: glossy keyboards and soul stylings have given way to an elemental blues with Rush playing magnificent harmonica. Indeed, his 2022 shows were going to be his first entirely solo concerts in Europe. “In 1970, Rufus Thomas advised me to retire the harmonica because Stax had told him it sounded old-timey,” notes Rush. “More recently I noticed that there was a return to blues roots and so I went that way. Less vaudeville, more authenticity. I wanted to show people where I came from … the sound I started out with.” In The Road to Memphis, Rush mentioned how, while he commanded a huge Black audience, he hoped he could cross over to a white one. Now that he has achieved this, I wonder if he still plays the chitlin’ circuit. “I crossed over but I didn’t cross out – you get me?” he replies. “Some Black artists – and I’m not naming names – cross over and lose their people. Not me. I can still play a club in the Black part of Memphis and pull thousands of people. Then I go play on Beale Street (the city’s blues tourist strip) and get a white audience.” In his autobiography, Rush notes how he has always possessed more energy than anyone else and, across our Zoom chat, he not only speaks with great ebullience but sings, plays harmonica and strums his guitar – everything but call on a shake dancer. His enthusiasm is infectious, this funky, funny pensioner who exudes Black pride and joy. “A lot of things have changed across my life,” says Rush when I ask about Black Lives Matter, “but still plenty remains the same. Music has a link to freedom; it’s a great place to bring people together, build friendships and understanding. That’s why I’m still going out there.” I Aint Studdin’ Ya is published by Hachette.With towns and cities across the US increasingly deluged by ferocious storms and rising sea levels, a group of disaster survivors has pleaded with the federal government to overhaul a flood insurance system they say is ill-equipped for an era of climate crisis. A petition of nearly 300 people who have been flooded, and their advocates, is set to be sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema) to call for a drastic overhaul of the government-run flood insurance system that underwrites most flood policies in the US. “We’ve lived without electricity, running water and secure shelter,” reads the petition, organized by Anthropocene Alliance, an environmental non-profit. “We’ve heard our children cry from the absence of friends, school and safety. And we’ve confronted homelessness, illness and mind-numbing red tape from insurance companies and government agencies.” The survivors are calling for a ban on “irresponsible” housing development in flood-prone areas, new rules that would provide buyers with the present and future flood risks of a property before purchasing it and a greater focus on relocating communities and elevating properties away from floodwater rather than simply funding rebuilding flooded homes in the same place as before. “To continue to build in vulnerable places does not make sense and needs to come to a halt,” said Stephen Eisenman, director of strategy at Anthropocene Alliance. “A lot of people are suckered into buying in these places because there’s no federal disclosure laws. This is turning into a crisis, especially for poorer people ... “We are beginning to see the start of a great American flood migration and that exodus is only going to accelerate in the next decade. To keep building in these areas is just crazy.” A particular controversy is a process called “fill and build” where developers heap soil upon flood prone areas, elevating them slightly before building housing upon the compacted dirt. Critics say this simply diverts floodwater to neighbors and is a short-term fix to a chronic problem. “We have developers building on wetland areas that can’t hold water anymore so it just flows off onto us,” said Amber Bismack, a petition signatory who lives in Livingston County, Michigan, which is a part of Detroit’s metropolitan area. Bismack moved to the area, close to a tributary of the Huron river, seven years ago and has seen her neighborhood flood on 15 occasions in this time. The flooding has become so bad at times that Bismack has had to don waders to carry her children home through floodwater. The family have had to temporarily move out of the house, too, when the drains stopped working because of the flooding. She said that the worsening floods are taking its toll on the local community. “I can’t tell you how much depression we are seeing in the community because it just floods over and over again, we’ve seen a real decline in people’s mental health,” said Bismack, who is part of a community group that is calling for Congress to mandate flood risk disclosure to all potential homebuyers. “I know someone who thought their flood insurance would be $1,000 a year but couldn’t find out the true risk until they bought and it was deemed by Fema to be high risk with a premium of $13,000 a year, which is unlivable,” she said. “People are just stuck.” The national flood insurance scheme was launched in 1968 and has become the default for millions of Americans unable to get mortgages without flood insurance, which is routinely denied by private providers. The system has been driven into debt, however, with some homes repeatedly rebuilt in the same place only to be flooded again. Fema deems homes at risk if they are in something called the 100-year flood plain, which means they have a 1% risk each year of getting a foot of water in flooding. This system does not account, however, for the proximity to water or the unfolding climate crisis, meaning that many of the flood maps are inaccurate and premiums do not reflect the actual risk. “Fema is a joke, it doesn’t update its flood maps,” said Jackie Jones, a resident of Reidsville, Georgia, a town that often floods following heavy rainfall. “I wouldn’t have bought this house if I knew I’d get so much water but based on Fema’s maps, there’s no flooding here. They need to step up and take some control.” In October, Fema unveiled a new system, called Risk Rating 2.0, that aims to address a situation where nearly half of the flood claims received by Fema are from people outside zones where insurance is required. Around three-quarters of the 4.9m federal insurance policyholders will pay more for their premiums. “We’ve learned that the old way of looking at risk had lots of gaps, which understated a property’s flood risk and communicated a false sense of security,” said David Maurstad, a senior executive of the national flood insurance program, told AP. The elevated premiums have been opposed by some members of Congress, who argue it will hurt people who require affordable housing, but Eisenman said the reforms do not go far enough as they do not actually curb new building on risky floodplains. “Much more profound changes are needed,” he said. Instances of ‘nuisance’ flooding, where high tides exacerbated by sea level rise cause streets and homes to fill with water, have increased dramatically along US coastlines in recent years and more powerful storms, fueled by a heating atmosphere, are bringing heavier bursts of rainfall to parts of the country. Rising sea levels alone could force around 13m Americans to relocate by the end of the century, research has found. For many people, however, moving is not an option, due to financial constraints or ties to home. “There is a great concern and fear because everything is at risk, even people’s lives,” said Rebecca Jim, who lives in the Cherokee nation in Oklahoma. Miami, a city in the area, has been regulary flooded by water that washes toxins from a nearby mining site onto homes, schools and businesses. “It’s foolish and criminal that more building is allowed on floodplains. But much of what is flooded here is tribal land and people here aren’t moving from that.”The prosecution: Mafalda I’m not against my sister going out and having fun, but she’s also got to respect my boundaries Before Mariana, my older sister, moved in last summer, I had my own space and routine in this flat. I was nervous because she’s such an extrovert and I knew our lifestyles were different. Mariana loves going out, meeting new people and having parties, whereas I’m really not into any of that. We established rules right away, one of which was that we couldn’t have strangers here. I knew that when my sister lived at university she had parties that got out of control, so I said: “Only friends and friends of friends, no strangers.” She didn’t like it, and said whatever she does in her room should be her business, but I argued that it’s a shared space and I want to feel safe. Mariana is a lot more free than me, sexually and socially, but I told her she needed to compromise and eventually she agreed. The first night I left her alone, Mariana had a huge party with a band she met at a club. There were loads of people in our flat when I got back, and the floor was sticky. The morning after, Mariana was apologetic, saying things just got out of hand; she seemed so sorry I let it go. But then about two months later she brought a random guy back for the night. She had called at 2am that night to warn me and told me he was a friend of a friend who had lost his keys. She said he’d be stranded if we didn’t let him crash so I’d agreed. But when I started chatting to them, it quickly became clear the story didn’t add up. I was stewing all the next morning; then Mariana confessed she’d made up the story because she’d wanted him to stay over. We got into a huge fight. Mariana thought I’d overreacted but she broke my trust over a random guy, so what did she expect? Since then, Mariana hasn’t brought anyone back (that I know of). I’m not against her dating casually, but she needs to respect my boundaries. I also think it’s better if she gets to know someone before bringing them home. This rule isn’t about controlling her; it’s about protecting her and our shared space – why can’t she see that? The defence: Mariana I’ve had a few fights with my younger sister about my love life – I’m offended she doesn’t trust me My sister is particular about having boys in the flat. She’s younger than me, still at university, and has less experience with relationships. But I’m in my mid-20s, and the rule makes a big difference to my life. Before living with Mafalda, I lived with a friend and we did what we wanted. I’m sexually comfortable and used to bringing people to my space. After my sister and I agreed on the rule, I was still really defensive. I said it was my room and my space. When I had the party that first time, Mafalda wasn’t even there for most of the night. There wasn’t much to apologise for as I cleaned up the mess. I had planned on inviting just a few people but loads turned up at the door. I knew most of them though. We’ve had quite a few fights about my love life. Mafalda said if I had been dating someone for a while, she would be OK with it, but if it was the first or second date, she wouldn’t want them around. She would feel uncomfortable. I was offended that she doesn’t trust my judgment. Does she think I go for terrible, dangerous guys? She once said I shouldn’t be having casual sex, which annoyed me – it’s not her business. I tried to explain that I would never bring someone back who would put me in a dangerous situation, much less her. That one time I brought a guy back and lied to her was stupid. Mafalda bought into it for a while but we were clearly drunk and lying. Afterwards, she and I had a huge fight and she didn’t talk to me for days. I tried to apologise but she got really angry. Mafalda kept reiterating that I had no consideration for her wellbeing. She blew it out of proportion, especially when I’m the one cleaning the house and cooking dinners – she forgot about all that. After a few days we had a long conversation. Now, ideally, if I want to bring a guy home I’ll prepare Mafalda and make sure she’s heard of him before so it’s not a surprise. But there may be times when this doesn’t work or she doesn’t approve, and I can’t stop living my life to suit her. The jury of Guardian readers Should Mariana stop bringing strangers back to the flat? Mariana is guilty of reneging on the agreement she made with Mafalda. If Mariana feels the terms are proving too restrictive, she should either attempt to reach a new compromise or look for somewhere else to live. Julia, 67 Mariana should be allowed to bring randoms back to her room and, when her sister’s out, be allowed parties if she cleans up afterwards. Mafalda should realise that it’s safer for Mariana to bring random men back to her place than going to theirs. Poppy, 38 Mariana appears to have been forced into accepting a rule which doesn’t suit her needs. The time when she lied about the guy’s keys is a natural reaction – we break the rules we don’t agree with and didn’t make. Alex, 35 Of course Mariana wants to have fun in her twenties, but not bringing strangers back to the flat is a small compromise to make. She is also being naive if she thinks she can identify a “dangerous guy” on a first meeting. Miranda, 22 For all the talk of compromise, the rule is Mafalda’s, and Mariana’s “rule breaking” since makes clear this was no negotiation and no agreed truce. Perhaps the seeds of a true compromise lie in Mariana’s final statement – fair warning as often as possible, and trust where not. Richard, 39 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Mariana stop bringing strangers back to the flat? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Roland should pay more of the rent, as he earns more than his boyfriend, James. 53% of you said no – Roland is innocent 47% of you said yes – Roland is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereKieran Trippier could have stayed at Atlético Madrid and played in the last 16 of this season’s Champions League but the England right-back realised he was more excited about the prospect of helping Newcastle United avoid relegation. While acknowledging that joining a team with one win all season is a “risk”, Trippier found himself powerless to resist Eddie Howe’s invitation to spearhead his Tyneside revolution. Shortly after becoming the first established England international to arrive at St James’ Park since Michael Owen in 2005, the 31-year-old took a seat at his new club’s training ground on Friday and set about explaining the reasons why. “I’m the type of player that loves challenges and Newcastle is certainly a challenge which excites me,” Trippier said. “I’m still ambitious, I still want to get in the England team. I know I’m up against Reece James, Kyle Walker and Trent [Alexander-Arnold] but I feel I’m in very good shape. I can handle the pressure. And I love taking chances.” It seems Trippier will need to shoulder a considerable amount of responsibility in the north-east, where Howe hopes a full-back he signed for Burnley a decade ago will inspire some of the world’s leading players to follow in his footsteps and join a club set to be transformed by their new Saudi Arabian-led owners. “Kieran’s arrival is a sign this club has huge pull and I’m not talking financially,” said Newcastle’s manager. “Kieran hasn’t come here for financial reasons, he’s come for this club and the challenge and longer-term vision. Hopefully other players around the world will share the same dream and vision.” Trippier’s relationship with Howe seems key to the arrival of a player who helped Atlético win La Liga last season. “It’s very important,” said the former Tottenham player. “He’s a great manager and I’ve kept in touch with him ever since I left Burnley. He’s a big reason why I came here. I’m here to fight and help him as much as I can.” The chance to live in northern England ticked another box. “I made it clear a few months back that I’d love to return to the Premier League,” said Trippier. “Living in the north is important for my family – but Newcastle’s also an exciting long-term project. The owners want to make this club very successful; the direction they want to take it in is fantastic. It’s a very exciting time for supporters and players here.” Many fans remain concerned about Saudi Arabia’s less than exemplary human rights record but Trippier straight-batted questions about the Kingdom. “I’m just focusing on football,” he said. “It’s not for me to discuss.” He gives short shrift to those who say the move is all about hard cash. “I know why I’m here: I came for the project and everything about it,” said Trippier. “If people say it’s about money they’re entitled to their opinions but I know the reasons why and that’s not one of them.” In a purely football context there appears a widespread view he has taken a gamble and he is becoming accustomed to people telling him he has made a “brave” decision. “It’s exactly the same question I got asked before I went to Madrid,” said a player whose initial £12m fee could eventually rise to £15m. “People were saying: ‘It’s a risk, he shouldn’t make that move.’ But I took that risk. I always believed in myself, that I can play anywhere in any team, in any country. I’m the type of player who is brave, who loves to take chances. It’s my mentality. I certainly took on a challenge in Spain and it’s the same here. I’m not afraid to fight.” Howe, who visited Trippier in Madrid last year, is quietly confident a new recruit he regards as one of the game’s finest crossers can help propel his side away from 19th position and up the Premier League ladder. “Kieran has leadership qualities on and off the pitch and a winning mentality,” he said. “He’ll help us succeed. He’s a very technical player with a level of calmness on the ball. He’ll attack very well but he’s a top defender too.” Trippier hopes to receive clearance to start Saturday’s third-round FA Cup tie at home to Cambridge, and Howe aims to have recruited a centre-half and striker before Watford’s league visit next Saturday. The latter purchase would replace the injured Callum Wilson, whose calf problem is still being diagnosed and could sideline him for either weeks or the remainder of the season. Although Newcastle have made a renewed bid for Lille’s Sven Botman, the Ligue 1 club rejected it and remain reluctant to sell the 21-year-old Netherlands defender.Were the songs covered by Chan Marshall on her 11th album as Cat Power left in their original form, they would constitute a stonking playlist. Taking in everything from forgotten classics (country superstar Kitty Wells’ It Wasn’t God Who Made Honky Tonk Angels) to beloved classics (These Days by Nico), from obscure numbers by obscure artists (Pa Pa Power by Ryan Gosling’s band Dead Man’s Bones) to obscure numbers by the greats (Iggy Pop’s The Endless Sea), it would be genre-spanning – there is jazz (Billie Holiday’s I’ll Be Seeing You), pop (Lana Del Rey’s White Mustang), R&amp;B (Frank Ocean’s Bad Religion), country, folk and punk – and era-traversing: every decade from the 1940s to the 2010s is represented. As a covers album, however, it is less life-enhancing. Marshall has chosen artists with hugely distinctive voices and replaced them with her atmospheric but breathily subtle vocals (plus rumbling and folksy instrumentation). That these songs also tend to have wending, impressionistic melodies means that without a really idiosyncratic delivery, they don’t quite cut through. Stripped of Shane MacGowan’s inimitable rasp, the Pogues’ A Pair of Brown Eyes is still beautiful but far less thrilling; White Mustang and Bad Religion are similarly robbed of their power. Where a song looms large in the collective memory, a nuanced take has value – such as Marshall’s warmer, looser version of These Days – but other tracks, such as the bristlingly strange The Endless Sea, are simply made more pedestrian and palatable. Not so much fresh takes on old favourites, Covers is more like watered-down versions of semi-hidden gems. • Covers is released on 14 January on Domino.UK house prices rose by 9.8% last year, the fastest rate since 2007, but the boom is predicted to end this year as household finances come under increasing pressure, according to Halifax. The price of the average UK home hit a record high of £276,091 in December, up more than £24,000 over the year, the biggest annual increase since 2003. Halifax said the housing market “defied expectations” last year, ending with a 3.5% increase in prices in December, a level not seen since the end of 2006. “In 2021 we saw the average house price reach new record highs on eight occasions despite the UK being subject to lockdown for much of the first six months of the year,” said Russell Galley, the managing director of Halifax. Factors that have helped fuel the homebuying boom include the government’s stamp duty holiday, which came to an end in England and Northern Ireland in September after finishing earlier in Scotland and Wales, historically low interest rates and the “race for space” sparked by the pandemic-fuelled shift to remote and flexible working. Halifax expects UK house price growth to slow considerably compared with the red-hot rates of the past two years of the pandemic. “Looking ahead, the prospect that interest rates may rise further this year to tackle rising inflation, and increasing pressures on household budgets, suggests house price growth will slow considerably,” Galley said. “Our expectation is that house prices will maintain their current strong levels but that growth relative to the last two years will be at a slower pace.” Wales had the fastest house price growth in the UK over a calendar year, 14.5%, to £205,579. Northern Ireland also performed strongly, with prices rising 10.6% to an average of £170,946. House prices also continued to rise in Scotland, up 9.7% to £192,988, the most expensive on record. In England, the north-west was the strongest performing region, up 11.8% to £211,954, followed by the south-west, where prices climbed 11% to £287,774. “The demand for housing continues to outstrip supply, which is underpinning house prices,” said Jan Crosby, the UK head of infrastructure, building and construction at KPMG. “Developers can’t build quickly enough to sell into the strong market – particularly for family housing with outdoor space.”While there may not be as many playoff spots on the line at this stage as was promised when the league introduced the its new 17-game schedule, there’s still a lot at stake this weekend. Beyond the battle for seedings among teams who have already booked their postseason berth, there are five games that will decide who joins them in the playoffs: we preview them here. Pittsburgh Steelers at Baltimore Ravens (Sunday, 1pm EST/6pm GMT) What the Steelers need to do to win: If Ben Roethlisberger wants to extend his career at least one more game, he’ll need to win this game and then hope that the Jacksonville Jaguars upset the Indianapolis Colts. Pittsburgh can only control what they control and that means grinding out what’s sure to be another tough, physical game against their perennial rivals. What the Ravens need to do to win: Chances are that Lamar Jackson won’t be back, which is already a huge disadvantage. It’s quite likely that Baltimore’s season will end as it began: with way too many players on the injured list. Still, the Ravens can at least play spoilers by winning what could be a defensive battle and taking advantage of Pittsburgh mistakes. Key player: TJ Watt, outside linebacker, Pittsburgh Steelers. With one more sack, Watt will tie Michael Strahan’s single-season record of 22.5, and needs 1.5 to break it outright. And although Watt is playing in an extended 17-game season he has only made 14 appearances so far (Strahan achieved his record in 16 games). Prediction: The Steelers beat the hobbled Ravens, who would still need additional help to make it to the playoffs even with a win. But it won’t end up mattering for Pittsburgh on account of a game down in Florida … Indianapolis Colts at Jacksonville Jaguars (Sunday, 1pm EST/6pm GMT) What the Colts need to do to win: Show up? The Colts are the far superior team and are playing for a postseason berth rather than to avoid the NFL’s worst record. They just have to play like they are not facing the season’s biggest embarrassment because if they sleepwalk through this game, the Jaguars will jump at a chance to make their opponent the butt of the joke for a change. What the Jaguars need to do to win: Can they? Let’s be real: this game would be the Jaguars’ Super Bowl if they managed to win it. Sure, the organization would rather have the first pick in this year’s draft but no NFL team wants to go to that well two years in a row. It would be a sign of a franchise-wise failure to capitalize on landing Trevor Lawrence with the top overall pick last year. Key player: Jonathan Taylor, running back, Indianapolis Colts. Aaron Rodgers has probably already secured a second-straight MVP but there’s still plenty of opportunities for Taylor to clinch a solid runner-up showing by putting together another 100+ yard rushing game. Prediction: The Colts win and clinch a playoff spot. New Orleans Saints at the Atlanta Falcons (Sunday, 4.25pm EST/9.25 pm GMT) What the Saints need to do to win: First of all, they should hope that the Falcons are checked out and don’t go full out in a game that means nothing for them. Assuming that Atlanta do play a competitive game, the Saints will have to hope that they get something out of their unsettled quarterback position. Can Taysom Hill really be their guy? What the Falcons need to do to win: Technically, the Falcons’ season is done but they can play spoilers here, ending the Saints’ attempts to sneak into the postseason. As with the Jaguars, the question might be as much one of will as ability (although the team have already gone 0-2 against Hill as a starter; they may want to avoid 0-3 just for pride’s sake). Key player: Matt Ryan, quarterback, Atlanta Falcons. Here’s an interesting Atlanta-centric subplot to this game, it could be Ryan’s final game as the Falcons’ quarterback. If so, it would be nice to end things with a win at his home stadium. Prediction: Falcons win, ending the Saints’ playoff chances. San Francisco 49ers at Los Angeles Rams (Sunday, 4.25pm EST/8.25pm GMT) What the 49ers need to do to win: At this point, an injury to Jimmy Garoppolo means that they haven’t yet announced a starter at quarterback. Whether it ends up being Garoppolo or Trey Lance, the Niners must seize on the opportunity and not give head coach Kyle Shanahan a chance to regret his choice. What the Rams need to do to win: LA have to be laser-focused and avoid scoreboard watching if they want to clinch the division with a win. Even with a loss, the Rams can still win the division should the Arizona Cardinals lose to the Seattle Seahawks. Oh and there’s the ball security issue: if Matthew Stafford has another multiple interception game, this one’s probably a wrap quickly. Key player: Aaron Donald, defensive tackle, Los Angeles Rams. The reigning Defensive Player of the Year has a good chance of winning the award once again. A few big plays to help his team wrap up a division title won’t hurt his standing. Prediction: Rams beat the 49ers, who still sneak into the playoffs thanks to the Saints’ loss and other extenuating circumstances. Los Angeles Chargers at Las Vegas Raiders (Sunday, 8.20pm EST/Monday 1.20am GMT) What the Chargers need to do to win: This is how the league drew it up when they came up with the idea of a Week 18 game: a chance to end the season with an old-fashioned win-and-advance contest. The Chargers, like always, will rely on the dynamic arm of their quarterback (in this case, it’s Justin Herbert rather than Philip Rivers) and look to get separation on their opponents. If there’s one thing no Chargers fan wants to see it’s their team in a one-score game late in the fourth quarter. What the Raiders need to do to win: The Chargers are a more talented team than these Raiders, but as Vegas will be playing at home against a team prone to late-game mistakes. The Raiders can’t exactly play conservatively but they will have to play smart, mistake-free football. Key player: Derek Carr, quarterback, Las Vegas Raiders. At this point, Carr is a known entity. He’s a league-average quarterback who will have good games and bad games. This is his shining moment to put together a highlight-reel performance. Prediction: It wouldn’t be a Chargers season without a last-minute collapse. The Raiders win, probably on a last-minute field goal, and move on to the playoffs while the Chargers go home. • This article was amended on 7 January 2022. The name of the 49ers’ coach is Kyle Shanahan, not Mike.It’s been the best of days, it’s been the worst of days. To find it all wrapped up in a few paragraphs, click here. 70th over: England 258-7 (Bairstow 103, Leach 4) So Bairstow reaches his century in the last over of the day, just like Steve Waugh on this ground in 2003. The day belongs to him, for his spirit and sparkling assault on Nathan Lyon, and also to his partners – Ben Stokes, who played through the pain with 66, and Mark Wood, who had some fun with 39. England were reduced to rubble, at 36-4, and to utter inertia, failing to score for 12 overs. Since then they’ve made 222-3, shown a lot of character, salvaged some pride and even given themselves a chance of escaping with a draw as there’s more rain hovering around Sydney. It has been a long day’s play and a hard day’s night, but it’s been well worth it. Thanks for reading, sorry not to get through all the emails, and do join us tomorrow to see what happens next in a game that has suddenly gone from a saddening bore to something resembling a contest. Cummins goes round the wicket and gets Bairstow playing and missing outside off, for the first time in ages. The England players are poised on their balcony, waiting to acclaim him. The sun comes out too, wondering what the fuss is about. And Bairstow upper-cuts for four! He raises both arms in triumph, as well he may. It’s his first Test hundred for three years and it’s a really good one, rattled up off only 138 balls when his team were at rock bottom. In a miserable series for England, it sticks out like a sore thumb. 69th over: England 254-7 (Bairstow 99, Leach 4) Bairstow gets a couple of freebies as Labuschagne drops short. He cuts for two and pulls for .... just a single, so he’s on 99. But he has the strike. 68th over: England 251-7 (Bairstow 96, Leach 4) Bairstow takes another breezy single and Leach repays his faith by keeping Cummins out. As Dan Norcross points out, Leach isn’t just the guy who famously made one not out: he has also scored 92 in a Test against Ireland. 67th over: England 250-7 (Bairstow 95, Leach 4) Bairstow doesn’t seem too concerned about the hundred, or the strike. He takes a single off the second ball from Labuschagne, who appeals for leg-before against Leach. “Outside the line, missing leg stump, too far down,” scoffs Mark Butcher, and HawkEye proves him right. “It seems that Bairstow’s innings is exactly what we’ve been hoping Buttler would bring to the table in Test cricket,” says Tom van der Gucht. “An attacking ODI-style counter attack that wrestles back some initiative or takes the game away. Ironically, it’s the sort of innings the 2016 Bairstow used to produce before losing form and being dropped for Buttler.” Yes, it’s a strange dance those two have been in for the past several years. They’re like a pair of brothers who can’t get on because they’re too similar. 66th over: England 249-7 (Bairstow 94, Leach 4) Jack Leach comes out at No.9. He has two jobs here: to make it to the close and see Bairstow to a hundred. The Aussies scent blood again, but Leach is calm, as ever, and even picks up four with a push past backward point. Wood is thumped on the helmet by Cummins – who thinks he’s got him caught at point. There’s a firm shake of the head from the ump, but Cummins reviews and he’s right. That’s the end of a feisty innings and an excellent partnership of 72. 65th over: England 242-6 (Bairstow 94, Wood 38) Cummins has used all four of his fit bowlers in quick succession and none of them have found the breakthrough, so he turns to a part-timer, Marnus Labuschagne. The batters treat his round-arm leg-spin with respect and don’t even hit a six. What runs there are – a single to Wood, a two to Bairstow – come on the off side. The partnership is 69 off 69 balls, to add to England’s collection of small mercies. 64th over: England 239-6 (Bairstow 92, Wood 37) Cummins, who does love a bowling change, takes Lyon off and brings himself on again. The field placings show that he’s planning to bomb Wood, which may not be the best idea. Wood pulls him for six, then six more. Cummins bowls a wide; Wood pulls yet again, for just a single this time. Fourteen off the over! The Barmy Army are missing a trick here: they should be singing “Are you England in disguise?”. 63rd over: England 225-6 (Bairstow 92, Wood 24) Starc, with a whole over to attack Wood, takes an unexpected tack by starting with a full toss, which Wood gratefully flicks for four. He tries a bouncer (too high), followed by a ball down the leg side (too wide). A short ball on the hip brings an easy single, which raises the fifty partnership. I take it all back: Wood hasn’t been flattered by being at No.8. As well as going for his shots, he has joined Bairstow in running well between the wickets, and the over ends with a hard-run two as Bairstow plays a square push. And Bairstow becomes the first Englishman to reach 90 in this series. He should really be waving his bat. 62nd over: England 218-6 (Bairstow 90, Wood 19) Bairstow, who’s had so much fun against Lyon today, finds the right way to avoid the follow-on – with a reverse sweep. It only brings him a single, but it’s a lovely touch. 61st over: England 215-6 (Bairstow 89, Wood 17) Bairstow, still swinging, pulls Starc for a single, and Wood adds another one with an airy glance, so there are now just two needed to make the Aussies bat again. The crowd give a big hand to Scott Boland, who is walking round the boundary in a T-shirt, looking cheerful, so maybe his rib injury isn’t too bad after all. 60th over: England 213-6 (Bairstow 88, Wood 16) Wood plays his personal shot of the day, giving Lyon the charge and lofting him over mid-off for four. One more of those will see off the follow-on. “This Ashes tour has been pretty bleak,” says Giles Page. “Mind you most of them are from an England point of view – only the 2010-11 series countering the cycle of misery. I wonder who would England call up for the next series, given the sheer number of batting failures this series? Do we go back to James Vince, Dom Sibley etc, or look for a completely new bunch? The series against NZ in England could be just as embarrassing as this, given their bowling attack in English conditions. I’m fully aware that I’m being utterly pessimistic.” 59th over: England 205-6 (Bairstow 87, Wood 9) Yet another bowling change: this time it’s Starc replacing Green. Bairstow pulls for two and inside-edges for a single – a false shot but also a good one, as he managed to jam the bat down on a testing yorker. Starc is saying to Bairstow, “You may be in one-day mode but two can play at that game.” And that’s drinks, with England needing 12 to make Australia bat again. Jonny Bairstow has shown tremendous character but that half-session belonged to Australia, as they got rid of the fearless Stokes and the hapless Buttler. Not only did poor Buttler perish for nought: he also managed to be caught by Usman Khawaja, the man who had added a hundred after being dropped by Buttler. This can be such a cruel game. 58th over: England 201-6 (Bairstow 84, Wood 9) Cummins gives himself another breather and brings back Lyon. Will he continue with Jack Leach impression? He won’t. Bairstow takes a single off the first ball and Wood is watchful. England need 16 to avoid the follow-on, though if they manage it, it will be a mixed blessing: good for their pride, not so good for their chances of a win, which will go from slim to infinitesimal and beyond. 57th over: England 200-6 (Bairstow 83, Wood 9) Green continues and Bairstow pushes the third ball into the covers for a single. Wood sees a wayward inswinger go for four byes – it should have been wides – and then flirts with danger by playing the same shot as Buttler, the loose chip into the covers. Luck is with him as the ball loops to extra-cover’s left. They run two, and up comes England’s 200. Riches! 56th over: England 193-6 (Bairstow 82, Wood 7) Actually, Bairstow’s not bothered about the strike, as he shows by taking a single off the first ball of this over from Cummins. Wood, justifying his faith, hooks the next one for six. After another single, Cummins fires in a superb bouncer, fast and ferociously accurate. Bairstow does well to jag his head out of the way at the last second. England now have five sixes in the match to Australia’s one. As crumbs of comfort go, it’s quite a tasty one. 55th over: England 184-6 (Bairstow 80, Wood 0) The Aussies are now a man down as Scott Boland has gone for a scan on his ribs after falling in his follow-through, but Cummins is still keen to ring the changes. He takes Lyon off and brings on Cameron Green. Bairstow sees a short one and pulls it for ... six! Then he steps away, just like in an ODI, and glides for four past third slip. A less elegant shot, top-edged into the leg side, brings a streaky single and allows him to keep the strike. 54th over: England 173-6 (Bairstow 69, Wood 0) So we’re down to the tail, and England are still 243 runs behind. Normal service is resumed. Mark Wood, flattered to be at No.8, starts with a very proper straight bat, as if rising to his positiion, then gets away with a wild heave that brings a toe-end into the off side. Broderick is right, England have had more than their share of luck today. And they’re still in the deepest of doo-doo. Noooo! Buttler chips to short extra, playing with his hands way too far in front of his body. So one brings two, Cummins gets his man yet again, and Buttler’s series from hell continues. 53rd over: England 173-5 (Bairstow 69, Buttler 0) Bairstow is wincing, but fighting: he clips Lyon for two and then sweeps him for another six. He has now faced 38 balls from Lyon and hit 42 runs off them, with four fours and two sixes. Defiance, thy name is Bairstow. And Stokes. 52nd over: England 165-5 (Bairstow 61, Buttler 0) After that delay, Jos Buttler has to face the music. He’s made some scratchy starts in this series and he’s facing Cummins, who has got him out five times in the past month, but his first five balls bring no alarms. Here’s Broderick, quoting me on Stokes’s performance. “‘It’s been brave, defiant, sometimes beautiful, sometimes bloody, and all utterly in character.’ Would also add ‘lucky’. Never seen a ball that fast hit a stump that hard without dislodgement. Good on him for making the most of it though...” True. Bairstow is being bandaged up. He may well be aware that if he retires hurt, England are down to their long tail. Ouch! Cummins finds some lift and strikes the shoulder of the bat, swiftly followed by the end of the thumb. The ball flies over the slips, so there’s a run, but Bairstow is in visible pain as the physio tends to him. 51st over: England 164-5 (Bairstow 60, Buttler 0) Before that, England were almost bullying Nathan Lyon. Bairstow played a slog-sweep for six, beautifully controlled, and followed it with a nudge for a well-run two. But then he took a single, and Lyon dug deep and did the trick. He now has the unfamiliar figures of 8-0-51-1. The breakthrough! Lyon fires in an arm ball, Stokes goes back and misses it, and this time he doesn’t bother to review. And that’s the end of a display of blazing bravery. 50th over: England 155-4 (Stokes 66, Bairstow 51) If you were the Barmy Army, how would you greet this flurry of landmarks? With a rendition of God Save the Queen, of course. Stokes almost spoils their fun with a top edge off Cummins, but it lands safely, somewhere near third man. 49th over: England 152-4 (Stokes 64, Bairstow 50) Lyon stays on and Stokes tucks in, hitting a slog-sweep for four. Bairstow clips to midwicket for a single that brings him fifty. He has played his best innings for ages, just when his team – and his career – needed it. Stokes celebrates his mate’s landmark by coming down the track and stroking a six over extra-cover. That was high-risk, as Lyon saw him coming and pushed the ball wide, but Stokes had the wit, and the composure, to go through with the shot and send it over the rope. And up comes the 150. As Prince used to say on stage, “Too many hits!” 48th over: England 140-4 (Stokes 53, Bairstow 49) Boland is off, after a rare fruitless spell, as Cummins brings himself back on. Bairstow tucks an easy single, but Stokes gets in some strife, offering a loopy edge that lands harmlessly at backward point, after taking a bouncer on the bicep. There could be a famous photo to be taken later, showing all his bruises. 47th over: England 138-4 (Stokes 52, Bairstow 48) Bairstow laps Lyon again – and is almost caught by Steve Smith, showing great anticipation and flying to his left from slip. But Bairstow gets another two and brings up the hundred partnership – 101 off 24.4 overs. It’s been a classic counter-attack. Stokes and Bairstow, by the way, have reached a silent milestone: their 2000th run as a partnership in Tests. This is the 45th time they’ve batted together and their tally is now 2020, which makes them the second most prolific pair for England in the past ten years, after Alastair Cook and Joe Root. Bairstow is also in the third-best pair, and Stokes is in the fourth – both with Root. Full list here. “Sitting in scorching Perth, Western Australia, a lonely England supporter in a sea of swaggering Australians,” says Richard Pearce. Richard, a lot of people feel your pain. “Following the OBO one update at a time, forlornly hoping that Stokes and Bairstow can dig in. And then I read ‘I don’t want to curse them, but….’. Maybe if I’m quick this email will get to you before the now inevitable tumble of all England remaining wickets. Sigh.” Sorry! 46th over: England 135-4 (Stokes 52, Bairstow 45) Boland remembers that he is The Great Scotty Boland and bowls a maiden to Stokes. And that’s tea, with England a whole lot happier than they were at lunch. They have made 99 for none in the session, and it’s almost as if they’ve remembered how to play Test cricket. Stokes has been brave, Bairstow fluent, and both have shown some mettle. Back shortly to see if this is more than an interlude in the middle of a catastrophe. 45th over: England 135-4 (Stokes 52, Bairstow 45) Lyon, who is nothing if not a fighter, restores order with a better over, flatter and tighter, and concedes only a single as Stokes drives to long-on. These two have now put on 99. I don’t want to curse them, but they did once put on 399, in Cape Town, six years and several lifetimes ago. 44th over: England 134-4 (Stokes 51, Bairstow 45) Thirties, schmirties. Bairstow has found his flow, clipping a yorker from Boland for two, then easing another cut away for four, and dabbing to square leg for two more. Cummins shows some imagination by posting himself at short mid-on, next to the umpire, but he can’t stop Boland going for eight off the over. Is one of the all-time magic spells – stretching over the man’s first two Tests – now at an end? I wouldn’t bet on it. 43rd over: England 126-4 (Stokes 51, Bairstow 37) Bairstow does the cut-and-sweep thing again, the other way round this time: first a sweep for four, well struck off the stumps as Lyon comes round the wicket, and then a nice late cut for three. Bairstow may even get out of the thirties, which have been his downfall all year. And Lyon, as Mark Butcher notes, is going for six an over here. “That’ll make Jack Leach feel a bit better about Brisbane.” 42nd over: England 118-4 (Stokes 50, Bairstow 30) Stokes plays a loose clip at Boland and picks up a streaky three – which is enough to get him to fifty off 70 balls. It’s been brave, defiant, sometimes beautiful, sometimes bloody, and all utterly in character. 41st over: England 115-4 (Stokes 47, Bairstow 30) Bairstow, facing Lyon, is proactive too – a cut for four, nice and measured, followed by a lap for four more. At 79, this is already England’s third-biggest partnership of the series, trailing only the two hundred stands compiled by Root and Malan, a long long time ago. “I’ve just woken up in the middle of the night,” says Max Savochkin, “to see we’ve had another batting collapse. Do you reckon we could get someone on the blower to Scott Morrison? Surely we could find something wrong with the team’s visas and have them all sent home?” 40th over: England 107-4 (Stokes 47, Bairstow 22) More than most types of sport, Test cricket reveals character, and we are now seeing what sort of captain Pat Cummins is: passive with his field-setting, but proactive with his bowling changes. He takes Starc off and brings back Scott Boland, the man of the moment. But the magic isn’t there in this over, as his first three balls go for one, one and four – a cover drive from Stokes, beautifully timed. 39th over: England 101-4 (Stokes 42, Bairstow 21) Lyon makes some noise, for the first time as a bowler today, by appealing for leg-before as Bairstow misses a sweep. Paul Eiffel shakes his head, rightly, as Bairstow is taking guard on middle-and-off and was struck outside the line. After a few blocks, Bairstow plays a neat cover push for two and then connects with that sweep shot, finding the gap and the rope. And the England hundred comes up! Another small mercy for a nation of insomniac masochists. 38th over: England 95-4 (Stokes 42, Bairstow 15) Bairstow cover-drives Starc and fails to middle it as the bat spins round in his hand, but that’s another two, and he glances the last ball for a single to keep the strike. In between, a couple of deliveries fly through to Alex Carey, as if to remind us about the gravity of England’s situation. They’ve got 99 problems and the pitch is one. 37th over: England 92-4 (Stokes 42, Bairstow 12) Green comes off, unexpectedly, after only three overs. Cummins turns to Nathan Lyon, who’s been redundant as a bowler for the last innings and a half – though keeping busy as a sledger. Stokes charges him, goes for a big mow and is lucky to pick up two off the inside edge. Then he calms down and picks up a proper two with a flick to deep square. It doesn’t feel as if Stokes can last much longer, but he has changed the mood and reset the tone. I trust Jos Buttler is watching. 36th over: England 87-4 (Stokes 37, Bairstow 12) Starc continues – and Stokes goes for broke. The first ball, an attempted yorker, is clipped for four as if this was just another World Cup semi-final. The second is on-driven, from outside off, for four more. The third, a lifter, is pulled for a third four, to bring up the fifty partnership – 51 off 13.4 overs. How England needed that. 35th over: England 75-4 (Stokes 25, Bairstow 12) With Starc and Green bowling in tandem, both over 6ft 5, Australia are making maximum use of this treacherous pitch. Green’s bounce bothers Stokes again as the over opens with a steepling bumper. Stokes flashes at the next ball, almost despairingly, and gets three for it. One of the many astonishing things about this series is the way Green has outbowled Stokes as the all-rounder and fourth seamer. From Simon O’Donnell to Shane Watson, that was the one department in which England could be sure of being better than Australia. “Good morning!” says Peter Preedy. “Another collapse... J. Liew’s article talking about a mixed gender Ashes seems more and more inspired by the over. It has been a great series for Ben Foakes and dare I say Sophie Ecclestone, who may be the best performing red-ball spinner in the country right now! Happy watching (so we don’t have to!).” That’s our job. 34th over: England 72-4 (Stokes 22, Bairstow 12) Bairstow flirts with danger again, playing a loose cover drive at Starc and inside-edging perilously close to the leg stump. But as the ball squirts down to fine leg, he does well to scamper a second run and give his embattled mate a breather. And that’s drinks. England have got through a whole hour without losing a wicket! These two have doubled the score and whittled the deficit down too. What’s 344 runs between old enemies? 33rd over: England 70-4 (Stokes 22, Bairstow 10) Now Stokes is struck, by an in-ducker from Green, on the inside of the knee I think. He sinks to the ground, the weight of this team on his shoulders, and a couple of balls later he’s struck again, on the hand. He does well just to get through that over. It’s all happening. 32nd over: England 69-4 (Stokes 22, Bairstow 10) It’s a double change as Cummins replaces himself with Starc. Bairstow, again taking his cue from Stokes, clips the first ball for four through square leg, the most fluent shot he has played. It’s too much for his bat, which seems to be split, and there’s a pause while he sends for a replacement. He flaps at a lifter and might be caught at leg slip – except that there isn’t a leg slip any more. Nobody could accuse Cummins of going in for the kill here, but then he doesn’t need to. He can be fairly sure that the kill will come to him. 31st over: England 63-4 (Stokes 22, Bairstow 4) That has put a smile on Stokes’s face. He celebrates by having a slog at Green – a miscued two into the covers, and then a lofted four over mid-off. He takes over from Crawley as the top scorer in a rather surreal innings. It doesn’t feel as if this is going to last, but they may as well go down fighting. Nowhere near the pad. The umpire was bamboozled, understandably as there was a deflection – off the stumps! He’s reviewing. The ball brushed the stumps but didn’t dislodge the pink bail. I don’t think it hit the pad, so it can’t be LBW, can it? 30th over: England 57-4 (Stokes 16, Bairstow 4) Cummins almost bags Bairstow, fending and edging just short of slip – perhaps saved by the glove. Stokes chips over cover for three, not timing it. “I think he’s in trouble here,” says Steve Harrison on commentary. “I don’t expect him to play cricket again for a while.” 29th over: England 53-4 (Stokes 13, Bairstow 3) Cummins gives Boland his eighth over on the trot and pays the price as England help themselves to five runs. Bairstow tucks into the leg side for a single and then Stokes plays another of his crisp drives, between the bowler and mid-on, for another handsome four. That brings up the England fifty – small mercies. even after taking a pounding, Boland has decent figures: 8-5-8-2. Here’s Brian Withington, picking up on my opening remarks (03:13). “If you are really looking for sympathy for getting up at 2:30am to this fiasco,” he says, “you might need to wake up a few close relatives – those of us who have stayed up have had all empathy siphoned away like the petrol from an abandoned car on bricks. Always lovely to have your company though, however belated.” I wasn’t looking for sympathy! I was looking for humour. Sometimes, as Tom Stoppard once said, we need a typeface called ironics. 28th over: England 48-4 (Stokes 9, Bairstow 2) Stokes is dropped! By Cummins, off his own bowling. It was another straight drive, not middled this time, that went back to Cummins just above his knee. He did well to get anything on it as he followed through, but it hit the heel of his hand and bobbled out. There was a wonderful view of it from StumpCam, which managed to capture the drop through Stokes’s legs. 27th over: England 48-4 (Stokes 9, Bairstow 2) Bairstow takes the hint from Stokes and pushes the first ball of this over for two, to make it 11 off the past four balls – a tiny feast after the famine. Scott Boland’s figures are ruined: the runs (three) now outnumber the wickets (two), though not the overs (seven). “Just thinking outside the box a little,” says Tony McKnight, “but if we start the fifth Test as soon as this one’s over, England could all be home by Tuesday, and Ashley Giles could get started on taking the game forward.” 26th over: England 46-4 (Stokes 9, Bairstow 0) The drawback to getting a single is that you have to deal with a different bowler. Stokes, facing Cummins for the first time, plays and misses. But at least he doesn’t go down the track – and a few balls later he hits a four! With a crisp straight drive, as if the past hour never happened. And then another! A swivel pull – well played, but it seems to have given Stokes some discomfort in that strained side of his. England have reached the point where even a good shot can add to their troubles. “I just woke up in a cold sweat,” says Kim Thonger, “after a nightmare about being trapped in a burning building, caused I suspect by a large doner kebab with chili and garlic sauce for supper, but now I see this batting performance I’m returning to the nightmare, it’s preferable. Nanight.” 25th over: England 37-4 (Stokes 1, Bairstow 0) The single was the sole excitement in that over. Progress! And here’s Charles Watkins with a question. “Is Djokovic allowed into NSW to play cricket for Europe with a racquet, on compassionate grounds? Regards, Chucky.” I don’t believe it. Stokes nudges Boland past gully for a single – the first run for 12 overs and 54 minutes. 24th over: England 36-4 (Stokes 0, Bairstow 0) Cameron Green has been taken off – well, he did only take one for none in four overs. Pat Cummins brings himself back and beats Jonny Bairstow outside off, as well as bruising him on the bicep as he misses a rather panicky pull. Cummins has three slips, a gully and a short leg. How bad would England have to be for there to be a fourth slip? Steve Waugh, if he was still captaining Australia, would have at least six. 23rd over: England 36-4 (Stokes 0, Bairstow 0) It’s Scott Boland to continue, and why wouldn’t it be? Where most Test bowlers make the job look like hard work, Boland just shoots fish in a barrel. Ben Stokes walks down the pitch to him, as if that strategy had been any use to him so far. Mind you, when he stays put, he plays and misses. That’s yet another maiden. “There was a moment of near-excitement there,” said David Gower in mid-over. “Almost a run.” Thanks Jonathan and morning everyone. Getting out of bed at 2.30am in London to find England collapsing even more easily than usual – we sportswriters really do live the dream. That’s all I can take. To see you through the remainder of the day, it’s over to Tim de Lisle. “Car crash cricket,” emails OBO stalwart Brian Withington. “Compelling but sickly viewing that makes you feel guilty to keep looking. I can’t believe Australian cricket lovers are really enjoying this any more? Someone please let Bairstow &amp; Stokes engage ‘turbo nutter bastard’ mode for ten minutes of light relief before the follow on.” I’d settle for a couple of singles to rotate the strike... There’s still 56 overs remaining today, plenty of time for a three-dayer. “I’m following this match from Vancouver where it’s still 6th January,” emails Julian Worker. “This is utterly pathetic from England. They couldn’t do worse if they reversed the batting order. For the 5th Test are there any one-day players available, so we could at least lose in a quick but entertaining way?” It is absurd that, with the series lost, only one change was made to this XI. It’s self-immolation. “Let’s not be too disproportionate here. There’s a lot of bad stuff going on in the world at the moment that’s far more serious than some guys in Sydney throwing lumps of leather and hitting with blocks of wood. But, yeah, this is pretty awful to see. I really do hope there’ll be some kind of inquest at the end of this and something put in place to try and make things better in future. Seeing who’s in charge, though, I’m not hopeful.” Matthew Lawrenson there summing things up. “Sitting in the renamed-for-the-day Jane McGrath pavilion, surrounded by jubilant Australians (including my wife). A performance worse than I could have possibly anticipated. This is horrible.” Godspeed Tom Goodfellow, let’s hope nominative determinism wins out. I need a drink. “I thought you were being a little sharp with poor old Hameed,” emails Robert Wilson, “but I just saw the dismissal. Bloody hell. Devon Malcolm* would have absolutely kicked himself for that one. Is that the second straight one he’s missed this series or the third? *Devon reserved almost all his most beautiful and orthodox strokes for those deliveries where he was clean-bowled. They sometimes looked, no joke, quite elegant. And must have felt great. Because he would hold the pose for just a second as the timber tumbled behind him. How can you not love a cricketer who does that?” Unutterably awful from England. Australia bowled well, as they have all series, but the visiting top order crumbled miserably. This match could be over today at this rate. Wow. Four more dots, including Malan getting two separate Green lifters on his gloves for good measure. Then he feathers a nothing delivery on his hip straight to Khawaja at leg gully. This is horrible. I would like someone to make this stop now. 21st over: England 36-3 (Malan 3, Stokes 0) That was the textbook Joe-Root-in-Australia dismissal. Even England’s superhero cannot rescue them this time. Boland, unfussy, gets back to the top of his mark and dots up Ben Stokes from over the wicket, then shifts around and immediately beats the outside edge twice with serpentine deliveries. Australia are rampant. Boland is in dreamland. England must long for a mercy rule. EIGHT maidens in a row. Dear oh dear oh dear. All those dots. All these wickets. Root is the latest to go, flashing with hard hands outside his off stump and edging Boland to the cordon where Smith takes a good catch above his head. Boland’s average down to 6.11. 20th over: England 36-2 (Malan 3, Root 0) SEVEN MAIDENS in a row. Three more dots to begin the set, this time from Green to Malan, then a hearty shout for LBW, declined on-field. It had a lot going for it, other than height, with Green beating Malan’s awkward fend from the crease. the final couple are left alone. England are going nowhere fast. 19th over: England 36-2 (Malan 3, Root 0) Make that six maidens on the trot. Boland continues his work and keeps Root honest for three balls. The England skipper then tries to run a single down to third-man but Green - a superb fielder - dives and stops sharply in the gully. 18th over: England 36-2 (Malan 3, Root 0) Once again Joe Root is in the middle at two for not very much. And somehow, Scott Boland’s unbelievable Test career gets even better! His bowling average has dropped to 6.88! Cameron Green’s figures almost get a boost when Malan mistimes a pull horribly, only to see it drop short of mid-on after looping over short-leg. Malan puts his cue in the rack thereafter and Australia celebrate a fifth consecutive maiden. Boland has settled into a lovely line and length, and he beats Crawley’s outside edge with a trademark seamer’s delivery. He follows that up with one that nips back off the seam and catches Crawley on his back thigh pad. 23 dots in a row now for England... and Boland joins those dots with a huge W! Line and length, movement in off the seam, Crawley aims a big drive, opens his gate, and he becomes the second opener of the session to be castled unceremoniously. Grim, grim, grim, grim, grim. 17th over: England 36-2 (Malan 3, Root 0) 16th over: England 36-1 (Crawley 18, Malan 3) Double change for Australia with Cameron Green giving Mitchell Starc a spell. There is an expectation the allrounder’s height will exploit any uneven bounce on an SCG surface that is beginning to show signs of wear. Not a lot to report from yet another maiden over, beyond Malan again missing with an attempted cut. 15th over: England 36-1 (Crawley 18, Malan 3) Captain Cummins shows he isn’t afraid to hook himself when he’s below-par, inviting Scott Boland to improve on his Test bowling average of 7.86. The Victorian is soon on a reasonable line and length, and he’s almost gifted a wicket when Crawley fails to time a pull that cannons off an edge into his pads. Another maiden, the sixth of the innings. 14th over: England 36-1 (Crawley 18, Malan 3) Starc is hurling down missiles full and straight to Malan, and they’re tailing into the left-hander a fraction from over the wicket... until the wider sucker ball that the English batter fails to cut without moving his feet. Maiden. 13th over: England 36-1 (Crawley 18, Malan 3) Cummins hasn’t hit a groove quite yet today, and he allows Malan to move off nought with a simple push off his pads. Another leak down the leg-side brings a further run. Uncharacteristic from the skipper. 12th over: England 33-1 (Crawley 18, Malan 0) Starc, with his tail up, in this gloom, is menacing. Crawley is ill at ease, and after allowing a delivery to crash into his thigh guard he is crunched on his left hand by a delivery that spits off a length. His reaction - that instinctive removal of the glove and body movement as though he’d been stung by a bee - is never a good sign. Out comes the physio with some tablets. He also has a good fiddle with the batsman’s hand and there doesn’t look to be anything broken, so Crawley continues. Not only does he continue, he shows some serious mettle, rocking back and slapping an imperious pull for four over midwicket. That was a thrilling shot. 11th over: England 29-1 (Crawley 14, Malan 0) Is that another drop!? Harris just fails to hold on at short-leg, diving high to his right, after the ball ricochets off Crawley’s thigh guard. Everyone is convinced there was an inside edge onto thigh guard, making it a catching opportunity. Cummins has been short or length to Crawley this morning, and as soon as he pitches full the Englishman drives handsomely for four through the covers, then clips neatly through long-on for three. 10th over: England 22-1 (Crawley 7, Malan 0) As I was saying, that drop was unlikely to be costly... Starc is steaming in, his knees lifting a few inches higher off the ground each stride with the adrenaline that comes with such a dramatic dismissal, and it’s Dawid Malan that has to face up. His opening ball is a brute that climbs on a length, but thereafter the line leaks down the leg-side. Ugly for Hameed. The English opener’s stumps are a splintered mess. Starc fast and full and straight, and Hameed just missed it. There was some movement off the pitch, turning a good length delivery into a pearler, but even so, that was ghastly batting. 9th over: England 22-0 (Hameed 6, Crawley 7) Cummins again finds enough movement off the pitch to beat Crawley’s outside edge with the English opener committed to a forward defensive. Otherwise it’s an over a little on the short side that Crawley is content to watch through to Carey’s gloves for a maiden. 8th over: England 22-0 (Hameed 6, Crawley 7) DROP! And a bad one too from Alex Carey. Routine outside edge from Hameed, playing tentatively forward outside his off stump, and the Australian gloveman failed to hold on diving one handed in front of first slip David Warner, who was ready to pouch the effort at waist height. Hameed punishes the error with a well-timed square drive for four. It’s unlikely to be costly, but that’s the kind of error Australia have done well to avoid this series. 7th over: England 18-0 (Hameed 2, Crawley 7) Lovely cricket. Pat Cummins’s first delivery of the day is over-pitched and Crawley pushes it elegantly down the ground. Marnus Labuschagne gave chase and put in a magnificent sliding dive to prevent the ball touching the rope - but it was to no avail as England ran four anyway. Cummins almost exacted his revenge a couple of balls later but after kissing the seam, his length delivery wobbles just wide of Crawley’s outside edge. “One of the many reasons why England are so poor is second chance runs scored (i.e. runs after a drop or other second chance, such as out off a no-ball) emails David Keech. “I don’t have any stats to back it up but it seems like whenever England drop someone they go on to add massive runs. E.g. Khawaja over 100 added after being dropped. In contrast whenever an England batter gets a second chance they get out anyway just a few balls later. Let’s see what happens with Crawley after being out off a no-ball. Anybody got any data to back up or disprove my gut feel?” I would also like to see any data available on this gut feel. 6th over: England 14-0 (Hameed 2, Crawley 3) Mitchell Starc begins full and straight to Zak Crawley in murky, floodlit conditions at the SCG. The Englishman is composed, then drags a pull down to fine-leg to open the scoring for the day. Hameed’s first delivery is a very tight leave outside off stump, the opener accurately predicting Starc would not generate any in-swing from over the wicket. The crowd is into this early, which is always a nice hubbub to hear. The two sides are now in their whites, both XIs wearing baggy pink caps, all of which are up for auction. “England have demonstrably made a hames of it, as we say here in Ireland. But without attempting to defend the indefensible, England have been unlucky as well as poor,” argues Dean Kinsella. “They just never seemed to get the rub of the green in these matches. Often small things, but always just against the English. Today I fear they are going to have icing poured over the vermicelli. When Ireland played their first test at Lord’s a couple of years ago, we duly climbed aboard the bus and travelled from the wild west of Mayo to witness it all. Ireland played pretty well to stay in the game and our hopes were high for at least a close enough game. Our tickets were for the next day and sure enough the rain had followed us from Mayo like a dutiful pet dog. When the covers were finally removed and play recommenced, poor old Ireland were skittled on the juicy damp pitch. I’m afraid poor old England may experience something similar today.” Can I borrow “made a hames of it” for the OBO? Both teams are now out on the SCG turf warming up. The two captains are chatting to the umpires, plenty of smiles all round. We should have cricket soon enough. Brian Delroy worries that the future of Test cricket will be subject to generational change. “As a young kid I used to play Tests against myself, bouncing a tennis ball off the front verandah wall and using a bit of wrist work for the spinners,” he emails. And me too, Brian, only I would throw a tennis ball at a particular brick, or bricks, on the side wall of our bungalow. “I always scored the most runs when I was Neil Harvey or Norman O’Neil and felt the tension when Fred Titmus or Ray Illingworth came on to bowl. Extra effort went into ball speed when John Snow came into the attack. I suspect that kids today are too attracted to the wiz-bangery of the short game, not to mention their screens, to absorb the history and subtleties of traditional cricket. I hope I’m wrong.” I think from England’s perspective it’s less the kids we need to worry about, more the administrators, who seem to be almost encouraging this sort of outcome.” Good news! The big tarp that covers the square and run-ups has been removed. The hessian is still down over the strip, but we are inching towards play. “Graham Russell’s point about England’s bowling is right on the money, except for a few minor details,” suggests William Vincent. “First, the fielders have dropped 17 chances in three and a bit Tests. Bloody hard to bowl a side out when you have to take about 15 wickets an innings to do it. Second, Australia were set 20 to win at Brisbane. Try bowling a side (with the possible exception of England) out for that. Third, despite the risible catching, Australia have been bowled out for 267, and declared at 230 for 9. Fourth, the captaincy has been dreadful: in particular, the use of Leach and Stokes has been inexplicable. Finally, some of the fields set have been frankly weird. England have been a laughing stock in this series because of the batting, the captaincy and the selection. The bowling, under these circumstances, has been remarkably good. Apart from that, I agree with him completely.” May I also add, when was the last time England converted a run out opportunity? As I’ve mentioned before on here, I thought after the Ponting/Rhodes/Penney golden era of the 90s we would have reached a point where ring fielders simply didn’t miss, but to my untrained eye all they do is miss! Haseeb Hameed especially seems to have had numerous half-chances this series without threatening the pegs. Brighten up your day with some of the finest pink outfits from Jane McGrath day at the SCG. “Seriously, I think Stuart Broad would have made, could still make, an excellent steely captain of this team,” emails Charlie Jeffery. “Listening to him after yesterday’s play, he really didn’t mince his words and sounded like a leader to me. I like Joe Root, but surely Broad with all his experience would make a great captain, even if just for a couple of years. Bowling captain is working pretty well for Australia after all.” It’s far from the maddest suggestion. Although, he would need a dedicated DRS SpAD. We’ve shared stories of cricket lulling listeners gently to sleep, but here’s John Honig emailing in how it can also put you to sleep. “My parents emigrated to Australia from Hungary and like most Europeans could not fathom cricket. A few weeks after they arrived my mother was asked in the street: ‘What’s the score?’ Needless to say, she was non-plussed. Her feelings about cricket can be summarised by her conviction that if you have trouble sleeping, just watch the cricket.” Benedict Carter is here to reminisce. “Here I am aged 58, still captivated by Tests Down Under after all these years... 1977, the Centenary Test, aged fourteen: I listened to every single ball bowled, five nights in a row, on a tiny radio sitting in my boarding school dorm bog. Never forgotten it, or the result, or my zombie-like status by the end of the match!” If anyone wants a slice of a certain English experience, listening to a cricket match happening 10,000 miles away in the middle of the night “in a boarding school dorm bog” is pretty good shorthand. Lovely stuff Benedict. “Kia ora from NZ,” and howdy to you too John Palethorpe. “As an English exile down here, the last few weeks have truly tested my patience as a follower of my home side and my local team. Watching England get turned over in similar but always slightly different fashion, and then Bangladesh knocking over the Black Caps really should see me down the beach or in the garden enjoying the summer. And yet, it’s all been fascinating. Scott Boland’s magical spell, James Anderson’s bowling in the same Test, how England batters just have forgotten their jobs, the immense work Bangladesh put in this week. Disappointing yes, but never boring. Test cricket is alive and kicking!” Andy Bull watched Stuart Broad lead England’s attack yesterday and wondered where the seamer had been all tour. Broad often takes his wickets in fits and sparks, there was none of that this time, just a lot of craft, sweat, and toil. It took him 29 overs – the last time he bowled that many in an innings in which he took five was back in 2009 – and there were moments when Khawaja, Starc and Nathan Lyon were laying into him, when he looked just as vulnerable as any of his teammates. But he persisted, bowling a line and length that, the data showed, he’d often struggled to find on his previous three tours here. He drew more false shots from batsmen than he has done in the past, too. And he made his point. How bittersweet for the team that it came so late. “I’m a Brit in Brooklyn,” opens Tobias Peggs, continuing the conversation around falling asleep to the sound of cricket, “so I tend to watch the first session on TV and then head off to bed at Aussie lunch time to the sweet radio sounds of 1116 SEN a Melbourne-based sports radio station that has somehow circumnavigated all the geo-blocking rights and offers live cricket commentary for overseas listeners (i.e. a TMS alternative, given TMS is blocked for overseas listeners on this series). During the second test, I drifted off to sleep with England facing another shellacking, only to be woken up about 5am by a hysterical commentator going crazy about James Vince smacking the ball about everywhere. It took a couple of hazy minutes to figure out Vince had not been recalled to the Test team, but I was now listening to a Big Bash game. But it still put a big smile on my face to hear a name that wasn’t Root or Malan get a Down Under score above 20. Let’s hope it stops raining today and we get some action - TV or Radio or OBO or otherwise!” “To win a Test match you have to take ten wickets, twice. England have only bowled the opposition out twice after six innings. Australia have passed 400 every other innings. Clearly the England batting has been poor, but it’s a mistake to think the bowling has been successful.” Excellent point, Graham Russell. Although I think the concern over the bowling (or more precisely England in the field) is more about the balance of the attack, holding onto catches, captaincy, and injuries - all of which suggesting there is a theoretical sweet spot somewhere - as opposed to the batting, which has been predictably abject with little prospect of swift redemption. “England need someone like Dean ‘Sir Edward’ Elgar today,” emails Andrew Goudie. “What a great knock. The Indians seemed distinctly niggly towards the end, brilliant stuff.” Hear hear. Stuart Broad spoke to the press following his five-wicket haul yesterday. Alistair Spooner has emailed in: “Perhaps other test tragics like me have noticed that ever since the big penalties over the sandpaper affair were doled out, the phrase “the bowlers aren’t finding much swing here” seems to crop up with considerably more regularity in Test cricket?” And while this series has not seen an imbalance between bat and ball (thanks to some sporting pitches, and some risible batting) I think the game is poorer for the decline of lateral movement. Swing has long been part of cricket and presents a specific challenge and aesthetic that benefits the contest. Ball manufactures should be incentivised to design balls that swing more, and - in my opinion - players should not be penalised for “altering the condition” to aid swing. I’m sure I’m an outlier, but I have never seen ball tampering as a moral problem. Pitches are flatter, bats are bigger and thicker, but the ball has remained largely the same, it doesn’t seem to add up. Speaking of the sounds of cricket, here’s The Final World Daily podcast for your ears. “I am envious of Mr. Ineson’s ability to fall gently to sleep to the sound of cricket commentary (earlier),” emails Damian Clarke. Accustomed as I am at failure in the art of slumbering, I often listen to the sound of rain through my earphones as an aid to rest. This evening I can combine my two favourite aural relaxants, and listen to the patter of precipitation on the roof of the SCG. Lovely.” This would make an excellent sleep meditation story, wouldn’t it? Stephen Fry gently reading old match reports with the sound of rain falling on a corrugated iron roof in the background. Aahhh, I feel calmer already. The late great Arthur Morris gave me one of the interviews I most cherish. Warm, patient and generous. If you’re heading to the SCG any time, check out his display. The square is fully covered. We won’t have any cricket for a while. Usman Khawaja’s century stole the show yesterday and it fell to Geoff Lemon to rhapsodise about a man so often a square peg in a round hole. Khawaja is no stranger to solving problems for Australia. During the one-day World Cup in 2019 he was thrown in at No 5 despite never having batted there in List A cricket. In the current match he was asked to bat there despite never having done so in Tests. By this point of his career the details such as where he bats don’t seem to faze Khawaja. He walked in on the first evening with Australia 117 for three, with trouble looming for the team if he failed, and instead made sure that he didn’t. He first batted through to stumps, then through the first session of the next day with Smith, before assuming the senior role once Smith was gone. Charles Sheldrick knows there are no rainbows without rain. “We could be on for England’s longest partnership of the series if it keeps raining. We can’t lose with the covers on!” Don’t tempt fate Charles, this is the England cricket team remember. Here’s what happened yesterday, through the eyes of Ali Martin. Well Christopher, feel free to drift off at your leisure tonight, there will be no cricket to distract you for a while. It’s raining in Sydney. Not heavily at the moment, and the radar isn’t too bad, but the covers are over the square and the start time remains a movable feast. Hello everybody and welcome to live over-by-over coverage of the third day of the fourth Ashes Test. We’re underway at the Sydney Cricket Ground at 10am local time (11pm UK). Today is Jane McGrath day at the SCG, so a sea of pink should brighten up English spirits after another grey day in this Ashes series. The tourists are once again on the back foot after being outplayed on day two, a day that belonged to the recalled Usman Khawaja. In a Test that has been interrupted by frequent showers, Australia have still managed to bat themselves into a strong position. Early wickets this morning with the new ball could give the match a familiar trajectory, and England a familiar sinking feeling. I’ll be back with more shortly, but if you would like to join in, you can reach me by email or Twitter (@JPHowcroft).Valentina Goncharova’s luminous output offers a window into a lesser-known Soviet history of experimental music, drawing from classical, jazz, and new age electronic sounds behind the iron curtain. Born in 1953 in Kyiv, Ukraine, Goncharova moved to Leningrad (now St Petersburg) at age 16, studying classical violin and contemporary composition at the Leningrad Conservatory, but experienced a revelation at a free jazz concert by the Ganelin Trio in the 1970s. Now set on a path towards the homemade and avant garde, she became involved in the underground rock scene and later married an engineer named Igor Zubkov who built her a modified electric violin. They moved to Tallinn, Estonia, bought a reel-to-reel tape recorder, and began making DIY electroacoustic music, recording household objects with contact mics, and according to one source, building a drum kit from pencils. The first volume of Goncharova’s enveloping music came out in 2020 on Estonian label Shukai; the second brings together duets with late Finnish experimental musician Pekka Airaksinen, theatre director and instrumentalist Alexander Aksenov and Russian composer Sergey Letov. The focus is on the remarkable music they made together, self-recorded in jams at home, in jazz cafes, apartments and studios in Tallinn, Riga, Helsinki and Moscow between 1987 and 1991. The spiritual Reincarnation II with Aksenov is the standout – it arrives as if waking from a dream, a gauzy dance with Goncharova’s voice wheeling like a bird. Pieces with Letov play with sound as texture – raindrops, and a conversation in which a violin pleads like a child and reeds reply gently, as if in appeasement. With Airaksinen the music is jaunty and off-kilter in the three tracks of compellingly unusual synthesiser jams. All the recordings give the feeling that we are listening in on private play and exchange. It is music made for personal pleasure; as exploration, and therein lies its magnetism. Also out this month Elsewhere, the excellent future ethnography series Antologia de Música Atípica Portuguesa wraps up with its third volume Canto Devocinário (Discrepant), capturing music by contemporary Portuguese artists drawing on ceremonial vocal sources used alongside drum machines and synths. Gospel et le Râteau (Bisou Records) collects unreleased work by the late Ghédalia Tazartès from across his career, with raunchy chanson, bizarre collage and his distinctive and visionary vocal style, closing with a sung text by Antonin Artaud. Finally, perhaps the first album inspired by a character from TV show Law and Order. Eiko Ishibashi’s For McCoy (Black Truffle) is not as daft as it sounds. It is dominated by slowly unfurling soundscapes for flute, voice, electronics and sax, with an easy, earwormy jazz number for when the credits roll. • This column’s regular author, John Lewis, is away.In simple terms, Nat Ogle’s debut novel is the story of a young nurse called Corina. When she is at Guy’s and St Thomas’ hospital in London, she’s caring for her patients. When she’s not working, she’s caring for her mother, who has advanced breast cancer. And in between, she’s trying – often failing – to care for herself in the aftermath of a shattering act of sexual violence. “The problem with surviving,” she notes, “is what to do next.” But In the Seeing Hands of Others does not want to be a simple novel. To that end, it’s presented not in the kind of written-through literary prose where the most jagged element is an artful flashback, but as an assemblage of documents. The spine of the story is told in posts from a blog Corina keeps in 2016, complete with reader comments – some supportive, some not (“Gtfo with your BS and put your face on … tramp”). Around that is a paper trail of other sources: witness statements, character references, text messages, transcribed voicemails, message board threads, fragments of scripts, screengrabs of emails. It’s a choice that works smartly against Ogle’s lyrical tendencies (he’s also a poet). “Showing the scars, my own sloppy stitches, that’s the point, if there is a point,” writes Corina. “This won’t be a well-made, thought-through thing.” The effect is suggestive of exhibits presented at trial, but we know from Corina’s blog that by the time she writes it, she has already been to court and seen her attacker – her ex-boyfriend, Cameron – go unpunished. So perhaps what Ogle is creating is a second bite at justice for Corina: all the material the police had and everything they didn’t, with the reader in the role of ultimate jury. Because if the original trial had seen everything Ogle lays out in this novel, it’s hard to see how Cameron could have got off, given that he appears to be an ironclad psychopath with no redeeming features whatsoever. Things start off within the bounds of standard rapist rhetoric. A Word document recounting his version of the encounter ends with the resonantly creepy assertion: “From my confident perspective, it was only somewhat messy.” Perhaps that isn’t enough to convince you he’s a nasty piece of work. After all, here’s a statement from his old drama teacher averring that he is “an individual of kindness, compassion and promise”. Ah, but here immediately after is a fragment of a play found on Cameron’s computer. It’s a dialogue between a female teacher and a 15-year-old boy who have been in some kind of sexual relationship. When she tries to break it off, he blackmails her. So much for his character reference. Even Cameron’s name hammers home his untrustworthiness. His surname is Struth: Cameron Struth, Cameron’s Truth. Corina is an imperfect victim – we learn that she was drunk, that she destroyed evidence by washing herself and her sheets, that she had begged Cameron to come to the party where he attacked her, that she got into bed with him – but Cameron is a perfect villain, a 4chan-haunting creep who lives to see the fear in others. Ogle’s publisher has tagged this as a story about “toxic masculinity”, but the dramatic problem for stories about toxic masculinity is that they start with their moral schema already firmly in place. This feels like an unwholesome criticism to be making, tantamount to asking where fiction’s sympathetic sex criminals have gone. But it is a fact that most rapists do not see themselves as wickedness incarnate; they think they are sadly misunderstood. Reading this novel made me crave the disturbing subtlety of Mary Gaitskill, an author who can look self-deception plainly in the eye, and draw nauseating tension from the he-said-she-said. The richest parts of In the Seeing Hands of Others are not in the CSI gameplaying, but in the way Ogle writes about the terror and grace of human vulnerability. “Love, I think, is where two wounds press each other so one wound becomes a kind of gauze for the other wound,” writes Corina. It’s a disgusting image and a beautiful one too, with a complicated truth at its sticky centre. • In the Seeing Hands of Others by Nat Ogle is published by Serpent’s Tail (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Pick of the week The Tragedy of Macbeth For his first film without collaborator/brother Ethan, Joel Coen has delivered a confident, stylish take on Shakespeare’s murderous Scottish play. Denzel Washington is a magnificently brooding Macbeth, while Frances McDormand embraces the dark side as his lady – a role she was born to play. Their regicidal plot is worked out across austere locations in crisp black-and-white imagery reminiscent of Ingmar Bergman’s The Seventh Seal. In an inventive touch, Kathryn Hunter plays all three “weird sisters” while eloquent support comes from Bertie Carvel as the doomed Banquo and Alex Hassell as an intriguingly shifty Ross. Friday 14 January, Apple TV+ *** After the Storm Hirokazu Kore-eda’s 2016 drama is another of the great Japanese film-maker’s understated, comic tales of fractured families and the ways they find to muddle through life. Hiroshi Abe plays Ryôta, a divorced, one-time novelist now gambling away his earnings as a private detective and neglecting his young son. His encounters with his no-nonsense widowed mother Yoshiko (Kore-eda regular Kirin Kiki) and long-suffering ex-wife Kyōko (Yōko Maki) nudge him slowly towards sorting his life out, though not exactly in the way he was hoping for. Sunday 9 January, 12.10am, BBC Two *** The Sisters Brothers Jacques Audiard, the French director of Rust and Bone, is not the first person you would expect to do a western. But this 2018 film is a fine piece of work, nodding respectfully to the genre staples of gunplay and glorious vistas while sneaking in moments of existential reflection. John C Reilly and Joaquin Phoenix play Eli and Charlie, the chalk-and-cheese assassin siblings of the title, sent to follow Jake Gyllenhaal’s scout John Morris to California and then kill a chemist, Hermann Warm (Riz Ahmed), who has developed a potentially lucrative method for extracting gold from rivers. Sunday 9 January, 10pm, BBC Two *** Eternals Here, Marvel stirs a whole new set of myths into its melting pot of fantastical adventures. The Eternals – including Gemma Chan’s Sersi, Richard Madden’s Ikaris and Angelina Jolie’s Thena – are superpowered aliens who have protected humanity down the millennia from destructive beasts called Deviants. In the present day, the group assemble again to fight a resurgence of the creatures, while discovering the true reason behind their mission. It’s portentous stuff but has good action, a dab of wit (courtesy of Kumail Nanjiani) and a lovely gold filigree look to it. Wednesday 12 January, Disney+ *** Magnificent Obsession The film that confirmed Douglas Sirk as the master of Technicolor melodrama and made Rock Hudson a star. He plays egotistical millionaire playboy Bob, who inadvertently contributes to the death of the doctor husband of Jane Wyman’s Helen. Their improbable connection leads to tragedy, redemption and love among the comfortable upper middle classes, in a movie imbued with a philosophy of selflessness and charity as a spiritual act. Thursday 13 January, 6.45pm, Great! Movies Classic *** Save the Cinema A true story ripe for dramatic treatment, Sara Sugarman’s guileless drama follows the fight to save the Lyric in Carmarthen in the early 1990s. Hairdresser and youth opera director Liz Evans (a warm performance by Samantha Morton) rouses the opposition, including Jonathan Pryce’s retired teacher Mr Morgan, when the council plans to replace the cinema with a shopping centre. There’s light villainy, in the shape of venal mayor Tom (Adeel Akhtar), a dash of Hollywood glamour and a gently reiterated message about the importance of community and local heritage. SW Friday 14 January, 10.55am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere *** Planes, Trains and Automobiles Who needs a straight man when you have talents such as Steve Martin and John Candy riffing off each other? In John Hughes’s superb 1987 comedy, the two are thrown together on a frantic, weather-impeded trip from New York to Chicago as they race to get home in time for Thanksgiving. Martin’s advertising executive Neal (superior, quick to anger) and Candy’s travelling salesman Del (genial, accident-prone) are the perfect odd couple in a film that bears comparisons with Midnight Run for its smartly plotted twists and characterful humour. SW Friday 14 January, 9pm, Comedy CentralAston Villa have sealed a deal to sign Philippe Coutinho on loan from Barcelona for the rest of the season with an option to buy. The Brazilian is due in Birmingham for a medical to complete a transfer under which Villa will pay about 65% of his salary. The move reunites Coutinho with Steven Gerrard, a former Liverpool teammate who is Villa’s head coach. The pair played together from 2013-15 and Gerrard’s presence at Villa has been key to the move. Gerrard had contact with Coutinho more than three times in the 48 hours leading up to the deal being agreed and on Thursday publicly described the 29-year-old as a “special footballer”. Villa’s option to purchase Coutinho will be valid until June and is understood to set the price at €40m (£33.4m). Gerrard, speaking on Thursday, said: “He’s won two league titles at Barcelona, two Copa del Reys. If you go and have a look at his Wiki page you’ll see a serial winner wherever he goes. He’s won 63 caps for Brazil, played for Barcelona and was incredible at Liverpool. “So I can understand why he’s linked to a lot of football clubs. I can understand why a lot of supporters up and down the country are speaking about him. I don’t think you get a nickname of ‘The Magician’ if you’re not a special footballer.” Coutinho’s time at Barcelona since a move from Liverpool for an initial £106m has in fact not been a success and he spent the 2019-20 season on loan at Bayern Munich. Barcelona have made attempts to sell him since summer 2019 without finding a buyer. Villa said in a statement: “Aston Villa and FC Barcelona have agreed terms for Philippe Coutinho to spend the rest of this season on loan at Villa Park. “The agreement, which is subject to the player completing a medical and receiving a work permit, also includes an option to buy and Philippe will travel to Birmingham in the next 48 hours.”Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, has said he personally gave the order to security forces and army to “open fire with lethal force” against protesters he called “bandits and terrorists”. In an uncompromising address on Friday, Tokayev said lethal force without warning would continue to be used against violent demonstrators, and also blamed “so-called free media outlets” for helping fan unrest. Authorities have said dozens of protesters were killed in the clashes as well as 18 people from police and security forces. The figures may rise. More than 3,000 people have been detained, according to interior ministry figures. The protests were sparked this week by a sudden rise in fuel prices combined with long-simmering frustrations over the political and economic situation in the country. Tokayev claimed that “all demands made in a peaceful form have been heard”, but appeared to dismiss a large proportion of the protesters as criminals, saying “20,000 bandits” were involved in the unrest in Almaty, Kazakhstan’s largest city and the centre of recent unrest. “Abroad there are calls for the two sides to hold negotiations for a peaceful resolution. What idiocy. What kind of negotiations can you have with criminals? We were dealing with armed and well-prepared bandits, both local and foreign. Bandits and terrorists, who should be destroyed. This will happen in the nearest time.” Earlier on Friday, government figures insisted that security forces had the situation under control across the country, including in Almaty. However, there were reports of fresh gunfire in the city. Tokayev thanked the “peacekeeping forces” sent by Russia and other nations from the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) but said they had not taken part in any fighting. The Russian defence ministry said Russian peacekeepers were guarding Almaty airport on Friday and other key infrastructure sites. The force totals about 2,500 personnel, the regional alliance has said. Witnesses in Almaty on Thursday described scenes of chaos, with government buildings being stormed or set on fire and widespread looting. Many of those demonstrating said the protests had begun peacefully earlier in the week, but turned violent after a heavy-handed government response. A police spokesperson, Saltanat Azirbek, told the state news channel Khabar 24 on Thursday that “dozens of attackers were liquidated”. There were also reports about 400 people were in hospital. City officials in Almaty said 748 officers from police and the national guard had been injured and 18 killed, one of whom they claimed had been found beheaded. It was not immediately possible to verify the figures, but video footage showed violent clashes between protesters and authorities in a number of cities. A local journalist, Ardak Bukeeva, who spent Thursday speaking to protesters in central Almaty, said demonstrators who stormed the presidential residence in the city told her dozens of people had been killed during the assault. Many protesters said they had been prompted to come out earlier in the week as a result of long-simmering frustrations with the political and economic situation in the country, Bukeeva said. However, on Wednesday the situation turned violent, with some claiming provocateurs had arrived to deliberately cause trouble, and others noting that police were almost entirely absent from the city centre. Irina Mednikova, a civil society activist in Almaty, said she saw large pools of blood in the grass around the presidential residence on Thursday morning, and an absence of security forces or police. “The residence was completely burned. The gates had been rammed open with cars or tractors, all the glass was broken, and inside there was smoke and a terrible smell of burning,” she said. Internet and mobile phone reception was down in most of the country for much of Thursday, with only state television being available to most Kazakhs to receive news about the protests. Rumours spread by word of mouth, and it was difficult to verify claims. Later on Thursday, news agencies reported fresh gunfire in Almaty and military vehicles on the move in the city. State television claimed an “anti-terrorist operation” was under way. “The terrorists are using civilians, including women, as human shields. The police forces are trying their best to ensure the security of city residents,” Khabar 24 told its viewers. On Thursday evening, authorities claimed they had all government buildings in Almaty under control. Valeria Ibraeva, an art historian who watched the protests from her window overlooking one of Almaty’s main thoroughfares, said on Tuesday the crowds were “friendly and smiling, without aggression and with lots of hope”. By Wednesday, however, there were attempts to overturn a bus on the street and widespread looting of shops, she said. Radio Azattyq, the Kazakh service of Radio Liberty, reported unrest in cities across the country. In Aktobe, protesters had got together to defend the airport and railway station, insisting they did not want violence and demanding negotiations with authorities. In other cities there were burnt-out cars, a shutdown in public infrastructure and panic as people could not withdraw money from banks and found their cards did not work after the banking system closed down. In the town of Taldykorgan, protesters pulled down a monument to Nursultan Nazarbayev, who ran the country from its independence in 1991 until 2019, on Wednesday. The former president, who has the official title of leader of the nation, has not been seen in public since the protests began, and there were rumours on Thursday he and his family may have fled the country. Western countries, which were already on high alert over a potential Russian attack on Ukraine, looked on with unease, aware there was little they could do to influence events in Kazakhstan. The British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said: “Any forces deployed must have a clear mission and act proportionately in any use of force to defend the legitimate security interests in Kazakhstan.” The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, talked to his Kazakhstani counterpart, Mukhtar Tileuberdi, and “advocated for a peaceful, rights-respecting resolution to the crisis”, according to a state department readout of the call. Additional reporting by Yevgeniya PlakhinaThe newly erected statue of a grinning man with an enormous phallus has prompted delight and rage in an archaeological hotspot in northern Peru where it has been on show since the beginning of the year. Although perhaps not anatomically correct, the crimson fibreglass structure is a faithful representation of a ceramic vessel from Peru’s pre-Columbian Mochica culture, whose people lived in the region between 150 and 700 AD. A 15-minute drive from the centre of the regional capital, Trujillo, the statue has already proved hugely popular with passers-by and tourists who pose beneath the 1.5-meter member for selfies. But despite its historical fidelity, the 9ft-tall fertility symbol has already been attacked by vandals who smashed a hole in the statue and reportedly fired shots in the air as they fled. Arturo Fernández Bazán, the mayor of Moche, the district named after the ancient culture, told local media: “At two in the morning three hooded criminals held a knife to the security guard’s neck to keep him from reacting or calling his colleagues on the radio, and two of them damaged the phallus.” The roadside monument to the ancient pre-Inca culture renowned for its sexually explicit ceramics has also drawn tourists, as the statue stands on the route between the imposing adobe temples of the sun and the moon, or the Huacas del Sol y la Luna. Fernández Bazán said he plans to erect up to 30 more statues representing the Mochica culture – about a third of them representing erotic acts or childbirth – along the archaeological circuit. “In our Mochica culture, these types of ceramics vessels were not considered erotic but represented the Godhead,” Fernández Bazán, who worked as a gynaecologist before entering local politics, told local media. “The [Ancient] Greeks had another type of representation. We have been more aggressive and more direct with our feelings,” he added. The statue has provoked diverse reactions posted on the Moche municipality Facebook page, some saying that they found the statue offensive or that it should not be viewed by children. Gisela Ortiz, Peru’s culture minister, said: “The idea that children shouldn’t see it or it’s too offensive belongs to the time of obscurantism.” She told the Guardian. “As Peruvians, we should all feel proud of our diverse heritage, including the sexual or erotic part, which is inherent to the human being.” She added that while “nothing justifies the violence against the security guard”, greater efforts to explain the cultural significance of the statue to the local population could help avert further controversy.A convoy of trucks laden with huge black granite rocks trundles along the dusty pathway as a group of villagers look on grimly. Every day more than 60 trucks take granite for export along this rugged road through Nyamakope village in the district of Mutoko, 90 miles east of Zimbabwe’s capital, Harare. The air reverberates with blasts and heavy machinery noises as the mountain above the village is slowly reduced, slab by slab. Quarrying has been happening here since the 1980s. Mutoko stone is sought after for its lustre. It is a popular material for tombstones. An extension to the Danish royal library in Copenhagen, known as the Black Diamond, is clad in Mutoko granite. The Buja people who live here say that as mining companies extract wealth from the mountain, they leave behind a trail of damaged roads and bridges, hazardous pollutants and dirty air. Cracks can be seen on houses and blast debris is everywhere. Now 50 families in the village have been told by a Chinese mining company that they will have to leave their homes and land. People in four other villages in the district fear they will also lose their ancestral lands. Two families, including an 82-year-old villager and his wife, have already been relocated by Jinding mining company, which wants to build a polishing plant. “The 82-year-old man collapsed when he heard the news because he never anticipated it. He was later resuscitated at the hospital. This is how bad things are here,” says Claudine Mupereri*, 38. She says the man was told his house was within the area licensed to the mining company by the government. Zimbabwe’s Communal Areas Act gives the president power to decide the use of an area that makes up 40% of the country’s land, home to about 70% of the population. “These companies do not respect communities. If the government does not protect us, then where will we get the protection we need?” says Mupereri. Two other families were given $2,500 (£1,840) to rebuild their homes, but community leaders say this is insufficient. “There is uncertainty around this village. Right now, we do not have anyone willing to help us because our councillor does not want to help us. Anyone who dares to speak out is threatened. Whether they remove us or not, we are already scared to speak out,” says Anesu Nyamuzuwe*. The 40-year-old father of four fears losing five hectares (12 acres) of land, his only source of income. “I have a good farm with fertile soil. My farming always meets my household requirements. I had built a good home and I am close to Mutoko centre, so I am not sure if I will ever get such a piece of land again,” he says. “What is more important, investors or the villagers? We should have the right to reject these people from entering our community.” Jinding mining company in China could not be reached for comment. A manager and interpreter at the company’s plant in Mutoko says families who live within the 500 hectares the company is licensed to mine will be relocated, but adds: “the people who are giving out the claims [to mining companies] have a problem. Why are they giving them [companies] so much land? This land is almost 500 hectares, I am sure they already know that people live in this place.” Zimbabwe has enjoyed a close relationship with China for decades. But the bond between the two countries solidified when western states imposed economic sanctions on Robert Mugabe’s government. As credit and investments dried up, China stepped in. In 2018, Zimbabwe-Chinese relations were elevated from “all-weather friends” to strategic partners, paving the way for Chinese investors to pour money into the country, particularly in the extractive industries, where they have been accused of paying little attention to environmental damage by environmental and human rights activists. Those living near granite mines say companies are failing to restore the land after extraction. Open pits are left uncovered, endangering children and wildlife. Zimbabwe’s government has been accused of turning a blind eye to complaints because, critics say, it doesn’t want to anger its biggest investor. Mineworkers speak of poor working conditions. At another mine in Mutoko, workers give accounts of beatings and poor pay. “Imagine going to work every day for over 12 hours and getting $50 at the end of it all. When I get home I am tired. My home knows no peace,” one worker tells the Guardian. “My friend was beaten with a steel rod and another 17-year-old boy had his arm broken after coming to work late. He was given $250 as compensation after villagers complained.” In 2020, two workers were shot and wounded in Gweru, central Zimbabwe, allegedly by a Chinese miner after a quarrel over salaries. Evelyn Kutyauripo, a paralegal with the Zimbabwe Environmental Law Association (Zela), who has been rallying villagers in Mutoko to resist evictions, says local officials need to protect people. “I blame the headmen and the councillors because they are working with the Chinese. They should stand with the community,” she says, adding that companies were taking from communities and not helping them develop. “They are not developing anything in the community. They should have a strong corporate social responsibility because they are killing our environment. We are suffering, our houses are cracking and there is pollution. The government should come to see what is happening.” Another Chinese mining company, Shanghau Haoying Mining Investments, is also causing unease among Nyamaropa villagers. Last year, the company was reportedly given a government licence to mine granite on tracts of land belonging to local people. “I hear they want to remove us so that they take the rock, which is underneath, but the people do not want to. They will have to use guns to remove us here,” says Gladman Murape*, 34. Shanghau could not be reached for comment. Richard Ncube, a legal officer at Zela, says people in Mutoko were “extremely worried” about evictions. “The major challenge is they are living in the dark, and they are not sure what is going to happen.” He said people were too scared to challenge the company. “We have gathered that most of the communities [in Mutoko] are afraid to come forward and take these matters to court due to intimidation and fear of being victimised,” says Ncube. Attempts to challenge the mining companies elsewhere in Zimbabwe have had mixed results. In November, Heijin mining company lost its mining licence in Murehwa, a district about 55 miles from Harare, after local leaders complained to the government that the company planned to evict locals. In 2020, Zela was involved in the successful fight to overturn licences to mine coal in Hwange national park, the country’s largest national park, home to 40,000 elephants. Following protests, the government banned mining in all its national parks. However, in September, hundreds of people in Chikomba district, 80 miles south of the capital, were evicted from their ancestral homes to make way for a $1bn iron and steel mining project. The Zimbabwe government says it has not received any reports of abuse of workers in Chinese-owned mines, but it did encourage workers to report any incidents. Deputy mines minister, Polite Kambamura, urged villagers to approach the ministry if they had problems. “We haven’t heard of any Chinese company which has relocated people in Mutoko. If villagers are not happy, they may approach our provincial mining office in Marondera or come directly to the ministry,” he says. “We understand that if ever there is a company that wants to relocate the people, they should engage the community, to buy that social licence from the community.” Kambamura adds that an environmental impact assessment – to ensure the environmental, social, economic and cultural issues related to any mining project are considered before it begins – must also be conducted by the company and should address any concerns. The Chinese embassy in Zimbabwe did not respond to numerous requests for comment. Mutoko leaders were also approached for comment. * Names have been changed Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Rare bats that are breeding in south-east England for the first time in a century will be encouraged to rear their young in an innovative maternity unit – a tumbledown stable block. The derelict stables at a secret location in Sussex will next month be purchased for greater horseshoe bats by the Vincent Wildlife Trust and Sussex Bat Group after the endangered species was discovered breeding in region after a 100-year absence. The protection of the stables comes after the remarkable return to Sussex of Britain’s rarest bat. The only known greater mouse-eared bat in the country has been rediscovered in a disused railway tunnel, two years after it was previously spotted. The 19-year-old greater mouse-eared bat – whose solitary life inspired a play – was assumed to be dead after it disappeared from the hibernation spot where it had been found each winter since 2002. But the venerable creature – whose wings can stretch to nearly half a metre in flight – was rediscovered during a bat count by enthusiasts shortly before Christmas. “It amazed me because we assumed it had run its course,” said Tony Hutson, of the Sussex Bat Group, who first discovered species. The adult male greater mouse-eared bat has never mated and for all of this century has been the sole representative of its species in Britain. According to experts, greater horseshoe bats and the greater mouse-eared bat are benefiting from climate change but may also be thriving in Sussex because of the spread of vineyards. Unlike many other bat species, the greater mouse-eared bat often feeds by swooping low and picking up beetles, and so may benefit from beetle-rich bare earth in organic or low-intensity vineyards, which are increasingly popular in Sussex. Research in Portugal has shown that the presence of bats around vineyards reduces pests that eat the vines and also lessens grape fungal infections caused by those pests. Fiona Matthews, a professor of environmental biology at the University of Sussex, is to supervise a PhD investigating relationships between bats and English vineyards. Matthews called on Natural England to investigate whether more greater mouse-eared bats were living undetected in their former range – the species was also once found in Dorset – and also consider reintroducing the species. “This individual bat is obviously getting quite geriatric now, it’s a fascinating thing, but I keep turning over in my head what could be done and why aren’t we doing more about this?” she said. “Given that we think Britain is probably going to become more suitable rather than less with climate change, why don’t we have a recovery programme for the greater mouse-eared bat? With climate change, we know this species is losing its range in southern Europe. They will probably need to move north for their survival. They are in northern France which is not that different and not that far away. Maybe they just need a helping hand across the Channel.” Matthews said the bat was known to roost in large roof spaces – in churches, stately homes and large barns – and genetic identification of bat droppings found in likely locations could detect if other individuals are at large. After decades of regional extinctions, the return of the rare greater horseshoe bat to south-east England has been boosted by the protection of its only known maternity roost east of Hampshire, with bat enthusiasts raising enough money to buy the £200,000 Victorian stable block where the animals were discovered rearing young in 2019. The Vincent Wildlife Trust and Sussex Bat Group must raise an additional £150,000 to repair the tumbledown block, install partitions for warmth and shelter, and ensure the air-flow and humidity is just right for the bats, which lost 90% of its population in the 20th century. Cameras will also be fitted so people can watch the maternity colony without disturbing it. The species’ recovery has been assisted by milder winters but also by the Vincent Wildlife Trust buying or leasing barns, churches and an old mill that house maternity roosts. It has 37 such “bat reserves” across Britain and Ireland, in which half the reviving population of 13,000 greater horseshoe bats raise their young. Lucy Rogers, the chief executive of the Vincent Wildlife Trust, said: “Buying one stable block seems like quite an extravagant thing but it’s not just the building – it’s bats returning to the whole of the south-east, and this is the most cost-effective and tried and tested way of making that happen. “We hope the colony will be safeguarded and can increase, and then we can work with partners and get some landscape-scale conservation going as well, which will enable this species to thrive in the wider area.”With the French presidential campaign under way, one of the country’s most provocative writers, Michel Houellebecq, is back with a novel closely linked to the forthcoming election. The 65-year-old author of Atomised and Platform releases the French edition of his 730-page novel Anéantir (Destroy) on Friday, with a sizeable first print run of 300,000 copies. Anéantir begins during a fictional presidential election campaign in 2027. Marine Le Pen has stepped down as leader of the National Rally but far-right candidate Éric Zemmour is still sparking controversy. President Emmanuel Macron is another real-life figure who, while not named, seems to feature, as is Bruno Le Maire, the current economy minister. Le Maire, a friend of Houellebecq, is the inspiration for Bruno Juge, one of the story’s protagonists. Juge is critical of the outgoing president (implied to be based on Macron), at one point declaring that the head of state “has one political conviction and one only … ‘I was made to be president.’” After two terms of this leader, Houellebecq presents a country that is on its knees, with high levels of unemployment and poverty. Previous satires by Houellebecq are thought to have had an influence on French politics. In his 2015 bestseller Submission, France elects a Muslim president, and the novel stirred up the fears of an Islamist takeover of France. (When asked by the Guardian at the time if he was Islamophobic, the author responded “probably”.) And his 2019 novel Serotonin, which criticised globalisation and the EU – Houellebecq is known to be fiercely Eurosceptic – seemed to predict the Yellow Vest movement. Reviews of Anéantir have largely been positive so far. Le Monde calls it a “political thriller that veers into metaphysical meditation”, although L’Obs magazine thought it was too long and described it as “a yawn”.Australia’s treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has tested positive to Covid-19, he announced late on Friday. As the country deals with a massive rise in case numbers due to the spread of the Omicron variant, with more than 78,000 Covid cases reported in a single day on Friday, Frydenberg tweeted the news that he had joined the statistics. “Like thousands of Australians, I tested positive today to Covid-19. I have the common symptoms and am isolating with my family,” he said. Frydenberg is the third Morrison government cabinet minister to contract Covid, after the defence minister, Peter Dutton, recovered from Covid-19 in 2020, and the deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, in 2021. Joyce was forced to isolate in a hotel in Washington DC after his visit to the UK. It comes as the Morrison government has been under pressure to make rapid antigen tests (RATs) available to the Australian public for free. On Thursday the prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced concession card holders would be able to get 10 RATs for free through pharmacies, but stated there was not support in national cabinet for tests to be made freely available to everyone. National cabinet also agreed to remove the requirement for people who test positive on a RAT to go get a PCR test. Victoria announced on Friday a new registration system for people who test positive on a RAT to become a “probable” case of Covid-19 and therefore able to get the support required while isolating for seven days. New South Wales is expected to follow suit next week.There was “nothing untoward” in the prime minister discussing a proposed “great exhibition” with a Conservative donor who was helping to fund his Downing Street flat refurbishment, a minister has argued. WhatsApp messages released on Thursday showed that Boris Johnson discussed the proposal with Lord Brownlow at the same time as requesting his help with the £112,000 revamp of his official residence at No 11, with the conversation leading to a meeting between the peer and the then culture secretary, Oliver Dowden. Asked whether the conversation about a “Great Exhibition 2.0” amounted to corruption, the small business minister, Paul Scully, told Times Radio. He said: “Ministers get proposals all the time and what rightly happened was that this got pushed on to the Culture, Media and Sport Department (DCMS) where it sits. “Lord Brownlow made his own approaches and it wouldn’t have just gone to the prime minister, but the important thing is it’s not gone ahead … so there’s nothing untoward that’s happening out of, you know, a few lines in a WhatsApp.” Downing Street said the proposal for Great Exhibition 2.0 was not taken forward although the government is going ahead with Festival UK, which was first announced in 2018. However, ministerial records show that only two months after Johnson’s exchanges with Brownlow, the peer attended a meeting with Dowden to discuss the proposal. Labour said that if Brownlow had access to senior ministers because he was footing the bill for the refurbishment work it was “corruption plain and simple”. On Thursday, Johnson was forced to issue a “humble and sincere apology” to his standards adviser, Christopher Geidt, after he failed to inform him of the exchange with Brownlow when he carried out an investigation into the funding of work last year. Johnson said he did not recall the exchanges and that the messages were on an old mobile phone, which he no longer had access to because the phone number was published on the website Popbitch. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said: “It appears that Lord Brownlow had access to the prime minister and culture secretary because he was paying for his luxury flat renovations. “It is pretty unbelievable that Boris Johnson didn’t know who was paying for his luxury flat renovations. If so, that is corruption plain and simple. No one should be able to buy access or exchange wallpaper for festivals. Boris Johnson has serious questions to answer.” In a statement, a No 10 spokesman said: “All prime ministers and ministers have proposals put to them at various points and ministers also meet stakeholders regularly as part of their engagement on an array of issues. “In line with normal practice, this idea was referred to the relevant department, considered and ultimately not taken forward by the government. “The government is taking forward Festival UK this year, which was confirmed in 2018, reaffirmed in the 2019 manifesto and is a cultural programme of events, called ‘Unboxed’, on arts, design and technology which will span the whole of the UK.”Ministers have backed calls for God Save the Queen to be played more frequently by the BBC and other public broadcasters. The culture minister, Chris Philp, told MPs the “more we hear the national anthem sung, frankly, the better” in response to a suggestion from a Conservative colleague for the Beeb to play it at the end of their programming for the day. The BBC already plays the national anthem at the end of every day on Radio 4. Andrew Rosindell, the Tory MP for Romford, told the Commons on Thursday: “I know the minister will agree that the singing of the national anthem is something that provides great sense of unity and pride in our nation. “So in this year of the Queen’s platinum jubilee, will the minister take steps to encourage public broadcasters to play the national anthem and ensure the BBC restores it at the end of the day’s programming before it switches to News 24?” The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, could be heard saying “fantastic” after Rosindell’s question. Philp added: “We fully support the singing of the national anthem, Her Majesty the Queen and other expressions of patriotism – including the flying of the union jack. “The more that we hear the national anthem sung, frankly, the better. Organisations like schools are free to promote it and the more we can do in this area, the better it’ll be.” The proposal was swiftly ridiculed online, with social media users telling him to get his priorities straight. The football broadcaster Gary Lineker said: “Yeah, let’s be less British and more North Korean.” The novelist Jonathan Coe asked: “Weren’t we a serious country once? I mean, quite recently.” The writer Otto English said: “160,000 British people dead, 200,000 Omicron cases a day – and the ruling party are concentrating their efforts on bringing back the national anthem on the BBC. “One sure-fire way to turn people against patriotism is to shove it down their throats. We don’t have to sing that terrible dirge to celebrate this place, or even, if we are so minded – the Queen.” The political commentator Ian Dunt wrote: “The only remotely interesting debate about the national anthem is whether we need a better one. And even that’s not very interesting because obviously we do.”My earliest reading memory My mum reading me Ladybird books, in Dollis Hill, north-west London, in 1971. Reading for myself began with comics, mainly the Beano, Whizzer and Chips, and in our house, The Broons and Oor Wullie, not because we’re Scottish but because my mum collected kids’ books and annuals from everywhere. My favourite book growing up The Billy Bunter books. This is again to do with my mum being a collector, as they were written in the 1920s and 30s, and so out of date, even in the 70s, but she foisted them on me. And from the perspective of Dollis Hill in 1973, the crumpet-toasting adventures at Greyfriars School felt exciting. I became a fan and joined a Frank Richards appreciation society, The Old Boys’ Book Club, where I was 11 and everyone else was 80. I imagine if I returned to these books now they’d be a hive of racism, classism and body fascism, so I won’t. The book that changed me as a teenager Ways of Seeing by John Berger, at 18. It introduced me to the idea that what we assume to be natural is often ideological. In the book, this is primarily about art(particularly how images of women in art are utterly encoded with the male gaze) but I took from it an understanding that nearly everything we create, indeed think, has an underlying unconscious ideological component. The writer who changed my mind John Updike. Again when I was 18, I read it without realising it was part of a sequence of books, Rabbit Is Rich. It converted me to the idea that, as Updike puts it, the job of art is to give the mundane its beautiful due – that if you are a good enough writer, your prose can make everything, even the most microscopic and ordinary things in life, rich and strange. The book I came back to I’m presently reading, or rather listening to, The Wings of the Dove by Henry James. I read a fair amount of James, particularly when I was doing a PhD in Victorian literature and sexuality, but although I found him interesting, I also found him soulless and convoluted. Now it’s clear to me that James was inventing psychological modernity in the novel. And to do that he’s prepared to go sentence after sentence refining complexities of mood and thought and expression. It’s hard but kind of thrilling. The book I reread George Eliot’s Middlemarch. I read it in my 20s and thought: meh. Now, in my late 50s, I think – unoriginally – it is indeed the greatest novel written in English. I can hear all of Eliot’s yearning and pain and nuance about time and tide and marriage and compromise and the pressure of the social order. It has passages of intense beauty, and also – in a way she never quite managed elsewhere – the most satisfying and elegant structure of all great books. The book I could never read again I imagine I wouldn’t like the Whizzer and Chips Annual quite as much as I did back then. The book I am currently reading I do have, in actual book form, waiting for me The Every by Dave Eggers. I very much liked The Circle, which I thought was ahead of the game about what the internet is doing to us, so I’m keen to read the sequel, if my eyes allow me. My comfort read I’m writing a book about atheism and have ordered a text of the Barcelona Disputation of 1263, which was a debate between a rabbi and a friar organised by King James of Aragon about who’s right: Jews or Christians? Only one way to find out: The Inquisition, as it turns out. No doubt that’ll be lovely to cosy up to in front of the fire. • (The Boy Who Got) Accidentally Famous by David Baddiel is published by HarperCollins. To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The hack Flyaway hairs, parched locks and static strands? A retro revival courtesy of TikTok suggests tumble dryer (yes, really) could be the remedy. The promise This cheap, at-home hack could turn a sad hair day into a joyful one. But is smelling like laundry worth it? The test There’s nothing like a trend from your teens being hailed as a “new” hair miracle to make you feel ancient. Unbelievably, the science behind this hack makes sense. Tumble dried sheets are positively charged, and our hair negatively charged, so the sheets help eliminate static hair – and the conditioner in the sheets smooths it down. The method is delightfully simple. Before heading on a night out, I took a dryer sheet and glided it down my hair for instant smoothing. I even stowed one in my bag, and three margaritas later was rubbing it on anyone in my path. But as a friend noted, they do make you smell like fabric softener. When I tried it again, hungover the next day, I felt the conditioner from the sheet rubbing off on my hands like a slightly greasy, “meadow fresh” film. The verdict I can’t deny this works. But sadly, the sheets are mostly non-biodegradable. Try a tiny bit of hair moisturiser instead, like Aveda Nutriplenish Daily Moisturizing Treatment (£29.50), which smoothes and defeats static – without making you smell like a laundry basket.The true number of deaths from the Covid pandemic in the US is probably being undercounted, due to the long-lasting and little-understood effects of Covid infection and other deadly complications that surged during the past two years. “We are seeing right now the highest death rates we have ever seen in the history of this business,” J Scott Davison, CEO of insurance company OneAmerica, told journalists on 30 December. “Death rates are up 40% over what they were pre-pandemic,” he said, among working-age people between 18 and 64. Deaths among older Americans have also increased, with one in 100 Americans over the age of 65 dying. There have been an estimated 942,431 excess deaths in the US since February 2020, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hispanic, Black and Native American and Alaska Native populations have been disproportionately affected with high death rates, research shows. Previous crises pale in comparison to the pandemic, Davison said. “A one-in-200-year catastrophe would be a 10% increase over pre-pandemic [levels]. So 40% is just unheard of.” Many of the deaths aren’t counted in the official Covid tally, he said, because they happen months after Covid infections. “The deaths that are being reported as Covid deaths greatly understate the actual death losses among working-age people from the pandemic. It may not all be Covid on their death certificates, but deaths are up in just huge, huge numbers.” In addition to deaths from Covid-19, drug overdoses – already one of the leading causes of death for working-age adults – and homicides have also risen during the pandemic. Insurers are also seeing a rise in disability claims – at first for short-term disability and now for long-term disability, because of both long Covid and delayed care for other illnesses, “because people haven’t been able to get the healthcare that they need because the hospitals are overrun”, Davison said. It’s a trend “consistent across every player in the business” of insurance. Deaths from long Covid have been particularly difficult to track, because the virus may no longer be present at the time of death, but it weakened organs or created fatal new ailments. “We’re seeing the statistics get written as we go, almost,” Micah Pollak, associate professor of economics at Indiana University Northwest, said. And high rates of mortality and disability will only continue as more people get infected, he said. “We really don’t know what the tail of this thing looks like,” Pollak said of long Covid. “The further you get out [from infection], the longer time you have to potentially develop some kind of complications.” The high rates of death have not surprised him, Pollak said, given the equally high rates of cases and the unknown effects of a novel virus. “There’s just so much evidence of these long-term effects of Covid that I naturally assumed people realized that, hey, we’re gonna see probably a lot of deaths down the road – not necessarily soon after infection, but indirectly as a result of infection, as well as not just deaths but disability.” He expects these losses to continue as the pandemic surges and hospitals pass their breaking points. “People say that we’re on the verge of the healthcare system collapsing and things like that, and I think we’re probably past that point,” Pollak said. “We don’t really know what’s going to happen in the next month or so as all these Omicron cases hit the healthcare system.” The crush of the latest surge is adding to two years of overload and burnout, which could have serious long-term implications for healthcare. “We’re going to come out of this with a healthcare system just incredibly diminished because of what it’s gone through,” Pollak said. “We have some very serious long-term consequences for our healthcare system that, if we don’t address them, you’re going to see more sickness, more preventable illnesses, whether it’s Covid or otherwise, showing up in the population that we just can’t deal with.” The economic fallout from the pandemic will probably be felt for years to come, with continued workforce shortages that are already being felt. “This worker shortage that we’re experiencing is not going to go away,” Pollak said. In addition to the large numbers of people dying, many are becoming disabled – making it difficult for them and their caregivers to work other jobs. “In the US especially, we just don’t have very good childcare benefits, elder care benefits, family care benefits,” Pollak said. “And as long as we don’t have those things, people are going to be making the choice to exit the workforce, if they can, to provide those services.”I wonder how many times you’ve been “stopped” in your life. I wonder what comes to mind when I ask that. The chances are it depends on your race. Black men will know exactly what I’m talking about, and for all too many, being stopped and searched by police is a routine element of their daily lives. One young boy from south London has been stopped and searched 30 times over two years. That’s more than once a month. He is only 14. Stop and search has been a controversial feature of policing for decades. You might think it was being reduced, in a post-Macpherson, post-Black Lives Matter world, where people have been talking about how to decrease the grossly disproportionate overpolicing of black communities for so long. But shockingly, provisions in the policing bill will widely increase its use and water down the need for suspicion in a number of ways. If it passes, the bill will enable police to stop and search people subject to certain orders at any time without any suspicion; and anyone at all in a certain area, if they believe certain types of protests might take place nearby. We know that stop and search is overwhelmingly used on one particular group: black people are at least eight times as likely as their white counterparts to be stopped and searched. The constant threat of stop and search makes young black men and boys nervous around the police; it chips away at trust and respect and means the very people who are meant to be viewed as protectors, are viewed as oppressors. Community engagement needs to be seen as crime prevention and essential to effective policing. Gangs thrive where policing is not legitimate and if we want to protect communities from the minority of people involved in serious violence, we must ensure we have meaningful and long-term community engagement in the most deprived areas. Real crime prevention requires police to work with communities to build trust so that they feel confident in letting us know who is causing most harm. You simply cannot enforce your way out of serious violence. I know that all too well from my time spent living and policing in Northern Ireland, which witnessed the most violent and protracted conflict to take place in the UK in living memory. I joined as a constable in 1999 and spent 10 years in the Police Service of Northern Ireland’s armed response unit before being promoted to inspector. In 1999, we had about 13,500 police officers, backed up by more than 7,000 military personnel with static checkpoints going into most towns and cities. I have no doubt the use of stop and search in Northern Ireland saved lives, but despite the heavy footprint and use of powers, the killing still continued until we sat down with those engaged in the violence and put measures in place to deal with the causes of violence. Now, we police a larger population with about 7,000 police officers, and with no military personnel routinely patrolling with us. Despite the progress that has been made, we still have active paramilitaries coercing and exploiting the community; these paramilitaries thrive in areas where trust in the police is low and where communities feel powerless to speak out against them. Individuals will often work with the police if they are treated with courtesy and respect instead of as suspects with no sufficient grounds. Both the College of Policing and Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary have questioned the effectiveness of existing stop-and-search powers in the detection and prevention of crime. Both bodies concluded that the overuse and misuse of the power has clearly undermined public trust and confidence in the police, specifically among Black and Asian communities who are so disproportionately targeted. These warnings should be heeded. It’s often said that it’s natural for police to want ever more powers. The old adage is it’s for police to ask and the minister to say no. In this case, though, important voices from within policing, and policing oversight bodies, are united in their opposition to the increased use of stop-and-search powers included within the policing bill. The last thing we need is more of what doesn’t target the causes of crime or reduce serious violence. Andy George is president of the National Black Police AssociationIn October 2020, I was doing a spot of DIY at home in Scarborough. My divorce had come through a week before, but my ex-husband was still living in our three-storey townhouse, which we also shared with our seven-year-old daughter. He was due to move out in four days’ time. I was finding it difficult emotionally, and busied myself with some decorating. I was on the top floor, in the hallway, steaming the walls to try to scrape off the wallpaper. The heat from the steamer set off the fire alarm. I climbed up on the fifth rung of the ladder to put masking tape over it – I had done that before successfully, but this time I slipped and fell backwards about a metre and a half on to the floor. I landed on a box my ex-husband had packed to take with him. He’d dismantled a shoe rack, and metal poles for it were in the box. I felt a sharp stab and extreme pain around the left-hand side of my back, so shouted for help. I knew I had been impaled, but did not dare to look at how bad it was. When my ex-husband rushed up the stairs and saw me, I could tell by his expression that it wasn’t good. He called 999 while I sat there, not daring to move or look down. I have a strong Christian faith and while I waited for the paramedics, I whispered, “Please, God, don’t let me die” over and over. In my panic, it felt as if it took for ever for them to arrive, although I imagine it wasn’t long at all. I still refused to look at the injury, but when the paramedics started talking about airlifting me to hospital, I realised it must be serious. In the end, they decided against it and asked if I’d be OK to walk outside to the ambulance, as they couldn’t carry me on a stretcher because of the narrow hallways in the house. They put a coat over me, which I was grateful for as it meant my daughter didn’t see the rod protruding from my back. She was worried and knew that something bad had happened, but didn’t know the details. I was taken to my local hospital but I needed specialist surgery so was transferred to another one in Hull. By that time, the rod had been in me for seven hours. All I could think about was how much I needed the toilet. The doctors did not want me to move too much. They operated on me for a couple of hours under general anaesthetic. Afterwards, the surgeon said how fortunate I’d been: the rod had gone eight inches into my body and missed my heart by two inches. They gave me the X-ray, but I couldn’t face looking at it until a few days afterwards. It was only then, when I finally examined it, that I realised how miraculous it was that the pole had missed all my major organs. We were in the middle of lockdown, so no one could visit me while I was recovering in the hospital. Amazingly, I was back at home 48 hours later. My daughter had found it difficult, as she knew I had been hurt. I had a fractured rib and lots of tight stitches. It took me seven weeks to recover, and my ribs were still sore three months later. I get a bit of stiffness on my left side from time to time, but apart from that I haven’t had lingering health issues. While I was in hospital, my ex-husband finished the decorating. When I got home, the box of metal poles was still there. I got rid of it as I didn’t want the reminder. The accident hasn’t put me off DIY, but you won’t find me going up ladders. I try not to dwell on what could have happened. I shared my story with the local paper and appeared on TV. I’d downplayed the accident to my family as they live down south, so once they saw the extent of what had happened on television, they were shocked and upset. One of the positives from the accident, though, was seeing my local community and neighbours rally round me. My best friend got everyone at her church and some other friends on a rota so they could bring me tea every night for two weeks. I received lots of flowers and gifts, too. I’ve always been a positive person, but now I’m even more grateful for everything. The experience has given me an edge of confidence and I feel almost invincible. • As told to Amy Sedghi Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comThe Ruby Princess cruise ship sparked concerns about a Covid-19 outbreak in San Francisco after a dozen passengers were reported to test positive. It is nearly two years since a Covid outbreak when the ship docked in Sydney resulting in over 900 infections and 28 deaths. Local US media reported on Friday the ship docked in San Francisco on Thursday after a ten-day New Years celebration trip to Mexico and back, with concerns there had been a major Covid outbreak on board. A couple on board said there had been an outbreak among the performers on the cruise, NBC reported, leading to shows being cancelled and the couple isolating as a result. “It was kind of disturbing that there wasn’t more widespread announcements about that … I think the only reason they announced that is because the shows were cancelled,” Diane Castillo told NBC. Under a local mandate, 25% of the passengers were tested for Covid-19, and 12 came back positive. According to the San Francisco Chronicle there were 724 passengers on the ship. Princess Cruises reportedly said those passengers were asymptomatic and departed the cruise either by private transport or into hotel quarantine. The Port of San Francisco confirmed this arrangement in a statement to local reports. The US Center for Disease Control (CDC) reported the ship had met the yellow classification threshold for investigation, which is more than 0.1% or more passengers having Covid-19. The CDC said the investigation had been undertaken and the ship was now under observation. Guardian Australia has sought comment from Princess Cruises. A spokesperson told CBS the cruise was operating as a “vaccinated cruise” with rates close to 100% among guests and staff, negative tests needing to be provided, and rigorous cleaning on board. The company’s website says for cruises from the US and the UK, guests are required to have received their final dose of an authorised Covid vaccine at least 14 days prior to the cruise beginning, and proof of a negative test either PCR or antigen in the United States, or a free test at the port in the UK. Passengers are also required to wear a face mask indoors at all times, and outdoors when physical distancing can’t be maintained. San Francisco reported 1,803 new Covid-19 cases on Thursday, with the city experiencing a significant rise in cases that is also being seen in many other parts of the world. While a handful of cases on a cruise ship might not have too much of an impact on overall Covid-19 transmission in San Francisco’s Bay Area, the outbreak does draw attention back to the role cruise ships had in spreading Covid-19 across the globe in the early days of the pandemic in 2020. The Ruby Princess itself became notorious for spreading Covid-19 in Sydney at the start of the pandemic. The ship was deemed “low risk” at the time by NSW health officials and was allowed to dock on 19 March 2020. All its passengers were allowed to disembark and travel interstate and overseas. This in turn lead to over 900 cases of Covid-19 and 28 deaths. An inquiry into the debacle ultimately found that there were “no systemic failures to address” and there were no repercussions for the decision makers involved. The then-premier of NSW, Gladys Berejiklian ultimately apologised unreservedly “to anybody who suffered as a result of the mistakes … undertaken by individuals within the health department or the health agency.”Aston Martin warned it would miss its annual profit target by about £15m after failing to deliver as many of its limited edition Valkyrie hypercar models to customers as planned. The British luxury car manufacturer said it had delivered 10 of the £2.5m vehicles in the fourth quarter, fewer than planned. “The impact is timing only, all Aston Martin Valkyrie Coupes are sold and remain allocated to customers with significant deposits,” the company said in a full-year trading update. Lawrence Stroll, the executive chairman of Aston Martin Lagonda, said that the Valkyrie project had proved challenging since he inherited it when he led a consortium to buy the company in 2020. “We inherited a challenging project with Valkyrie but we are now producing these fabulous hypercars,” he said. The company said the profits from the delayed shipping of the vehicles, which had faced electrical problems, would be reflected in its profits over the next two years. The company said sales of its DBX sports utility vehicle, which is targeted at wealthy female customers, have been strong. It sold 3,001 of the vehicles, on which the company is pinning its recovery, last year, taking an estimated 20% share of the luxury SUV market. Overall, Aston Martin said wholesale sales grew 82% to 6,182 last year, as the company changed strategy to limit the amount of cars made available for sale to increase its prestige status. “The evidence is there that our strategy is working, as retail sales are well ahead of wholesales supported by strong pricing and improving residual values,” Stroll said. “It is a very long time since the core business was in such good health as it is today.” Stroll said that the return to Formula One, part of his £500m rescue deal, had “significantly increased our brand exposure, perception and desirability”. He added that the completion of a first full year of DBX sales and new products, such as a “new generation of front-engine sports cars” coming in 2023, meant the company was on track to achieve its target of £2bn in revenues and £500m in adjusted profits by 2024-2025. Tobias Moers, the chief executive of Aston Martin, said there was “tremendous demand” for its limited edition cars, with the Aston Martin Valkyrie Spider two times oversubscribed by buyers since its launch in August. “Our core business delivered as planned while navigating a challenging external operating environment,” he said. “We have taken aggressive action on improving the efficiency and profitability of the business. Brand desirability is strong, with new customers being attracted to Aston Martin as we follow our demand-led, ultra-luxury business model.” The company said its cash balance at the end of the year was a better-than-expected £420m. Aston Martin reported a pre-tax loss of £98m in the three months to the end of September, as revenues jumped from £124m to £238m year on year for the quarter. Shares rose 2.5% on Friday morning.Jürgen Klopp is hoping to fill the sizeable gap in his Liverpool frontline by signing the nifty Porto forward Luis Díaz. With Sadio Mané and Mo Salah away at the Africa Cup of Nations, the 24-year-old is seen as just the right kind of pesky menace to help Diogo Jota and Divock Origi in attack as Liverpool try to keep sight of Manchester City’s coattails through January in the Premier League. The word is that the Colombian, who impressed Klopp in two appearances against Liverpool in this year’s Champions League, would cost around £60m. Liverpool will have around £12m to put towards the transfer fee when they sell their granite-headed centre-back Nat Phillips, with Watford leading that particular race. The Hornets will have a gap to fill in defence after telling Danny Rose to clear his locker and head further north if he likes. Having scooped up Kieran Trippier from Atlético Madrid, Newcastle’s Saudi-led owners are hoping to waft enough riyal in the faces of West Ham beancounters so that they part with 24-year-old France centre-back Issa Diop. They’ll also try to convince Todd Cantwell to swap a relegation battle at Norwich for a more luxurious scrap at St James’ Park, with the proviso that he will have to do Jonjo Shelvey’s running for him. Attempts to sign Liverpool legend Origi look to be over, though, with Bournemouth’s Dominic Solanke a preferred option as back-up for the injured Callum Wilson. Rafa Benítez’s attempts to rebuild his 2017-18 Newcastle team at Everton have been scuppered after a bid for Sean Longstaff was rejected. The midfielder is out of contract at the end of the season but Newcastle are keen to get him signed up again and aren’t exactly lacking in the resources to do that. Benítez may turn his attention to Lyon’s Bruno Guimarães instead, though Arsenal appear to be in the box seat to sign the 24-year-old holding midfielder. Over at Manchester United, the word is that Cristiano Ronaldo will take his #CR7 brand to another club if he does not approve of the next poor soul to follow interim manager Ralf Rangnick. Mauricio Pochettino is desperate to take on that challenge as he can’t wait to get away from the PSG circus but Ajax’s Erik ten Hag appears to be first-choice and Ed Woodward is keen to seal the deal before he leaves Old Trafford in February. Having bullishly announced that Barcelona “are back”, club president Joan Laporta made some noises about snaffling goal-addict Erling Haaland away from Borussia Dortmund. The reality is that goal-starved Anthony Martial is a more likely option on loan from Manchester United and they may have to do battle with Newcastle for him. Barcelona also have Philippe Coutinho on Aston Villa’s wage bill now instead of their own too. Leicester have £33m at the ready and will hit the button just as soon as they can to bring the Club Brugge striker Charles de Ketelaere to the King Power Stadium. The 20-year-old midfielder has scored nine goals already this season but could be so good that Real Madrid come in for him and duly ruin his career. And Tottenham are readying a bid for Wolves’ rampant winger Adama Traoré, with Antonio Conte keen to install the 25-year-old at right wing-back.Paul Barry has spent much of the past two years striving to help preserve the two industries which have not merely shaped but enlightened and enriched his life. Recent, pandemic-stricken months have been challenging for the majority owner of assorted US-based travel companies and League One Cambridge United, yet 2022 has opened on a doubly optimistic note. While Barry is confident tourism has begun a sustained, if still cautious, revival, Cambridge are also going places. On Saturday Mark Bonner’s team visit a sold-out St James’ Park for a third-round FA Cup tie against Newcastle with 5,000 away fans due. Geography dictates that Barry watches most Cambridge games on a live stream early in the morning at home in Seattle. “I can’t sit still; I’m jumping up and down in front of the television,” he says. “When we lose, my wife takes the dog out for a walk.” The best match days arrive when he flies to England to watch the team about six times a season, often sitting alongside his 85-year-old season-ticket-holding mother. Although she has opted to follow live radio commentary from her home in Cambridgeshire on Saturday, Barry will be in the directors’ box and is looking forward to meeting Amanda Staveley. Given that Newcastle’s co-owner recently revealed her own, considerable, struggles to stay seated when watching Eddie Howe’s side play, the pair should swiftly strike up a rapport. “Newcastle have reached out and offered us a great welcome,” says Barry, who has poured millions of pounds into Cambridge since joining the board in 2005 when a club now mid-table in League One fell into the Conference, beginning a nine-year Football League exile. “I know it’s going to be a brilliant occasion and a great experience.” He and Staveley probably have more in common than might initially be apparent. The recent takeover the latter spearheaded alongside her majority shareholding Saudi Arabian partners may remain controversial but it has undeniably reinforced the ties binding Newcastle to their north-east community. With supporters disillusioned and disenfranchised under the former, unloved owner Mike Ashley’s regime now re-engaged, Saturday’s mood should be celebratory and Barry understands precisely why. “The value of football clubs to their local communities has really been clarified during the pandemic,” he says. “They’ve proved they’re huge community assets – and also offer great entertainment. During lockdown, I watched a game a day – it helped me stop spending all my time worrying about stabilising Cambridge and the businesses.” Albeit remotely, Barry also helped coordinate the Cambridge United Community Trust’s much-lauded Careline initiatives throughout England’s lockdowns. Club staff and players helped older and vulnerable local residents with shopping and prescription collections, delivered free meals to families normally dependent on food banks, organised online activities for children missing school and made countless phone calls, offering friendly chats to anyone who might be isolated or lonely. “The Trust did a lot of community outreach work,” he says. “It shows clubs are about far more than just football, they unify people of all types, shapes, sizes and backgrounds. Football creates incredible bonds and those bonds were kind of strengthened during the pandemic. For me, the community work is one of the reasons to be involved in a club.” During the long months when fans were locked out of the Abbey Stadium last season Cambridge won promotion from League Two, enjoying one of the most memorable seasons for Barry since the days when, as a schoolboy in the 1970s, he travelled to matches on the bus with his father from their home village of Hauxton, five miles south-west of the city. “I always loved the feeling of being at games,” he says. “It becomes part of who you are – and there’s nothing like the great sense of camaraderie it produces.” This sense of belonging is similarly important to Bonner. Very much at the vanguard of football’s “new school” coaching cadre, Cambridge’s inspirational 36-year-old manager never kicked a ball professionally but, having started out running the Abbey Stadium’s under-eights, has risen through the ranks to become one of the club’s most successful recent managers. Barry’s own career trajectory has also proved slightly left field. After graduating in chemical engineering from Imperial College London in 1983 his wanderlust transported him to New York and a role as a reservations agent with British Rail. He soon joined a travel agency and, having eventually become its manager, branched out independently, establishing his own companies. After selling the Europe Express Group to First Choice Holidays in 2005 he found himself in a position to help keep Cambridge afloat. “Travel’s recovering this year,” he says. “It’s going to be stepping back up to 50% of 2019 levels, although you won’t see a full return to pre-pandemic levels until 2023.” Newcastle, too, remain in the early stages of recovery from long years of under investment under Ashley and despite Kieran Trippier’s arrival from Atlético Madrid this week, a team who have won only one game all season could, arguably, be vulnerable to a giantkilling. “If you’re rational, we don’t have a chance,” says Barry. “But football isn’t played on paper and I’m optimistic we won’t be overwhelmed. I just hope we all really enjoy being at a full St James’ Park and that it turns into a celebration of where we’ve come from and the journey we’ve made over the past 20 years.”Good morning. Joe Biden marked the anniversary of the Capitol attack with his strongest denunciation yet of his predecessor, accusing Donald Trump and his allies of placing a “dagger at the throat of American democracy”. Condemning Trump’s attempts to overturn the 2020 election as a “failed” pursuit, Biden underlined that the insurrection continues to endanger American democracy as the lies that led to the violence persist. In a show of just how divided Washington remains, there were only two Republicans on the floor of the House of Representatives when the speaker, Nancy Pelosi, presided over a moment of silence: the former vice-president Dick Cheney and his daughter, the congresswoman Liz Cheney. The Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, who was in Georgia for the funeral of a former colleague, issued a statement calling the attack “antithetical to the rule of law”. The potential for a future stolen election is higher than ever, Sam Levine warns in his analysis of the continuing machinations. Since the insurrection, Republicans have powered ahead with efforts to undermine the processes of election administration and vote counting. The forceful denunciation “cannot have been easy” for Biden, who favours bipartisanship and ran on a platform of national unity, writes David Smith in his analysis. It shows that Biden understands the “threat must be looked squarely in the eye”. What did Trump say? He had planned to hold a news conference from Mar-a-Lago, but canceled under pressure from conservative allies. Nevertheless, he issued a series of statements maintaining the “big lie”. Real number of Covid deaths US likely undercounted The true number of people lost to Covid in the US is likely to be higher than the official figure, experts have said, owing to the virus’s long-term effects and other fatal complications that have risen since the pandemic began. Since February 2020, there have been an estimated 942,431 excess deaths in the US, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, with Hispanic, Black and Native American and Alaska Native populations disproportionately affected. But the CEO of insurance company OneAmerica, J Scott Davison, said the real death toll was likely to be higher, as the deaths that happen months after infection are not included in the figure. He said death rates among working-age people were up 40% over what they were pre-pandemic. What else has contributed to climbing death rates? Drug overdoses and homicides have also risen during the pandemic. Why are long Covid deaths difficult to tally? In some patients, the virus weakens organs or leads to new ailments – but may no longer be present at the time of death. Thousands detained in Kazakhstan as president says order mostly restored Order has mostly been restored in Kazakhstan, president Kassym-Jomart Tokayev has claimed following days of protest during which more than 3,000 people have been detained and 26 killed, according to interior ministry figures. In an address on Friday morning, he said he had personally given orders to open fire with lethal force against protesters he called “bandits and terrorists”. The apparent end to the unrest comes a day after Russia sent “peacekeeping forces” numbering about 2,500 into Kazakhstan. Witnesses in the country’s largest city, Almaty, described chaotic scenes on Thursday, with government buildings stormed and torched. However, many said the protests – triggered by a spike in fuel prices as well as longstanding political and economic dissatisfaction – had started peacefully earlier in the week, before tipping into violence following the government’s crackdown. Why did Russia intervene? The Russian-led Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) deployed troops within hours of Tokayev’s appeal. The move has been divisive, with some in Russia praising the action while other have compared it to the Soviet-era Warsaw Pact interventions. In other news … Ten bodies were crammed into an SUV and left in front of the office of a Mexican state governor, officials have said. The vehicle was left before dawn in the main plaza of the capital of Zacatecas – a state that has become one of the country’s most violent due to turf wars. Philadelphia deadliest fire in a century may have been caused by a five-year-old setting a Christmas tree alight, officials revealed on Thursday. The possibility is being considered as investigators seek to determine the cause of the blaze that killed 12. Australia’s home affairs minister has rejected accusations that Novak Djokovic is being held “captive” in a Melbourne immigration hotel. The Australian Open champion is fighting his deportation in court after border force officials detained him. Stat of the day: 37% of Gen Z have sought counseling More than a third (37%) of Gen Z have sought therapy, according to recent figures from the American Psychiatric Association, and millennials aren’t far behind, with 35% going for counseling. Therapists believe this prioritisation of mental health is behind the rising tide of young people pursuing couples therapy. Don’t miss this: Tilda Swinton: ‘I am a proper capital F failure’ Tilda Swinton only ever intended to make one movie. “I love seeing people, I’m not interested in seeing actors at all,” she says. She went to university aiming to become a poet, and feels a “real dark shame” about not doing so. As Simon Hattenstone accompanies her for a walk with her dogs in the Scottish Highlands, she tells him about long Covid and considering a radical career change. Climate check: searching for the ‘Asian unicorn’ Nicknamed the ‘“Asian unicorn”, the saola was heralded as one of the 20th century’s most impressive zoological discoveries. Less than three decades on, however, its population has plummeted due to the indirect effects of commercial wildlife poaching. In 2001, the saola population was estimated to number 70 to 700 in Laos and several hundred in Vietnam; experts believe there are now fewer than 100 in existence. Last Thing: Peruvian statue’s giant penis vandalized Tourists have flocked to take selfies with a newly erected statue of a man with a big grin, and an even bigger phallus, in northern Peru – but not all have been fans of the 9ft representation of the fertility symbol. Breaking in overnight, vandals smashed a hole in the phallus and reportedly fired shots as they left.In the year since the deadly insurrection at the US Capitol, federal authorities have faced intense scrutiny for failing to detect warning signs on social media. After the 6 January insurrection, the US agency tasked with combatting terrorism and extremism, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), has expanded its monitoring of online activity, with officials touting a new domestic terrorism intelligence branch focused on tracking online threats and sharing information about possible attacks. A senior DHS official told the Guardian this week the department aims to track “narratives known to provoke violence” and platforms that have been linked to threats. The primary goal, the official said, was to warn potential targets when they should enhance security. In the days leading up to the anniversary of the riot, for example, the agency saw an uptick in activity on platforms tied to white supremacists and neo-Nazis and warned law enforcement partners when appropriate, the official said. This monitoring relies on DHS analysts, not artificial intelligence, and doesn’t target “ideologies”, the official added, but rather “calls for violence”. The Guardian spoke with Harsha Panduranga, counsel with the liberty and national security program at the Brennan Center for Justice, a not-for-profit organization that has tracked police and government entities’ online surveillance programs, about the US government’s monitoring of social media in the wake of 6 January. Although DHS says its online efforts are consistent with privacy protections, civil rights and civil liberties, the expansion of social media monitoring still raised concerns, Panduranga argued. Without proper safeguards, a new report from the center warns, the expanded social media surveillance could be both ineffective at preventing attacks and harmful to marginalized groups that end up targeted and criminalized by “counter-terrorism” efforts. The conversation has been edited and condensed for clarity. Which US government agencies monitor online activity? Many federal agencies monitor social media, including DHS, the FBI, the state department, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF), the US Postal Service, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), the US Marshals Service and the Social Security Administration (SSA). Our work has primarily focused on DHS, FBI and the state department, which make extensive use of social media for monitoring, targeting and information collection. Why do these agencies monitor civilians’ social media? The FBI and DHS use social media monitoring to assist with investigations and to detect potential threats. Some of those investigations do not require a showing of criminal activity. For example, FBI agents can open an “assessment” [the lowest-level investigative stage] simply on the basis of preventing crime or terrorism, and without a factual basis. During assessments, FBI agents can search publicly available online information. Subsequent investigative stages, which require some factual basis, open the door for more invasive surveillance, such as the recording of private online communications. The FBI also awarded a contract to a firm in December 2020 to scour social media and proactively identify “national security and public safety-related events” not yet reported to law enforcement. DHS’s Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) division says it relies on social media when investigating matters ranging from civil immigration violations to terrorism. Government entities also monitor social media for “situational awareness” to coordinate a response to breaking events. How broad is this surveillance? Some DHS divisions, including Customs and Border Protection (CBP), the National Operations Center (NOC) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema), keep tabs on a broad list of websites and keywords being discussed on social media platforms. The agencies’ “privacy impact assessments” suggest there are few limits on the content that can be reviewed. Some assessments list a sweeping range of keywords that are monitored, including “attack”, “public health”, “power outage”, and “jihad”. Immigration authorities also use social media to screen travelers and immigrants coming into the US and even to monitor them while they live here. People applying for a range of immigration benefits also undergo social media checks to verify information in their application and determine whether they pose a security risk. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) agents can also look at publicly available social media content for a range of investigations, including probing “potential criminal activity” and are authorized to operate undercover online and monitor private communications. How has this surveillance expanded in the wake of the insurrection? The main new DHS effort we’re aware of is an initiative monitoring social media to try to identify “narratives” giving rise to violence. DHS says they’ll use social media to pinpoint tips, leads and trends. In September, for example, DHS warned there could be another attack on the Capitol in connection with a Justice for J6 rally. But reports showed that law enforcement personnel [and journalists] outnumbered the protesters, and there was no indication of violence at the protest. This shows how difficult it is to predict violence relying on social media chatter. How concerned are you about the potential for civil rights violations in the wake of 6 January? January 6 seems to be accelerating this emphasis on social media monitoring without sufficient safeguards. And the monitoring to identify “narratives” that may lead to violence is broad enough to sweep in constitutionally protected speech and political discussion on various issues. We’ve long seen that government monitoring of social media harms people in a number of ways, including wrongly implicating an individual or group in criminal behavior based on their online activity; misinterpreting the meaning of social media activity, sometimes with severe consequences; suppressing people’s willingness to talk or connect openly online; and invading individuals’ privacy. Authorities have characterized ordinary activity, like wearing a particular sneaker brand or making common hand signs, or social media connections, as evidence of criminal or threatening behavior. This kind of assumption can have high-stakes consequences. Can you share some specific examples that illustrate these consequences? In 2020, DHS and the FBI disseminated reports to law enforcement in Maine warning of potential violence at anti-police brutality demonstrations based on fake social media posts by rightwing provocateurs. Police in Kansas arrested a teenager in 2020 on suspicion of inciting a riot reportedly based on a mistaken interpretation of his Snapchat post, in which he was actually denouncing violence. In 2019, DHS officials barred a Palestinian student arriving to study at Harvard from entering the country allegedly based on the content of his friends’ social media posts. The student said he had neither written nor engaged with the posts, which were critical of the US government. In another case of guilt by association, the NYPD was accused of wrongly arresting a 19-year-old for attempted murder in 2012 in part because prosecutors argued his “likes” and photos on social media proved he was a member of a violent gang. That same year, British travelers were interrogated at Los Angeles international airport and sent back to the UK reportedly due to a border agent’s misinterpretation of a joking tweet. Is social media surveillance effective at identifying legitimate threats? Broad social media monitoring for threat detection purposes generates reams of useless information, crowding out information on real public safety concerns. Government officials and assessments have repeatedly recognized that this dynamic makes it difficult to distinguish a sliver of genuine threats from the millions of everyday communications that do not warrant law enforcement attention. The former acting chief of DHS’s Office of Intelligence and Analysis (I&amp;A) said last year, “Actual intent to carry out violence can be difficult to discern from the angry, hyperbolic – and constitutionally protected – speech and information commonly found on social media.” And a 2021 internal review of I&amp;A reported that searching “for true threats of violence before they happen is a difficult task filled with ambiguity”. The review observed that personnel collected information on a “broad range of general threats” that provided “information of limited value”, including “memes, hyperbole, statements on political organizations and other protected first amendment speech”. Similar concerns cropped up with the DHS’s pilot programs to use social media to vet refugees. What groups are most impacted by this kind of surveillance? Black, brown and Muslim people, as well as activists and dissenters more generally, are especially vulnerable to being falsely labeled as threats based on social media activity. Both the FBI and DHS have monitored Black Lives Matter activists. In 2017, the FBI created a specious terrorism threat category called “Black Identity Extremism” , which can be read to include protests against police violence. This category has been used to rationalize continued surveillance of Black activists, including monitoring of social media activity. In 2020, DHS’s Office of Intelligence and Analysis used social media and other tools to target and monitor racial justice protestors in Portland, Oregon, justifying this surveillance by pointing to the threat of vandalism to Confederate monuments. DHS then disseminated intelligence reports on journalists reporting on this overreach. Muslim, Arab, Middle Eastern and South Asian communities have often been particular targets of the US government’s discriminatory travel and immigration screening practices, including social media screening. How do you think the government should be responding to the intelligence failures of 6 January? A Senate committee report from last year found that DHS failed to produce a specific warning connected to what would happen on 6 January. An FBI field office had circulated a warning about an online threat with a specific call for violence, but it didn’t convince officials to better prepare for the attack. I think one takeaway from these failures is that broadly monitoring social media for scary things people are saying, without any further reason to suspect wrongdoing, tends to flood warning systems with useless information. This makes it harder to pick out what matters and sweeps in thousands of people who haven’t or wouldn’t do anything violent. Intelligence and law enforcement agencies already have ample and potent tools to investigate far-right violence without relying on indiscriminate social media monitoring, but they are not using these tools as effectively as they should. Instigators of the 6 January riot, for example, were members of groups that were already known to law enforcement. Some of them had previously participated in organized far-right violence, yet authorities did not bring charges or fully investigate the criminal activities of these organizations. So more indiscriminate surveillance isn’t the answer – in fact, such measures are much more likely to harm the very communities that are already at greater risk.A year on from the Capitol attack by loyalist supporters of Donald Trump, many families are still reeling from members outing each other to law enforcement and offspring traumatized by their parents’ involvement in the insurrection. Jackson Reffitt, a 19-year old from Texas, called the FBI weeks before his father, Guy Reffitt, stormed the US Capitol on January, saying that his father had been hinting at doing “something big”, Teen Vogue reported. In text messages obtained by the magazine, Jackson’s younger sister texted their father in a family group chat, writing: “Dad, please be safe!! You know you are risking not only your business but your life too.” Guy Reffitt replied: “I have no intention on throwing it away. I love ALL of you with ALL my heart and soul. This is for our country and for ALL OF YOU and your kids. God bless us, one and all … ” Guy Reffitt has since been charged with numerous crimes. The charges relate to obstruction of an official proceeding, obstruction of justice for threatening his children, transporting firearms with the intention of using them during the mob attack on the Capitol, and a misdemeanor charge of accessing Secret Service-protected grounds without lawful authority. While in jail awaiting trial, the senior Reffitt texted news reports to the family group chat that featured photos of himself at the riots. Jackson told Teen Vogue that as the attacks unfolded, live on television, he received a phone call from the FBI, asking him to confirm his father’s identity and he confirmed that it was his father at the riot. Jackson now lives away from his family and rarely communicates with them. “He used to be one of the best dads ever,” he told the magazine. “He made me the man I am today. He taught me to be honest, not to steal, all that cliche stuff. I believe he brought me up to do what I did.” When Jackson does talk to his mother, she calls him “the Gestapo”, referring to Nazi secret police. His older sister, Sarah, 24, reportedly remains in disbelief towards Jackson. According to Sarah, she knows that their father loves Jackson, which in turn makes her even more upset to accept the fact that her brother turned him in to the FBI. “It’s hard not to condemn Jackson in defending my father,” she said. “I’m not gonna call [my dad] a hero for going [to the Capitol],” she added, but said: “He’s a hero to me because he’s my dad, but not for that.” Sarah also does not think her father should be jailed as he awaits trial. Unlike the judge in Guy Reffitt’s case, she does not see her father as a danger to the community. In a jailhouse letter obtained by ProPublica, Guy Reffitt wrote: “January 6 was nothing short of a satirical way to overthrow a government. If overthrow was the quest, it would have no doubt been overthrown.” On Thursday, Joe Biden, and Liz Cheney, the Republican congresswoman and the co-chair of the Capitol attack select committee, spoke about how close the mob came to violently overturning the election result – but failed. Meanwhile, Robyn Sweet, the 35-year-old daughter of a Virginia man, Douglas Sweet, is dealing with being the daughter of a Capitol Hill insurrectionist. Douglas Sweet, a staunch Donald Trump supporter, has been sentenced to 36 months’ probation with one month of home detention, fined and ordered to perform community service. Robyn Sweet said that once, when she was protesting against schools being named after Confederate generals, she saw her father across a parking lot, standing under a Confederate flag with his friends. “It’s like we’re living these mirrored lives,” Robyn told the magazine. When a friend sent her a link to a news report that mentioned her father as one of the rioters arrested on 6 January, Robyn said she felt relieved because she knew he was safe. Since then, Robyn and her father have limited their conversation topics to only light ones. “We can’t even talk about religion, politics or current events,” she said. While Jackson and Robyn continue to remain in touch with their families, albeit to different extents, 19-year-old Helena Duke has not spoken to her mother, Therese Duke, since the day she found out that her mother was part of the Capitol mob. After a video showing Therese harassing a Capitol police officer and then being punched in the face surfaced online, Helena tweeted, in what has become a viral post: “Hi mom, remember the time you told me I shouldn’t go to [Black Lives Matter] protests because they could get violent … this you?” Helena has since moved across the country from her mother and says that they are barely in contact. “It horrifies me to this day that she did such a thing. I’ve attempted to close the last chapter of my life in order to heal fully,” Helena said. Nevertheless, Helena mourns the relationship that she used to have with her mother. “As a child, my mother was my idol. She was the ‘fun mom’ who all my friends adored. She was so loving and full of life. I wish people knew how painful it is to grieve the life of a parent who is still living,” Helena said. Since the riots, federal prosecutors have brought cases against 727 individuals over their involvement in the deadly riots.In 1953, scientists at the University of Chicago observed that people dream much more frequently during certain deep phases of sleep characterised by “rapid movements in both eyes, choppy breathing, irregular heartbeat and fast brain waves”. As the Brazilian neuroscientist Sidarta Ribeiro explains in his new book on the history of dream research, the discovery of what became known as rapid eye movement (REM) sleep had profound implications. Where Sigmund Freud had postulated that dreams are an articulation of our deepest desires, neuroscience seemed to suggest they are in fact “purely random by-products of a strictly physiological underlying reality, and therefore of no psychological significance”; as such, the work of understanding dreams lay beyond the purview of science, “a matter for charlatans, fortune-tellers, priests, psychoanalysts and other professionals in the metaphysics business”. Ribeiro looks to bridge the gap between neuroscience and psychoanalysis by drawing attention to various studies that suggest a scientific basis for psychoanalytic dream theories. Electrophysiological experiments carried out on rats in 1989, for example, showed that neurons activated while awake were specifically reactivated during subsequent sleep, which supports the idea, advanced by Freud in The Interpretation of Dreams (1899), that dreams constitute a “day residue” – a revisiting of memories and emotions experienced during waking life. Research by the South African neuropsychologist Mark Solms has demonstrated that the brain’s dopaminergic reward system is activated during REM sleep, leading Ribeiro to deduce that “the Freudian proposition that desire is the motor of dreams is much more factual than its critics would acknowledge … Dreaming ‘is’ desire because both ‘are’ dopamine.” Ribeiro precedes his scientific disquisition with a lengthy survey of notable dreams in politics and culture from antiquity to the modern day. Many of these are premonitory, prophetic or revelatory in nature. We learn that both Xerxes and Alexander the Great were inspired in their expansionist adventures by megalomanic dreams; Julius Caesar’s wife, Calpurnia, foresaw her husband’s demise in a nightmare on the eve of his assassination; when Prince Frederick III of Saxony was asked to extradite Martin Luther to the Holy Roman Emperor after he had torched a papal bull, he declined to do so after having a revelation in a dream, and thereby altered the course of European history. Artists and musicians as varied as Albrecht Dürer, Marc Chagall and Paul McCartney have produced major works inspired by dreams; Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s famous poem Kubla Khan was largely composed during a deep sleep following an opium binge; the chemist August Kekule discovered the hexagonal structure of benzene after dreaming about a snake eating its own tail. The Oracle of Night contains a number of interesting insights into the science of sleep. These include the intriguing possibility of a link between dreams and psychosis, an idea first mooted by psychiatrists Emil Kraepelin and Eugen Bleuler in the early 20th century and seemingly borne out by investigations into the effects of dopamine on rodents, which indicate that “the mental disturbances of psychosis make the differentiation between fantasy and reality difficult precisely because they are the result of an invasion of waking by sleep”. Another is the discovery, after experiments into sleep deprivation in mice, that sleep helps consolidate memory – meaning people who nod off straight after learning something are more likely to retain the information. Ribeiro believes educationists should therefore adopt a “biologically more intelligent” approach to school timetables, and predicts we will eventually see the introduction of “napping rooms or siesta clubs … [and] individual pods for sleeping” in educational institutions. “The brain that dreams is the same brain that lives through waking experience”, so it’s unsurprising that there’s a correlation between real-life anxiety and bad dreams: research has shown a high incidence of nightmares among children from conflict-ridden parts of the world such as the Gaza Strip and Kurdistan compared with those in peaceful, northern European cities; studies also indicate a greater prevalence of sleep problems in low-income communities. The recurring vivid nightmares common to PTSD sufferers are an extreme version of this phenomenon: “The memory of the violent event, having been so powerfully codified, is too intense, it possesses very strong synaptic connections, which makes them capture and monopolize the electrical activity produced during sleep.” Ribeiro, a professor at the Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, is an erudite guide through some rarefied terrain, and Daniel Hahn’s translation from the Portuguese reads seamlessly. That said, the scientific explanations aren’t always easy to follow and the writing occasionally lapses into a specialist register. The study of dreams is an inherently transdisciplinary pursuit – encompassing neuroscience, biochemistry, psychobiology and anthropology – so offshoots and digressions are to be expected. All the same, a more hands-on editor might have trimmed some of the considerable fat here, which includes, among other things, idle conjectures about the dream repertoires of animals and Palaeolithic people; a segment on the evolution of the earliest multicellular beings; an overview of funerary rites in the Neolithic and bronze ages; a potted history of the concept of madness; reflections on the persecution of astronomers Giordano Bruno and Galileo; a vignette in praise of Bruce Lee; and some personal broadsides on cancel culture and populism. There are some amusing titbits in among the sprawl, however. The writings of St Augustine of Hippo reveal that the celibate, fourth-century theologian was racked with guilt after having had some steamy sexual dreams. Agonising over whether they constituted a sin, he takes pains to stress that whatever pleasure he experienced while asleep was endured only with the greatest reluctance. The 11th-century French monk Raoul Glaber, whose Benedictine order forbade lie-ins, “left a record of being assailed by a demon whose temptation consisted of whispering in his ear that he should ignore the bell and surrender to the ‘sweet repose’ of the second sleep”. The bombardment of facts and esoterica gradually gives way to a polemical treatise on the science of the mind, and a through-line of sorts. Ribeiro believes psychiatry lost its way in the second half of the 20th century: when it turned its back on Freud, it essentially turned its back on the whole idea of the psyche; the reduction of human souls to pure physiology – a mere matter of neurons and synapses – has been a boon to big pharma, but it is not serving people well. Ribeiro laments the overmedicalisation of psychiatry and our over-reliance on SSRIs as a mental health panacea, and advocates using psilocybin, ayahuasca and MDMA to treat depression and anxiety. He makes a persuasive case, but one wonders if he could have made it more briskly. • The Oracle of Night: The History and Science of Dreams by Sidarta Ribeiro is published by Transworld (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Why will I love it? Epiphyllum anguliger, more commonly known as the fishbone or zigzag cactus, is a fun, non-spiky plant that will add movement to your room – plus it’s non-toxic for pets and people. Light or shade Like all epiphytes it prefers the shade, with just a few hours of sunshine each day. In the late summer and early autumn, move it to a spot where it will receive a little full sun (but not during the peak afternoon heat) to encourage it to produce flowers. Where should I put it? Avoid windowsills that are in direct sunshine at any point of the day. Using a screw hook, hang it in a holder from the ceiling between 50cm and a metre away from a bright window, or put it on a bookshelf next to a window so it gets some bright indirect light. How do I keep it alive? Like all cacti, it requires free-draining soil to avoid root rot and to allow the soil to dry out completely between waterings. From April until September, water your fishbone cactus once a week, and use fertilizer; from October to March, don’t feed it and water only every four to six weeks. Did you know… It may produce fragrant white flowers in late summer, followed by an edible, gooseberry-like fruit. • The subheading of this article was amended on 14 January 2022. The fruit is green in colour, not pink.Are you British and reading this piece at the age of 94? If so, as you will know, you may actually have fought in the second world war. Widen the metric to anyone born by the end of the conflict, and the demographic swells: 76 and up. Even so, the greater part of the country could only know the era through parents, grandparents or grandparents’ parents. Yet January has still begun with two new depictions of wartime Blighty. Such is British film. Whatever year the calendar says it is, the nation’s cinema is always here to put an arm a little too tightly around your shoulder and pull you into a fusty back room to look at its Airfix Lancaster Bombers. The first of the new films, Munich: The Edge of War, adapted from Robert Harris’s novel, in fact unfolds in the last moments of peace, as Hitler carved up Czechoslovakia. Dial forward to 1943 and the second movie is Operation Mincemeat, a true story of deception plotted in a Whitehall basement. In each, the Nazi menace looms before expertly tensed British actors. The cast of Mincemeat is led by Colin Firth and Matthew Macfadyen; in Munich, Jeremy Irons is Neville Chamberlain, George MacKay a jittery adviser. Britain has made a remarkable amount of films about the war. But as with any genre, not every one is alike. Moods change. Like canny politicians, the trick is to channel them. To make the right war film at the right time, tuned into the British id. So something telling may be happening with these two new movies. In each, patriotism now comes with caveats. The atmosphere is less than triumphal. Of course, Munich could hardly fail to be downbeat. But if Operation Mincemeat is a tale told with the larky air of a heist movie, cynicism colours it, too. Of its two leads, Macfadyen is overshadowed within his own family by a dead war-hero brother. Firth also has sibling issues. His is suspected of being a communist spy. And in British high command, plenty are as interested in personal vendettas and their own postwar careers as thoughts of noble sacrifice. It makes quite a contrast with the last cluster of British war films, which began in 2016 with the release of Dad’s Army. A few months later came Their Finest, Gemma Arterton cast as a scriptwriter drafted into a propaganda film about Dunkirk. By summer 2017, Christopher Nolan had released the actual Dunkirk. It became a sensation. It was followed by another smash, Darkest Hour, which saw Gary Oldman morph into Churchill under heavy prosthesis. The movie was the second such biopic in the same cycle; a year before, Churchill saw the PM played by Brian Cox. And in the middle of it all, of course, was the EU referendum. Aside from the sheer explosion of product, the tone of the biggest hits was striking. Dunkirk was an Imax blockbuster tightly focused on the microcosmic courage of ordinary Britons; Darkest Hour saw a cometh-the-hour Churchill communing with the public on the Tube. Neither was made in response to the Brexit vote. By then, Darkest Hour was already greenlit; Nolan was shooting Dunkirk in Swanage. But each was patriotic, a lavish British whipper-upper. As successful movies do, they caught the mood. They tapped the id. Of course, it would be just the kind of weird exceptionalism to which Britain can be prone not to register that other countries’ films also fixate on wartime glory. Russian box office records were broken in 2019 by T-34, a movie named after, and tied up with, a Red Army tank. Last year Chinese audiences made The Battle at Lake Changjin – a Korean war epic of a clobbered America – the most popular film in national history. Britain’s equivalents are an inch less gung-ho, and yet cinema remains the place where we roll out wartime memories. That is only fitting. Whatever pathology surrounds Britain and the second world war, movies helped make it. The conflict began in the heyday of cinema; British films were put to work as propaganda. They did it wonderfully. The problem was, it proved hard to lose the habit. The audience stayed in their seats even as the real thing slipped out of view. How could second world war films not be addictive? They offered Britain an endless national Marvel movie. The particular British identity that came with the package diffused through a million screenings of The Dam Busters on bank holiday telly. As the country fractured, second world war movies remade us whole. When Britain felt small, they enlarged us. And if the ghosts of empire threatened a guilty conscience, they recast us as an underdog nation of little boats. Who wouldn’t vote for that? Old news, of course. But although the conveyor belt of war movies has rolled on since 2016, the national mood has shifted. Five years after Nolan’s Dunkirk, the shine has come off. Britain is in a more sceptical place now. So, too, are its second world war films. These are still mainstream stories. Operation Mincemeat is not the film, for instance, to tackle misgivings about Churchill. But it feels a lot less giddy and a little more grown-up, from the shits climbing the military hierarchy to the knowing wink at how much fiction war involves. And the past looks different too in Munich: The Edge of War. For one, its Chamberlain is an idealist and strategist, desperate to keep the peace after the horror of the first world war, buying time for Britain when he can’t. Historically, the jury remains out on that. It still makes some novelty for British cinema. Churchill can’t be Churchill without Chamberlain as his antithesis; the feeble boob before the fearless bulldog. Chewier yet is the focus put on an anti-Hitler plot from inside Germany, based on the thwarted Oster conspiracy – one that in a different timeline might have lopped the head from Nazism in 1938. British dramatists have long loved counterfactuals in which we were successfully occupied. Munich offers a new How About: what if the Nazis had withered and the war never happened at all? Where would modern Britain be now? If that weren’t a mind-bender enough, a related question might ask the same of British films. The answer comes close to the unthinkable. So many actors, so many costume departments, all needing another script. Of course, in reality, they never did. And they won’t. Now, as in 1945, British cinema will dim the lights and restart the sirens, making sure we’ll meet again, the way we always do. Munich: The Edge of War is in cinemas now and on Netflix on 21 January; Operation Mincemeat is in cinemas from 22 April.More than 400 weather stations around the world beat their all-time highest temperature records in 2021, according to a climatologist who has been compiling weather records for over 30 years. Maximiliano Herrera keeps track of extreme weather around the world, and publishes an annual list of records broken in the previous year. He and many other climatologists and meteorologists who follow these issues closely expect that 2021 will probably not be the hottest year in history (Noaa and Nasa will publish their results in the next few days). But it is likely to be in the top five or six, continuing the long-term upward trend. The past six years have been the six hottest on record. And, as is now the norm, a sheaf of new heat records have been broken, according to Herrera. Ten countries – Oman, UAE, Canada, the United States, Morocco, Turkey, Taiwan, Italy, Tunisia and Dominica – broke or tied their national highest record, 107 countries beat their monthly high temperature record, and five beat their monthly low temperature record. A few continental and planetary records fell too: Africa had its warmest June and September ever. August brought 48.8C (119.8F) in Syracuse, Italy, the highest temperature ever recorded in Europe. July had already brought 54.4C (130F) in Furnace Creek in the US’s Death Valley – the highest reliably recorded temperature on Earth. (A temperature recorded as 129.9F in 2020 was also rounded up to 130F.) But there were a few specific events that particularly stood out for experts. For meteorologist Patricia Nying’uro, a co-founder of Climate Without Borders and based at the Kenyan Meteorological Department, the two consecutive failed rain seasons in Kenya were unusual, and forced the government to organise for food aid for the first time in many years. “You can certainly see the effect of climate change in our weather in Kenya, and globally. We’re just putting together the data for 2021, but we think we will have seen an annual temperature which is 2.1C higher than normal for some parts of the country. The shifts are very noticeable, from one extreme to another in a very short space of time.” This was one of the reasons Nying’uro helped found CWB, a group of broadcast meteorologists and weather presenters from around the world who share information on extreme weather events. They also support weather presenters to make the connections with climate change and communicate these to the public. Meteorologist Scott Duncan, who collects data on world weather, pointed to the European summer heatwaves, which broke records in a number of countries – and were accompanied by wildfires around the Mediterranean. They had been preceded by a hot March, a sharp cold shock in early April which “was catastrophic for many agricultural businesses in France”, and then the floods in July. “Those events really stood out for me.” He also highlighted the heat in Alaska in December, where a number of records were broken by a large margin. “That was extraordinary.” China experienced its hottest ever year, according to the China Meteorological Administration. But it was the rain that hit the central province of Henan that really shocked: the region was hit by more rain in three days than it normally receives in an entire year. Hundreds died, crops and homes were destroyed, and the cleanup continues. Jia Xiaolong, deputy head of the National Climate Centre, said the situation last year had been abnormal. “Warming was the main theme of China’s climate in 2021. In the context of global warming, recurrent extreme weather and climate events have become the norm, which is also a major challenge to disaster prevention and mitigation.” Other key unusual weather events last year were the Siberian heatwave in the summer, and the deep freeze in Texas in February. Nearly 200 people died, millions of homes were without power, and the fallout led to huge political rows. Guy Walton, an activist meteorologist who has been campaigning on climate change since the late 1980s said “the cold outbreak in February 2021 leading to the failure of the power grid in Texas and dozens of deaths” was “ironically attributed to climate change by many”. He also highlighted “the extraordinary mild/warm fall leading to the warmest December on record for the United States. The National Centers for Environmental Information should make this official in the next couple of days.” But the key event of 2021 for the meteorological and climatological community was the extreme heatwave that struck the west coast of the US in June/July, led to a heat dome and broke records by up to 5C in some places. At the time, Geert Jan van Oldenborgh (who died in October 2021) of the Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute called it “way beyond the upper bound” and “surprising and shaking”. “Of course 2021 was full of extreme events,” said Herrera. “But if I have to name one, I’ll name what struck every single climatologist and meteorologist in the world.” Herrera nicknamed the event “the mother of all heatwaves”. “I confess, I would have never believed this to be even physically impossible. The magnitude of this event surpassed anything I have seen after a life of researching extreme events in all modern world climatic history in the past couple of centuries.” Meanwhile, 2022 has begun with a number of records already shattered in the UK and the US in the first few days of the year.Spider-Man swings from skyscraper to skyscraper, pirouetting and somersaulting across the skyline like a whirling dervish in zero gravity. He makes a sharp left and eventually slides through his Queens bedroom window before removing his mask and settling down into Peter Parker mode. But who is it beneath the red and blue suit? In the mainstream Marvel Cinematic Universe, it’s likely that Tom Holland will continue for some time to come, which has left rival studio Sony (which owns the big-screen rights to Spidey) with a longstanding problem: its superhero flicks set in the world of Spider-Man, such as the Tom Hardy-led Venom movies and the forthcoming Jared Leto film Morbius, are much weakened by the fact that the wallcrawler can’t actually turn up. In comic-book terms, this is a bit like making a movie about Gotham City and leaving out Batman. In Venom’s case it is particularly ridiculous, because Spidey was intimately involved with the origin of the toothy antihero in the comics. Fortunately for Sony, it’s also a problem that the recent Spider-Man: No Way Home appears to have solved, at least in part. That movie is set in the MCU and features the friendly neighbourhood Holland as the webslinger. But it also brings back various Spider-Men and their supervillain counterparts from previous Sony movies, as a result of Doctor Strange accidentally ushering in the multiverse with a spell aimed at restoring Spidey’s secret identity. Now some fans are calling for those returning Spider-Men, played by Tobey Maguire (Spider-Man and its two sequels) and Andrew Garfield (the two Amazing Spider-Man films) to be given their own future spin-offs. Frankly, it is hard to see why this shouldn’t happen: the move would suit Sony, which would get to add its own Spider-Man to existing projects while still benefiting from the success of Holland in the MCU. Audiences might get a little confused for a while, but only if they have not seen No Way Home; given the film’s huge box office success and the fact it will presumably make its way to streaming services at some point, that may not be an issue for long. There are already rumours circling that Garfield and Maguire could team up for a Sony-led buddy movie titled Spider-Men – which sounds like a bit of a retread of No Way Home’s plotline – as well as suggestions that Maguire could appear in the forthcoming Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, a move that would require reshoots. Given the latter film is being directed by Sam Raimi, who made the first three Spider-Man films, and the huge hype generated by No Way Home after it was leaked that the movie would bring back past Spideys, the studio would be well advised to get working on the reshoots now. Would Garfield and Maguire want to return? The very fact that both were convinced to appear in No Way Home suggests they felt they had unfinished business. At 46, Maguire would be playing a very different version of the wallcrawler to the one we’ve come to know and love on the big screen (Garfield isn’t much younger, at a baby-faced 38.) Peter Parker has rarely been portrayed as older than his 30s in the comics, but there is the little-known 2006 limited run Spider-Man: Reign to draw on if the studio wants to go down a Dark Knight Returns-style path. It could work. Where Maguire has the advantage is that the villains featured in Spider-Man and Spider-Man 2 are both among the greatest in comic-book movie history. Following his barnstorming return in No Way Home, Willem Dafoe’s Green Goblin is probably fighting it out with Heath Ledger’s Joker for the mantle of greatest big-screen supervillain of all time, with Alfred Molina’s Doc Ock not far behind. It would take some clever writing to bring both back to the dark side after they were ostensibly cured at the tail end of No Way Home, but it could be done. Still, it seems to me that Sony might be best served by restoring its Spider-Men in future Venom and Morbius movies, which could certainly use the extra hype. Sony’s Spider-Man universe never made any sense without the main player, and the studio is now in the perfect position to restore a little Spider-sense to proceedings.There’s something exhilarating about hearing someone tell the truth, especially now when so many people seem to believe that the difference between facts and falsehood is a matter of political affiliation or personal opinion. Watching Kamala Harris and Joe Biden speak in the Capitol Rotunda on the anniversary of the 6 January insurrection, hearing the president blame the brutal riot directly on Donald Trump and his supporters – it felt almost like exhaling, after holding your breath for too long. Yes, it’s a lie that the 2020 election was stolen. Yes, it’s a lie that the rioters swarming the Capitol building were genuine American patriots. Those are facts that can’t be stressed enough, that need to be said and repeated by the powerful and the widely respected. Over the past few days, I’ve watched deeply moving interviews with the Capitol police officers who lived through the riot. Especially affecting was the PBS conversation with Sandra Garza, whose partner, Brian Sicknick, defended the Capitol against attackers and died the next day of a stroke; in Garza’s view, Donald Trump “needs to be in prison”. When I register my own jarringly adrenalized response to even the briefest film clip of the surging crowd calling out for blood, I know that I cannot begin to imagine what those who survived it – and their loved ones – continue to suffer. So it came as a relief to hear Biden emphasize the gravity and the dangers of political violence, as well as the urgent necessity of defending and upholding the constitution. It seemed vitally important to hear him say that January 6 needs to be remembered; that forgetting the past and moving on (as many Republican senators urge us to do) could conceivably pave the way for a second – and perhaps more catastrophic – assault on our government. Yet – like many listeners, I imagine – I couldn’t help wondering how many people were being convinced, how many minds were being changed by the reasonableness, the maturity and clarity of the president’s address. It’s not just that, as we keep hearing, Americans now inhabit two entirely alternate realities: one in which the Covid vaccine staves off disease, another in which inoculation causes infertility and ALS. Among the obstacles that stand in the way of changing hearts and minds is that our problems, as a nation, are older, deeper and more severe than Donald Trump’s megalomania. So even as it was satisfying to hear Biden hold Trump directly accountable for ramping up his base’s bloodlust, for watching the mayhem on TV and making no attempt to stop it, I kept recalling something I remember people saying in the immediate aftermath of the 2016 election: that the malevolent genie that Trump had unleashed from the bottle was unlikely to go back in. Five years later than seems truer than ever: My sense is that Trump could completely retire from public life tomorrow and the support for him and his ideas would remain undiminished. A half-dozen Capitol rioters were elected to office in November, and two dozen more plan to run in upcoming elections. What I wished that Biden had acknowledged was the fact that the raging, disruptive genie had inhabited the bottle long before “the defeated former president” ever popped the cork. I wished Biden had followed up his gratifying excoriation of Trump and his supporters with a commitment to seeking out and eradicating the roots of the alienation, resentment and fury that so deeply divide our country. Why – aside from the lying claims of a stolen election – had the rioters armed and armored themselves and traveled all the way to Washington? It struck me that many of Trump’s supporters may not be entirely anti-democratic so much as acutely (or unconsciously) aware of our democracy’s imperfections: its oligarchic edge. Biden may have reminded us that each of our votes matters equally. But the one thing I may possibly share in common with the thugs who invaded the Capitol is the pained awareness that my voice is not nearly as audible in Washington as the voices of the chief executives of Pfizer, Delta and Target. I thought of how, during the Great Depression, Eleanor Roosevelt toured the country, asking beleaguered Americans about their hardships and needs. How little of that seems to be happening now, when the consensus appears to be that our wounds can be healed remotely, by cajoling recalcitrant lawmakers into passing legislation with potential benefits that have so far eluded many Americans’ understanding. Of all the horrific things that occurred on 6 January, among the most disturbing to me was Trump’s parting speech to the rioters when at long last he advised them to go home. “You’re very special,” he said. “We love you.” Like any cult of personality, Trump’s impassioned support more closely resembles an (admittedly one-sided) affair of the heart than a reasoned political choice. And, in my experience, few lovers have fallen out of love after being informed that the beloved is an egomaniac and a liar. Of course the best known cure for love is to find someone else, but what’s more useful, in the long run, is to understand why one became embroiled in a deceptive and unbalanced relationship, and to find a way of designing and inhabiting a brighter future. What I wished I’d heard in Biden’s speech was a persuasive vision of the more fulfilled and less tormented life that, we can only hope, awaits us in the event that the poisonous romance with violence and hatred sputters out – and is finally over. Francine Prose is a novelist. Her latest book, The Vixen, was published in JuneWes Anderson is to make a second adaptation of a Roald Dahl story, 12 years after the success of his stop-motion version of Fantastic Mr Fox. The production is backed by Netflix, which recently purchased the rights to Dahl’s full catalogue. According to Daily Mail reporter Baz Bamigboye, Anderson is to direct an adaptation of the short story The Wonderful Story of Henry Sugar, first published in 1977, about a gambler who studies meditation to acquire the ability to see through cards – and then opens a string of orphanages with his winnings. Benedict Cumberbatch will play the title role. Deadline reports that Ralph Fiennes, Dev Patel and Ben Kingsley are also lined up to appear, and that the film may take the form of an anthology, incorporating other stories from the same 1977 collection. Netflix acquired Dahl’s full catalogue from the Roald Dahl Story Company in September 2021 after licensing 16 of Dahl’s best-known titles in 2018; this original agreement, Netflix said at the time, alerted the company to the possibility of the “creation of a unique universe across animated and live-action films and TV, publishing, games, immersive experiences, live theatre consumer products and more”. Already in development are two TV series from Jojo Rabbit’s Taika Waititi – Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Oompa Loompas – and an animated series based on The Twits. Forthcoming feature films include an adaptation of the stage musical of Matilda starring Emma Thompson and directed by Matthew Warchus. Also in production is Wonka, an “origins” story featuring Timothée Chalamet as the young Willy Wonka; the licensing agreement with Warner Bros to make this film predates the Netflix deal. Anderson’s Fantastic Mr Fox was released in 2009 and featured George Clooney and Meryl Streep; described by the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw as “eccentric, whip-smart and very funny”, it was a moderate financial success and was nominated for two Oscars.In 1970s Paris, Betty Catroux and her husband, François, were the glittering couple at the heart of French high society and what used to be known as the international jet set. She was the androgynous model and darling of the French designer Yves Saint Laurent, he the self-taught interior decorator who transformed the mansions, grand apartments and chateaux of the super-rich or royal, among them the Rothschilds, Diane von Furstenberg and, later, Roman Abramovich. At Chez Régine nightclub, the celebrated venue on the rue de Ponthieu, the towering 6ft Betty and her husband, described by one friend as having the air of “a Riviera playboy”, held court with the likes of Andy Warhol, Salvador Dalí, Serge Gainsbourg and Jane Birkin, or visiting Hollywood stars such as Audrey Hepburn and Ava Gardner. When the partying ended, the Catroux returned home, often in one of his expensive sports cars. And their ultimate homecoming was to be to a superb apartment in the former Maeterlinck Palace overlooking the Baie des Anges on the French Riviera at Nice, where François had decided he would end his days. It was a best-laid plan; tragically the Côte d’Azur flat, a personal culmination of his life’s work and designed entirely for him and his wife, was barely completed when Catroux discovered he had cancer. He died in November 2020. Now the entire contents of the property, in which the couple are said to have spent only a handful of nights, are to be sold off in a single auction as a tribute to the discreet designer often hailed as one of the most influential decorators of the 21st century. François Catroux, born in Algeria, was the grandson of the Gen Georges Catroux, a distinguished military hero who met Charles de Gaulle while in captivity in Germany during the first world war and joined the Free French in London during the second. As a boy, Catroux was a pupil at the same Roman Catholic boarding school in Oran as Saint Laurent, who later became his close friend. He was living in New York, working as a journalist for Elle magazine writing about luxury apartments, when the Italian fashion queen Mila Schön asked him to design her Milan showroom. The result, a laminate spaceship, caused a storm worldwide and put the 30-year-old Catroux on the design map. As an interior designer, Catroux started with the staples of sixties design, Plexiglas and steel – but quickly moved to natural materials, wood, leather and cotton, mixing the modern and comfortable with traditional furniture and art. While largely unknown to the general public, he quickly became the decorator of choice for aristocrats, royals and the super wealthy. He earned plaudits for mixing old, such as the Rothschild’s 17th century tapestries, paintings by the masters and heritage furniture, with modern designs of his own invention. For Von Furstenberg, a longtime friend, and her husband, Barry Diller, he designed houses in Los Angeles and Connecticut, as well as the interior of their luxury yacht. He met Betty, whom he described as a “living mannequin” for YSL, when she sent him a drink in Régines, where she also met Saint Laurent. The couple married in 1968. The Belgian designer Anthony Vaccarello, now the creative director of Saint Laurent, told the New York Times: “Betty likes to say she was the bipolar double of Saint Laurent, which is a chic and elusive way of expressing their twinning. Through her, he was able to give life to his vision. Thanks to him, she was able to become herself.” The sale of the contents of the couple’s Riviera home, overseen by Sotheby’s, includes about 100 lots reflecting François Catroux’s personal taste, including contemporary artworks and items from Asia and Africa, as well as some of his own creations. Florent Jeanniard, European head of design and vice-president of Sotheby’s France, said the Catroux’s home was an “unmatched setting”. “Here, works by great contemporary artists and cutting-edge designers mingled with timeless antiques that the decorator treasured for his entire life. He loved this place and it suited him,” he said. Jeanniard added: “Everything you see inside the apartment is up for sale. The amazing thing is that this sublime place is Catroux … it was his last great work. “François wanted to end his days in the sun so they bought this apartment and he designed everything in it. This place and everything in it is François Catroux’s universe. It was almost finished when he became ill so they never lived there apart from a few nights. After he died, it became too painful for Betty to go there, so the family has decided to sell it. “Catroux was best known in France and the United States where he had many clients, but was not a well-known name to many people. However, he was without doubt one of the most important decorators of the 21st century and we believe this sale will be a tribute to him.” • The François and Betty Catroux collection goes on sale at Sotheby’s, Paris on 24 February.The organic food retailer Riverford has increased the price of its veg boxes by 5% as costs, including wages and transport, soar “across the board”. The Devon-based company told its customers that after holding its prices for two years, widespread cost pressures meant “reluctantly, we need to increase our prices”. Riverford delivers 80,000 veg boxes a week and this week’s changes mean a small seasonal veg box now costs 60p more, at £13.25, while a large fruit and veg delivery has risen £1.20 to £24.75. The increase is the latest example of the cost of living squeeze hitting UK households as food and energy bills increase. Figures released on Wednesday from the supermarket analysts Kantar put grocery price inflation last month at 3.5%. Rob Haward, Riverford’s managing director, said putting up its prices would enable it to ensure everyone in its supply chain was being treated fairly. The company has been employee-owned since 2018. “The two biggest costs for us are pay for our co-owners who grow, pick, pack and deliver, and the prices we pay for fruit and veg from our farmers and growers,” he said. Riverford workers received a pay rise of more than 8% in the autumn, while the prices paid to growers would rise about 5% this season, Haward said. “Our growers and farmers need this to cover the increasing costs of labour and fuel, and to reinvest in the farm.” He also pointed to other cost pressures, with packaging up 6% and haulage up 10%. “This would probably all be OK for us as a business if it was short-lived but we expect all these costs to continue, so we had no choice but to reflect them in our prices.” Shoppers have turned to the home delivery services offered by companies such as Riverford in big numbers since the coronavirus pandemic began. Sales of its veg boxes have increased from 50,000 a week at the start of 2020 to between 80,000 and 85,000 today, propelling its turnover to £76m. Jack Ward, the chief executive of the British Growers Association, said the backdrop of steep cost increases, particularly for labour on hand-harvested crops, was starting to affect growers’ confidence. “People are saying: ‘We’re just going to cut back this year because we’re not sure we can get the staff we need to harvest the full extent of what we’d originally planned,’” he said. “I think everyone is expecting prices in the shops to go up. There is a general issue now between how we reconcile the competing demands from consumers for static pricing and funding the cost of production where the costs are not static, they are increasing.”Monday As we age, some things fade, while others take on greater significance. It’s a line that sounds lifted from a Call the Midwife voiceover, but as the new year begins, it also strikes me as true. For the first time this year, I’m aware of a shift in emphasis, from Christmas Day itself – a pain of logistics and expectation management – to the period directly afterwards. Specifically, an occasion that before now I’ve never felt to be any such thing: the taking down of the tree. I bought our tree three years ago from Bed Bath &amp; Beyond. It was $39.99 and came loaded with the kind of lights that, twinkling magically and extremely brightly, caused me to blurt out “bad wiring” and “house fire” every time I walked past. On Sunday night, while my children pottered around engaged with their new presents, I started slowly to remove the ornaments. I untangled the tinsel. I removed the listing star. As I did so, I caught myself in one of those unnerving moments in which you can feel time as an almost material property. For a second, I saw the scene as through a telescope backwards. How much longer would the magic of Christmas hold? How soon would this stage of childhood evaporate? How definitive the dismantling of a large object in my living room felt, the physical manifestation of another year passing. Some of this nostalgia was down to the decorations. We lean heavily on the homemade: the wonky angel from nursery school, already an echo of a distant past, along with the loo roll penguin and the glitter art. Six days after Christmas, my children turned seven – as a friend in Paris pointed out, the beginning of the age of reason. Six seemed to be running on the last vapours of toddlerhood. Seven is a different proposition entirely. With the care of one handling the crown jewels, I laid the decorations in Tupperware and covered them in tissue. “Why do you look like that?” said a child, crossly. God forbid anyone should have a moment of internal privacy in this house. “It’s my thinking face,” I snapped. On we go. Tuesday Climbing into a cab in the pouring rain, in the middle of Broadway with a bus behind us, is a stressful business without my kids operating at quarter speed. “Hurry up, you guys are so slow,” I say, as they ease their way into the car and I continue to stand in the traffic. “That’s so mean!” says my daughter, when we’re finally in. “You tipped my bucket.” Are you aware of this? The bucket philosophy of childhood emotional welfare? It’s a thing. In schools in the US, or at least in our corner of New York, emotions are buckets. Or wait. The child is the bucket and you, the adult, are responsible for filling or tipping it. That could be wrong. “Explain the bucket thing to me again?” I say. She gives me a look of disdain, like I could study this for the rest of my life and still never grasp it. When children do well at at school, they are issued “bucket tickets”, like the gold stars of yore but with a prize at the end and an extra level of frisson because buckets can also be emptied. “You called me slow and that’s mean and it tipped my bucket,” she says. But I’m not wearing this one. “It would only be mean if you were incapable of going faster,” I say. “Are you saying you are literally incapable of going any faster when I ask you to?” Yes. That’s exactly what she’s saying. Wednesday What a gift on a gloomy Wednesday is Novak Djokovic, not merely barred from the Australian Open, but barred after taking an 18-hour flight from Dubai, then held overnight at Melbourne airport. Never mind that his treatment was a result of a dithering U-turn by the Australian government. It looked, for all the world, like a piece of top-class trolling and correspondents on Australian TV could hardly contain their delight. A day earlier, the Serbian world No 1 and vaccine-sceptic had smugly tweeted “today I’m heading Down Under with an exemption permission” – that is, special dispensation to enter Australia and play in the Open, despite being unvaccinated, and causing sufficient fury among Australians for Scott Morrison to jump. At the 11th hour, the country’s border force cancelled Djokovic’s visa and after keeping him in the airport, moved him to another venue. Or as his mother, speaking at a press conference in Belgrade and ably demonstrating where her son gets his charm, summarised the week’s events, Australia was “keeping him a prisoner” in “some small immigration hotel”. Thursday The new mayor of New York, Eric Adams, has been showing off since his inauguration five days ago, culminating in the moment mid-week when he slides down a firefighter’s pole in Queens. (One tries to imagine Bill de Blasio doing this and concludes it would be worse than that scene from the first Bridget Jones.) Hard on the heels of the pole slide, Adams displays a strapped finger at a press conference, which when questioned about he says is an injury sustained after shaking a police officer’s hand too vigorously. Adams, an eccentric figure who was busted before Christmas for abandoning his car in the middle of the street, to emerge from his house hours later and coolly drive up the pavement in avoidance of the traffic chaos he himself had caused, suddenly seems a delightful prospect for the next four years, with a pinch of that old Ed Koch showmanship. He certainly knows how to spin a line. Stand by, in coming weeks, for Adams to throw his back out bowing his head at the 9/11 memorial, get laryngitis from over-reciting the Pledge of Allegiance, and wear an RSI wrist guard after too-enthusiastically saluting the flag. Friday The weather in New York is bananas. It was 15C last weekend for new year; mid-week it dipped to -5. Today there’s snow. I drive through it to a garage to return a rental car. Renting a car in the city can cost more than staying in a hotel, with an invoice full of add-ons that make less sense than a cable bill. Through incompetence, impatience and an inability to decode the fine print, I manage to gift the rental firm half a tank of petrol. This happens every time. It’s really tipping my bucket.It has been a bittersweet experience watching the final seven episodes of Pen15 (available on Sky Comedy and Now in the UK and Hulu in the US), the cringe-inducing high-school comedy that sees thirtysomething comics Maya Erskine and Anna Konkle play 13-year-old versions of themselves (amid a cast of actual teens). The show is as brilliant and bracing as ever, full of adolescent angst, absurdist humour and the occasional moment of devastating drama. But until these episodes arrived, there was no indication that they would be the show’s last. When that news broke, the assumption was that Pen15 – a little-watched if critically beloved comedy – had been cancelled, but that wasn’t the case: Erskine and Konkle have both just had children and have tons of other commitments (Erskine is in the upcoming Obi-Wan Kenobi series; Konkle is writing a memoir), so were conscious of burning out, and – crucially – felt that they had told their characters’ story. Still, it’s hard not to feel like Pen15 has gone too soon. This is a pretty common feeling these days. The promise of the streaming revolution was that you would get more of what you wanted, when you wanted – and the expectation was that that would extend to shows getting to tell their stories over as many series as required. After all, one of Netflix’s earliest moves was to revive the beloved and prematurely cancelled show Arrested Development (a move that didn’t go so well). In actuality, though, the length of a series in the streaming age tends to be pretty short. Really, we should have seen this coming: streaming platforms – with their algorithmic models predicated on figuring out who is watching their content where, when and why – were always likely to make ruthless decisions on when to cut a show loose. Indeed Netflix has been particularly brutal in this regard (Glow, we hardly knew thee). But Pen15 illustrates another reason that shows aren’t sticking around for long: the talent. Creating TV, particularly in an age where quite a few shows resemble blockbuster movies in their scope and budget, is an intense, laborious experience, so the old model of series trundling on into their sixth, seventh or eighth year hardly feels fit for purpose (it is hard at this point to imagine a show like Succession, so operatically full-on every week, being able to maintain that intensity for another five or six years). And, of course, these days TV has become a desirable place for Hollywood A-listers, whose schedules – not to mention salaries – don’t chime terribly well with multi-series epics. That is why, in the past half decade or so, we have witnessed the rise of the limited or mini series: self-contained stories that get told within a tight 10 episodes or fewer. A superstar such as Kate Winslet can take on Mare of Easttown knowing that she isn’t signing her life away to a multi-series show. And it’s also why there has been an increase in anthology shows such as American Crime Story or Black Mirror, with a different cast every series or even episode. Brevity has its benefits, too: attracting a higher calibre of talent (take Barry Jenkins directing all 10 episodes of The Underground Railroad), and allowing its creators to tell ambitious, tightly constructed stories, with none of the wheel-spinning or forced cliffhangers that a longer, baggier show might necessitate. Such programmes don’t outstay their welcome. Strikingly, of the top three shows on the Guardian’s best TV of 2021 list, two were limited series (Mare of Easttown, It’s a Sin) and one was an anthology series (The White Lotus, whose second season will have a different setting and cast, including – excitingly – The Sopranos’ Michael Imperioli). Still, it is hard not to feel a pang of regret for the TV that we have lost: those vast, “novelistic” series like The Sopranos and The Wire, aren’t gone necessarily, but they’re certainly harder to get made. (Although we should note that on US “network” TV, the never-ending show is still the model, in the form of procedurals such as CSI or comedies such as The Simpsons). And it’s hard not to feel sadness too for the shows that disappeared right as they seemed to be hitting their stride. I personally could have watched … oh, another 15 series of Pen15. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Unsuk Chin’s first violin concerto was premiered 20 years ago. It won her the prestigious Grawemeyer award in 2004, and brought her music to an international audience. Chin had decided not to write another violin concerto, preferring to explore other instrumental combinations, but then encountered the playing of Leonidas Kavakos, which suggested to her an entirely fresh way of approaching the form. The result is her new work for violin and orchestra, subtitled Scherben der Stille (Shards of Silence); it was co-commissioned by the London Symphony Orchestra, which got to give the first performance; Kavakos naturally was the soloist, with Simon Rattle conducting. Chin describes the new concerto as “a subjective portrait of and a dialogue with Leonidas Kavakos’s musicianship”. It’s a single movement lasting around 25 minutes, and cast as a series of often roughly juxtaposed episodes (the “shards” of the subtitle) which develop from the thematic kernel of repeated string-crossing harmonics with which the unaccompanied violin begins the work. The solo writing is strenuously demanding – Kavakos seemed totally at ease with every one of its challenges – while the LSO relished all the usual glitter and playful fizz of Chin’s sound world. But this time there seems to be an undertow of deep seriousness to the brilliance too, which sometimes takes the music in unexpectedly dark directions. After the premiere Rattle paired two works that were both completed in 1924, but which could hardly be more different. His account of Sibelius’s Seventh Symphony seemed less stark and implacable, less forbidding perhaps, than many interpretations, but it was imposing all the same, and not as self-consciously moulded as some of his other recent Sibelius performances. In Bartók’s Miraculous Mandarin (the truncated “suite” from the ballet, rather than the complete work, alas), the orchestra revelled in the score’s vivid imagery: Bartók at his most aggressively dissonant. Some passages could perhaps have been sexier, others more violent, but it was all hugely impressive. • Available to stream on Medici.tv until 6 April, and broadcast on BBC Radio 3 on 18 January.Rooney Mara is set to play Audrey Hepburn in a new biopic of the Breakfast at Tiffany’s actor. The film will be directed by Luca Guadagnino, the Italian director best known for the Oscar-nominated Call Me By Your Name, as well as for A Bigger Splash and his remake of Suspiria. It will be written by Michael Mitnick, who collaborated with Guadagnino on 2019 short The Staggering Girl, and who also has a biopic about Jim Henson in production. Hepburn’s elegant performances in films such as Roman Holiday, Sabrina and My Fair Lady, coupled with her iconic image, have meant she has remained in the public consciousness for almost 30 years since her death in 1993, aged 63. Born in 1929 to a Dutch baroness and a British diplomat, she spent much of her adolescence under Nazi occupation in the Netherlands under an assumed Dutch name, fearful of appearing English. However, she also performed in dance recitals to fundraise for the resistance and transferred messages in her ballet shoes. After training as a dancer, she was spotted in 1950 on a beach in Monaco by the French author Colette, who cast her as the lead in the Broadway transfer of her novella Gigi. Two years later, Hepburn won an Oscar, a Bafta and a Golden Globe for Roman Holiday, beginning a remarkably successful screen career – from which she largely retired 14 years later, to raise her family and work for Unicef. Mara, 36, was Oscar-nominated for her role in Todd Haynes’s romance Carol, and also starred in David Fincher’s remake of The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo, Lion, Her and Mary Magdalene.Lawyers for Bob Dylan have formally denied allegations of child sexual abuse made against him in a lawsuit from an anonymous woman filed in August 2021. The lawsuit claims that Dylan groomed the woman, referred to as JC, when she was 12 years old and sexually abused her. Dylan, it is claimed, aimed to “lower her inhibitions with the object of sexually abusing her, which he did, coupled with the provision of drugs, alcohol and threats of physical violence, leaving her emotionally scarred and psychologically damaged to this day”. JC originally alleged that the abuse took place over a six-week period in 1965, including at New York’s Chelsea Hotel. Last week, the lawsuit was amended to state that the alleged abuse took place over “several months”. Dylan’s legal team have responded to the amendment with a filing of their own, calling the lawsuit “a brazen shakedown … false, malicious, reckless and defamatory”. It goes on: “Mr Dylan will not be extorted. Mr Dylan will vigorously defend himself against these lawyer-driven lies and seek redress against all those responsible, including by seeking monetary sanctions against persons responsible for manufacturing and bringing this abusive lawsuit.” They claim that JC “told a very different story about her alleged interactions with Mr Dylan to a journalist, Mr Daryl Sanders, in 2017”, and attempt to discredit JC by highlighting her work as a psychic. JC’s lawyer Peter Gleason responded, saying: “Neither my client or her counsel are going to be bullied. More than half of Americans believe in psychic phenomena. If you’re going to attack somebody for their beliefs, you’re encroaching upon very dangerous territory. This is what this country is based on, freedom of beliefs. It shouldn’t divert our attention from the allegations. This case is about the facts.” Her allegations, including the new timeframe, are also described by Dylan’s lawyers as a “chronological impossibility”, something also claimed by others in the wake of the initial filing. The music writer Clinton Heylin said it was “not possible” that Dylan was in New York for long enough during the initial alleged timeframe, saying that the singer was in England, Los Angeles and Woodstock in rural New York. Another lawyer for JC said in August that Dylan’s itinerary was “not inconsistent with our client’s claims. There are dates that he wasn’t touring for several weeks in April and this will all come out at that appropriate time. The claims were vetted before the case was filed and we did our research. It’s our position that the evidence will establish that he was in New York during the relevant time period.” No hearing date has yet been set for the case.From colour-shifting cars to digital art TVs and stress-predicting watches, the annual Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, which opened on Wednesday, offered its usual mix of wacky, visionary and desirable goods. Here are some of the highlights. The NFT television The non fungible token, which confers ownership of a unique digital item such as a work of art, became a multi-billion dollar market in 2021 and Samsung announced a new TV feature that allows enthusiasts to browse, display and buy NFT-based art. Given how much some NFTs cost, you may not have much left over to pay for the screen. The stress-forecasting timepiece Nowatch has produced a smartwatch that monitors your cortisol levels to predict stress. Developed with the electronics firm Philips, the watch predicts if you are about to become stressed an hour in advance and recommends activities to avoid that, such as going for a walk or meditating. The health-monitoring lightbulb Running out of interconnected home products? A lightbulb that tracks your body temperature and heart rate using a combination of radar technology and artificial intelligence was unveiled by Sengled, the Shanghai-based maker of smart bulbs. The bulb connects to a smartphone app and its colours change if it detects anything amiss. Sengled says its Smart Health Monitoring Light can even detect falls. The portable burglar detector Germany’s Bosch presented the Spexor, an 11.9cm-high (4.7in) device that monitors air pressure, noise and motion to detect break-ins. It can also measure air quality and temperature. The metaverse wardrobe The immersive world of the metaverse – the wooly concept of working and socialising in virtual reality – was given a sensory boost by the Japanese firm Shiftall, which has produced the PebbleFeel device that straps to a user’s back and allows them to experience the temperature of the VR environment they are exploring. It was demonstrated alongside Shiftall’s HaritoraX full body motion-tracking system, which allows users’ avatars – their digital representation in VR – to lie down, jump and spin around. The invisible headphones The Noveto N1 soundbar transmits music through ultrasound to “pockets” just outside a user’s left and right ear, giving the effect of wearing headphones, even though no head-based hardware is involved. The Israeli company says other people in the room will hear a “whisper” of sound only. The chameleon car CES is also a big event for the automotive industry, which likes to show off its cutting-edge advances alongside the usual displays from mobile phone makers, TV set manufacturers and big tech players. BMW, for instance, unveiled a concept car that, thanks to an external wrap filled with electronic ink, was able to shift colour from white to black at the touch of a button. The autonomous tractor John Deere unveiled a self-driving tractor that can be controlled by smartphone and plough and sow seeds in a straight line. It plans to make the self-driving system available to a small number of farmers later this year. The 1,000km electric car Mercedes-Benz produced a prototype electric car with a range of more than 1,000km, approximately a drive from Brighton on England’ south coast to Inverness in the Scottish Highlands. The Vision EQXX, whose range is three times longer than that of the average electric car, could go on sale in 2024.One day in Évora, Portugal, my travelling companions and I walked across a square hammered with 40-degree heat. A little delirious, having just visited a chapel decorated with human bones and the hair of young brides, we entered the apparent calm of a shop selling household items. Except our day of the macabre was not over. One of these items was a hat-rack made of four sheep feet, their still-grubby hooves varnished, bent at their joints into L-shapes, and fixed none too elegantly to a moulded piece of wood. I bought it. I held on to it even after it became infested, in the style of a Dalí painting, with ants. I brought it back home to Britain. Only with great reluctance, and under duress from members of my family who found this increasingly dilapidated object for some reason disgusting, did I throw it away. I still mourn it, as if it were a missing limb. Much as a sheep might feel, indeed, whose feet had been made into a hat stand. But never mind. I can console myself with a bowl made of pine cones from the Taygetos mountains in Greece, a glow-in-the-dark Virgin Mary from a religious shop in Brixton market in London and the Little Lovemaking Monk, an object of extreme bad taste from a joke shop in the Paragon Arcade in Hull. Also models of food of the kind that restaurants in Japan sometimes display in their windows and an ashtray and lighter in the shape of the “Bird’s Nest” stadium built for the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games. (Which, one imagines, was the last time it was deemed appropriate to sell memorabilia for this sporting festival that were also smokers’ requisites.) Because I write about architecture, it might be thought that I surround myself only with the most refined objects. “Have nothing in your house that you do not know to be useful,” as William Morris said, “or believe to be beautiful.” Such good advice. Except I don’t follow it: some of the things I live with are definitely useless and some might be considered by many to be ugly. You could call a lot of them kitsch, but that’s a derogatory word for artefacts which, one way or another and with the possible exception of that monk from Hull, deserve respect. What they have in common is their freedom from hierarchies of taste, their unconcern with whether they constitute Design with a capital “D”. The attraction is partly sentimental. These objects can recall a time and place, this or that holiday or work trip, the people I was with, the heat in the air or the smell of the trees, the weight of food or the haze of alcohol, more effectively than a photograph. They are antidotes to globalisation. At a time when similar arrays of brands inhabit the main streets of cities everywhere, it’s a pleasure to find an object that could only come from one place. Some have the power to convey disappeared worlds, such as the Soviet-era postcard books of mountain ranges, baroque palaces or Rubens paintings bought in Tallinn, Estonia. I’m drawn to things that show a desire, a dream or a belief, where you can get a sense of connection with the maker. And with The Maker: most of the world religions are represented in my collection. Many of the pieces are about death or love or hope. I have boxes of soap, made in Argentina and bought in Spain, that carry colourful images suggesting use of the product might encourage a saint to help with school exams and resolve marital strife. I like the preposterous, for example a pop-up cardboard model of the colossal palace that the tyrannical President Ceaușescu built in Bucharest, an object that is made with more delicacy than the building itself. Also the absurd, as with a plastic ashtray carrying a reproduction of Goya’s La Maja desnuda. I admire that someone so fearlessly took the logic of tourist souvenirs – apply an iconic image to an everyday object – to its logical if jarring conclusion. Brought together, these objects reveal the extents to which things are alike and different, the way that a fruit made of felt might chime with one carved from wood, or a metal Turkish clock with the plastic grotto that contains that luminous Virgin, for no other reason that they are the same blue-green colour. There are leaps of scale – a tiny castle, an oversized clock – and thwarted or faded technologies, such as lenticular postcards or clockwork or models of obsolete cars. There’s a preponderance of skeuomorphs in my collection, that it is to say of things that look like something other than what they are. Not that it should really be called a collection, as that might imply more direction than is actually present. An accumulation would be a better word. A sense of connection can come from the way something is made as well as anything it might try to represent. Tiny trees and kitchen units for architectural models, bought at the giant and phenomenal Tokyu Hands department store in Tokyo, bowl you over with their precision. Small enamel coffee cups, deep red from Barcelona and leaf green from Salvador but otherwise identical, have the appeal that comes with doing something simple well. That pine-cone bowl, bought from an old woman in a lonely stall on a mountain road, while not dishwasher-safe, is exquisite. My favourite objects are those where image and making combine. These include the cardboard models of valuable goods that are sometimes burned at Chinese funerals so that, even if some of them become a bit dated, they can be enjoyed in the afterlife: Rolexes, a Walkman, an SLR camera. Both idea and execution are beautiful. I also treasure a swan, made from a plastic milk bottle by the artist Madelon Vriesendorp – who incidentally is a far more accomplished accumulationist than I am – that lights up from inside. All human life, in short, is there. There are thrift, invention, fantasy and extravagance, skill and error, naivety and cleverness. The objects are prompts, distractions and inspirations in my daily life. They manifest intent in material, which is something I am always looking for, whether in a cathedral or a coffee cup.We first meet sardonic New Yorker Edie sitting in the office talking dirty on a dating app with a man who says he is in an open marriage. For Edie, who is 23, the product of a difficult childhood and one of only two Black editors at her publishing firm, casual sex is a way to distract herself from her myriad disappointments. And so she begins an affair with the white fortysomething archivist Eric, which is complicated when his wife, Rebecca, decides to get to know her too. When Edie is fired and can no longer afford the rent on her cockroach-infested apartment, Rebecca invites her into the couple’s smart suburban home where they live with their adopted daughter, Akila. This, it appears, is done partly in the hope that Edie will provide guidance for Akila, who is on the brink of adolescence and is the only Black child in their white neighbourhood. American writer Raven Leilani’s debut novel is a dazzling and often uncomfortable exploration of race, class, power and the thankless grind that is being young and broke in the city. Ariel Blake narrates, expertly inhabiting Edie’s knowing and analytical tone, and revelling in the writer’s winding sentences and caustic one-liners. Edie describes Rebecca as “sexy in the way a triangle can be sexy”. At finding herself alone for the first time with Akila, she observes: “There are times when I interact with kids and recall my abortion fondly.” It’s a classic Leilanian line, blending trauma, humour and unblinking candour. • Luster is available on Picador, 6hr 39min. Further listening The Day of the Triffids John Wyndham, Audible, 8hr 13min A new recording of Wyndham’s 1951 novel in which homicidal plants stalk the land. Kingsley Ben-Adir reads with suitable menace. All About Me! My Remarkable Life in Show Business Mel Brooks, Penguin Audio, 15hr 6min The 95-year-old actor, comedian and filmmaker provides a sprightly reading of his memoir of a life in showbusiness.Refractive Africa by Will Alexander (Granta, £10.99) This visionary act of “transpersonal witness” to a continent is an Afromodernist epic in the tradition of Kamau Brathwaite’s The Arrivants. It is first of all an act of repossession, as in the opening section’s dialogue with Nigerian novelist Amos Tutuola and closing homage to the Madagascan Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo, often considered Africa’s first modern poet. At the heart of the book is a 50-page poem, The Congo, on that country as a site of colonial pillage, “vertiginous with derangement”. An incantation against “Eurocentric stultification”, Refractive Africa embraces an aesthetic of sprawl and overreach, summoning free-flowing visions of grandeur and desolation. Alexander, an American, is the author of more than 30 books, and his introduction to a British readership is overdue. The Vulture by Gerard Woodward (Picador, £10.99) We begin with the discovery of a dead vulture at the foot of a cliff; slicing open its belly reveals “nothing in there / but the usual unspeakable things”. Any expectations of dark secrets laid bare in the poems that follow are tempered by a mood of ubiquitous quirkiness. Describing a piano stool, Woodward writes of its “black wood, as though the piano had calved”, a comparison that could be on day release from Craig Raine’s A Martian Sends a Postcard Home. He prefers his imagery poised and metaphysical: “scholarly, they held / seminars, conferences”, he says of some frogs. More memorable are the narratives of buildings and family histories in the book’s second half, such as Chinoiserie and Paraffin. These poems are at their best when they “come up against something solid”. Duino Elegies by Rainer Maria Rilke, translated by Vita and Edward Sackville-West (Pushkin, £14.99) The Sackville-Wests’ translation of the Duino Elegies is reissued for the first time in 90 years. Edward Sackville-West was a gifted linguist, and his cousin Vita “had the assistance of her latest lover”, as we learn from the introduction (not Woolf). What sank their Rilke was their insistence on parcelling him into blank verse, smoothing out so much that should have been spiky. Chumminess is also a factor: “Every angel is redoubtable,” begins the second elegy here, as though we are dealing with a doughty old dinner-party guest rather than a supernatural emanation. This is a fascinating slice of unselfconscious Georgianism in a world that, even in 1931, had dramatically moved on. Litanies by Naush Sabah (Guillemot, £8) This is a book of faith and doubt, of roots and rejections. “Slay the messengers, the oracles, the gods and diviners,” Sabah declares, in poems that shake off outgrown beliefs while finding the language of belief rather harder to discard. Theistic fatalism is a source of anguish: “if she lives / they’ll praise God’s mercy,” we read in Litany of the Shoreline, a poem on a child’s illness; but “if she dies / they’ll praise God for his mercy.” The sensory ecstasies of Questions of Faith provide a daring counterpoint (“love was all I believed in ask me one more time about my faith”). Sabah has something of Thomas Hardy’s bittersweet dialogue with the divine, his eye for the disappointments and betrayals of love, in what are poems of huge emotional courage. Already well known as an editor, Sabah’s blossoming as a poet is a spectacle to behold. Pilgrim Bell by Kaveh Akbar (Chatto &amp; Windus, £12.99) “When I saw God / I trembled like a man I used the wrong pronouns.” Where Sabah’s poems proceed from the sacred towards the secular, Akbar’s move from a default secularism back towards the language of the sacred. The epigraph reads “Any text that is not a holy text is an apostasy”, a line suggestive of Blakean ecstasies but also the force of a more exclusivist faith. Akbar’s way of processing this is studied vulnerability, as in Reza’s Restaurant, Chicago, 1997, or The Value of Fear (“The value // of joy is in its / asking, what now shall I repair?”). “Art is where what we survive survives”; these are poems on the grand scale, staging dramas of cosmic light and dark.Bibo in Shoreditch, a sophisticated Spanish restaurant by chef Dani García, was definitely a night of firsts. A pivotal moment in my restaurant-reviewing career came when, just after eating my porcini croquettes, I downloaded a decibel-monitoring app on to my phone. There was something brazenly cranky about doing so, true, and it was without doubt cringingly uncool, too, but after a certain age, you just don’t bloody care and it’s marvellous. In Bibo’s defence, however, this had been brewing. Many restaurants these days are far too noisy. I can tell this by how, in some places, I have to lipread my guest from almost the second I’m seated or nod pointlessly while I guess the rough gist of what they’re telling me. And how, time and again, I suddenly become quite subdued, because going into detail during an anecdote is futile. Dinner with friends is all about telling stories, and stories are all about detail; they are also about timing and red herrings and withholding information until the perfect point. And none of that can happen at places such as Bibo that, my new app told me, play dance music at 84 decibels. Am I the only person who, when cooking in my own kitchen, turns down the radio to concentrate when I taste and season, as if my senses can properly focus on only one thing? Bibo has taken over the space that restaurant fans may remember as Marcus Samuelsson’s Red Rooster in the Curtain hotel, and now the London outpost of the Mondrian group. Bibo, in the basement, is admittedly slap-bang in central Shoreditch, so many visitors will want, nay, expect it to be loud and more like a cocktail bar or club that serves a few tapas mainly to line stomachs. But I say: no! There is something about its modern Spanish, sophisto-tapas menu, its decor and, well, its marketing as a formerly three Michelin-starred chef’s passion project that suggests it should instead feel more like spending a sultry, elegant evening in Madrid, nibbling oxtail brioche and pulpo a la gallega in a genteel, terracotta-tiled room with well-kempt floor staff bearing glugging fish jugs. And the front of house are certainly warm, prompt and full of recommendations about your order and, on the surface at least, the place has the look and feel of a fancy-ish Spanish restaurant. The open kitchen full of harassed-looking chefs is definitely up to something. Our first course, those aforementioned porcini croquettes, were earthy and delicate enough, but they were also lukewarm and uncrunchy. The tiny, slider-style oxtail brioche bun was one of the best dishes we tried, featuring a rich, pulled oxtail stew that had clearly had some serious TLC. On the other hand, the broccolini salad, which we were heavily sold, featured a rather sickly black sesame mayo that I had no urge to wolf down. And the signature tortilla brava was a tepid, sloppy mess, and its brava sauce and mayo topping had gone all Jackson Pollock before it reached the table. And did I mention that the music crept ever louder with every plate? If standards are quite blasé in the kitchen, it’s not entirely surprising, because the food seems secondary here. Due to the noise levels, I missed the finer details of the explanation that came with our huevos rotos: four eggs fried tableside before being mixed into some cooked but now lukewarm chips. As any fool knows, eggs with potatoes is a timeless, winning combo both in the UK and all over Spain, but when you’re confronted with a large, oval plate of underseasoned mush, it feels more like a challenge. Butterflied bream, cooked for rather too long, came with an attractively vivid bell pepper sauce that also lacked seasoning. We rescued it with some lime wedges from another dish. A reportedly caramelised rice pudding was again rather cold, and there had apparently been no attempt to make it enticingly crunchy and bronzed, because it came scattered with raw brown sugar. The chocolate mousse was topped with a thick layer of set chantilly cream, and was the other truly decent dish we had that night. By this point, however, it was pushing 9pm and the noise levels were louder than a nightclub at midnight. This became especially evident when a jolly, young woman at a nearby table kept standing up, waving her arms and heading off to find the dance floor, before being reminded by her companions that she was at dinner and that those were her croquettes. Each time, she sat down thwarted, glum and incarcerated. Here I was in a restaurant that felt like a nightclub, shoving down mousse and desperate to be liberated; and there she was in a nightclub, being forced to eat a full square meal and equally desperate for freedom. Which of us Bibo is aimed at remains a bit of a mystery, but in this instance, I’ll graciously step aside. • Bibo at The Mondrian, 45 Curtain Road, London EC2, 020-3988 4455. Open all week, noon-11pm. From about £35 a head, plus drinks and service. • The final episode of the second series of Grace’s Comfort Eating podcast is released on 11 January. Listen here or wherever you get your podcastsSir Tony Blair is a striking case study of how elite opinion and popular common sense collide. In media and political circles, Blair is a respected statesman: when he speaks, agree or not, you listen. His passionate detractors are essentially treated as cranks suffering from an acute case of Blair Derangement Syndrome: an unholy alliance of rightwingers enraged by three consecutive Tory defeats and leftwingers still bitterly resentful about their exile during the New Labour era. Yet among the electorate, sympathy for Blair belongs to the fringe. According to a new YouGov survey, just 14% approve of his knighthood – fewer than believe the moon landings were faked – and only 3% strongly so, while 63% disapprove, 41% strongly so. A decisive 56% of Labour voters disapprove, two and a half times more than approve. Meanwhile, almost a million people have signed a petition demanding the knighthood be rescinded. How Blair went from a prime minister with a 93% approval rating in 1997 to one of Britain’s most loathed public figures – including among his own political tribe – offers invaluable lessons for Labour’s future. There has been no shortage of attempts to rehabilitate him. His frequent public utterances are accompanied by deferential, soft-soap interviews, and Keir Starmer is surrounded by aides (including close associates of Peter Mandelson) who regard recovering Blair’s reputation as a political and moral imperative. The most obvious lesson is, of course, is: don’t launch a bloody war of aggression in conjunction with a hard-right US administration. Blair’s former defence secretary, Geoff Hoon, this week claimed he was asked to burn a memo from the attorney general questioning the Iraq war’s legality; for many of us, former UN secretary general Kofi Annan’s conclusion that it was illegal was already sufficient. Merely mentioning the Iraq war often sets off a cascade of eyerolls, of oh-so-bored retorts of “Move on!” and “Still going on about that, are we?”. Such sentiments, alas, are firmly placed in the long, tawdry tradition of the west’s contempt for brown and black victims of its foreign horrors: if hundreds of thousands of white westerners had so recently been slaughtered, their lives would not be so impatiently dismissed. As protesters courageously battle Kazakhstan’s dictatorship, Blair’s later CV warrants more than a cursory glance. Nursultan Nazarbayev is one of many despots Blair’s foundations have taken millions from: more gruesomely, our former prime minister offered his regime PR advice after it massacred 15 civilian protesters. Now, most of the public are not aware of the finer details of Blair’s association with various tyrannies – including receiving millions from the Saudi regime, which he shielded from a corruption inquiry when he was in No 10. What has cut through is a sense that Blair genuflects before wealth and power while lacking any apparent moral compass. But it’s a mistake to conclude that Blair’s toxicity relies entirely on foreign horrors. Margaret Thatcher is adored by her own tribe because she transformed Britain in accordance with its most radically held, and long-suppressed wishes. The Tories before her, she declared, had “merely pitched camp in the long march to the left” by accepting the postwar consensus of public ownership, the welfare state and public spending. Those she delighted in facing down – from the trade unions to the municipal left – were the bogeymen of her grassroots, rather than her own kind. Blair mirrored the Tory predecessors Thatcher scolded – “I always thought my job was to build on some of the things she had done rather than reverse them,” he said, on Thatcher’s death – and delighted in confronting elements of Labour’s own coalition. When he assailed the “forces of conservatism”, he included trade unions. While Thatcher’s zeal for privatisation went with the grain of her grassroots, Blair’s own passionate advocacy for expanding the role of the private sector in public services – not least in the NHS, Labour’s most treasured institution – did the opposite. Blair’s reputational downfall cannot be understood without examining his record on immigration either. Under New Labour, immigration did rise sharply, yet without the government making a political argument for it. Meanwhile, a growing housing crisis, caused by the failure to build, and a squeeze on living standards that predated the 2007-8 financial crash – the income of the bottom half flatlined after 2004 while for the bottom third it actually fell – created ample fodder for those seeking to scapegoat migrants. Without Labour offering a counternarrative, or indeed viable solutions to these grievances, anti-migrant sentiment overwhelmed British politics, culminating in Brexit. This issue, too, toxified New Labour, and Blair with it. And here’s the tragedy: Labour did have proud achievements in this period: from the minimum wage to tax credits, from gay rights to public investment (albeit undermined by creeping privatisation), from lifting millions of children and pensioners out of poverty to reducing homelessness. Yet this record was lethally undermined in three ways. First, Blair sought not to emphasise these wins, instead glorifying, say, public-sector reform (code for marketisation), which alienated his own side. Second, these transformative policies relied on an unsustainable financial bubble that inevitably popped. Third, Blair not only failed to defend his own government from the Tories’ post-crash deceit that Labour overspending caused economic calamity, he furthered it – castigating his party for failing on deficit reduction after 2005 and cautioning against blanket opposition to George Osborne’s slash-and-burn economics. That allowed the mainstreaming of the lie that the government Blair himself headed was unsustainably profligate. Thatcher forged a new political consensus that she forced her opponents to accept; hence her proclamation that New Labour was her greatest achievement. Blairism did no such thing. Its greatest achievement, public investment, was not only swept away after defeat, it was positively demonised. Its other pillar – an inconsistent social liberalism, which included gay rights but which was undermined by often cartoonishly authoritarian home secretaries – has utterly crumbled. So what lessons for Labour today? That relentlessly confronting the interests and values of your own tribe is both politically avoidable and ultimately self-defeating. That relegating progressive values isn’t the strategic genius it might seem to be. And that failing to address growing social and economic insecurities will unleash political forces that will consume you. Blair’s own hubristic belief in his own political genius blinded him to these truths. It’s too late for him: it’s not too late for Labour. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistFamilies of care home residents isolated in a rising wave of Omicron lockdowns are pleading to be allowed in, saying they can alleviate staff shortages and comfort loved ones facing a winter of loneliness. Relatives have warned of more deaths triggered by isolation unless ministers ease rules requiring settings with two or more positive cases to close to all but essential caregivers for up to 28 days. The number of English care homes that recorded at least one positive Covid case in the last week of 2021 rose nearly 40% compared with before Christmas, to 764 – more than at the previous peak of the pandemic in January 2021. Families have also described anguish at not being able to help with chores as care home staff rotas are decimated. With high levels of triple vaccination in care homes and an apparently less dangerous virus in circulation, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, is facing calls to let families reunite. “The impact of loneliness and isolation has far outweighed the impact of Covid on care home residents in the later part of the pandemic,” said Jenny Morrison, a co-founder of the Rights for Residents campaign group. “We need to ensure that measures put in place to protect residents are proportionate to the current situation.” Sixty-five people died from Covid in England’s care homes in the week to 31 December, compared with about 1,850 in January 2021. Birgit Clark, whose daughter Franziska, 26, has severe learning difficulties and lives in a care home in Cheshire, said: “I want to go in and help her out. It’s horrific. I just don’t understand why you would not utilise someone who is willing and able and free when you are struggling. We could all be happier.” Clark said her daughter was getting less time walking outside, their visits together to shops and cafes were now prohibited and Franziska was becoming more withdrawn. “I have said I will drop everything and will help out, but we’re not allowed to do that,” she said. “My daughter is alive and well, but she doesn’t have a life.” Joanna Casson, a registered nurse who is no longer able to visit her 81-year-old mother at her Teesside nursing home after an outbreak started after Christmas, said: “Everyone needs more than just the medical side of care. They need love and stimulation.” Her mother is confined to her room and cannot have a shower or bath. Casson used to visit most days and would care for her mother’s nails, wash her hair and give her massages. She now visits at the window and talks to her by phone. This week the Plaid Cymru MP Liz Saville Roberts told Boris Johnson in the Commons that she feared separation from her mother, who has dementia, when she moves from a hospital into a nursing home. She said: “The human rights of disabled people, sick people and the elderly are not fair weather luxuries, and everyone with dementia, wherever they live, has the right to care from a family member.” The MP is set to meet Javid next week to press the case for greater rights of access. Care home operators have also called for restrictions to be lifted. The chief executive of Four Seasons Health Care, Jeremy Richardson, told the Guardian it was “an outrage” that people were being deprived of their right to receive visitors. Sam Monaghan, the chief executive of MHA, criticised the “huge disparity” between the seven days isolation for the general population and 28 days for care home residents. At Summerfield House care home in Halifax, a substantial outbreak among residents and staff has led local health officials to impose a 28-day lockdown, although no one is seriously ill. Penny Hutchinson is allowed in as an essential caregiver for her mother, Yvonne Williamson, 81. With 10% of staff off with Covid, she wants access for her siblings and for other residents’ families to help. “When she [her mother] sees carers, she knows, her face lights up. But she won’t drink and take food from [staff] she doesn’t know,” she said. “What they do when there is no stimulation is they sleep and then people don’t want to disturb them for a drink and it leads to dehydration. That’s not just happening in Mum’s home but across the country.” When asked for a response, a spokesperson for the Department of Health and Social Care cited visiting guidance for homes without outbreaks. “We are doing everything we can to support care providers to facilitate safe visits and guidance was changed to allow each resident three listed visitors, as well as an essential caregiver, either a family member or friend, who may visit the home to offer companionship or help with care needs,” they said. “Essential caregivers should be able to visit inside the care home even during periods of outbreak.”Michelle Jay was running an events business, but when the pandemic put paid to gatherings she decided to fulfil a long-held dream and open her own bookshop. The Reading Tree started out in May 2020 as online only, but in April 2021, when lockdown restrictions eased, Jay opened to the public. “The response from the local community has been absolutely incredible, they have really embraced us,” said Jay. “We are in the heart of the Northamptonshire countryside in the small village of Weedon, so the location has minimal footfall and we are completely dependent on the local community.” Jay runs events, including Monday-morning story time for preschoolers and an after-school happy hour where children can come get a book, a cake and a milkshake for £5. “It has definitely been a huge challenge, starting a new customer-facing retail business during the pandemic, and coupled with a busy family life it has not been easy,” she said. “But I absolutely love it and I am so glad I took the plunge. I’m really optimistic for the future.” The Reading Tree is one of 54 new independent bookshops to have opened in the UK and Ireland over the last year, from Rare Birds Books in Edinburgh to The Ivybridge Bookshop in Devon, and from The Athlone Bookshop in County Westmeath, Ireland, to Storyville Books in Rhondda Cynon Taf. For the first time in almost a decade, more than 1,000 indies are open for business: it is a sector thriving against the odds. Between 1995 and 2016, the number of stores in the Booksellers Association (BA) membership dropped from 1,894 to 867, as the industry faced stiff competition from Amazon and financial pressures from business rate hikes. The number has slowly grown since, and in 2021 reached 1,027. Matt Steele, who has worked in bookshops in Hong Kong since the 90s, and last year “took the plunge” and opened the Ivybridge Bookshop. “Looking at the buoyancy of both the book market and independent retail in the UK, combined with the right timing to move back here, it felt like it would be now or never,” he says. “There isn’t another bookshop within a 10-mile radius, and with a lot of schools, young families and retirees living here we have some wonderful customers. We timed the opening for the end of the last lockdown, and so far business has been steady. If anything, circumstances may have weighed in our favour a little, with people shopping more locally where they can rather than going into the cities.” “Covid has been an undeniable driver in this movement towards conscious consumerism”, agrees Natalie Whittle, a former Financial Times journalist who also opened a bookshop, Outwith Books in Glasgow, last year. “I get lots of people coming to the counter and showing me books on Amazon that they’re seeking to order from us instead.” “The biggest challenge is not the the rise and fall of [Covid] variants but the lack of clear routines. Working from home, people’s days are more elastic than they used to be so it has taken a while to work out patterns and benchmark our regular trade. And I’ve yet to figure out how to stop my lockdown puppy from barking when people walk in!” The growth of independent stores conceals the fact there have also been 31 closures over the past year – but readers have also been voting with their wallets. The UK’s first specialist black bookshop, New Beacon Books in Finsbury Park, announced on 29 December that financial pressures were forcing its closure. But days later, it was revealed that a crowdfunding campaign had raised £50,000 to help it move to new premises. Fundraising campaigns also helped Book-ish in Crickhowell in Wales raise money to buy its own premises, while Afrori Books, the first black-owned bookshop in Brighton, opened in the autumn after a crowdfunding campaign raised more than £12,000. The profit-sharing platform Bookshop.org, meanwhile, is about to reach £2m of profit generated for indies. “After a challenging few years for the sector, it is reassuring to see the number of independent bookshops in BA membership grow for a fifth consecutive year,” said Meryl Halls, managing director of the Booksellers Association. “The fact that the number of bookshops can increase in the face of lockdowns, restrictions and supply-chain issues demonstrates the passion, innovation and determination of booksellers, who continue to bring books to readers even in the most challenging circumstances”. But Halls warned that “the high street is still in a precarious position, with potential disruption to retail activity and consumer confidence on the horizon, the playing field still skewed in the favour of tech giants, and supply chains causing issues across retail”. She stressed that booksellers still need support. She added: “We will continue to lobby the government to support booksellers and provide proper assistance and guidance, and are working with publishers and distributors to ease the effect of supply-chain issues on bookshops. And, as ever, we will work to encourage the public to choose bookshops whenever they can”At 3pm on Saturday, Kidderminster, fifth in sixth-tier National League North, will hope to add another dream-come-true tale to the FA Cup story by knocking out Reading, the domestic game’s 41st-ranked side. “That’s exactly what we want,” says Sam Austin, the Carpetmen’s longest-serving player, who joined in 2016 and will line up as the No 10 in Russell Penn’s 4-2-3-1. The 25-year-old, though, was not always a creative force with a penchant for ‘worldy’ goals such as the 20-yard left-foot volley he blazed in against Manchester United during a pre-season friendly in the summer. “When you get one, you gain the confidence to try again, don’t you?” he says. “You carry it on, you take a few more chances than you probably would if you’re low on confidence. But when I first joined it was all about earning experience, trying to get into the team. A chance arose at full-back and I thought: ‘Well, to get games I’ll have to adjust my playing style.’ I played there for a few seasons and I always loved the attacking aspect of full-back.” Austin had signed having been released after a debut season at Burton Albion. “I’d played at wing-back, too [but] since Russ took over 18 months ago, he’s played me higher and I’ve loved it even more. That’s where I’ve always meant to be playing.” Aggborough, Kidderminster’s home for 132 years, is a 5,000 sell-out for Reading’s visit, as the 2022 vintage try to emulate the class of 2013 which reached the fourth round – where Sunderland beat them (on Wearside) – and the 1994 vintage which went one better, before West Ham halted the run of Graham Allner’s team. Kidderminster are the lowest-ranked side left in the competition and there seems a disconnect between the competition’s much-repeated “magic of the Cup” mantra and how the club have been passed over for a TV tie and the lucrative money this would have provided. Two other non-league teams – Yeovil (hosts of Bournemouth), the next-lowest left, and Chesterfield (who travel to Chelsea) – can be watched live on BBC iPlayer. But, like Boreham Wood, Kidderminster have not even been granted this exposure. Reaching the third round has been worth £75,000 in prize money and about £100,000 in total but a live television payday draws a further £85,000, although after a stabilising of teetering finances under Richard Lane’s 75% ownership – the businessman bought in as head of a consortium in 2019 – this is not a seismic blow. Lane, whose father ‘Rocky’ was a Kidderminster director and owns the local workplace technology company EBC Group, has ensured Kidderminster are no longer threatened by winding-up petitions. Lane has attracted a new shirt and stand sponsor this season and the club are a full-time operation, with the annual wage budget ranking them seventh to 10th in the division. Aggborough remains equipped to stage EFL football, which the club played in from 2000-05. Yet Kidderminster took a sizeable hit from Covid so extra finance would have been welcome. As Penn says: “We were the lowest-ranked team going into the draw, so we thought that would work in our favour. Am I frustrated with the decision? Yes. Am I surprised? No. The magic has gone from the Cup a little bit. That’s not the case for us, but we’ve had to win five games to get here and you want to be rewarded a little bit more.” To reach the stage, Penn’s men have discarded Sporting Khalsa (of eighth-tier Northern Premier League Division One), Ware (eighth tier), Bedfont Sports (eighth tier), Grimsby (fifth tier) and Halifax (fifth). Reading, then, are first EFL opposition in the run and the highest at Aggborough since Wolves who, as now, were in the top division when visiting during the 2004 FA Cup. Austin is anticipating a vibrant welcome for the Championship side who finished eighth in the 2006-07 Premier League season and reached the Cup semi-finals and quarter-finals in 2015 and 2016 respectively. “It should be a brilliant atmosphere,” he says. “From the Halifax game, that was a little snippet of what’s to come on Saturday. When the fans get behind us, it’s just having another man outside on the pitch.” Owing to Covid Kidderminster have not played since a 4-1 reverse at Boston United on 18 December and last enjoyed victory the previous week – 2-1, again at Boston. Of the emotion that will surge on Saturday, Austin says: “It’s definitely excitement, because we can go out there with the feeling there’s nothing to lose. All the lads have been excited all week, and I think that’s what’s going to help us on the weekend to go out there, play our stuff and enjoy it. They’re definitely the biggest opponents that I’ve played against, and it’s definitely the biggest game of my career.” All Austin wants is to score the winner – preferably from his repertoire of breathtaking strikes. He says: “It would be unexplainable. The adrenaline would last for a few days, I know that. I’d probably never have to buy another drink in Kidderminster and I wouldn’t sleep for a few days.”The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, and her Irish counterpart, Simon Coveney, have had a “good and friendly” first meeting over the vexed issue of the Brexit arrangements in Northern Ireland, Irish government sources have said. They met for the first time over dinner in London on Thursday night and discussed the Northern Ireland protocol, the wider relationship with the EU, and UN security matters including the crisis in Ukraine and Kazakhstan. The meeting came less than a month after the Brexit minister David Frost quit and before a first meeting with the European Commission vice-president responsible for Brexit negotiations, Maroš Šefčovič, at the foreign secretary’s grace and favour home, Chevening. Truss and Coveney had previously met in 2014 when they were both responsible for agriculture but had not seen each other in person since Truss became foreign secretary in the cabinet reshuffle in the autumn. An Irish government source said: “The minister for foreign affairs and the foreign secretary have previously worked together in the agriculture brief, so it was good to have the opportunity early in the new year to meet in person. They had a good and friendly discussion on all matters in their current brief, including Brexit in Northern Ireland, as well as matters of the UN security council.” While the meeting was described as “good”, UK sources say Truss would not be dropping demands for further compromises from the EU on the Brexit protocol in Northern Ireland. The UK is seeking a radical reduction in trade barriers affecting consumers and businesses amid continuing threats by the Democratic Unionist party to leave the Stormont assembly unless the current protocol is torn up. The UK is also maintaining Lord Frost’s call for changes to the rules of state aid and governance and dispute resolution, removing the European court of justice as the sole arbiter in the event of trade disputes. While Truss has said she wanted a “comprehensive solution”, many have seen her appointment as a reset moment with expectations of fresh impetus to be forged at her meeting with Šefčovic next week. The UK has accepted that a two-stage solution may break the nine-month impasse, with a deal of customs paperwork and physical checks struck by the end of February to avoid a crisis before the Stormont elections in May. Under this scenario, the trickier governance issues would be pushed back to the second half of 2022, when political tensions over Brexit would have subsided in Northern Ireland and France would no longer hold the presidency of the European Council.After Scott Boland’s dream run at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, it seemed self-evident that things would never be that easy again. In his second bowling innings on debut, the Victorian seamer rolled in for four overs and picked up six wickets. Catches streamed into the cordon, he hit the stumps, he hit the pads, and he took a return catch himself. Another catch was dropped at gully. The longest he went without a wicket was five balls, and when it was done the whole enterprise had cost him seven runs. When he came on to bowl in his second match in Sydney, though, the dream continued. His first over was a maiden, and nearly had Zak Crawley playing on to his stumps. His second over kept Crawley guessing, hitting the seam with a perfect position that sometimes ducked away and sometimes in. The final ball of the over was a little fuller, carving back off the seam to hit the very top of off-stump. Perfection. His third over was tight on the off-stump, keeping Joe Root quiet throughout, so that when Boland offered some width in his fourth over, England’s captain and best player chased it and edged to slip. Ben Stokes blocked out the rest of that over and another after lunch. Combined with Boland’s Melbourne outing, that made nine overs for eight wickets and seven runs. Eventually, perfection has to pass. It may even have been some sense of relief for Boland to return to cricketing normality after that, given the tiny abashed waves he gave to the crowd at fine leg every time he returned to their sonic embrace. Stokes scored a single in Boland’s sixth over of the innings, England’s first run in 70 balls. Soon afterwards Jonny Bairstow scored a brace, then in what seemed a minor miracle the batting pair scored three boundaries in the next four Boland overs. Coming down to earth happened literally in Boland’s 12th and final over of the day, when he lost his footing bowling the final ball of the second session and fell heavily on his side. In obvious discomfort, he left the field and was taken for a scan. Cleared of damage, he returned to the ground in his training kit to test himself out in the SCG nets, and was back fielding by the end of the day without being called upon to bowl. Ending the day sore with figures of two for 25 was more in keeping with reality. It was a similar story all round for Australia’s bowlers. Alongside Boland, they put on a show through a rain-shortened morning session that was no less torrid for its brevity. Cameron Green extracted alarming bounce, using it to discomfit Dawid Malan before making him fend a catch. Pat Cummins smashed a few gloves himself, and Mitchell Starc burned a full ball through Haseeb Hameed. Aside from reducing England to 36 for four, the innings also saw Australia drop three catches, have a wicket overturned for a no-ball, and have Stokes survive a ball from Green that smashed off-stump but didn’t disturb the bail. Far from being a source of frustration, these misses only reinforced the feeling that 10 wickets would fall in no time. It was a great surprise, then, when things stopped going Australia’s way. At Headingley in 2019 it was a counterattack from Stokes and Bairstow that changed the game. The version in Sydney will probably not lead to the same result, but it shifted the atmosphere, nonetheless. Nathan Lyon was targeted, the off-spinner conceding the second-fastest 50 runs of his career. Instead of settling into his rhythm he sometimes slipped too full or too short, as he was hit repeatedly to the fence or over it. Winning that battle was a big part of England adding 99 wicketless runs in a session. Suddenly there was a sense of enjoyment in England’s game that has been sorely missing this tour, and there was a sense of things not going Australia’s way. That course looked to have reversed abruptly when Lyon burrowed through the Stokes defence with a ball that skipped on, and when Cummins just about detached Bairstow’s thumb from his hand with the very next ball. But Bairstow got treatment, took stock, and carried on. A couple of Bairstow sixes followed soon afterwards, the wounded man swinging, including an audacious pull from Green. Then it was Mark Wood – a wholehearted performer but batting too high at No 8 – who laid into Australia. Cummins had never been hit for three sixes by a player in one innings. He has now, by a most unlikely source. All of the sixes were hook shots, all with two catchers out in the deep. The first of them had Cummins laughing. By the third the humour had faded. None of this has much chance of changing the ending, England are still 158 runs behind with three wickets in hand. But for one thing, the fun of the day means this doesn’t really matter, and for another, one never knows what twists a game will bring. More to the point, after a series in which almost everything has gone their way, Australia’s bowlers for the first time experienced consecutive sessions where things didn’t.A new type of heat pump that may soon be rolled out in the UK could ease the shift for homes to low-carbon heating but is no quick fix, experts say. The Swedish company Vattenfall and the Dutch company Feenstra claim their new high-temperature heat pump, being launched in the Netherlands this year, could replace gas and oil boilers in UK homes without the need for added insulation or new radiators like other heat pumps. The developers claim their product is not a “one-size-fits-all solution” for everywhere in the country, but it could be the most effective solution to low-carbon heating in rural and suburban areas. “The high-temperature heat pump solution is innovative, simple to install and could be the solution to help decarbonise homes in the UK that are heated using traditional gas boiler,” said Mark Anderson, the commercial and development director at Vattenfall Heat UK. Heat pumps work by taking heat from outside air and transferring it inside, but without making changes in a home most heat pumps cannot reach the same heat as the gas and oil boilers they would replace. Dustin Benton, policy director at the Green Alliance thinktank, said making these changes could be a barrier to some people shifting towards heat pumps and having innovations in the technology helps to make the market more viable. “The typical argument is to insulate your house but there are some properties where it’s difficult, because it’s old and expensive to do, or where people don’t want to for aesthetic reasons,” said Benton. “If you want to do the best thing for the planet, you should insulate your home and get a low-temperature heat pump but if you can’t do that, or don’t want to do that and want to go green, then you can go for high-temperature heat pumps.” The UK government has promoted the use of heat pumps, proposing that they lead a shift away from fossil fuel-based heating. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, promised in October to subsidise up to 90,000 homes to install heat pumps. But Insulate Britain has accused the government of ignoring the importance of insulating homes in their focus on heat pumps. “It makes no sense to believe that heat pumps, on their own, will solve the central issue of heating homes whilst reducing CO2 emissions,” said Tim Gough, a lecturer in architecture and Insulate Britain activist. “Deal with the fabric of the building to reduce CO2 emissions and heating bills by increasing insulation, improving windows, and reducing air infiltration from outside. Then you may well be in a position to reduce significantly the amount of heat needed for comfort and health.” Jerry Whiteley, technical manager at the Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering, said new products claiming not to require insulation do not offer a quick fix because it will take time to train enough people to be able to install the heat pumps as most engineers are experienced with boilers. He also said it was important for these engineers, including newcomers retraining from other professions, to understand how the design of a heating system works and not simply the installation of a heat pump without considering other parts, including the insulation. “The more insulation you have in your property, the less heat you have to put in it. It doesn’t matter how high the heat pump works, you don’t want to be having to use that much heat,” he said. Stew Horne, the head of policy at the Energy Saving Trust, said both high- and low-temperature heat pumps needed to be considered, because emissions from heating and hot water needed to be cut by 95% to meet 2050 net zero targets. “It is a bold target that will require significant changes within the next 10 years. We need to become more energy efficient and support householders to retrofit their homes,” said Horne.The attorney general has said she is “carefully considering” whether to refer the Colston statue case to the court of appeal after a jury cleared four protesters of criminal damage over the toppling of the monument. Suella Braverman announced she was contemplating what would be a highly unusual move after an outcry from Conservative MPs following the jury’s verdict on Wednesday. The former cabinet minister Robert Jenrick suggested the rule of law had been undermined, while Tom Hunt, a vice-chair of the parliamentary Common Sense Group, said he was “deeply concerned by the precedent set here”, despite jury decisions not setting legal precedents. Writing on Twitter on Friday, Braverman said: “Trial by jury is an important guardian of liberty and must not be undermined. However, the decision in the Colston statue case is causing confusion. “Without affecting the result of this case, as attorney general, I am able to refer matters to the court of appeal so that senior judges have the opportunity to clarify the law for future cases. I am carefully considering whether to do so.” If the case does go to the court of appeal, the judges will not be able to rule on whether the jury’s decision was correct, only on whether there was an error in law in the directions that were given to the jury. Juries have an absolute right to acquit, which they have exercised in the past for protesters against climate change and military action, even when defendants have admitted causing disruption or damage. People who have used, grown or supplied cannabis for the purposes of alleviating pain have also been acquitted by juries in the past, as was Clive Ponting, a senior Ministry of Defence official, in 1985, who was tried under the Official Secrets Act for revealing to an MP that government ministers had misled parliament over the sinking of the Argentinian warship General Belgrano during the Falklands war.A new year, but hardly the fresh start Italian football was hoping for. Serie A was supposed to return from its winter break with a full round of games on Thursday, but four out of 10 never took place. As Covid cases continue to rise across the country, local health authorities (known in Italy by the acronym ASL) intervened to block teams from attending fixtures. Bologna, Torino, Salernitana and Udinese were each ordered to quarantine following outbreaks in their respective squads. Their opponents – Internazionale, Atalanta, Venezia and Fiorentina – still each showed up to the relevant stadium and performed the surreal but increasingly familiar ritual of pretending to get ready for football matches that could not happen. Juventus were the first team to go through this pandemic-era charade, after Napoli were barred from travelling to face them in October 2020. Since then, the story had been repeated for Lazio v Torino in March and Udinese v Salernitana in December. On each occasion, Serie A’s organisers declined requests to postpone. Last season, the league introduced a protocol which followed the guidelines set by Uefa – stating that teams were obliged to fulfil scheduled fixtures so long as they had at least 13 first-team players available for selection, including a goalkeeper. In theory, failing to play a match while meeting those criteria should lead to a forfeit. In practice, the sporting justice ruled the opposite for Juventus v Napoli and Lazio v Torino, ordering both games to be rescheduled after an appeals process – accepting the argument that clubs ought not to be punished for deferring to health authorities during a pandemic. There is growing frustration, however, at the inconsistency with which rules are applied by those authorities in different parts of Italy. Torino were ordered to stay home this week after eight Covid cases were confirmed among their first-team group – six players and two members of staff. Verona were allowed to travel to Spezia despite 10 individuals testing positive. And then there was Napoli – caught once more in an outbreak before their visit to Juventus. Mário Rui, Kévin Malcuit and the club’s manager, Luciano Spalletti, all tested positive on Tuesday. On Wednesday, the backup goalkeeper Alex Meret joined them, together with a further member of non-playing staff. The ASL for central Naples granted the rest of the team permission to travel. But then a further communication arrived from a different ASL, responsible for a northern section of the city where several players live. This one ruled that Piotr Zielinski, Amir Rrahmani and Stanislav Lobotka should quarantine immediately due to close contact with a positive case. The decision was based on national legislation introduced at the end of last year, which imposed tighter restrictions on individuals who have not received a booster vaccination and are more than 120 days removed from their second jab. Napoli named all three players in their starting XI regardless, holding to a belief that the Italian Football Federation’s rules allowed them to do so. Footballers in quarantine had previously been allowed to travel between their homes and work so long as they continued to test negative, but there is ambiguity about how such permissions interact with the new law. In any case, they played, and it mattered. Napoli’s squad had been thinned out by the Africa Cup of Nations, with Kalidou Koulibaly, André-Frank Zambo Anguissa and Adam Ounas all departing to represent their respective countries. Victor Osimhen missed out on the tournament but remains unavailable as he recovers from facial fractures and a positive Covid test. Hirving Lozano was another coronavirus absentee and Fabián Ruiz was out injured. Juventus were missing players of their own – most notably the centre-back pairing of Giorgio Chiellini and Leonardo Bonucci – but this still ought to have been an opportunity to claw back some ground in the race for a top-four spot. The Bianconeri played like it, too, throwing themselves into a high-tempo opening and almost scoring through a Weston McKennie header. It was not long, though, before familiar flaws began to show. This Juventus had plenty of energy – an improvement on some games before the winter break – but still no fluency. Like a new year resolutioneer on a poorly planned health kick, they faltered at the first hint of resistance. Lorenzo Insigne chipped the ball into the area for Matteo Politano, who took a touch and laid the ball off for Dries Mertens with the outside of his boot. Mertens crashed his finish into the bottom of the net. Napoli ought to have buried Juventus before the interval. Their 10 first-half shots were the most any away team has managed at the Allianz Stadium since 2013. Their lack of ruthlessness allowed Juventus back in, Federico Chiesa drilling home an equaliser at the start of the second half after Rrahmani could only head the ball down from a challenge with Álvaro Morata. The game finished 1-1: a better result for Napoli, in the context of both the standings and their absentee list, but also a missed opportunity. Lobotka and Diego Demme had held the middle of the pitch throughout. Juventus will have their own regret at knowing they ought to have been able to do more. Even including the trio who were ordered to quarantine, Napoli still only had two senior players – Andrea Petagna and Eljif Elmas – left over to fill spots on the bench. Juventus flexed their depth in the second half with Paulo Dybala, Dejan Kulusevski, Moise Kean, Rodrigo Bentancur and Mattia De Sciglio all coming on and Arthur an unused sub. The real winners on Thursday, however, were Milan, who beat Roma 3-1 at home. Their squad, too, has been stretched, with Franck Kessié and Ismaël Bennacer playing in the Africa Cup of Nations and the combination of Covid and injuries depriving them of three-quarters of a starting defence. A centre-back pairing of Matteo Gabbia and Pierre Kalulu looked like an open invitation for Tammy Abraham and the rest of the Giallorosso attack. Instead, Milan dominated, taking the lead with an Olivier Giroud penalty and extending it through Junior Messias. Abraham did pull a goal back before half-time but Rafael Leão came off the bench to make it 3-1 in the second half. The Rossoneri should have had a fourth, but Zlatan Ibrahimovic fluffed his lines from the penalty spot. The win allowed Milan to move back within a point of first-place Inter – pending resolution of their neighbours’ unplayed game against Bologna. Stefano Pioli deflected a question about his team’s Scudetto hopes after, saying: “Tests like this are important but only if we are capable of replicating them next Sunday. We have an objective in our heads which is to improve our points tally from last year and we have started well.” On a day when almost half the league was unable to even play, it could only feel like more of a relief to get 2021 off on the right foot.Shell expects a significant boost in profits in its natural gas division, thanks to soaring prices, when it reports its latest results next month, as the oil and gas company said investors would benefit from the continuation “at pace” of its $7bn share buyback scheme this year. Shell, the world’s largest producer and trader of liquified natural gas, expects trading results at its integrated gas business in the fourth quarter to be “significantly higher” year on year as the rocketing price of gas outweighs a drop in production volume because of unplanned maintenance works. Wholesale gas prices continue to break records, with energy suppliers warning of a “national crisis” that has already led to 27 suppliers going bust, and the prospect of bills increasing by more than 50% in April to about £2,000 a year. Shell, which will report its fourth-quarter results on 3 February, said it intends to pick up the pace of its $7bn (£5.1bn) share buyback scheme, which is being funded using the proceeds of the $9.5bn sale of its US Permian Basin shale oil assets to ConocoPhillips at the start of December. The company has already returned $1.5bn to investors and said on Friday the remaining $5.5bn “will be distributed in the form of share buybacks at pace”. The remaining $2.5bn from the sale is being used to strengthen Shell’s balance sheet. While Shell is benefiting from the energy crisis, last week the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, held emergency meetings with the bosses of the UK’s biggest energy suppliers, who are pushing for the government to intervene to alleviate the impact of soaring prices. Potential interventions being lobbied for include a windfall tax on major oil and gas companies such as Shell, as well as extending fuel grants, moving green levies from household bills into general taxation, and axing the 5% VAT on bills imposed when the UK was part of the EU. Later this month, Shell will move its headquarters from the Netherlands to the UK and scrap its dual share structure, after shareholders voted to back a proposal to simplify the Anglo-Dutch company’s operation.Ralph Hasenhüttl believes the Premier League should consider preventing January signings from featuring in matches rearranged from the past month. Southampton complained to the league about a perceived lack of transparency after their game last Sunday did not go ahead because of a combination of Covid cases and injuries in the Newcastle camp. Hasenhüttl said he raised the issue at the last Premier League managers’ meeting and has called for the league to consider banning signings from playing in rescheduled games to protect the division’s integrity. Newcastle, for example, completed the purcahse of Kieran Trippier on Friday and the defender would be eligible for the rearranged match at St Mary’s. “It is for us the same,” Hasenhüttl said. “We can also now with our new owners sign three players and I don’t think it is really fair for them to play in games that have been postponed. I think the last word is not spoken so far. I was disappointed we could not play because we have been in good shape. We also had five cases of Covid. It is not long ago that we had to fill up our team with nine academy players and then we got a big defeat against Man United.” Southampton visit Swansea in the FA Cup on Saturday and take on Brentford in a rearranged league game on Tuesday. “I think it should maybe be something the Premier League is discussing,” Hasenhüttl said. “How many games have we had postponed? I think 16, 17 or 18 games so far. It is something that you cannot stop playing in December and wait for a signing in January to play. “Nobody did this but it could in the future be an opportunity. You shouldn’t get that … We could now sign four players and against Brentford we could play with a completely different squad.” The goalkeeper Willy Caballero has agreed a contract extension until the end of the season.It doesn’t take a genius to see why green feels aspirational at the precise moment in history when we humans finally seem to be twigging that a green future is the only future that is going to exist. Green is good. Green is the zeitgeist. So, what to wear? Green – but make it fashion. The expression “but make it fashion” means to add a splash of showbiz, but also a hit of sharpness. A dash of syrup, plus a squeeze of lime. If the taste is too vanilla, that’s not fashion. Which is how we have ended up with a colour-of-the-moment that symbolises nature, but actually looks a bit synthetic. The green that is everywhere right now is a flat, saturated, straightforward green. It is not the colour of moss or of olives or of sea foam. No, it is the colour of green-screen technology. It is bold and brash and full of main-character energy. It is neither dazzling like emerald nor subtle like pistachio. It is not a colour that sparkles from a cocktail ring or from a slice in a highball glass. It speaks of crayons and grass lawns and lunchbox apples. It is green at its most blunt. Except in fashion, the green does have a name already. This is Bottega green – some call it Zoomer green to reference the generation who wear it. It’s the green that is everywhere, that lurid shade somewhere between a shamrock and a matcha latte, has for the past year been effectively owned by the Italian fashion label Bottega Veneta. When Bottega – first name only to all self-respecting fashionistas, no idea why – staged a show at Sadler’s Wells theatre in London, the stage was bathed in this green. Bottega has made the colour a signature, just as Hermès has with orange, and Tiffany with duck-egg blue. Such a hit is the colour that Bottega-the-green is now bigger than Bottega-the-brand. Yes, the handbags are divine, if you can afford them, but a granny smith apple is also a fashion status symbol in its own right. How did this green replace blush pink, which was the chic colour a year or two ago? Green snuck in as an accessory first. Because you know what works great with blush pink? Green. That is why a trailing ivy houseplant looks so good against your setting-plaster-coloured walls. Combine that with the fact green is more than a colour, being also a philosophy, a mindset, and the modern lens through which we look at everything from who to vote for to what to eat and what to wear. At a moment when sustainability is front and centre of every fashion conversation, it is only logical that the hottest dresses would be green. Fashion has begun to fluff out its feathers after the battering of the pandemic but is emerging with fewer airs and graces, humbled by the ease with which culture kicked dressing up into the long grass during lockdown. A down-to-earth green is where it’s at. Green is punchy but homely, and that makes it perfect for this year. There is another way of reading this colour, one that decodes it not via a Pantone chart but from the highway code. This is traffic light green, you see. A universal symbol, understood across ages and languages. It means that it is safe to proceed. After living life on pause for so long, the allure of a colour that gives us permission to pick up where we left off is strong. We want to wear green not because it makes us feel pretty or chic or elegant, but because it makes us feel safe. A green light for a safe future? A handbag doesn’t get much more aspirational than that.When 12-year-old Rose learned about the Bristol bus boycott in her history class, she felt an immense sense of pride. She knew there was a civil rights movement in the US, but wasn’t aware of the UK’s own struggle for racial justice. “I’ve felt quite proud that there were big stands here as well,” she says. Her schoolmate Ruqiiya, also 12, agrees and spoke of her frustration of initially struggling to find more information about the boycott online. They both love learning about it in class. Both students attend Stoke Newington school in the east London borough of Hackney, which is leading a nationwide movement to reform their curriculum so it better reflects the achievements of black and minority ethnic people and addresses the legacy of colonialism. The diverse and anti-racist curriculum, titled the Diverse Curriculum – the Black Contribution, was developed by teachers and local council staff just over a year ago and provides students with nine new six-week lessons on subjects including the Windrush generation, diversity in science and activism. The free resource has proven successful, with more than 2,000 schools across the country signing up. Orlene Badu, from Hackney Education, who led the development of the project, said there is a misconception that decolonising school curriculums means taking subjects out or not sticking to the national curriculum. The programme from Hackney shows schools how to better utilise the curriculum to ensure what they teach is more reflective of the positive contributions of different communities. “Children for such a long time in this country have only learned about enslavement, and not about the black contribution. There is a positive contribution and it’s really important that everyone knows because it’s part of our national story,” Badu said. “I’ve had a lot of people saying in my class that they really like history. I think it’s underrated. It seems like a boring subject, but actually, if you’re learning about fun stuff like that, it’s really cool,” Rose said. Anntoinette Bramble, councillor, deputy mayor of Hackney, and cabinet member for education, young people and children’s social care, said it was important that the diverse curriculum was embedded across subjects and that they didn’t confine learning about black history to a single month. “So you’re constantly evoking, challenging but, ultimately, empowering young minds to think about how they reshape their future and the world that they go out into,” Bramble said. The groundswell of support for the curriculum across the country shows the desperate need for a resource such as this, Bramble said. She is keen to work closely with the national government to implement it on a national scale. The political will, however, is currently not there. The government’s Sewell report on Race and Ethnic Disparities in the UK pointed to “negative” demands to decolonise the curriculum – warning against “banning white authors” and “token expressions of Black achievement”. “This curriculum is empowering for children that are white, black and of all diverse backgrounds, because it’s part of British history. It’s telling some of those untold stories that weren’t told. It’s not to replace history, it is not to eradicate history, it’s to add to it,” Bramble said. “It builds tolerance, it builds understanding, it builds cohesion and it gives all children a new sense of identity of where we’ve come, but, more importantly, where we’re going.” The students appear to agree. “If you get taught things from a young age, they just kind of stick with you,” Ruqiiya said. “And if you teach the younger generation, then they’ll keep what you have taught them. And then they’ll go on to bring change.” Both students say it’s nice to see where movements and ideas, particularly ones they don’t agree with, originate from. They believe it’s vital to hold on to these “untold stories” as they grow up. “It’s kind of like a string that you connect. So that the history doesn’t just evaporate out of existence,” Ruqiiya said.If you assumed that every possible scenario in a TV police drama had been exhausted by now, then BBC One’s The Responder invites you to think again. It features Chris, a night patrol officer played by Martin Freeman, who answers a 999 from the nephew of an 85-year-old woman found dead on her sofa. When he arrives at the scene, he promptly takes a cigarette from the pack lying next to the dead body and smokes it. A vacuum flask of soup sits nearby. Might she have been poisoned? Chris obviously doesn’t seem to think so; peckish on the night shift, he scoffs the lady’s last supper while watching the TV show she left half-seen. This macabre slapstick is realism not satire, says its writer, Tony Schumacher, whose 11 years as a first-response cop on Merseyside inspired the show. “One of the things you are guaranteed in the police is that you will laugh on every shift,” he says. “You might not guffaw, but something is going to make you smile in that 10 or 12 hours. Police are the first response to most sudden deaths, and that takes a lot out of you. It’s a profound moment: I can still remember 80% of the deaths I attended. But if you let the profundity get to you, you won’t be able to do it. I never pinched a corpse’s cigarettes, but you’ve got to put up blinkers.” But such defence mechanisms only partly worked for Schumacher, who left the force after a mental breakdown left him with post-traumatic stress disorder: “I still have some not-great days now.” During the extraordinary opening episode, scenes from a night shift are cut with Chris talking to an occupational therapist about violence he might do to the general public, or his own family. He is on the verge of exploding, imploding, probably both. There is a terrifying sense of momentum that builds up. “The producers deliberately shot the first part of The Responder as much as possible in order,” says Freeman, “which did really help establish the louring, foreboding sense something is about to fucking go off.” This part continues a performing curve that has seen Freeman rise from sitcom (The Office, Hardware) through Hollywood Tolkien (The Hobbit) to meaty dramatic parts, including a detective disciplined for breaking the rules while catching a killer in true-crime drama A Confession. The Responder sits in the subset of roles – up there with Sherlock and Fargo – that ricochet between wit and grit. “What I loved about The Responder, from first reading it,” says Freeman, “was its world in which there are laugh-out-loud moments, but it so quickly turns into something else. And it’s not: here’s a funny bit, now here’s a tragic bit. It’s all mixed together.” “Being in the police,” says Schumacher, “was like some long LSD trip. You’d go into a pub and there’d be a llama there for some reason. And then you’d be called to a homicide.” Schumacher wanted to capture all the extremes of emergency police work: “One minute you’re speaking as gently as you can to a recently bereaved relative, the next you’ve got someone restrained on the floor and you’re screaming in their face. There are moments of such different size and I wanted to get them all in.” Born in Hampshire, Freeman delivers Chris’s whispers and screams in Schumacher’s Liverpudlian accent. In times hypersensitive to “authentic” portrayal, did the issue arise of Freeman “scousing up” and taking work from native Merseyside performers? “That did come up,” admits Freeman. “First of all, from me! I did ask: ‘Am I the right person for this? I won’t be offended – I might be a bit hurt – if you say: You know what? Let’s get so and so who’s actually from there.’” Freeman could have played Chris in his own tones, but he refused that. “He read for me as being from Liverpool. So I was always going to play him that way, if I did it.” Was the accent in his armoury or did he have to learn it? “I worked at it. I wanted to do more than the Saturday Night Live version of it, if you know what I mean: comedy sketch scouse. I’ve got a decent handle on most accents for a first go. But that wouldn’t be enough to sustain it for five hours. I had to get beneath the surface.” Schumacher reports that one of the local co-stars, after filming with Freeman, texted that “his accent is fucking amazing”. “It was great getting that sort of feedback,” says Freeman. “People were very generous.” In the same way that the Scottish actor Martin Compston keeps up the London delivery of his Line of Duty character between takes, did Freeman stay verbally beside the Mersey? “Yes, around the house, talking to my kids, with them joining in. Daniel Day-Lewis, I think, used to stay in character on set. I wouldn’t do that, but I always stay in accent from pick-up in the morning to the wrap at the end of the day, whether it’s American, Scottish, Mancunian, whatever. I liken it to sport – you wouldn’t ask a sprinter to run 100 metres without warming up first.” Schumacher was on hand to give tips. “Sometimes Martin would leave me a voice message, trying out particular words, asking how I would say them.” “You have to be careful,” adds Freeman. “There’s no such thing as a ‘London accent’, there are several. Same with Liverpool. So what I was really asking Tony was: ‘How would Chris say this word?’ because it might be different from someone three miles away. I want to keep it coherent and consistent. If I wasn’t careful I could be mixing people from different postal districts and social classes.” The actor has so totally immersed himself in the relevant dialects that he notices, during our conversation, that Schumacher says the word “know” as if he’s from the Wirral, although he lives in the Knowsley area. Schumacher says he’s probably picked it up from his partner, a Wirral woman. “But I’m doing this interview in my telephone voice. If we go and have a pint later, I’d be sounding like this.” The last sentence goes much higher, faster, more catarrhal. Another thing that helps The Responder stand out is that Chris generally goes it alone – at least at first – without any Lewis to his Morse, as is the TV crime standard. Again, this is true to Schumacher’s own experience. “Ninety-nine per cent of the time, I responded on my own,” he says. “Double-crewing has become pretty standard now. But someone like Chris would go solo because, if he’s with someone else, he would have to play by the rules.” “It suited him to be a loner,” says Freeman. “He’s not bent, but he’s bendy …” Chris’s creator disagrees: “Oh, I think he’s bent. He’s fallen into a trap: he didn’t set out to be like this. Look, I’ve never met a drug dealer who grew up wanting to be a drug dealer; I’ve never met a bent copper who went into it to become a bent copper.” Also, if he’s on his own, no one can see how close to collapse he is? “Oh yes, totally,” says Freeman. “Twelve hours is a long time to spend in a car with someone.” “Especially if they talk about gardening the whole time,” says Schumacher. “I did have that.” The Responder airs at a time of exceptionally low public confidence in the police, due to scandals including the murder of Sarah Everard by serving officer Wayne Couzens. Schumacher characterises Chris as a bent copper; would that also have applied to the writer? “I hope not. I’m still mates with a lot of coppers, and I never did anything illegal, which Chris does. But I worked with a copper who ended up in prison. I look at the likes of Wayne Couzens and don’t know what to say. I don’t think I worked with anyone of that ilk. But how can you know?” After the police, Schumacher got a job as a taxi driver in Liverpool, while trying to become a writer, frequently explaining to potential employers that he isn’t related to the film director Joel or the former Formula One racing champion Michael. He published a trilogy of novels set in an alternative-reality Nazi-occupied London – “Originally, they were set in occupied Paris, but I was too skint to go to France to do the research” – and was then mentored by Jimmy McGovern (creator of Cracker, Accused and Time) under the ScreenSkills High End TV Writers Bursary Scheme. McGovern proved the perfect tutor: “Being mentored by Jimmy is like being pecked by a chicken. ‘What are you doing with this bit?, ‘What about that bit?’ You get emails at five in the morning. But you can only hope to emulate a bit of what he’s got.” Might there be future seasons of The Responder? “When I started writing,” says Schumacher, “I never saw it as more than one series. But now I’ve seen what Martin brought to it, I’ve got stories I haven’t used.” “I like shows to be finite,” says Freeman, “But I’d be up for another one of this.” Perhaps, as Tony did, Chris could leave the police to drive cabs? Schumacher laughs: “I wouldn’t rule it out. I thought I knew about life after being a copper. But that first night driving a cab, I thought: I know nothing about anything.” The Responder is on BBC One and iPlayer this monthBritish farmers have criticised Asda’s decision to backtrack on its promise to sell only British beef. The retailer said the U-turn was the result of higher beef prices, and it would now sell both Irish and British-produced beef in its stores. The move comes just over a year after the supermarket chain, under its new owners the Issa brothers, made a pledge to source 100% British beef. The retailer only managed to fulfil its commitment last October. Neil Shand, the chief executive of industry body the National Beef Association (NBA), said he was “very disappointed that Asda wasn’t able to continue its commitment beyond two months”. The NBA estimates that farm gate prices for British beef have risen by around 20% since the start of the pandemic. However, farmers warn that the higher prices they are receiving for their produce are offset by the soaring costs of feed, fuel and fertiliser. “The higher price for beef is being eroded,” said Shand. “Asda may claim beef is too expensive, but it can’t be produced at a lower price.” Asda said: “We know that it is important to our customers that the beef on our shelves has been produced to high welfare standards and is affordable. Unfortunately, the price of British beef has risen and whilst we continue to work hard to keep prices as low as possible for our customers, these increases are significant.” The retailer added that all of the beef sold in its premium Extra Special range would remain 100% British. Irish beef is about 20% cheaper than British beef, according to the Irish Examiner. The UK is Ireland’s main overseas market for its beef, and accounted for more than three-quarters (78%) of beef imports entering the UK in 2019, according to figures from the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board (AHDB). Richard Findlay, the chair of the livestock board of the National Farmers Union (NFU), said farmers needed support from retail, given the post-Brexit changes to agriculture policy, and at a time when they were looking to invest in environmentally friendly food production. “Given the significant changes to trade and agricultural policy, it is more important than ever that our retailers champion British food and farming and that, fundamentally, any sourcing commitments they make are honoured,” Findlay said. Shand said he was pleased that six grocers – Waitrose, Marks &amp;Spencer, Morrisons, Co-op, Aldi and Lidl – had maintained their commitment to selling exclusively British beef.Pakistan’s top judicial commission has nominated a female judge to the supreme court for the first time in the country’s history. The move to pave the way for Justice Ayesha Malik to join the court has been widely praised by lawyers and civil society activists as a defining moment in the struggle for gender equality in Pakistan. The parliamentary secretary for law and justice, Maleeka Bokhari, called it a “shattering of the glass ceiling”. “An important and defining moment in our country as a brilliant lawyer and decorated judge has become Pakistan’s first female SC [supreme court] judge,” Bokhari, a junior minister of the ruling Tehreek-e-Insaf party, wrote on Twitter. The 55-year-old’s appointment has been supported by the chief justice of Pakistan, Gulzar Ahmed, and now goes to a parliamentary panel for confirmation. The decision has not been without opposition, with one group of lawyers threatening to strike if Malik joined the supreme court bench. The nine-member commission turned down her appointment to the court last year, but this time the decision of the panel of judges was five votes to four in her favour. A number of lawyers and judges said her selection violated the rules in terms of seniority, maintaining that she was not among the top three senior judges in the court from which she was nominated – the Lahore high court, where Malik has served since 2012. Imaan Mazari-Hazir, a lawyer in Islamabad, said: “Women have, in the past, been blocked from becoming chief justices of their respective high courts and the fact that we did not have a single woman in the supreme court until now illustrates that there is indeed deep-rooted misogyny in the legal fraternity.” Malik has given some landmark verdicts in her career, last year outlawing virginity tests for female rape survivors. “It is a humiliating practice, which is used to cast suspicion on the victim, as opposed to focusing on the accused and the incident of sexual violence,” she said in her verdict, which only applies in the state of Punjab. Nighat Dad, a digital rights lawyer and human rights activist, said Malik had proved “her competence in the courtroom”. “Justice Ayesha Malik’s appointment is a historic move for our judicial system as it is not only the first time a woman has a seat in the supreme court since Pakistan’s inception, but it opens up endless possibilities for other women in the legal field,” she said. “In a country where crimes of gender-based violence are a constant reality, more women in the supreme court can hopefully have a domino effect on the larger justice system to be more inclusive,” said Dad, adding that the law had “immense barriers for women and marginalised communities”.Peter Bogdanovich, who has died aged 82, was among the few examples of a film director whose career rocketed spectacularly at its beginning before it soon plunged to earth. His third feature (after two neophyte efforts), The Last Picture Show (1971), was nominated for eight Academy Awards, and won two. The film that followed, What’s Up, Doc? (1972), was a massive box-office hit, which grossed a healthy $28m for Warner Bros. On a winning streak, Bogdanovich achieved a hat-trick with Paper Moon (1973), which was not only a commercial and critical success, but won a best supporting actress Oscar for Tatum O’Neal who, at 10, was the youngest ever recipient of the award. It seemed that Bogdanovich could do no wrong. But then came Daisy Miller (1974), which received mainly bad reviews, and was followed by further flops and personal upheavals. He bore it all with equanimity (externally, at least), making cameo appearances in friends’ films and TV shows – nicely dry in the role of Dr Elliot Kupferberg, Tony Soprano’s therapist’s therapist in the hit series The Sopranos (2000-07) – cropping up regularly on documentaries, commenting wittily on film directors and directing films himself from time to time, though he never returned to the glory days. Bogdanovich belonged to the generation of directors who emerged in the 70s, brought up on the movies produced during the golden age of the major studios. In fact, the majority of his films are exercises in style – attempts to recreate the Hollywood past. His two best films were shot in black and white, a practice that had already become rare a decade before. Both The Last Picture Show and Paper Moon lovingly evoke the spirit of John Ford, Howard Hawks, William Wellman and William Wyler and, despite their allusiveness, they still appeal to the non-film buff, while What’s Up, Doc?, graced by Ryan O’Neal and Barbra Streisand, is a homage to the screwball comedies of the 30s. (In his documentary Directed By John Ford, 1971, revised in 2006, Bogdanovich disarmingly allowed himself to be put down by the great man.) Bogdanovich was born in Kingston, New York, after his parents fled from Europe and the Nazis, and grew up on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. His mother, Herma (nee Robinson), came from a well-off Austrian Jewish family, and his father, Borislav Bogdanovich, was a Serbian Eastern Orthodox Christian painter and pianist. After graduating from the Collegiate school, he studied acting at the Stella Adler Theatre Studio in the city. Although he both appeared in and directed a number of plays – including The Big Knife, Clifford Odets’s searing drama about Hollywood, in 1959 off-Broadway – Bogdanovich was always drawn to film, and began writing on the subject for various publications. In the early 60s, taking a lead from Henri Langlois’ eclectic programming at the Paris Cinémathèque, Bogdanovich showcased movies at the Museum of Modern Art, introducing audiences to neglected or forgotten American directors such as Allan Dwan, about whom he wrote a book, Allan Dwan: The Last Pioneer (1971). He also wrote books on Ford, Fritz Lang, Alfred Hitchcock and his friend Orson Welles, all of whose voices he could mimic brilliantly. Bogdanovich even had a leading role in Welles’s uncompleted The Other Side of the Wind (shot between 1969 and 1976), as an up-and-coming film director with a talent for mimicry. After a stint as film critic for Esquire magazine, he moved in 1964 to Hollywood where, inspired by French critics such as François Truffaut, he hoped to turn to directing. Initially, he worked as second unit director on Roger Corman’s Wild Angels (1966), before Corman allowed him to direct a Z-movie, Voyage to the Planet of Prehistoric Women (1968), hiding under the name Derek Thomas. Actually, all Bogdanovich had to do was film scenes of Mamie Van Doren and other flimsily clad women on the seashore, and splice the new material together with a dubbed and re-edited Russian sci-fi film called Planeta Burg. Corman then gave the tyro director the money to make the impressive Targets (1968), in which the octogenarian Boris Karloff played Byron Orlok, a horror movie star in danger from a sniper, and confronted by his own image (in Corman’s The Terror) on a screen of a drive-in movie theatre. Targets was good enough for Columbia Pictures to entrust The Last Picture Show to Bogdanovich. This fondly nostalgic look at 50s small-town America cast Ben Johnson (a Ford favourite) as surrogate father to the town’s youngsters, and owner of the movie house forced to close because of the advent of television. The titular movie is Hawks’ Red River. Hawks is also acknowledged in What’s Up, Doc?, with O’Neal and Streisand doing their best to match up to the memories of Cary Grant and Katharine Hepburn. For Paper Moon, Bogdanovich went further into the past – the Depression – for a charming yet cynical picaresque tale of a father-daughter con team (O’Neal and daughter Tatum) wheedling money out of widows. Why and how did things go wrong after that? Some commentators have put the decline down to Bogdanovich’s relationships with women. When he was preparing The Last Picture Show, he saw a magazine cover featuring the 19-year-old fashion model Cybill Shepherd, whom he cast as the richest girl in town. It was not long before he divorced his wife, Polly Platt, the production designer on his first films and mother of his two children, whom he had married in 1962, to live with Shepherd. With Shepherd in mind, he directed Daisy Miller, based on the Henry James novel, which came in for a heavy lambasting from the critics. “Trying to make that little thing he’s with into Daisy Miller was hilarious,” the veteran director Henry Hathaway, whom Bogdanovich admired, remarked cruelly. Undeterred, Bogdanovich starred Shepherd opposite Burt Reynolds in At Long Last Love (1975), a flat-footed, off-key musical. It was greeted with even greater scorn than the previous movie. This was followed by a third bomb, Nickelodeon (1976), a slapdash tribute to slapstick silent screen comedy, starring Reynolds with Ryan and Tatum O’Neal. This time Bogdanovich blamed the producers for not allowing him to shoot it in black and white on a more modest budget. After three years spent licking his wounds, Bogdanovich returned, helped by Corman as producer, with Saint Jack (1979), a sincere attempt to get away from Hollywood in two senses. Set in a world of pimps and prostitutes, it has an excellent sense of locale (the red-light district of Singapore). Among a cast headed by Ben Gazzara, the director himself played an American mobster. Although the old-fashioned romantic comedy They All Laughed (1981), flopped initially, it gained a certain cult status for various extra-cinematic reasons: it was the last major role played by Audrey Hepburn, whose son Sean Ferrer is also in the film; Bogdanovich’s two daughters had parts, as did the director’s then girlfriend (the Shepherd liaison was over), the former Playboy model Dorothy Stratten. At the end of filming, Stratten was shot and killed by her husband after he learned of the affair with Bogdanovich. In 1988, Bogdanovich married Stratten’s half-sister, Louise. He regained some credibility with Mask (1985), a film that eschewed the resurrection of moribund genres. Powered by Cher’s strong performance as the drug-taking biker mother of a child with a rare bone disorder, the film gave the director the praise that had eluded him for so long. However, Bogdanovich’s passionate love for Hollywood’s distant past led him to make Illegally Yours (1988), a leaden comedy featuring Rob Lowe (in spectacles, like Grant in Bringing Up Baby). Perhaps still searching for the kind of acclaim he had enjoyed with The Last Picture Show, he went back to the same author (Larry McMurtry) and characters, played by most of the same cast, in Texasville (1990), but the sequel proved lacking in the same appeal and success. His necessarily stagy Americanised film version of Michael Frayn’s frenetic theatre farce, Noises Off (1992), tested Bogdanovich’s skill at orchestrating screwball antics, but it, too, failed to ignite. The Thing Called Love (1993), which followed four young people hoping to make it as country music singers in Nashville, suffered from a detached performance by River Phoenix in his last completed role before his death. For the next few years, Bogdanovich directed several TV movies, and acted in a fair number of them. His return to feature film directing was also a return to Hollywood’s pre-talkie era. The fairly entertaining, well-received The Cat’s Meow (2001) told of the mysterious death of the film mogul Thomas H Ince during a party on William Randolph Hearst’s yacht, with Marion Davies and Charlie Chaplin among the guests. Prior to his final film, a documentary on the silent movie star Buster Keaton, The Great Buster: A Celebration (2018), he made She’s Funny That Way (2014), a likable romantic comedy that proved Bogdanovich was capable of finding a way between outright disasters and masterpieces. He and Louise divorced in 2001. His two daughters, Antonia and Sashy, survive him. • Peter Bogdanovich, writer, director and actor, born 30 July 1939; died 6 January 2022 • Ronald Bergan died in 2020The NHS in England is experiencing the highest number of Covid absences since the vaccine rollout, with more than 40,000 staff unable to attend work on two days in the past week, prompting claims that hospitals are “simply not safe”. An average of 35,596 staff were sick with Covid in the past week, a level last seen in January 2021 at the height of the second wave of the pandemic and higher than any week since all priority groups were offered at least their first vaccine in mid-February. The number of NHS staff in England off sick due to Covid rose by 41% in the week to 2 January, latest health service figures show. The average of almost 36,000 was up from 25,000 the week before. It is also the third week in a row that absences have risen by about 40%. These absence figures are still much lower than those seen during the first wave peak, when almost 83,000 staff were off due to Covid. Including non-Covid absences, more than 80,000 staff were absent each day on average, up from 71,000 the previous week. Almost half of staff absences are due to Covid (44%). Military personnel are being deployed to NHS trusts in London to help plug staff shortages. Northamptonshire on Thursday declared a system-wide major incident, with hospitals, care homes and emergency services subject to a shortage of staff and facing increased demand because of coronavirus, Northamptonshire police said. Northamptonshire Local Resilience Forum, made up of NHS organisations, local authorities, Northamptonshire fire and rescue service and Northamptonshire police, issued the alert due to “rising demand on services and staffing levels”. Staff shortages were so serious and so widespread that hospitals were now unsafe, the Royal College of Nursing (RCN) claimed. “These figures reveal why the government hurriedly announced military support for health and care services in London last night. The numbers off work due to Covid-19 in acute trusts rose by almost 60% in the most recent week and have more than trebled in a month to nearly 40,000 staff in a single day,” said Patricia Marquis, the RCN’s director for England. “Outside of healthcare, staffing shortages are closing shops and cancelling trains but nurses can’t stop helping their patients. Instead, they find themselves spread thinner and thinner, but they can’t keep spinning plates indefinitely either. This situation is simply not safe.” The NHS Confederation said this week that some trusts had recently had as many as 750 staff off sick as a result of Covid or other illnesses and that at one trust, 270 of the 413 personnel on sick leave last Friday were a direct result of Covid. “It’s clear that we are facing a staffing crisis in the NHS, with a number of hospitals telling us they have around 10% of their staff in self-isolation or on sick leave for other reasons,” the confederation’s chief executive, Matthew Taylor, said on Thursday. Hospitals were “extremely concerned” about units being left with too few personnel to maintain normal staffing levels for patients, he added. However, NHS Providers, another hospital body, said sickness absence was running as high as 19% in some trusts outside of London. Many of the at least 24 hospital trusts whom it has emerged this week have recently had to declare an internal critical incident – an admission that they cannot cope with the level of demand they are facing – cited staff sickness absences as a key reason. On Thursday, the Ministry of Defence announced that the 200 military personnel were being deployed to help hospitals in London, including 40 doctors. NHS England’s national medical director, Prof Stephen Powis, said the Omicron variant meant there were more patients to treat and fewer staff to treat them. “In fact, around 10,000 more colleagues across the NHS were absent each day last week compared with the previous seven days and almost half of all absences are now down to Covid. “While we don’t know the full scale of the potential impact this new strain will have it’s clear it spreads more easily and, as a result, Covid cases in hospitals are the highest they’ve been since February last year – piling even more pressure on hard working staff.”There were many excruciating bits in the exposure of Boris Johnson’s affair with cray-cray model-slash-infosec-entrepreneur Jennifer Arcuri (who I can’t help but retain a soft spot for, even if she has been fully red-pilled these days). One of the worst, though, was when Arcuri found herself, in the eye of the media storm, being ghosted by Johnson. The one time she successfully got through to him on his mobile to ask him how to handle it, she found herself being mocked by someone “pretending to speak in a Chinese accent”. Or rather, “someone”. I cannot believe that this someone is now involved in further phone-related shithousery – but I guess you never really know anyone. Still, like me, you probably cannot get enough of brilliant prime ministerial investigator Lord Geidt, whose ability to piece together highly complex cases such as “who paid for this £840 roll of wallpaper and why?” marks him out as one of the most fascinatingly unconventional detectives of the era. You’d stop just shy of comparing Geidt with Sherlock Holmes, perhaps – but in the decorative mystery of the Downing Street flat refurbishments, his lordship was certainly Ideal Holmes. Only Ideal Holmes would somehow be able to conclude absolutely nothing from the fact that in the very message in which the prime minister asked for a huge sum of money from a Tory donor, Johnson felt moved to add, apparently ingratiatingly, “PS am on the great exhibition plan Will revert”. Nor from the fact that in the very message in which the Tory donor told the prime minister the money was on the way, he replied – apparently ingratiated – “Thanks for thinking about GE2”. This reboot of the Great Exhibition seems to have been something of a pet project for Lord Brownlow, who initially met £112,549 of Johnson’s decor bills himself. Less than two months after the above WhatsApp exchange, according to official ministerial records, Brownlow was – according to official ministerial records – meeting the then culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, “to discuss plans for Great Exhibition 2.0”. Just one of those weird instances of Jungian synchronicity that attend this government’s way of doing business, I guess. Something branded Festival UK is now happening instead, and Downing Street yesterday simply refused to say precisely how that event differs from the Great Exhibition 2. Either way, the whole saga is certainly a great exhibition of British establishment accountability. After the Electoral Commission discovered these “accidentally withheld” WhatsApp messages in its own probe into the affair, Lord Geidt was forced to reopen his original investigation, but has now concluded once more that career liar Johnson did not intend to mislead. Or to put it in strictly procedural terms, his lordship has taken a second dive into the barrel of tits, and still come up sucking his thumb. The case has been closed via strongly worded letter – my favourite type of elite justice. I think all punks have to ask themselves: did he fire off six pieces of headed notepaper or only five? Do I feel lucky? Well, DO I? I think most of us would take our chances, let’s face it. Indeed, it’s hard not to laugh at the entire concept of Boris Johnson having a “standards adviser” – it’s like discovering Mark Zuckerberg has a stylist. Or, indeed, a standards adviser. Anyway, now the “Great Exhibition” angle is being queried, you’re probably wondering if the investigation could be reopened by Johnson’s corruption tsar. And you’re probably forgetting that Johnson’s corruption tsar is the guy married to Dido Harding. Take a moment. I needed one too. As for the still-undead Downing Street decoration saga, what’s not to enjoy in these new glimpses of Johnson trying to come off as aesthetically sensitive? In the messages to Brownlow, the prime minister explains that the flat is a “bit of a tip”. Strong words, coming from the lovechild of Uncle Fester and Cousin Itt. Whatever transformation the interior designer Lulu Lytle eventually wrought on the place, I imagine it is by now enhanced by red wine stains and bits of Stilton trodden into the carpet. Takeaway wrappers down the back of the sofa: model’s own. Of course, the real driving force behind the refurb was not Johnson but his wife, Carrie. I know she bangs on about rented dresses and stuff, but her financial positioning is starting to feel a bit “Kate in the streets, Meghan in the 500-thread-count sheets”. John Lewis furniture and fittings would be right at the upper end of what most British people would ever feel able to afford – and yet, I don’t think we’re in John Lewis any more, Toto. Speaking of which, I used to think the only person I wanted to read on the Johnsons’ flat saga was chief justice of interiors, Nicky Haslam. Regrettably, however, Nicky has been bumped down my wishlist by previous No 10 occupant Theresa May, who was famously pictured at home in this very well-appointed dump. “FOR THE LOVE OF GOD, BREAK YOUR SILENCE, MRS MAY” are not words I ever expected to type, but here we all are. I desperately, desperately want to hear a defence of the tip by the no-nonsense tastemaker who created it – ideally at pamphlet length, but would settle for a 3,000-worder. Failing that, can the Great Exhibition/Festival UK include some of these absolute prize human exhibits? We could have a whole pavilion dedicated to Chancers, Chisellers and Chintz-grifters, and never have to leave a single street in Westminster to fill it. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistA Ukrainian opera director arrested in Italy at Russia’s request has pledged to continue his fight against the “oppression” of Vladimir Putin’s government as calls for his release mount from around the world. Yevhen (Eugene) Lavrenchuk, 39, was detained in Naples on an international arrest warrant issued by Russia during a stopover in the city on 17 December. Russia is seeking his extradition for financial crimes allegedly committed when he was director of the Polish Theatre in Moscow. Lavrenchuk left Russia for Ukraine in 2014 in protest at Russia’s annexation of Crimea that year. Lavrenchuk told the court of appeal in Naples that he was being persecuted by Russia for publicly voicing his dissent. He claimed the persecution led to him being beaten up outside the Odessa opera and ballet theatre, where he was a director, in December 2020. He has refused extradition, saying that he feared being “exposed to discrimination”. Lavrenchuk is being held at Poggioreale prison in Naples, where he was visited this week by Francesco Emilio Borrelli, a regional councillor for the Europa Verde party. “I spoke to him for about 15 minutes during a prison check, which we do periodically,” Borrelli said. “He was calm and in good form; he came across as a person aware of living an injustice and that in the end he will be proven right. He said he’s determined to return to his country to fight against the oppression of Putin’s regime.” Lavrenchuk had never been to Italy before landing at Capodichino airport on 15 December on a stopover in his journey between Tel Aviv, where he had been visiting his sister, and Lviv in Ukraine. He was arrested at a hotel close to the airport after providing his ID at check-in. By law, hotels in Italy have to scan a copy of a guest’s ID document; the details are then sent to the local police for registration. “Police found his name had been inserted into an international search system with a mandate for his arrest,” said Alfonso Tatarano, Lavrenchuk’s lawyer. “He didn’t know he was being looked for by Russian authorities or that his name was in this system.” The case comes as fears mount over the possibility of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Liudmyla Denisova, the Ukrainian parliamentary commissioner for human rights, said on Thursday that Lavrenchuk’s arrest was not made on the basis of a “red notice” by Interpol, as was originally reported, but on a circular note distributed to a limited number of countries. “This testifies to Russia’s abuse of the Interpol charter and its misuse as an instrument of hybrid warfare for the politically motivated persecution of Ukrainians,” Denisova wrote on her Facebook page. The warrant for Lavrenchuk’s arrest was issued by a Moscow court in July 2020. The accusations against him date back eight years, when he allegedly defrauded one of his students by asking for money to pay for repairs to the Polish Theatre. However, it is not yet clear to Italian judicial authorities whether the court had issued a conviction for his alleged crimes or a preliminary injunction. The crime is punishable by 10 years in prison. “We don’t yet have the complete records of the proceedings,” said Tatarano. Russia has 40 days, from the day it was notified of Lavrenchuk’s arrest, to send its formal extradition request and related documents. The case is being handled by Luigi Riello, the chief public prosecutor of the Naples appeals court. “He will evaluate on what basis the request for extradition is being made before submitting his evaluation to the court,” said Tatarano. “If there is concrete danger that Lavrenchuk will receive unfair treatment or that the accusations are based on political opinions, the court will reject the extradition request. But we have to prove this, and I think we can.” Tatarano will appeal for Lavrenchuk to be either released from custody or placed under house arrest pending the outcome of the legal process. A Facebook page calling for Lavrenchuk’s release has attracted more than 1,400 followers while members of the Ukrainian community in Italy are planning to protest in Milan on Saturday. “We are mobilising to show how the Russian regime exploits legal cases against Ukrainian citizens for its own political purposes,” the protest organisers wrote on Facebook. PEN America, the writers’ association, has also called for Lavrenchuk’s immediate release. “The circumstances of Lavrenchuk’s detention – he was detained in Naples while transferring to a flight to Lviv after travelling from Tel Aviv – are a disturbing echo of Belarus’s move last year to force a Ryanair flight to land in order to arrest blogger Raman Protasevich,” said Polina Sadovskaya, PEN America’s Eurasia director. “In this case, Lavrenchuk is one of the most visible voices against the Russian annexation of Crimea in the Eurasian theatre community, and Russia’s extradition request against him bears the hallmarks of politically motivated repression.”Emmanuel Macron has said the EU needs a “frank, exacting” dialogue with Russia to defuse tensions, as he called for new security arrangements on the continent. The French president was rebuffed by other EU states in June when he and the then German chancellor, Angela Merkel, made a surprise proposal for a summit with Vladimir Putin. Speaking in Paris at the start of France’s six-month EU presidency, Macron said: “I think that the European Union must have a dialogue with Russia. To have a dialogue doesn’t mean to concede – dialogue means above all to take stock of disagreements.” In a nod to last summer’s fierce opposition from Poland and the Baltic states to a summit with Putin, he said talks with Russia had to be coordinated among the EU. Macron said: “I continue to ask for a dialogue that is frank, exacting and coordinated, because member states don’t have the same history with regard to Russia, nor the same geography.” Russia has massed an estimated 100,000 troops along its border with Ukraine, sparking fears of an invasion. Macron was speaking alongside the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, who pledged proposals for a new “architecture of European security”. She rejected claims the EU was a bystander in efforts to resolve the security crisis in Ukraine – the bloc has no formal role in a sequence of meetings next week between the US, Russia and Nato, and under the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe. “It’s very clear: no solution without Europe,” Von der Leyen said. Macron welcomed US talks with Russia, praising “exemplary” coordination between Europe and Joe Biden’s White House in this matter, a sign of mended fences since the furious row between Paris and Washington over the Aukus submarine and security pact. The French president said a new security architecture in Europe must take into account the expiry of a cold war-era arms control treaty. The 1987 intermediate-range nuclear forces treaty, which kept nuclear weapons off European soil for three decades, lapsed in 2019 when the US and Russia failed to agree on its future. “We are no longer covered by the INF treaty, which is a concern to many states, in particular in central and eastern Europe,” Macron said. “We can’t remain in this situation. It’s our responsibility to address it.” Von der Leyen, a German former defence minister, who was Macron’s choice to lead the EU executive, has called for a more “geopolitical” European Commission. She said she was monitoring with great concern the situation in Kazakhstan, where authorities were using lethal force to quash protests. “The rights and security of the citizens are of the utmost importance and must be guaranteed,” she said. “I am launching a call for the end of violence, and the European Union stands ready to offer its assistance where it can.” Earlier in the day, Macron and Von der Leyen visited the Panthéon, the secular mausoleum of prominent French citizens, where they paid tribute to the late Holocaust survivor and celebrated French politician Simone Veil, as well as a founding father of the European project, Jean Monnet. Veil, the first female president of the European parliament, was buried in 2017 in the Panthéon, the final resting place of the philosophers Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and – since last November – the French-American civil rights activist Joséphine Baker. Monnet, who died in 1979, proposed in 1950 with the French foreign minister, Robert Schuman, a common market in coal and steel for six European nations – the genesis of the EU. French officials say the EU must become more sovereign in everything from foreign policy, industrial production and management of the pandemic. This means a more assertive stance regarding authoritarian powers such as China and Russia; European production of crucial technologies, such as microchips and medical equipment; as well as exporting vaccines to Africa. Even Europe’s climate agenda for net zero emissions by 2050 is defined as “environmental sovereignty”, as France seeks a speedy agreement on a proposed CO2 levy on polluting imports into the bloc. Member states that seek less economic intervention in the economy, however, are wary of France’s agenda to onshore European production, fearing it could be a form of protectionism against foreign trade. While French and European officials have extolled EU exports and donations of 1.5bn vaccine doses, critics, such as the former UK prime minister Gordon Brown, have accused the bloc of “commandeering” South Africa’s production of Johnson &amp; Johnson shots. • This article was amended on 7 January 2022. Veil was the first but not the only female president of the European parliament as stated in an earlier version.With her Mickey Mouse backpack, coloured Duplo blocks and disarmingly cute smile, Serena could be any young child constructing a toy house for an imaginary character – were it not for the wires and nodules sticking out of her head. But Serena is a pint-sized pioneer at the cutting edge of research into the enduring mystery of what makes toddlers tick. She is among the first children to be studied at the world’s first dedicated ToddlerLab – a multimillion-pound effort to get inside the heads of toddlers. Young children do and say the most extraordinary things, and in neurological terms, they are extraordinary creatures. “The change in between two and five years of age is pretty spectacular: there’s a lot going on in terms of brain development and cognitive development,” said Prof Natasha Kirkham, a reader in developmental psychology at the Birkbeck Centre for Brain and Cognitive Development (CBCD) in London, home to the Wohl Wolfson ToddlerLab. Babies’ brains have been extensively studied, by tracking their eye movements, the flow of blood to different brain regions – through a technique called functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) – and the brain’s electrical activity. However, scientific understanding of toddlers has been limited because, until recently, they needed to be tethered to a machine for these tracking and imaging technologies to work. “That was fine for babies, because babies don’t move around much. But as soon as you get to about 18 months and above, children want to move around, and importantly, it’s not part of their natural behaviour to sit still,” said the CBCD’s director, Prof Denis Mareschal. The development of wearable and wireless technologies is now enabling scientists to extend their studies to toddlers. “It means that we can now study young children roaming wild and free, in their natural form, to see what’s happening in the brain while they’re exploring,” Mareschal said. “It also allows us to better understand how they begin to interact with each other socially, and how that impacts on their learning.” Though no longer a toddler, six-year-old Serena Cadete Duarte is part of a cohort of young children who have been followed by Birkbeck researchers since the age of three, to better understand the development of executive function – a set of mental skills that includes planning, working memory, flexible thinking, and self-control. “What’s these?” asks Serena, as research lab developer Dr Paola Pinti hands her a pair of pink fingerless gloves, covered in white reflective bobbles, to wear. The gloves will enable the research team to track Serena’s hand movements via 18 motion-tracking cameras rigged up around the laboratory ceiling, while she plans and builds a house out of Duplo blocks. “Kids are very physical: they gesture a lot, and they point a lot, and sometimes that can give away their thought processes,” says Kirkham. “For example, if you ask a kid to move an item to a certain place, you can see them do it, but what you might catch on a motion capture system is a slight movement to a different thing first – so you can see where they almost made an error.” Now, Pinti slips a fNIRS cap covered in wires and sensors on to Serena’s head, and slides a transceiver into her backpack. This will wirelessly transmit information from the sensors to a computer. “We need to look at your brain while you’re playing with the Duplo blocks,” Pinti says. “OK,” says Serena, sitting down at a table in the lab, which has been kitted out to resemble a preschool classroom. She is shown a short video in which an adult demonstrates how to press a button to release individual Duplo blocks from a set of boxes in front of her, and use them to build a house. When the video stops, Serena is told to copy what she has just observed. The last time Serena executed this task, her performance was very different: three- and four-year-olds are less able to follow complex instructions, their fine motor skills less developed. Now, she deftly builds a sturdy coloured house, with a garden filled with bright plastic flowers. Understanding how such brain processes develop isn’t a purely cerebral exercise: Children with neurodivergent disorders, such as autism, may also have trouble with certain skills such as planning, which Pinti’s study is focused on better understanding. Toddlerhood is also when children start to discover social interactions, gradually progressing from playing alongside one another, to sharing and collaborating during play. Here, too, a better understanding of the subtle ways in neurodivergent children’s brains and behaviours differ during the early years could help potential problems to be identified earlier, when there may be more scope to intervene. Other laboratories include a “home lab”, resembling a front room, and a “nap lab” where researchers can study children’s sleep. However, the jewel in the ToddlerLab’s crown is a virtual environment known as the Cave, which can simulate real-world settings, such as a farm, playground or supermarket, without the need for a bulky VR headset. “If you really want to understand natural behaviours, you have to be in a 3D world, but of course we can’t build environments such as a beach, or a forest, or a zoo, in a laboratory,” Mareschal says. Understanding how children interact with an animal, versus a person, say, could provide new insights into conditions such as autism, where some individuals appear to find it easier to connect with animals compared with their peers. Virtual environments could also help researchers to understand when and how young children begin to distinguish between what’s real and imaginary. Serena is the first child to test the system out. On top of the motion-tracking gloves and fNIRS cap, she is given a pair of large plastic spectacles to wear. These enable her to see in 3D, as well as allowing her eye movements to be tracked – an indication of what is capturing her interest at any given time. “I think I look like a DJ,” Serena says. She is guided into a section of the room, where a playground scene is being projected on to the walls and floor. A small purple elephant is standing on the grass in front of her. Serena is taught how to burst the balloons that rise up from behind his head, by waving her arms to control a small white ball. “I like coming here to play the different games, says Serena,” as she leaps around the room. I wonder what she would like to be when she’s older. “I’d like to be an ocean scientist,” she says.I occasionally get asked why I don’t give more negative reviews – that is, ones that warn readers off the bottles I think are unpalatable or poor value for money. My usual answer is that there’s too much good stuff around (and not a lot of space to write about it), so I’d rather focus on drinks that are worth buying. In the much smaller market of no- and low-alcohol drinks, however, those rules don’t really apply. There’s a lot of innovation and experimentation going on right now and, because a fair number of new producers are jumping on the bandwagon, not all of them have nailed it. Alcohol-free wine is an obvious case in point. If you enjoy wine, they’re simply not going to cut it for you: I keep trying, and I keep being disappointed. If you’re less picky than I am, however, you might enjoy Oddbird Blanc de Blancs (£9.99 Amazon, 0%), which is at least vaguely vinous, but to be honest I’d rather have a glass of kombucha or sparkling tea, such as the Saicho I mentioned a year ago or the Real Royal Flush in today’s pick. At the other end of the spectrum, there is a great deal of more than decent alcohol-free beer around, my latest find being Butcombe’s, which should appeal to those who find beers described as craft a bit too full on. It’s reasonably priced, which is more than can be said for a lot of the new alcohol-free spirits and aperitifs, some of which taste positively unpleasant on their own. I know that’s not how you should drink them, but if you have to drown something with tonic and garnish it with citrus to make it vaguely palatable, you might as well save yourself a few quid and drink just the tonic. (I exempt my favourites Pentire’s Adrift and Sipsmith’s Freeglider from these strictures, and can recommend the interesting Fluère and Wilfred in today’s panel, although “Would you like a Wilfred?” or “Do you fancy a Fluère?” are not the kind of invitations that trip easily off the tongue.) I also find the ecospeak about some of the latest entrants to the market pretty hard to swallow, among them Ful’s “powered by climate active nutrients” (why would you want a drink that’s Haribo blue, though?) and Bemuse’s “specially selected honey from planet-positive beekeepers” (I guess all beekeepers are planet-positive, so they don’t have to look that hard, but maybe I’m being mean: it’s drinkable at least, so hallelujah for that.) Five decent drinks to get you through dry January Butcombe Goram IPA Zero £14.45 for 12 x 330ml bottles butcombe.com, 0.5%. Yet another properly good AF ale to add to your arsenal, made in a more classic style than many craft beers. Bemuse Hops Sparkling Low-Alcohol Mead £3.30 for 330ml lowandnodrinks.co.uk, £19.90 for 6 cans bemuseddrinks.com, 0.5%. Pleasant, gently sparkling honey drink. The hops are barely detectable by today’s standards, but offset the sweetness nicely Real Non-Alcoholic Sparkling Kombucha Royal Flush £8 for 750ml Sainsbury’s, £48 for 6 realkombucha.co.uk. Like sparkling tea, a good stand-in for champagne or other bubbly. Delicately fruity. Wilfred’s Bittersweet Orange And Rosemary Aperitif £18 for 50cl The Alcohol-Free Co. If you don’t like cloves, you probably won’t take to this bittersweet aperitif, but I have to say it’s right up my street. Fluère Smoked Agave Non-Alcoholic Spirit £20 Amazon, £24 Harvey Nichols. One for the budding mixologists among you. A really interesting AF “spirit” with a smoky, mezcal-like character. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comIt is known as Ireland’s “front room”, where esteemed visitors including the Queen, Joe Biden, Emmanuel Macron and the Duke and Duchess of Sussex have been taken to get a sense of the “land of saints and scholars”. Biden, vice-president at the time, was so moved by the atmospherics in the dimly lit, barrel-vaulted hall when he visited Trinity College Dublin (TCD) in 2016 that he came back a year later to contemplate the history of its old library, known as the Long Room. But if he makes a third visit, he may not be so lucky. Three hundred years after the first foundation stone was laid, the 250,000 ancient books and manuscripts – including the ornately decorated ninth-century Book of Kells – printed on vellum, paper or silk are to be moved one by one, along with 500,000 others, to make way for the restoration of the building. It is a monumental task that will take the best part of five years and cost €90m (£75m). “Moving 750,000 vulnerable books is quite an undertaking, so we are having to pilot everything to see what is involved,” says TCD’s librarian and archivist Helen Shenton, who is leading the daunting project involving a 50-strong team. Some of the books in the alcoves that line the 65-metre hall are so delicate they are joined together with fabric ties. The accumulation of exhaust fume particles from the roads surrounding the building can accelerate the deterioration, while human detritus from nearly 1 million annual visitors pre-pandemic, ranging from clothing fibres and human hair, reaches 1cm in parts. Each book has to be examined, dusted, carefully hoovered and repaired if necessary. In a normal maintenance and preservation cycle “it takes us five years alone to clean all the books”, Shenton explains. The restoration project is currently in an “enabling” phase that will last two years because of the fragility of the books. It will determine the logistics of the move and the equal challenge of keeping the collection of books open to students and visiting scholars. The physical preservation of the books is the driving force behind the project. Recent fires at Notre Dame, the national museum in Brazil and the Mackintosh building at the Glasgow School of Art have shown the risks to historic and cultural buildings. “We do not want to join that litany,” says Shenton. “We need to conserve the building and the collection for its fourth century,” she said. Even the distinctive smell that Shenton says many visitors remark on when they enter is evidence of deterioration. According to a book on the library by Harry Cory Wright, the sweet scent is “the smell coming from ageing cellulose in paper, similar to the smell of almonds, which contain the same chemical.” Shenton says: “Books are organic artefacts and what you are smelling is deteriorating leather, deteriorating paper, and the thing we can do to slow that down is to have better environmental conditions. Not only do we need temperature and humidity control, we also need to protect against particle pollution that is coming through the windows.” The restoration has been on the cards for years, and cataloguing each book was finally finished during the pandemic with a team of 50 working from home, completing what was a 40-year project. To future-proof the collection for study, Shenton is also creating the first online catalogue of Trinity’s collection. Each book will be fitted with a radio frequency identification (RFID) tag to enable scholars to be able to target their reads from the comfort of their desks. Once all the books have been removed, the library will close for about three years, during which time the building, under the plans of heneghan peng architects, will undergo a complete makeover. In what will be a shock to many previous visitors, the ground floor will be returned to the open arcade of the original building, which was designed to protect the books on the first floor against damp. At the same time there will be “a completely reimagined exhibition” that will position treasures such as the Book of Kells in an international context, exploring for example “what was happening on the Silk Road at the same time”. And finally, the male-only series of busts, remarked upon by Meghan, that stand at each of the alcoves in the Long Room is also going. It was one of the first things Shenton noticed when she took the job and, after a competition, four new busts by four different artists will be commissioned, of the mathematician Ada Lovelace; the Abbey Theatre co-founder, Lady Gregory; the writer Mary Wollstonecraft; and Rosalind Franklin, the biophysicist who made critical contributions to the identification of the double helix structure of DNA and related RNA.“Stop the bombs” reads the angry red writing in the storm cloud thought bubble above the little girl in a pale blue dress. Like all the children in the Japanese artist Yoshitomo Nara’s paintings, she has puppydog eyes and a toddler’s outsized head, yet her posture is pure bruiser. There are tiny animal fangs at the corners of her mouth. Of the paintings, drawings and sculptures in Nara’s latest exhibition, she is the closest to the pint-sized characters with big dark feelings that he began making in the 1990s, some of contemporary art’s most recognisable creations. Those early works, where tots sweetly clutched knives or took fag breaks, blended Japanese kawaii – cuteness – with mischief and menace. Partly thanks to Nara’s alignment with the pop art titan Takashi Murakami’s Superflat movement, he reached a global art audience and a wider public. Both artists mined the Japanese weakness for baby-faced adorableness, an infantilising that Murakami linked to the trauma of Hiroshima. Yet where Murakami’s trademark smiley acid-faced flowers and phallic mushrooms channel the surface sheen of a depthless mass-produced world of cartoons and commerce, Nara’s appeal has always been universal human emotion. “My works’ roots are my childhood, not pop culture,” he explains. “Around me there were orchards, sheep and horses; I read fairytales rather than comics.” Once described by the artist as self-portraits, his paintings communicate as powerfully as the folk tunes that first inspired him as an isolated child listening to the radio from the US air base in Misawa, or the punk rock he later turned to, creating artwork for cult bands such as Shonen Knife. While Nara’s figures recall saccharine anime, his paintings are expressively hand-wrought, with cardboard or wood planks often used in place of canvas. In recent years, his blackly comic tykes have given way to a more introspective tribe. The latest works include girls with huge eyes flecked in many colours, who stare into the middle distance as if lost in life’s great imponderables, or close their eyes in meditation. Even his guitar- or drumstick-wielding mini rock chicks seem spaced out, depleted of punk’s riotous energy. Nara has created an installation from abandoned building materials in which to show many of his works, like a cross between a clubhouse and a protective retreat. There are a few protesters among the new girls. One wears a “no war” slogan T-shirt, another flips a peace sign, stirring thoughts of Hiroshima and the anti-nuke movements, as well as today’s demonstrations. The turning point for his work’s tonal change, Nara says, was the Tohoku earthquake and tsunami that led to the Fukushima nuclear accident of 2011. “Fifteen thousand people within the 650km from where I live now, north of Tokyo, to my home town, were killed,” he says. “I felt an enormous sense of loss.” The gap between his figures’ pluck and physical powerlessness is striking: little people up against insurmountable forces. They speak to adult angst and the vulnerable child inside us all. Pinacoteca, 2021 (main picture) Taking its title from the classical term for a public art salon, Nara has created an installation from wood and building cast-offs in which his latest works are displayed. “I’ve always felt quite uncomfortable with architecturally solid spaces such as museums,” he says. “To me, places that have a temporary feel such as huts feel more familiar.” No War, 2019 Nara’s paintings typically draw on his childhood experiences. “I was nurtured by the civil rights movement’s protest songs and the anti-war movement’s rock songs,” he says. “Also, the Vietnam war didn’t feel like something that happened in a faraway land, as American troops were dispatched from the military bases in Japan.” Stop the Bombs, 2019 A number of Nara’s recent paintings reference the 1960s, its protest symbols and hippy culture. Here he was thinking of John Lennon and Yoko Ono’s 1968 “living sculpture” in which two acorns were planted in the east and west gardens of Coventry Cathedral. It was the same year as the adoption of the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Girl With Drum Sticks, 2019 Music is key to Nara’s process and, while punk has been a touchstone, in recent years he has turned to the folk songs he heard on US military radio as a child. He explains: “I was influenced a lot by hippy culture with its emphasis on community and nature as in: ‘Back to nature’, and, ‘Living is not breathing but doing’, in the words of Jean-Jacques Rousseau.” Yoshitomo Nara: Pinacoteca, Pace gallery, London, to 15 Jan.Exhibition of the week Marcus Jansen Visceral paintings of a world gone mad by this US army veteran. • Almine Rech, London, from 13 Jan to 22 February Also showing Turner in January The swirling, luminous landscapes of JMW Turner get their traditional new year airing in Edinburgh. Who says there are no fireworks this year? • Scottish National Gallery, Edinburgh, until 31 January Rana Begum Paintings and installations that explore the nature of colour. • Warwick Arts Centre, from 13 January to 13 March Astronomy Photographer of the Year Stunning pictures of the night sky that prove anyone can create a masterpiece of astrophotography. • National Maritime Museum, London, until 7 August Gold of the Great Steppe With Kazakhstan currently in crisis, this exhibition uncovers its long and rich history as a land of nomads before the Soviet era. Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, until 30 January Image of the week This is a painting by the pseudonymous artist Rhed, who has been exhibiting in London since 2018 and whose work – inspired by Lucian Freud, Francis Bacon and Paula Rego, according to his gallerist – has sold for five-figure sums. This week Rhed was revealed to be Rocco Ritchie, the 21-year-old son of Guy Ritchie and Madonna. Read the full story here. What we learned Italy is returning a Parthenon fragment to Greece amid UK row over marbles Tracey Emin is to launch a “revolutionary” art school in Margate Crypto tycoons helped drive global art market records in 2021 A Tory minister wants to change the law after topplers of the Colston statue in Bristol were cleared by a court The Royal Academy will show how Francis Bacon created his own mythology of the perverse The ‘democratic’ painting of AR Penck, which made him an enemy of East Germany’s Stasi, will go on show Eminem is reported to have paid $450,00 for an NFT of a bored ape “Eminape” … … but Melania Trump is selling an NFT portrait of herself for just $180,000 The radical Blk Art Group rocked Thatcher’s Britain A New York exhibition, Doomscrolling, explores our appetite for hearing the worst Fresh proof has been uncovered that the Nazis used fake auctions and paperwork to disguise their art theft Wayne Thiebaud, famous for his paintings of cakes and pies, died aged 101 … Pioneering British photorealist painter John Salt died aged 84 … and humanist photographer Sabine Weiss also died Masterpiece of the week Francisco de Goya: The Sleep of Reason produces Monsters (El sueño de la razon produce monstruos) 1797 - 8 Made long before Sigmund Freud or Surrealism, this etching looks into the dark recesses of the mind. If this man of the 18th-century Enlightenment was awake, he would be going about his rational business of improvement, indicated by the book over which he slumps. But his sleeping psyche is populated by sinister creatures of the night who personify bestial passions and unholy terrors. Goya created this profound image as the French Revolution degenerated into the Terror and, with it, hopes of liberal reform in his native Spain started to look like fading dreams. Things would soon get worse when Napoleon conquered Spain, bloody resistance ensued and Goya witnessed real monstrosities. Here he shudders at what he senses is about to unfold in reason’s twilight. • British Museum, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comMouths agape, we’ve all cringed and borne witness to that infamous (and now deleted) TikTok video of a young woman doing a selfie dance routine in a newborn intensive care unit, next to her very ill infant’s hospital bed. “‘Li’l Lee was taken in cause of low oxygen. He tested positive for RSV. Waiting for him to breathe better on his own,’” read the caption, as she danced to Nessa Barrett’s If You Love Me while miming cradling motions. For many internet commenters, the video was evidence of a society hell-bent on collapse. “This is the kind of stuff Black Mirror warns us about,” wrote one person on Reddit. Another asked, “Is this real or just some gross ‘social experiment’?” (It’s real.) This is not the first time a video like this has gone viral. In TikTok’s early days, when it was known as Musical.ly, a teen shared a video of himself dancing heart gestures and lip-syncing Justin Bieber while in the background his grandfather lay on his deathbed, while his grandmother wept. How do we explain people doing TikTok dances in the middle of moments of grief, pain and mourning? You might think that Gen Z hasn’t been taught how to properly deal with trauma. But that doesn’t seem right, especially since they admirably are the generation that dismantled the taboo of discussing mental health, some even going as far as self-diagnosing and listing their ailments on social media bios. Thanks to Gen Z, people are finally comfortable with publicly sharing their troubles with peers. Still, there is something remarkable about the degree to which we are beginning to stage public expressions of grief, like this video of a woman bawling over her dead snake. Despite the myriad venomous responses knocking her for positioning a camera specifically to capture and share her bereft wailing, I actually, to my surprise, found the video quite moving. Crying snake woman stirred something in me. I’m unable to watch someone breaking down with a dead animal in their arms without getting teary-eyed myself. I’ve had to say goodbye to beloved pets before, and seeing someone experience relatable heartbreak opens my old wounds right back up. Still, we are not used to public displays of grief – and even less so when they take place to jaunty music on social media. Short of North Korean-style forced public mourning, we’ve been conditioned to wear black, weep and meet a minimum requirement of depression weeks after the death of a loved one. That’s why when we see a video of two sisters processing the death of their mother by singing and dancing Rick and Morty in front of her open casket, or a clip of a woman twerking over the casket of a beloved deceased, some of us react with confusion or even outrage. How dare they express that type of emotion during this dark life event! What we fail to do is acknowledge our morose western predisposition and that many cultures permit dancing around death, like the beloved dancing pallbearers from Ghana. There’s no right way to grieve. And why should grief be private? Teenager Reese Hardy has been anointed the flag bearer for the everyday person’s struggle. Reese cry-dancing to Mariah Carey’s Obsessed over her post-breakup, at-home hair-dye fail has 3.8m views and serves as the official meme of toughing it out in hard times – life-changing or trivial. TikTok’s cringeworthy public displays of emotion could actually be the gift we didn’t know we need: the message that it’s OK to be in our feelings … together. If TikTok is the looking glass into our dystopian future, it’s clear that we can dance through tragedy. Optimism and openness during sadness are precisely the virtues we need to survive this world. We now have permission to put our rawest emotions on display; just because they are set up on a tripod doesn’t mean they are not real and authentic. So, to all the moms and teens in hospitals and funeral homes: keep dancing. Rohit Thawani is a creative director working at the intersection of tech and advertising. He is co-host of The Hopeless Show podcastApple’s chief executive, Tim Cook, was paid nearly $100m (£74m) last year, a 570% increase on the previous year, according to regulatory filings. Cook, 61, who took over as chief executive from the Apple founder Steve Jobs in 2011, also gained access to share awards worth about $750m as the iPhone maker’s market value approached $3tn. His total compensation for the year to September 2021 was $98.7m, up from $14.7m the previous year, filings with the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) show. Cook’s pay was 1,447 times that paid to the average Apple employee, who collected a median average of $68,254, the company said. His 2021 pay was boosted by a $82.3m stock award bonus related to Apples’ soaring share price. His base salary was $3m, he also collected $12m in bonuses for hitting the company’s financial and environmental sustainability goals. The filings also show Apple spent more than $700,000 on private flights for Cook, as the company has decided it is too much of a security risk to allow him to fly on scheduled commercial flights. The company also paid hundreds of thousands in personal security, pension contributions, life insurance and buying back unused holiday time. “It’s been a remarkable decade for Apple and in 2021 Mr Cook was granted an equity award for the first time since he was promoted to CEO in August 2011,” Apple said in the filing. Cook, who is sitting on a personal fortune of more than $1bn, according to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index, has said he plans to give away all of his fortune before he dies. In 2015, he told Fortune magazine that he planned to donate all of his wealth to charity after providing for his then 10-year-old nephew’s education.This week’s acquittal of four people over the toppling the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston was hailed by many as an exemplar of the jury system in action, although there were significant dissenters. Conservative MPs variously said the verdict undermined the rule of law and that they were deeply concerned by the precedent it set. For Mike Schwarz, a partner at Hodge, Jones and Allen and a veteran in representing protesters – including 28 Greenpeace activists cleared in 2001 of causing criminal damage despite admitting destroying a crop of genetically modified maize – that reaction was all too familiar. “I remember just after one of the Greenpeace cases, over a decade ago, there was a front page of the old G2 environment section of the Guardian where there was a big picture of a protest and a banner headline posing the question whether the verdict meant a ‘free for all’ [for direct action protests],” he said. “And when I saw the reaction to Colston I had flashbacks to those times. Now, as then, there was a concern – outrage, even – from the more reactionary parts of the political spectrum about activists being able to do what they want and juries acquitting them.” He said governments and businesses never liked juries acquitting protesters who had admitted damage or disruption, but it was not a new phenomenon and had not caused a free for all. Even before the GM crops case, in 1996 a Liverpool jury acquitted two women charged with causing £1.5m damage to a Hawk fighter jet. They admitted the damage but said they had acted to prevent its use in the bombing of East Timor by Indonesia, which contravened international law. Schwartz, who represented six climate crisis activists acquitted last month for a protest that halted the Docklands Light Railway (DLR) in London’s financial district, said the lesson from Colston was that “juries are the safest pair of hands to deal with issues about the lawful scope of protest and concerns about what government or business do. This is the rule of law in action.” Martin Porter, a coordinator of Greenpeace’s Manchester branch and one of those cleared in the GM crops case, also dismissed the idea of dangerous precedents being set. “In our case it was a government that was clearly going against public opinion in the way it was allowing GM crops, and in this case Bristol council had not taken any action over community outrage at the statue,” he said. “We were only asking for acquittal for what we did, not a carte blanche to go and do it anywhere else. In our case the evidence was around the things we’d done beforehand to try and get this crop stopped, and in the Colston case it was the campaigns that had been going on for years to try and get this statue removed.” Ian Bray, a co-founder of Extinction Rebellion (XR) who has twice been acquitted by jurors – once in the DLR trial and once in April last year after damaging Shell’s London headquarters – said juries understood that “not all damage is the same” but it also came down to luck. “It’s like pulling the lever of a fruit machine and you’re hoping for three pineapples,” he said. “You’ve got to get at least three jurors who won’t convict. If you’ve only got two, the other 10 are a majority who can convict, but you can’t have a nine-to-three majority.” Bray said it was a deliberate tactic of XR to get trials before juries – there are a string of cases delayed by Covid – in the hope that they prove more sympathetic than magistrates. To that end, in the action against Shell he said they aimed to cause just over £5,000 damage to meet the threshold for a crown court trial but avoid the risk of heavy sentencing, only to be charged with £25,000 of damage. “It’s very hard to calculate,” said Bray. Schwarz and a fellow HJA partner, Raj Chada, who represented two of the Colston four, believe the defence of protesters has been boosted by a supreme court ruling last year. In June the UK’s highest court quashed the convictions of Nora Ziegler and three others who had formed a blockade outside a London arms fair, saying there must be a test of “proportionality” weighing up the defendants’ rights to freedom of expression and freedom of assembly against the disruption caused. The defence of proportionality was subsequently used in the DLR and Colston cases. By contrast, in the Shell case, which was pre-Ziegler, the judge said there was no defence in law. However, the Shell defendants were still acquitted. It illustrates that for all the government talk of closing loopholes to prevent a repeat of the Colston decision, and Boris Johnson and Priti Patel encouraging prosecution of protesters, while there is a right to jury trial – something the government has itself proposed strengthening in a new bill of rights – juries will always have the right to acquit where they see fit. Kirsty Brimelow QC, the vice-chair of the Criminal Bar Association, said: “This wasn’t a rebellion. The verdict was within the law. Juries will continue making their decisions on the lives of those placed in their hands on the facts of the cases and within the protection of the law for both defendants and prosecution. The verdict should not be traduced by politics. “Taxpayers may prefer their money to be directed at the causes of the protests: they are big causes such as the climate crisis, the erasure of black history and historic and present atrocities and violence against women and girls.”The first person in the UK to catch a new strain of bird flu has been named as 79-year-old Alan Gosling, a retired engineer who lived with about 20 ducks inside his home in Devon. Gosling, who had about another 100 ducks living outside on his property in Buckfastleigh, noticed several birds falling ill shortly before Christmas, Devon Live reports. Subsequent tests by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) and the Animal and Plant Health Agency (Apha) were returned positive for the H5N1 strain of avian flu. They were subsequently killed shortly after Christmas. Gosling then tested positive for general flu virus and the H5N1 strain of avian flu – a first for the strain in the UK. The risk to the wider public continues to be very low, health officials have said, but people have been urged to not touch sick or dead birds. Gosling reportedly welcomed about 20 of the birds into his home as pets after he began feeding the flock. His daughter-in-law, Ellesha Gosling, from Cranbrook, told Devon Live how Gosling begged for their lives to be spared and described the Muscovy ducks as his best friends. She said: “The past couple of weeks have been hell for this family. He saw all of his ducks killed, and they were like his closest friends.” The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) confirmed on Thursday that a person in the south-west of England had tested positive for bird flu. In a statement, the health protection body said: “Bird-to-human transmission of avian flu is very rare and has only occurred a small number of times in the UK previously. “The person acquired the infection from very close, regular contact with a large number of infected birds, which they kept in and around their home over a prolonged period of time. “All contacts of the individual, including those who visited the premises, have been traced and there is no evidence of onward spread of the infection to anyone else. The individual is currently well and self-isolating.” The UK has recently reported a large number of bird flu outbreaks among animals, with the UK’s chief veterinary officer, Christine Middlemiss, issuing warnings to bird owners over hygiene. There are 64 cases of avian influenza H5N1 in England, according to Defra, with new cases being confirmed on a daily basis. There are also a number of cases in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. The whole of the UK is covered by avian influenza prevention zones, which require bird keepers to take measures to try to stop the disease’s spread, such as housing or netting all poultry and captive birds to keep them separate from wild birds, and disinfecting clothing and equipment. Some strains of bird flu can pass from birds to people, but this is extremely rare, according to the UKHSA. It usually requires close contact with an infected bird, so the risk to humans is generally considered very low. Human-to-human transmission of bird flu is also very rare, the organisation said. This was the first human case of the strain in the UK, the organisation said, although there have been cases elsewhere globally.As the first half of his fifth album draws to close with a track called Here We Go … Again – a beautiful, beatless ballad blessed with a chord progression that recalls the Love Unlimited Orchestra’s sublime 1973 hit Love’s Theme – Abel Tesfaye allows himself a moment of self-congratulation. He hymns his appearance on the cover of Billboard magazine at the start of last year, suited and booted, smoking a cigar, surrounded by his “kinfolk”: “Catalogue looking legendary … now we’re cruising on a yacht, we clear.” By the end of last year, Tesfaye – or rather his alter ego, the Weeknd – was on the cover of Billboard again, accompanying a feature that offered an oral history of the making of Dawn FM’s predecessor, After Hours. Complete with quotes from friends, producers, record company bosses and the tailor who made the suits he wore in the videos, it was the kind of celebration that normally appears in heritage rock magazines and is reserved for august classic albums. But then, After Hours’ biggest hit, Blinding Lights, had just dethroned Chubby Checker’s deathless 1962 smash The Twist as the top Billboard 100 single of all time, a designation based on total weeks on the US chart and the positions held during that time. He was already vastly successful before After Hours came out but the triumph of Blinding Lights – its combination of melancholy and dancefloor propulsion the perfect complement to the misery and yearning for escapism engendered by the pandemic – elevated Tesfaye to even more rarified heights. And Dawn FM is very much the sort of thing you might release had you recently been officially crowned an all-time great. It’s a concept album of sorts, with some lofty ideas about the afterlife that seem to be bound up with current affairs and informed by lockdown. “You’ve been in the dark for way too long, it’s time to step into the light,” offers the opening title track, while its description of what awaits us in the hereafter (“now that all future plans have been postponed”) could just as easily be a description of the hedonistic nirvana of the dancefloor: “Soon you’ll be healed, forgiven and refreshed, free from all trauma, pain, guilt and shame – you may even forget your name.” The album comes studded with star guests that say something about its author’s status. The inter-track narration is provided by Jim Carrey; Quincy Jones rocks up six tracks in, discussing his mother’s mental illness and the effect it had on his relationships; Here We Go… Again improbably unites Tyler, the Creator and 79-year-old Beach Boy Bruce Johnston; the production team pitches together Max Martin, Swedish House Mafia and leftfield electronic auteur Oneohtrix Point Never. And its references seem to place its author in a lineage of musical greats: aside from Here We Go… Again’s suggestion of Barry White, the concluding Phantom Regret By Jim nods to both Prince and Marc Bolan. But the most noticeable thing about Dawn FM is how effortless and confident it feels, as if Tesfaye has been bolstered rather than cowed by its predecessor’s success. Brilliantly written, produced and sung, it offers the captivating sound of an artist who knows he’s at the top of his game, at a blissful point at which every melody sticks, and every production idea works just so. It doesn’t bother cravenly chasing the success of Blinding Lights – although Less Than Zero, which marries that track’s clipped beat and retro electronics to an acoustic guitar and perfect chorus, is a huge hit single in waiting. And it delves further into the fascination with the 80s that Tesfaye first explored on the mixtapes that kickstarted his career, with their samples of Bad-era Michael Jackson and Kaleidoscope-era Siouxsie and the Banshees. This interest finds its expression throughout, from a second half entirely consisting of mid-tempo tracks influenced by 80s R&amp;B – uniformly stunning songs that never slip into pastiche – to the title of Less Than Zero (presumably a reference to Brett Easton Ellis’s epochal 1985 novel of moneyed, coke-numbed indifference, rather than the Elvis Costello song about Oswald Mosley from which the book swiped its name). Indeed, Tesfaye’s interest in the era of the “second British invasion” is such that he occasionally communicates icy hauteur by slipping into an English accent, which ranges from mild intonation to what you might call the full Dick Van Dyke, on Don’t Break My Heart and Gasoline. That is a rare jarring moment on an album so well done that it’s hard to pick out highlights, although Out of Time is a particularly gorgeous ballad, and the moment when the wracked electro of How Do I Make You Love Me? segues into Take My Breath – five and half euphoric minutes of disco-house, with a riff that recalls Daft Punk’s Da Funk – is pulse-quickening. Students of the often vexed relationship between pop stars and the personae they inhabit may note that, after the Weeknd was depicted bloodied and bandaged on his last album cover, Dawn FM pictures him prematurely wizened and grey, as if his past excesses have caught up with him. Quite what that image is supposed to mean isn’t clear but someone minded to pick holes might suggest that the lyrics that stick to the Weeknd’s classic subjects – creepy abusive relationships, overconsumption and jaded small-hours decadence – are starting to sound as old as the character looks. The one flaw in Dawn FM is that the imagery in the album’s opening tracks feels very well-worn: “I wrap my hands around your throat you love it when I always squeeze”; “It’s 5am, I’m nihilist”; “You’re offering yourself to me like a sacrifice”, etc, etc. Then again, maybe it’s meant to signify maturity born out of bitter experience. There’s a certain narrative arc to the songs, independent of the stuff about the afterlife, that sees the Weeknd go from erotic asphyxiation and hoofing up drugs to feeling wounded that one of his conquests is cheating on her husband with him (“I heard you’re married, girl, and I hate it,” he sings, the negative image of the cokey hedonism of I Can’t Feel My Face), then pleading for affection and panicking that he’s stuck: “I don’t want to be a prisoner to who I used to be”. Perhaps it’s supposed to be taken in conjunction with the album’s afterlife theme, a suggestion that the character is reaching the end of the line and that Tesfaye – who has talked in interviews about wanting to “remove the Weeknd from the world” – intends to move on. If that’s true, Dawn FM is a fantastic way to bow out: 2020s pop music so brilliantly crafted that it causes you to realise how much other 2020s pop music is makeweight.Anyone who has ever tried to be a trailblazer in women’s sport will identify with Sara Cox’s inch-perfect analogy. “It’s like walking through a patch of stinging nettles,” suggests the world’s first female professional referee. “If you’re the first one to do it, you’re going to get stung. If you’re the next person behind me, I’ve already created the path for you. You just need to walk.” Even in supposedly enlightened 2022 it is already clear that professional rugby is not yet a totally level playing field and, as Cox puts it, “there’s always going to be a little bit of friction”. Ideally the hugely capable Cox would be sitting here on the outskirts of Exeter discussing the plum officiating gigs she has already enjoyed, notably last year’s Olympic women’s sevens gold medal match. Instead the 31-year-old is quietly reflecting on the hidden battles she still has to fight in a traditionally alpha-male environment. Take the history-making day last September when the Devonian became the first woman to referee a Premiership fixture. Her performance in Harlequins’ game against Worcester at the Twickenham Stoop earned universally good reviews; now it turns out she had to wear men’s kit in the absence of properly fitted women’s gear. She ended up in an extra small men’s jersey which she customised herself at home. “With me we’re treading ground we’re never trodden before. ‘We’ve never had a female in the Premiership before so why would we need to order female kit?’ It’s not even considered.” Another fact of life is regularly opting to share a small dressing room with her two male assistants, as opposed to being exiled to a distant side of the ground which can make her pre-match tasks – stud checks etc – more logistically tricky. She mostly finds it easiest to escape around the corner to the shower area and do a speedy change there. “I don’t want to make my male counterparts uncomfortable by changing in front of them … that’s not fair because they don’t know what to do.” Cox, back at the Stoop as an assistant referee for Saturday’s rerun of Quins’ dramatic 2021 Premiership final encounter with Exeter, is not complaining: she is simply telling it like it is, having refereed men’s matches in unglamorous surroundings since she was 17. She was also once a decent enough winger to have been invited to England Under-20 trials. Many are hoping 2022 will prove a stellar year for women’s rugby but, equally, greater recognition for brilliant role models such as Cox is seriously overdue. How long must we wait, for example, for a woman – whether it be Ireland’s Joy Neville, Scotland’s Hollie Davidson, South Africa’s Aimee Barrett-Theron or Cox – to control a men’s Six Nations fixture? In Cox’s view, the naysayers are fast running out of road. “Nobody has ever turned around to me and said: ‘You’ll never get to men’s international rugby.’ In theory there is no reason why not. None at all.” It might even increase respect for officials worldwide. Aside from some social media abuse following the Olympic final – “You name it, they complained about it” – Cox insists her main on-field issue is players not knowing what to call her. “They stand there almost like little schoolboys going: ‘Er, um …’ I just say: ‘Call me Sir.’ I really don’t mind. By the time they’ve tried to correct themselves and address me as ‘Ref’ or ‘Ma’am’, they’ve often forgotten the point they were trying to make.” Some, though, have been supportive, notably the England prop Joe Marler who promised the scrums in the Quins v Worcester game would not descend into chaos. Sure enough, there were no issues and Cox came away with memories she will forever cherish. “If I could bottle that feeling I’d be a very rich person. People could say what they liked on social media … they were never going to take that unique moment away from me. “Sometimes the easiest part of your job is being on that field. You’re free of the peripheral noise … you go out and feel at home. In your mind you’re thinking: ‘This is what makes me happy.’ Sometimes people find it strange that a referee might smile. They think about a referee as a robot. It’s as if I should have no personality. Why? I’m still a human being. It’s almost like people think I’m a thing that makes decisions. We’ve got to change that and break that down.” It might also help if rugby folk knew how deep Cox has had to dig emotionally to make it this far. “If I wasn’t optimistic I would have given up a long time ago. There have been a couple of times when I’ve been in some very dark places, both personally and professionally.” The biggest jolt was a breast cancer scare early last summer. “I found a lump in a place I wasn’t expecting to find one. Everything else suddenly doesn’t matter any more. Your whole world stops spinning. You stand there and think ‘Now what?’ Unfortunately there is cancer in my family: my grandmother had it and my mum had a scare as well. You forget about being out on a rugby pitch and all the things that come with that.” Thankfully things turned out fine and her optimistic streak also remains intact. As she continues to stride through her metaphorical nettles – “Yeah, I’m going to get stung a couple of times but I know that what I leave behind me will make life so much easier for the next generation” – she also senses times are finally changing. “I think we’ve got people in the Rugby Football Union who are willing to look at the future of the game and have a genuine desire for it to be all inclusive, no matter your background, your sex or how you identify.” So what about her own remaining ambitions? Surely she fancies being the next Wayne Barnes or Luke Pearce? “It’s very difficult for me to turn around and say: ‘I think I should be there.’ I have zero control over how appointments are done. The guys above me do that.” OK, but can she feel another slice of history beckoning? “You’ve just got to focus on the bits you can control. Can I go to the gym at 7am and make sure I’m as fit as I can be? Can I go home and put the necessary time into my post-match reviews? Do all that and I put myself in a position where they have no excuse any more.”My son is 30 and a lawyer. He is ambitious and enthusiastic, but he’s now in his fourth job, and already wants to leave after just a few months. When he starts a new job, he is generally happy, but within a short time he realises there’s a gap between the job description and the reality, and wants to get out because he feels he’s wasting his time. He says the problems he encounters are poor management and bad organisation. Although I think each time he has good reasons to resign, I try to suggest that there might be something in him – his expectations, his choices – which could explain that “pattern”. In his current job he resents his young superior’s constant rewriting of his contracts, mostly for minor grammatical details. He acknowledges that she is neither harassing him nor ill-intentioned. His older sister (also a lawyer) sees nothing wrong in his boss’s behaviour. My son dismisses her help and thinks that she’s too “submissive”. I told him recently that he can’t have it all. That it could never be perfect, just like in a relationship. I would very much have liked to know what your son was like as a young boy. Could he take criticism? How was he with authority? He seems to struggle with seeing others’ point of view, or thinking he’s never wrong. My specialist this week, psychotherapist Chris Mills, thought you sounded really sensible. You could see that there was a problem but realised that this may be down to your son’s attitude. “In a way,” said Mills, “your son’s fighting off admitting he has a problem, so he’s making the problem literally anybody else’s.” What might this problem be? “For all that your son does brilliantly, he can’t seem to grasp that he can’t relate well to other people; if he could just admit that, it would transform his relationships and his working life would be more bearable.” The people around him seem to see this, yet he doesn’t. “He reminds me of students I used to work with who never failed at anything and it made them incredibly fragile,” says Mills. “Failure, which is entirely ordinary, becomes terrifying to those who aren’t used to it. Sometimes people who are super intelligent find it incredibly difficult to adjust to the ordinariness of the everyday, which is full of people getting things wrong and disagreeing with you.” Mills further pointed out that success in everyday life is “being able to deal with that failure and not expecting life to be tidy or linear”. We also thought it was interesting that he comes to talk to you. Mills thought it seemed slightly immature – that your son felt that only his mum really understood him. I think you’re doing all the right things in bringing a bit of ordinariness to his complaints, and asking him to look at his own role in things. I know people like this: they leave job after job (or relationship, an interesting parallel you made there), never looking at the common denominator in all of it: themselves. We learn by our failures and they help us develop. Acknowledging our failures is a strength, but only if we can see them as our failures, and not attribute them to others. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.The old joke about the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact was that it was the only military alliance to attack itself, after its tanks rolled into Prague in 1968 to crush a reform movement there. With the deployment of troops from the Russian-led Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) to Kazakhstan on Thursday, some heard “eerie echoes” of the so-called Prague spring of 1968, and the Soviet crushing of the Hungarian revolution in 1956. Meant as a mutual defence pact, the CSTO has not made any joint deployments since its founding in 1999. Now it has been called upon to quell internal unrest in one of its member states. Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, claimed the revolt was inspired by foreign-backed “terrorists” to justify his appeal, but the call to the CSTO suggests he no longer felt he could trust his own forces. When Tokayev’s request came, the CSTO jumped into action in a matter of hours, and on Thursday morning Russian paratroopers were already arriving in Kazakhstan. In a hardline address to the nation on Friday in which he said he had personally approved orders to shoot to kill, Tokayev gave “special thanks” to Vladimir Putin for sending the troops, but said they had not taken part in any fighting. The force totals about 2,500 personnel, the regional alliance has said, and Russian defence ministry said it was used to guard key infrastructure sites. Some in Moscow praised the decision to intervene. Maxim Suchkov, the director of the Institute for International Studies at MGIMO, a leading Moscow university, dismissed comparisons with the Soviet-era Warsaw Pact interventions as “propaganda” and said a short mission could boost Russia’s standing in the region. The events in Kazakhstan represented a “crisis in which Moscow can be instrumental and helpful,” Suchkov wrote on Twitter. One definite similarity with the Warsaw Pact is that although the CSTO is an alliance, the decision to intervene was almost certainly taken in Moscow. It was cheered on by Belarus’s Alexander Lukashenko, who in 2020 was able to crush a huge revolution using his own domestic forces, but Putin will have made the final call. Putin may be hoping that a swift mission will quickly restore order and leave Kazakhstan grateful and indebted to Moscow, but the operation comes with risks. The fact that the CSTO move is seen as a Russian intervention has caused dismay for many in Kazakhstan, where one of the former president Nursultan Nazarbayev’s main achievements was avoiding major conflict between the Kazakh majority and ethnic Russian minority in the country. Kazakhstan has proudly pursued a “multi-vector” foreign policy for years, and its close relations with Moscow were offset by good relations with western nations. As news broke on Wednesday of Tokayev’s request to the CSTO, the editor-in-chief of the state-run television station RT, Margarita Simonyan, set out a wishlist of demands. “We should definitely help, but we need to lay down some conditions as well,” she wrote on Twitter. These included making Russian a second state language in the country and recognising Crimea as part of Russia. It was a sign, perhaps, of how some in Moscow view the CSTO alliance. If Tokayev does succeed in crushing the protests with Moscow’s help, the Russians may expect favours in return.Joe Biden marked the first anniversary of 6 January with a powerful, ideological speech about the choice between democracy and autocracy. It began a day of reflection in which Democratic Congress members and police officers spoke of the fear they felt for their lives. Every major news network opted for somber programming and roundtable discussions about the fragile nature of American democracy. Except for one. Fox News’s primetime lineup of rightwing hosts used rock guitar licks to introduce a different narrative: one of hysterical Democrats “jilling up noise” and crying “crocodile tears”. Hosts Tucker Carlson, Sean Hannity and Laura Ingraham pushed conspiracy theories that undercover FBI agents or Capitol police were responsible for the breach of the Capitol and spent most of the night claiming Congress should be focused on investigating the “real rioters”, Black Lives Matter protesters. Carlson began his show in incendiary style. While Biden and the press agreed 6 January was one of the most significant dates in recent history, Carlson said it “barely rates as a footnote”, arguing that because “not a single elected official was killed” and “none of the insurrectionists had guns” that the effort to overthrow the government was “embarrassingly tepid”. “Not a lot happened that day,” he said in an almost disappointed tone. He said he accepted it was a riot, “but really only just a riot, maybe just barely”. In a night of endless false equivalencies, Carlson got his in early. Was what happened on 6 January a greater risk to America than inflation? Why were the protesters rotting in jail while the Sacklers walk free? Why were “unarmed protesters” being demonized? If he had watched the day’s coverage on any other channel, Carlson would have seen that investigations and video evidence have proven that the Capitol mob was incredibly violent. Objects used to attack police officers included bricks, pepper spray, pipes, bats and Tasers. Prosecutors have charged 187 of the rioters with violent acts. Michael Fanone, a Metropolitan police department officer who voted for Trump in 2016, was shocked on his neck with a Taser several times, which led to a heart attack. Rioters threatened to take his weapon and shoot him with it, shouting, “Kill him with his own gun!” Threats to life were not mentioned by the three hosts. Instead Carlson quickly moved on to conspiracy theories, in particular his baseless claim that riots were stoked by Ray Epps, a Trump supporter from Arizona whom Carlson falsely believes is an undercover FBI agent. He showed clips from his documentary series Patriot Purge which led to the resignation of two Fox News contributors who said the documentary was “incoherent conspiracy-mongering”. But his biggest strut was to invite Senator Ted Cruz on the program, who on Wednesday had accurately described 6 January as “a violent terrorist attack”. Carlson was appalled at this language and demanded that Cruz explain himself. Cruz first attempted to wheedle his way out, calling his choice of words “sloppy and dumb” but Carlson continued to berate him, making him walk back and continually apologize for his language. Carlson was dishing out a humiliation, reminding Cruz of his status as a Republican kingmaker. As a final punishment Carlson asked Cruz what he thought about Ray Epps, pushing him to join him in a nonsense conspiracy theory, which Cruz did for the first time, saying “for [Epps] to appear on the FBI’s most wanted list and come off it certainly suggests he was working for the FBI. That’s not conclusive, but that’s the obvious implication.” Later in the evening, Sean Hannity took the baton, railing against the “rank hypocrisy”, “lying” and “grandstanding” by the Democrats – ignoring the hypocrisy that his on-screen opinions are entirely opposed to the feelings he shared with the Trump administration as the attack was taking place. Hannity called Biden a liar, playing a clip from his speech in which he says that Donald Trump did nothing during the attack but watch TV. But Hannity’s own texts, revealed by the congressional committee investigating the attack, show he was perturbed by the former president’s lack of action on that day. Hannity’s texts at the time show he was “very worried about the next 48 hours”, that he begged the chief of staff to persuade Trump to “make a statement” and “ask people to leave the Capitol” and that Trump “can’t mention the election again. Ever.” Hannity has repeated Trump’s lie that the election was rigged almost daily since November. Instead of a mea culpa, Hannity claimed Trump had wanted to send 10,000 national guard troops to protect the Capitol and was blocked from getting them by the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi. This has been disproven. He made no direct order and was not concerned about securing the Capitol. The night finished with Ingraham returning to the network’s central theme, that Black Lives Matter protesters were to blame for the real violence. “If the Democrats were truly worried about political violence, they would have condemned it in summer of 2020,” she told her viewers. Ingraham’s own texts, also revealed by the committee, show she too was deeply worried about political violence on 6 January. She texted the White House chief of staff saying, “Mark, the president needs to tell people in the Capitol this is hurting all of us – he is destroying his legacy”.Sainsbury’s is increasing hourly pay by more than 12% for grocery delivery drivers and more than 5% for its lowest paid shop workers as staff shortages continue to affect British businesses. Basic pay for shop workers, at Sainsbury’s supermarkets and the Argos catalogue chain, will rise to a minimum of £10 an hour from the current £9.50 from 6 March. The company said the change would cost £100m. Grocery delivery drivers’ pay will rise to £11.50 an hour, including a 75p premium on top of a 75p booster already being paid. Argos drivers will receive an extra 25p an hour on top of basic pay in addition to a 75p existing supplement, taking their total to £11 an hour. Sainsbury’s staff will also get a 15% discount in stores for five days around each payday. Argos, Sainsbury’s and Habitat staff will continue to get a 10% discount at other times. The new rates of pay exceed the legal minimum wage for people aged 25 and older, which rises from £8.91 to £9.50 an hour from April. Dave Gill, the national officer at the Usdaw union, welcomed the increase after lengthy negotiations. “It’s been a tough time for food retail staff who have worked throughout the pandemic in difficult circumstances … they deserve decent pay and this offer is a welcome boost,” he said. Sainsbury’s is being forced to act as retailers and other businesses battle for staff amid widespread shortages that are driving up wages and the price of goods. Some companies, including Tesco and Asda, have been offering qualified lorry drivers signing-on bonuses of £1,000 or more. But shortages extend to warehouse staff and van drivers, while shops are also under pressure as the spread of the Omicron Covid variant has forced millions to take time off. Greggs bakery chain said on Thursday that it had brought forward pay rises for workers by five months so they were received before Christmas amid “continued disruption to staffing and supply chains”. The company also said it had put up the price of its baked goods by 5-10p each because of increased costs including wages. Next said it was also having to put up the price of its clothing by as much as 6% this autumn as the fashion and homewares retailer expected average wages to rise by more than 5% this year. Lidl announced in November that it would increase minimum pay from £9.50 to £10.10 an hour outside of London, a more than 6% increase, from March and £10.85 to £11.30 within the M25. Workers at the discounter can earn up to £12.25 an hour in London depending on length of service. However, last month that was topped by Aldi, which said it will increase minimum hourly rates for shop workers to £10.57 an hour from £9.55 nationally from February, a near 11% rise, and £11.32 in Greater London from £11.07. Aldi is one of the few retailers to continue to pay staff for break times, making its overall pay deal even more generous. Simon Roberts, the chief executive of Sainsbury’s, said: “We are making this significant investment to show our colleagues how much we value the brilliant job they do for our customers every day. It also reflects the significant progress we are making against our plan and to save money we can invest in lower prices, offer fantastic colleague service and make shopping convenient for customers.”What is the problem with how we help elderly and disabled people? The quality of life of social care recipients in England is a lottery based on their council area, wealth and the availability of family to offer unpaid care. Social care is means tested and councils do not pay enough to care operators to cover the cost of state-funded recipients, so private funders in effect subsidise them. Standards and availability of care are patchy, families end up bearing a huge burden and people occupy NHS hospital beds when they could be helped in the community. Funding for people who need social care stands at around £20bn a year compared with £135bn for the NHS, and the population is ageing. How might Welby’s ‘covenant’ change things? Underwriting social care more fully and setting it alongside education and the NHS as a public good requires, in the archbishop’s words, making it “a national obligation, expressed by the state”. That would need wider public acceptance of the merit of improving the quality of life for people nearing the end of their lives, or who are disabled, perhaps by emphasising basic values such as kindness, empathy and justice. Far from everyone will need social care, so a broader state commitment to providing better care is likely to need to be sold by politicians as an insurance policy for all. What approach is the government taking? Its policy announcements have focused more on personal finances than quality of life. The reason for capping care costs at £86,000 was explained as preventing people having to sell their homes, or in most cases, their children losing a valuable part of their inheritance. Chronic shortages of care staff, which mean about 400,000 people are awaiting care packages or assessments in England, can only be addressed with resources of an additional £7-£10bn a year, experts say. Nowhere near that amount is being offered. Does the government have a longer-term vision? The social care white paper, which sets out a 10-year vision, includes elements that could overlap with Welby’s hopes. It talks about increasing housing options and spreading innovative community models of care so there is no longer a binary choice between struggling on at home or going into a care home. More intermediate assisted-living options are to be encouraged. This approach could help those who advocate building elderly care into new housing estates and linking care homes with schools to keep the old and young together. A gentler slope between healthy adulthood and death is hoped for.The archbishop of Canterbury has called for a new “covenant” on social care between the state and the people, similar to the provision of the NHS and education, which makes “absolute value and dignity” the top priority. Justin Welby, the leader of the Church of England, said that focusing on managing the cost of social care, a priority in the latest government reforms, is “the wrong way round” because it fails to consider what people who need care want. “You start with the value of the human being,” Welby said. “Then you say, ‘what is the consequence of that? [in terms of the care system]’. We did that for the health service. We haven’t done that for social care.” He called for a deal that would make the best possible care for all “a national obligation”. Welby was speaking out before a parliamentary battle over the funding of social care. A new tax and a cap on care costs to prevent most people from having to sell their homes are at the heart of the government’s proposed reforms of the sector, which affect 11 million people in the UK as carers or care recipients. Ministers have resisted calls from MPs, care experts and the former health secretary Jeremy Hunt to inject at least £7bn a year in new money to stabilise social care after nearly two years of crisis, with the pandemic leaving parts of the system in collapse. Scotland is pursuing a different approach and is consulting on setting up a new National Care Service. The archbishop said: “There isn’t a clear vision for care. We know the vision for the NHS: ‘free care at the point of use’. You can sum it up in a sentence … We keep putting the cart before the horse. We keep talking about how we are going to pay for it when we don’t really know what we want to pay for.” The House of Lords, in which Welby sits, will soon consider plans for financing the cap on social care. Under the government plans poorer people will lose a larger proportion of their wealth than richer people and their homes may still be sold to finance their care. The upper chamber is expected to demand changes to the proposal that has been labelled unfair. Welby is pressing for a more profound reform. “You have to have a covenantal approach which says regardless of who you are, of your economic value, of your utility, society covenants to give you the best possible care it can as you approach the end of your life,” he said. That means making social care “a community obligation, not just a family obligation”. Welby’s father-in-law lived with him and his wife for the last year of his life, with his wife, who trained as a teacher, spending many years caring for him. Their daughter receives care funded by a carer’s allowance, and lives with them. “If it is just a family obligation it is totally unjust because poorer families, families struggling to make ends meet, families with significant debt simply will feel guilty,” Welby said. “We have got to get rid of the guilt. It is a community obligation. We have done that in health and education, we need to do that with social care. It is a national obligation, expressed by the state. The state at the very least has to underwrite that covenant, as it does with health.” Welby and the archbishop of York have commissioned a review of social care to examine the wishes and needs of people who use it, which will report back in the spring. The Archbishops’ Commission on Reimagining Care is chaired by Dr Anna Dixon. She said: “The care system is not enabling people to live a full life. People are not being supported to live the lives that they want or any of us would choose for ourselves.” The commission has produced a list of values to underpin a future vision of care. They “include concepts that are not usually heard in policy discussions about care, such as flourishing, loving kindness, empathy, trust and justice”. “This affects all of us,” Dixon said. “At one time or another we are needing care or providing care. We have got to get away from seeing this [as a] thing that happens to someone else.” Welby said that often when discussions about someone’s end of life care focus on cost “my colleagues who work with me here [at Lambeth Palace] from Africa and the global south just find that incomprehensible. They start with saying they are very special.” He added that in the UK people don’t like to talk about the final stages of ageing. “We jump from being a respected elder, who is independent and able, and we close our eyes to the next stage, Shakespeare’s sixth and seventh age of man … the next thing you have is the obituary,” he said. “We leave out the bit between being competent and the obituary.” “There is a point at which our individual autonomy is lost but we are still alive,” he said. “At that point in a really healthy society, the community says because we love you and value you as an individual we will ensure the maximum possible dignity and care in this period, whether it be long or short.”There comes a point on every Ashes tour when even the most ardent England fan has to ask whether the cricket is worth getting out of bed for. It’s a complex set of calculations in which you have to weigh the score in the series and the state of the game, the likelihood of the team being humiliated again, the ambient temperature of the bedroom, the distance to the TV set, the hour and whatever you’ve got on the next day. Exhaustion multiplied by dejection divided by hope. Whatever the answer is, it absolutely isn’t 36 for four off 21.5 overs, 3-0 down in the series, 380 runs behind in the match, at three in the morning. That’s the time to make like the team have been, and roll over. And then Pat Cummins overstepped. It was his first called no-ball of the series. He missed his length and Ben Stokes smacked the ball back for four down the ground. That ended a stretch in which England, lost in the doldrums, had scored one run off 76 balls. Two balls later, he pulled four more, through square leg. It was the first twitch of resistance, the throbbing vein on the forehead of a man who, like all the rest of us, has had just about enough. In the next Cummins over, Stokes was nearly caught-and-bowled. In the over after that, Jonny Bairstow was almost caught at slip. And then something truly extraordinary happened. Cameron Green, bowling from around the wicket, fooled Stokes into shouldering his bat to a delivery that slanted in and hit his off-stump. But the bail barely moved, and the ball carried on through to the keeper. Stokes has never come across as a devout sort, but this freakish bit of good fortune felt like a sign of divine intervention, a finger on the scale, a thumb on the bail. All the luck England had missed in the first three Tests served up to him in one dollop. He grinned. And like all good God-fearing men came to the obvious conclusion that, today, at least, providence was with him. So fuck it. He uppercut Green over the slips, then clipped him through midwicket. Something was stirring. You could feel it. We’ve seen too little of this Stokes lately, while he has been labouring away on his best impression of a prim and proper top-order batsman, block, block, block. This was the Stokes who clears bars and empties beds. It was time to dash to the living room. In the next over Green smacked Stokes hard on the bottom hand. He was already in obvious pain, grimacing because of his side strain, but the wounds only seemed to harden him, as if battle had sharpened his instincts. Sometimes it happens like that. They always said Gordon Greenidge was more dangerous on one leg. Cummins brought on Mitchell Starc. Stokes hit him for one four through long-on, another through long-off, and another through midwicket. He came out of his crease to play Scott Boland, drove him hard through cover for four, and whipped him to square leg for three, a shot that brought up his fifty, England’s sixth of the tour, and the first by anyone other than Joe Root and Dawid Malan. And where he went, Bairstow followed. Early in his innings you could almost see Bairstow sheltering in his lee, he had four from his first 18 balls, 17 from his first 46, but as Stokes’ confidence grew, Bairstow’s did too. By the time Stokes was closing on his fifty, Bairstow was, for the first time in years, back batting at his best in a Test match. The muddled and messy player who has spent the past two years scratching around, in and out of the team, had turned back into the crisp, bristling batsman who looked so good when he scored all those runs and set all those records, in 2016. It was a masterful innings, especially in the way he cut and swept Nathan Lyon, and expertly measured. He accelerated his pace after he passed fifty and slowed again as he neared his hundred. There are all sorts of ways to talk about Bairstow’s innings, you could look at the data, which showed how he had doggedly blocked everything the seamers bowled him around the top of off, or the technique, and the way in which he switched his guard after he had passed fifty so was finally able to marry his white ball game with the demands of Test cricket. But Bairstow chose to frame it in terms of the character he showed, especially after, like Stokes, he was wounded by a vicious blow that did serious damage to his bottom hand. “It’s about gritting your teeth and getting stuck in,” he said. “You’ve got to dig deep, these are the times you look at yourself and say: ‘What am I about and where do I come from? What’s the bit in the tank that keeps you coming back?’ I’d like to think that in 20 years’ time when I’m sat over a pint they’re the moments I’d like to look back on, and say: ‘When did you stand up? When did you front up for the other 10 blokes in the dressing room?’” There are lessons there, for the other batsmen in the team, yes, but for the management, too. Character isn’t a question of scheduling, or “systemic change”, it comes from the culture of the team, which comes, in turn, from the leadership. There was a ringing clarity about the way Stokes and Bairstow played, what they wanted to do and how they planned to do it, which was at complete odds with the confusion that has dogged England’s Test team, and their own careers, for the past few years. England have still lost the Ashes. England are still losing this game. But they showed they’re still worth getting up for and gave a glimpse of how they might move forward, too.Zack Snyder’s Justice League: 4hrs 2mins. The Irishman: 3hrs 29mins. The latest James Bond, the longest ever: 2hrs 43mins. Some of the most hyped films of the past few years have been as known for their length as their plot. So is this the new normal – are films getting longer? I asked Sarah Atkinson, professor of screen media at King’s College London. I loved Tenet, but I remember craving an interval and an ice-cream. Am I the only one feeling films are longer? Cinema is a bit of a machine, and is surrounded by marketing, so what we hear is often what we remember. These days, there’s a lot of talk about long running times. It’s all part of incentivising people to go out and pay for a ticket, which they won’t do unless it’s for something special – a big, epic film. Just look at the Marvel franchise: almost every one is well over two hours. The Marvel thing of putting a scene after the credits was a global crime against bladders. Did you come across Przemysław Jarząbek, the data scientist who crunched the numbers around film length? I did, and he found that, on average, film length isn’t going up; we just think it is. That doesn’t surprise me. It is all marketing. Why the need to incentivise people to go to the cinema? Aren’t films making money through streaming? Yes, but Amazon and Netflix cut out the distributors, the marketers, and even the cinemas themselves. Also, films can’t be entered into the Oscars unless they’ve had a cinematic release. Alfonso Cuarón’s Roma – another epic – went straight to Netflix but also aired in cinemas. Cuarón himself even said people should see it on the big screen because it’s a cinematic film. Isn’t a film cinematic merely by virtue of being in the cinema? I know what you mean. Is a film more epic just because it’s made more use of digital tech? It’s weird the way a film’s length can be a sticking point, yet many of us have no problem bingeing 10 episodes of a series … That’s not really a fair comparison. Streamed series are by their nature fast-paced, with multiple storylines and characters and cliffhangers. Whereas epic films such as Dune, and The Lord of the Rings before it, are full of indulgent, long, sweeping camera shots: scenes without dialogue simply to show the beauty of the image. How has the pandemic changed film? Virtual production has taken off. So you don’t have to be in a location – you can be in a large studio, projecting whatever image you need, which increases the opportunity for special effects and more dramatic scenes. The TV series The Mandalorian is the epitome of this: the actors performed in front of an enormous LED screen. Progress in virtual production that was supposed to take four years happened in one because the industry knew it was the only way stuff would get finished. I’ve enjoyed seeing film-makers use the tools at hand. I saw one horror film, Host, that takes place over Zoom; it was about an hour long. They say 90 minutes is the optimal time for a horror. It’s good to hear low-budget and indie films are flying the flag for shorter runtimes – and still getting made. They’re getting made more than ever, because of the accessibility of technology and the abundance of ways to view. We still have film festivals; it’s just that the marketing machine talks loudest about the blockbuster. It’s an exciting time for film.These thick, chewy cookies have a similar vibe to an oatmeal raisin cookie, which I know is rarely anyone’s first choice. But these are way more interesting, with the savouriness from the tahini and sweet, sticky dates. One of my favourite things about them is that they don’t require any chilling, meaning they go from bowl to oven to plate in about 30 minutes. Vegan tahini and date cookies Prep 15 min Cook 15 min Makes 12 100g tahini 2 tbsp water 60ml neutral oil 45g golden syrup 2 tsp vanilla extract 120g caster sugar 125g plain flour 75g jumbo oats 1 tsp bicarbonate of soda ½ tsp salt 130g chopped dates Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 and line two large baking trays with greaseproof paper. Put the tahini, water, oil, golden syrup and vanilla in a bowl, and give everything a good mix until smooth. Stir in the sugar. In a separate bowl, mix all the remaining ingredients. Pour in the tahini mixture and stir thoroughly to make a thick dough. Divide the dough into 12, roll into balls, put them on the baking trays and flatten them with your hand. Bake for 14-16 minutes, until browned and the edges are firm but the middle is still a little soft. Leave to cool for a few minutes, then transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThe US economy ended the year with disappointing jobs growth figures for December, adding just 199,000 workers to the non-farming labor force. Economists had been expecting more than double that number – 422,000 – suggesting that the US economy was improving, but erratically, as worker shortages troubled employers even before the Omicron coronavirus variant arrived, threatening another recovery stall. Figures released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics showed that the US unemployment rate fell to 3.9%, and that job creation was highest in leisure and hospitality, a key recovery sector, which added 53,000. Professional and business services contributed 43,000 while manufacturing added 26,000. “The muted 199,000 gain in non-farm payrolls and the more muted increase in labor force participation suggest that worker shortages were becoming a bigger restraint on employment growth, even before the Omicron surge in infections, which could knock hundreds of thousands off payrolls in January,” noted Michael Pearce, senior US economist at Capital Economics. But the slower-than-anticipated pace of hiring is offset by the record number of positions in 2021 and jobless claims registered at 207,000 last week close to the lowest level in 50 years. But the latest numbers suggested continued uncertainty over the course of a US economy that had begun rebounding strongly between waves of Covid disruption. The latest Omicron surge, which has disrupted transportation, office reopenings and hospitality, has shown that expectations of a smooth recovery are misplaced. “The volatility incurred by Omicron sweeping across America means that the data point of today is basically useless in assessing tomorrow,” said George Ball, chairman of financial services firm Sanders Morris Harris, told NBC TV on Friday morning. The disappointing job figures may also cause US central bankers to reconsider plans to accelerate reductions in stimulus spending as they attempt to balance job growth against tackling inflation that stands close to a 40-year high. Fed officials predict three rate rises this year, with a further five by the end of 2024 as it moves toward its goal of bringing inflation to a 2% target and achieving maximum employment. But the Fed chairman, Jay Powell, has also said that the central bank is watching wage growth closely for further evidence that the economy could turn into a repeating self-reinforcing battle between rising costs and wage gains. Average pay rose 0.4% in December, indicating that wages rose around 4.8% in 2021. But that’s still beneath the rate of inflation, most recently pegged at 6.8%. Still, weekly jobless claims are around 200,000 – or at a level below the 2019 weekly average from before the pandemic – but the labor force overall remains about 2.4 million workers below pre-pandemic levels, reflecting ongoing disruptions related to the virus. Friday’s figures reflect how tricky it is to forecast an economy that’s still being roiled by a pandemic. ADP Research Institute data released on Wednesday showed that US companies added the most jobs in seven months using data that is less comprehensive than the analysis put out by the labor department on Friday. Economists had predicted half the number of job gains, with the ADP chief economist, Nela Richardson, saying the hiring was “broad-based”. Higher wages and more attractive working terms may have been behind the surge, but many economists warn that the fast-spreading Omicron variant could affect hiring. Capital Economics’ Pearce warned that employees off work would still be paid, and therefore counted as employed, and not show up in employment figures in the latest figures. “The rapid spread of Omicron doesn’t appear to have delivered a big hit to services demand yet, but we expect widespread absenteeism could supersize the economy’s worker shortage this month,” Pearce said. “The key takeaway for the Fed is that, with few signs of a recovery in labour supply, the continued decline in the unemployment rate and surge in wage growth looks set to be sustained over 2022,” he added.Across 1 janissary IN JARS SAY (anag) 9 Act One impACT ON Election (hidden) 10 febrility IT in BRIEFLY (anag) 11 gazebo GAZE + O(utside)B(roadcast) 12 marshland MARS + H  AND [bridge hand] 13 shrimp (iri)SH  P(lan) 17 ear rehEARsal/clEARly/hEARd 19 plaguer EARPLUG (anag) 20 yorkers (we)EK (rev) in SORRY (anag) 21 aye eye (hom) [an eye for an eye] 23 in fact IN/F(ine)/ACT 27 juliennes JU  NES 28 rookie ROOK + IE 29 augmented GET ME AND (yo)U (anag) 30 seeing triple def 31 septettes P(iano)/T(ime) in SETTEES (rev) Down 2 apeman NAME/P(er)/A(nnum) (rev) 3 inrush IN/RUSH(plant) 4 solely SOLE/L(eft)/(chipp)Y 5 rotunda R(adius) + OUT-AND (anag) 6 octachord CH(check) in A DOCTOR (anag) 7 novelised NO  SED 8 decompose DECO + POEMS (anag) 14 apriorism A PRIOR IS M(ass) 15 Mayflower MAY  LOWER 16 junctions J(udge)/UN  IONS 17 era E(urop)E + R(embe)R + A(si)A 18 rye/Rye double def [port in Kent] 22 YouTube OUT in BUY (rev) + (pric)E 24 kismet K(ing)/IS/MET 25 unknot trUNK NO Thanks (hidden) 26 severe SEVER + romEo or juliEtAndres Serrano is not known as an especially political artist. The 71-year-old’s photographs are more accurately described as transgressive, perennially summed up with a singular point of reference: Piss Christ, his 1987 photo of a crucifix submerged in his own orange-tinted urine, which has over the years sparked multiple instances of national outrage. In the photographic series that followed, including The Klan (1990), The Morgue (1992), Shit (2007), and Nudes (2009), Serrano’s work has remained as provocative as it is aptly named. “I like to make the kind of pictures where you don’t need much more than the title to tell you what you’re looking at,” the artist said over the phone. As for his perpetual association with a single, 34-year-old work of art, he doesn’t mind: “Piss Christ is a good soundbite – easy to remember and repeat.” Serrano’s latest work, Insurrection (2022), takes a decidedly more political tone, having debuted in CulturalDC’s Source Theatre in Washington this week, the one-year anniversary of the Capitol attack. As the artist’s first-ever film, Insurrection offers a grim portrait of the United States, stitched together from found footage of the 6 January riot. True to the transgressive nature of Serrano’s practice, it zooms well past the point where ordinary news media would cut away: we get extended cuts of the sheer spectacle of violence, the smashing of windows, the prolonged attempt of one adrenalized horde of men to force its way past another. The frenzy climaxes with an uncut, closeup sequence of Ashli Babbitt’s death, and her subsequent martyrdom in a eulogy by the former president. Much of Insurrection is nothing short of excruciating to watch. “I like that word, excruciating,” Serrano says. “What I intended to make was an immersive experience that takes you to Washington DC on January 6 in real time.” In close collaboration with the London-based organization a/political, Serrano began working on the film in April, feeling compelled to respond to the day’s events on multiple levels. He was appalled by the racial dynamics that played out on the Capitol steps, as white rioters who had broken into a federal building were gently escorted out: “Black people get killed for a lot less than storming the Capitol, and these white people got treated with kid gloves.” To him, the Capitol insurrection was also an extension of Donald Trump’s legacy of divisiveness and fraud, a subject the artist had begun to explore in his 2018 installation The Game: All Things Trump. The former president’s widely accepted version of events – that these were righteous citizens protesting a rigged election – represented not only a triumph of fake news, but his continued hold over the Republican party. “This guy has to be commended for having the charisma that Hitler had with the German people; there are Americans who don’t believe it really happened, and Republicans who say let’s forget about it and move on,” Serrano says. “I wanted to make a film that anyone would have a difficult time walking away from saying ‘We should forget about it.’” Spanning 75 minutes, Insurrection comprises news clips and smartphone footage culled from around the internet, alongside archival imagery dating back to the riots of the Great Depression. The score is a mix of American ballads that range from Bob Dylan’s You Ain’t Goin’ Nowhere to a children’s rendition of the historic civil war song, Battle Hymn of the Republic. As rioters march toward the Capitol steps, the incessant repetition of “glory, glory hallelujah” emphasizes the role that Christianity, a recurring theme in Serrano’s practice, plays in validating violence in American mythology. “There are groups of people who believe they have the right interpretations of Christ, not only in how they should live their lives, but how the rest of us should live ours,” he says. “They’re going into battle like Crusaders in their holy war.” The musical interludes and title cards interspersed throughout – “D.J. Trump Presents Insurrection”; “The Killing of Ashli Babbitt” – were inspired by Birth of a Nation, a 1915 silent civil war film condemned for its heroic portrayal of the Ku Klux Klan. The inclusion of these historical references is a reminder, according to Serrano, that “history repeats itself in specific ways.” The insurrection was not a novel event, but another instance of division within a nation that never recovered from civil war, he adds, citing the widespread refusal to accept Biden’s presidency as a resonant parallel. “There are also a lot of people who’ll never accept that the north won, and who’d love to go back to the good ol’ days. Donald Trump was there to tell those people what they wanted to hear.” Despite the symbolic criticism embedded throughout the insurrection, Serrano is actually reluctant to speak poorly of Trump, whom he photographed in 2004 for his America series. “This guy is a massive showman; he’s incredible at it, and I could see why he’s gone this far in life. He did not wreak damage on America – America was damaged already.” As for the Capitol rioters, he refuses to condemn anyone, nor say that they belong in jail: “I tried to humanize this crowd, to show their faces and hear what they’re saying. That’s what gives a work of art power: when you let people speak for themselves.” Serrano makes an important distinction in his practice: while provocation is essential to bringing art to life, he is not in the business of political messaging, telling his viewers what or how to think: “A lot of times I look at work, particularly paintings or pictures on the wall, and I’m not particularly moved,” he says. “The one thing I always try to do, whether it’s photographs or with this film, is to give you something to react to. I’m not concerned too much about how you’re going to feel about it, good or bad, but the important thing is that you’re not indifferent. You can’t walk away from it, and say, ‘I didn’t feel nothing.’”Sidney Poitier, whose groundbreaking acting work in the 1950s and 60s paved the way for generations of Black film stars, has died aged 94. His death was announced on Friday by the minister of foreign affairs of the Bahamas, Fred Mitchell. The Bahamas deputy prime minister, Chester Cooper, said he was “conflicted with great sadness and a sense of celebration when I learned of the passing of Sir Sidney Poitier”. He added: “Sadness that he would no longer be here to tell him how much he means to us, but celebration that he did so much to show the world that those from the humblest beginnings can change the world and that we gave him his flowers while he was with us. “We have lost an icon. A hero, a mentor, a fighter, a national treasure.” Poitier’s family released a statement, saying: “To us Sidney Poitier was not only a brilliant actor, activist, and a man of incredible grace and moral fortitude, he was also a devoted and loving husband, a supportive and adoring father, and a man who always put family first… So many have been touched by our dad’s extraordinary life, his unwavering sense of decency and respect for his fellow man.” Poitier, who was born in Miami and raised in the Bahamas, was the first Black winner of the best actor Oscar for Lilies of the Field and, along with Harry Belafonte, was a pioneering Black presence in mainstream Hollywood cinema. Political and entertainment industry notables paid tribute to Poitier’s achievements. Barack Obama posted a photo of himself with Poitier, writing: “Through his groundbreaking roles and singular talent, Sidney Poitier epitomized dignity and grace, revealing the power of movies to bring us closer together. He also opened doors for a generation of actors.” Oprah Winfrey wrote: “The utmost, highest regard and praise for his most magnificent, gracious, eloquent life. I treasure him. I adored him. He had an enormous soul I will forever cherish.” Denzel Washington, the second Black actor to win the best actor Oscar, said in a statement: “It was a privilege to call Sidney Poitier my friend. He was a gentle man and opened doors for all of us that had been closed for years. God bless him and his family.” Actor and director Tyler Perry wrote: “The grace and class that this man has shown throughout his entire life, the example he set for me, not only as a black man but as a human being will never be forgotten.” Whoopi Goldberg wrote: “If you wanted the sky I would write across the sky in letters that would soar a thousand feet high. To Sir… with Love. Sir Sidney Poitier R.I.P. He showed us how to reach for the stars.” Westworld star Jeffrey Wright called him “a landmark actor. One of a kind. What a beautiful, gracious, warm, genuinely regal man. RIP, Sir. With love.” Actor Viola Davis added: “No words can describe how your work radically shifted my life. The dignity, normalcy, strength, excellence and sheer electricity you brought to your roles showed us that we, as Black folks, mattered!!!” Questlove, musician and director of Summer of Soul, wrote: “King Sidney. One of the greatest actors of his generation.” Born to Bahamian parents while they were visiting Miami to sell tomatoes in 1927, Poitier grew up in the Bahamas – then a British colony – before returning to the US aged 15 and working at a series of low-paid jobs before briefly serving in the army during the second world war (and attempting to feign insanity to win a medical discharge). Somewhat directionless, Poitier auditioned for the high-profile American Negro Theater, based in Harlem, and although he was rejected he worked hard to improve his acting skills – and to lose his Bahamian accent. After being allowed to attend classes, Poitier stepped in when Belafonte, then a star student, was unable to perform. Having been spotted by a Broadway director, Poitier subsequently carved out a nascent career in the Black theatre circuit of the period. Poitier then secured his first significant film role, in the 1950 film noir No Way Out, in which he played a hospital doctor whose racist patient (played by Richard Widmark) starts a race riot. With its overt depiction of racial conflict, No Way Out was considered too controversial to be shown in southern states, but established Poitier’s trademark persona as sensitive, forbearing figure, more intelligent than the white characters around him. Though films examining the fraught state of race relations were popular at the time, there were still limited roles for Black actors in the US. As one of the few who had made an impact, Poitier then went to South Africa to shoot the British-produced adaptation of Cry, the Beloved Country; his experience of apartheid in there pushed him towards activism. Poitier’s breakthrough role came back in the US, with another social comment picture: Blackboard Jungle, in 1955, in which he played a rebellious high-school student. The film was a hit, with its use of Bill Haley’s Rock Around the Clock ensuring a large teenage audience; in the UK it inspired the infamous Elephant and Castle teddy boy riot of 1956. Poitier continued to win plaudits: he played a dock worker who mentors John Cassavetes’ drifter in Edge of the City, and then secured an groundbreaking Oscar nomination as best actor for The Defiant Ones, the Stanley Kramer message movie about social cooperation in which he played a convict who escapes in the deep south while shackled to Tony Curtis. (Both Curtis and Poitier were nominated; they lost to David Niven for Separate Tables.) He continued to take on ideologically charged roles, such as Porgy in Otto Preminger’s film of Porgy and Bess, and the lead in A Raisin in the Sun, the adaptation of Lorraine Hansberry’s much-admired play about family life in segregated Chicago. (Poitier had appeared in the same role in the original theatrical production in 1959.) He finally won his Oscar for the earnest drama Lilies of the Field in 1964; he played a handyman who helps a group of German nuns build a chapel in the Arizona desert. After the interracial romance A Patch of Blue (which, again, was censored in the south with scenes of Poitier kissing his white co-star Elizabeth Hartman being removed), Poitier would experience arguably his high-water mark as an actor in 1967, with three hit films. To Sir with Love, was a British-produced answer to Blackboard Jungle, featuring Judy Geeson and Lulu in its cast; In the Heat of the Night, directed by Norman Jewison, starred Poitier as shades-wearing detective Virgil Tibbs investigating a murder in a racist Mississippi town; and Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner?, which again tackled the thorny subject of interracial romance. However, despite two further Tibbs movies (They Call Me Mister Tibbs! in 1970 and The Organization the following year), Poitier suddenly found himself out of favour, as a more confrontational, politicised attitude gained traction in the wake of the civil rights struggle; Poitier responded by reinventing himself as a director. For his debut, Buck and the Preacher, he cast himself opposite Belafonte in a civil war western; but after that his directorial output would largely consist of comedy pieces. He cast then-hot comic Bill Cosby in Uptown Saturday Night (1974), Let’s Do It Again (1975) and A Piece of the Action (1977) – though his best known directorial entry is arguably Stir Crazy, the 1980 jail comedy starring Gene Wilder and Richard Pryor. Poitier largely retreated from cinema in the late 1980s and 1990s, directing Cosby in Ghost Dad and taking odd roles in the likes of surveillance thriller Sneakers; he assumed the role of elder statesman in both cinematic and diplomatic circles. Having been knighted in 1974 (due to his Bahamian citizenship), he was appointed Bahamas ambassador to Japan in 1997 and received an honorary Oscar in 2002. In 2009 he was awarded the presidential medal of freedom, and in 2016 a Bafta fellowship. Poitier was married twice: to Juanita Hardy between 1950 and 1965 (with whom he had four children), and subsequently to Joanna Shimkus in 1976 (with whom he had a further two).Latonya Peterson sums up her frustration as a parent over Detroit schools returning – at least temporarily – to virtual learning in three short words: “I hate it.” Facing a surge in Covid-19 cases, the Detroit district this week joined a growing number of others in moving classes online after the winter break. The shift involving 50,000 students once again leaves parents juggling home and work schedules around the educational needs of their children. A single parent who works more than 60 hours each week at two jobs, Peterson sometimes had to miss work to help her teenage son during more than a year of online learning. “I will have to take time off, but I’m looking at how long this is going to last. You only get so many off days and so many paid time-off days,” Peterson said on Wednesday, a day after the district announced that students would resume classes at home with laptops through at least 14 January. The vast majority of US districts appear to be returning to in-person learning, but other large school systems including those in Newark, New Jersey, Milwaukee and Cleveland have gone back to remote learning as infections soar and sideline staff members. Dozens of smaller districts have followed, including many around Detroit, Chicago and Washington. The disruptions also raise alarms about risks to students. Long stretches of remote learning over the last two years have taken a toll, leaving many kids with academic and mental health setbacks that experts are still trying to understand. Joe Biden, who campaigned on a promise to reopen classrooms, is pressing schools to remain open. With vaccines and regular virus testing, his administration has said there’s no reason to keep schools closed. “We have no reason to think at this point that Omicron is worse for children than previous variants,” Biden told reporters earlier this week. “We know that our kids can be safe when in school.” But the reality for some districts is not so simple: Testing supplies have been scarce, and many districts face low vaccine uptake in their communities. In Detroit, just 44% of residents five and older have received a vaccine dose, compared with a statewide rate of 63%. In a letter to parents, Detroit superintendent Nikolai Vitti said: “The only way we’re going to get to the other side of this pandemic is if we move to higher rates of vaccination.” The closures are often driven by waves of teachers calling in sick. More than a third of Philadelphia’s 216 public schools have switched to remote learning through at least Friday. Chicago students remained out of school for a third straight day on Friday, after school leaders failed to reach an agreement with the teachers union over virus safety protocols. The union wants to revert to remote instruction because of the infection surge. In Detroit, both Peterson and her son, Joshua Jackson, 16, are vaccinated. Joshua would rather stay in-person and said it was more difficult for him to focus in a virtual classroom. “I feel like I learned less,” the high school junior said. “I’m worried that we won’t go back to class. They (the district) did it before and said it only would be a short while. It turned out to be the whole school year.” Officials in districts that are returning to online instruction insist the move is only temporary, with most intending to go back to in-person classes within a week or two. As infections reach record levels in some areas, some parents say it’s the right move. The Omicron-driven surge has likely not topped out yet in the US, said Rochelle Walensky, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on Friday. “I don’t believe we’ve seen the peak yet here in the United States,” she told NBC’s Today show. The US reported 662,000 new cases on Thursday, the fourth highest daily figure in the pandemic.Serb politicians and celebrities have described the treatment of Novak Djokovic as shameful scapegoating, as the foreign ministry in Belgrade suggested the world tennis No 1 had been “lured to Australia … to be humiliated.” The 34-year-old champion, who was born in the Serb capital, is in detention in an immigration hotel in Melbourne pending a legal challenge to Australia’s decision on Wednesday to cancel a visa allowing him to play in the Australian Open. In an op ed for the news portal Iskra, reprinted by the pro-government tabloid Informer, the acclaimed Serbian film-maker Emir Kusturica argued Djokovic’s detention was “not just a lesson to the noble Serb”, but to everyone. Kusturica said the “arrest of Novak Djokovic, first among the free, a rebel who does not want the chains of the new world and believes in a more just order” recalled the plot of a movie in which prominent citizens were arrested as a lesson to the rest. Australian officials have said the player, who has refused to reveal his Covid vaccination status but previously said he was opposed to vaccination, was refused entry because he failed to meet exemption requirements. They have also said the player is free to leave the country whenever he chooses. “Hasn’t the world already become a prison of which barbed wire is the most expressive symbol?” Kusturica asked. “Aren’t the punishments for those who refuse to be jabbed just another step by the world government?” The president of the Serbian parliament, Ivica Dačić, a former prime minister whose Socialist party of Serbia is a partner in the country’s coalition government, said Djokovic was enduring “despicable political harassment”. Any country in the world “would gladly give citizenship to Mr Djokovic, let alone let him visit for a tournament”, Dacic Dačić said, calling Australia’s behaviour “shameful” and the result of “political instability in that country since elections are approaching”. The player’s family, who on Thursday compared him to Jesus and accused Australian authorities of “trying to crucify him”, called for a mass protest against his continuing detention on Friday, when Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas. “The family of Novak Djokovic calls on all fans and supporters of the best tennis player in the world, who is in a delicate situation, in front of the Belgrade city assembly,” the family said in a joint statement. “The biggest Christian holiday is an opportunity to show the significance of the community, to send support from Belgrade, and to show how much support the best tennis player in the world has in its own country.” The foreign ministry said in a statement that the Serbian public “has a strong impression that Djokovic is a victim of a political game against his will, and that he was lured to travel to Australia in order to be humiliated”. It added: “Novak Djokovic is not a criminal, terrorist or illegal migrant, but he was treated that way by the Australian authorities, which is causing understandable indignation of his fans and citizens of Serbia.” The Serbian government sent a formal protest note to its embassy in Canberra for transmission to the Australian government, and the foreign minister Nemanja Starović delivered a verbal protest to Australia’s ambassador to Serbia, Daniel Emery. The foreign ministry said Serbia did not want to influence the upcoming court decision but expected “the authorities of the country, in the spirit of good bilateral relations, to allow Djokovic to spend (time) in better accommodation”. Djokovic’s wife, Jelena, posted a photo of the couple embracing on a beach to mark Orthodox Christmas, saying: “The only law that we should all respect across every single border is love and respect for another human being.” Milivoje Pantovic is a producer with N1 Television in Belgrade.Skateboarding in middle age can help people feel empowered and reduce the chance of mental health issues such as depression, according to a study. Dr Paul O’Connor, 46, who published the research and is a lecturer in sociology at the University of Exeter, said he wanted to look at the phenomenon of ageing within a subculture. “Older people talked about the profound experiences they were having and I ended up looking at skateboarding and religion,” said O’Connor, a skateboarder himself. “Religion didn’t really resonate with them, but when it came to experiencing a sense of meaning, community, and ritual, they found that in skateboarding. “For a lot of middle-aged people, once you have responsibilities, like a mortgage and kids, it’s nice to have an identity away from that kind of stuff. The best time to skate is as an older person as you are plugged into online and skatepark communities from day one.” Here four people speak about skateboarding in middle age and what it means for them. ‘We’re called silver surfers’ Scott and Georgie McVeigh, 43 and 42, from Caterham in Surrey, took up skateboarding together during the first Covid lockdown in March 2020, “to see if we could”. Scott, a telecoms project manager, first skated in his early teens. “They were the early Tony Hawk days, when the first big, pro model boards with good graphics and bright colours were being released,” he says. “We had a small group of skating friends, but we lost interest. It was also deemed more childish at the time, and we wanted to be more grown up.” He and Georgie returned to the sport after seeing adult lessons advertised at their local skatepark, Skaterham. “We turned up on a Wednesday evening and there were five to 10 older skaters – also called silver surfers – and it was a great experience. People needed an outlet and some support and found it in these groups during lockdown. The exercise routine got us outside every day.” Skateparks can be intimidating, says Scott, especially for an adult beginner. “You stick out like a sore thumb, so we call ourselves ‘the dawn patrol’ and go out at seven or eight in the morning when the park is empty. You need space to be able to practise at your own pace – and you don’t want to fall over in front of kids and their parents.” In the summer of 2021, Scott started coaching other skaters. “Going from zero to skateboarding almost every day, I saw the opportunity. I had good feedback from kids and parents who I’d helped, so I started a Skateboard GB qualification. You get a buzz from helping others and seeing their progression.” ‘Skateboarding was always a happy place, and it still is’ Six years ago, Neil Garrett, then 40, took up skateboarding for the first time since he was 18. “When my eldest daughter turned seven, she asked for a skateboard and I was overjoyed,” he says. “When it arrived, I took her to our local skatepark to try it out. It was easier to teach her a few basics by showing her what to do, rather than telling her, and I found out that I still had the muscle memory. It wasn’t long before I began to think, ‘maybe I should get myself a skateboard’.” Garrett’s return to skating was at times triumphant. “I once strung four tricks together on a half-pipe and was told by a youngster next to me that I was ‘really good’. But the lowlights were the inevitable slams which seemed to hurt so much more in my 40s than at 14. Some huge bruises came up, and on more than one occasion I put my back out quite seriously. “I concluded that tricks and street skating were now probably beyond me and it would be safer if I stuck to a longboard. But for a brief moment, I recaptured the feeling of achievement and the sense of freedom when I was young. Skateboarding was always a happy place, and it still is – even if it’s strictly four wheels on the ground at all times these days.” To potential latecomers to skateboarding, Garrett advises: “Pad up. The concrete is unforgiving, especially if you’re older.” ‘It helps me switch off from the demands of everyday life’ In London, Lisa Berenson started skateboarding when she turned 40, just before the pandemic started. “I had one when I was younger, but it was a boys’ sport then and I didn’t fit in,” she said. Berenson, a copywriter, said she was inspired by seeing older women learning on Instagram and decided to give it a go again. “I was just pushing about at first, but I started to take lessons and try more tricks. “It took me a long time to get over the self-conscious feeling of being a mum in her forties at the skatepark. I was sure everyone was laughing at me. But the more I got to know other skaters, I realised that my age and skill level didn’t really matter.” She said she finds skating a great way to “switch off from the demands of everyday life”. “I have two kids with special needs and I’m the primary earner in our family and Covid has been tough on us all,” she said. “But when I’m skating, I’m so focused on learning a new trick and not falling that I don’t have room in my brain to worry about anything else.” “Other skaters are really supportive and motivate you to keep trying. It’s just so much fun.” ‘Skateboarding makes you want to smile’ “I skate for the sense of freedom,” said 58-year-old Jon Holden from Bath, who started when he was younger “back in the days of the Z-boys [a group of American skateboarders from the mid-70s called the Zephyr competition team] ”. Holden, who is self-employed doing modelling work and making wooden surfboards, said he takes more “cruises” now rather than skating in bowls and pools. “When you get older, you get heavier, and falling gets harder on the body,” he said. “Like surfing, the speed and flow is addictive and it helps me keep in touch with my core spirit. Skating for me is celebrating freedom, the feeling, the flow and the philosophy. It just makes you want to smile and definitely helps with balance.” For anyone thinking of taking up skateboarding, Holden suggested “taking your time”. “Definitely wear a helmet and pads to start out and be patient. If possible, find somewhere clear with plenty of smooth surface, and most of all, celebrate the feeling of freedom that it brings.”For postwar America, Sidney Poitier became something like the Black Cary Grant: a strikingly handsome and well-spoken Bahamian-American actor. He was a natural film star who projected passion, yet tempered by a kind of refinement and restraint that white moviegoers found very reassuring. Poitier was graceful, manly, self-possessed, with an innate dignity and a tremendous screen presence. He also had a beautiful, melodious voice – the result of his childhood spent in the Bahamas, and then struggling early years in New York, trying to make it as an actor and privately studying the voices of mellifluous white radio announcers. He was a traditional, classical actor in many ways, following in the footsteps of Paul Robeson and Canada Lee, but eminently castable in a new generation of modern roles. Almost all his famous movie roles are defined by race and racial difference, particularly that extraordinary trio of movies that came out in one year, 1967. In To Sir With Love, he was the visiting Black teacher in swinging London who gets through to the kids by challenging them to be adults. In Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner he is the Black man who wants to marry a young white woman, in an America where this was still illegal in many southern states. (This proposal causes excruciating discomfiture in his fiancee’s liberal parents, played by Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn.) And in In the Heat of the Night he was the Black homicide detective forced to assist a bigoted white cop, played by Rod Steiger. Poitier was always admired for his style and intelligence and an instinctive, classical technique. He was a class act. But as the 60s unfolded, in a new era of Black power and radicalism, Poitier found himself very unfashionable, derided as a pseudo-white sellout, the safe option for a reactionary movie industry that would tolerate only this prettily spoken Uncle Tom. The Black dramatist Clifford Mason wrote a New York Times article furiously denouncing Poitier, claiming that “artistical NAACPism is all that this whole period of Sidney Poitier moviemaking stands for”. This new mood, and a feeling that there were no good roles for a middle-aged Black man, caused Poitier to withdraw from acting, returning to lower-key character roles in the late 80s (including, inevitably, a performance as Nelson Mandela in a TV movie opposite Michael Caine as FW de Klerk). But he became a well-regarded director, in charge of the huge commercial hit Stir Crazy, with Gene Wilder and Richard Pryor. He also directed some movies featuring Bill Cosby, a professional association for whose embarrassments he can hardly be blamed now. Poitier’s breakthrough was No Way Out in 1950, a noir crime picture directed by Joseph Mankiewicz, in which he is the Black hospital doctor who has to treat a white racist hoodlum (a characteristic turn from Richard Widmark). Five years later, at the ripe old age of 28, Poitier was cast as a troubled teen in Blackboard Jungle, the brow-furrowing “issue movie,” about teenage delinquency and inner-city schools – bookended later by his Black teacher in To Sir With Love. It was entirely in line with his subsequent career that he provided the frisson of blackness, but was also the reliable good guy. Race was also a factor in Edge of the City (1957), in which he plays an easygoing, confident dock worker who becomes a kind of mentor figure to a troubled guy on the run from the military police (a young John Cassavetes). Poiter’s openness and smiling sympathy in this movie showed him at his very best. But it was in The Defiant Ones (1958) that he was more uninhibited, as the Black prisoner shackled to Tony Curtis’s bigoted criminal, making their escape together, realising they have to work together and finally becoming friends. Then came the movie for which he became the first Black man to win the best actor Oscar: Lilies of the Field (1964), a regular joe who finds himself bamboozled into doing manual labour for some expatriate German nuns, finally building their chapel, and achieving a mysterious if sentimental kind of redemption for him and them. It’s a movie with gentleness and charm – and it isn’t obviously about race. Three years later came that annus mirabilis in which his big three films came out – and then the disaffection set in. Looking back, some of Poitier’s performances do seem a bit tame, and the fact that for so long he seemed to be Hollywood’s sole Black actor left him exposed. He was wounded by the Clifford Mason article and still more upset by the 1990 stage play Six Degrees of Separation by John Guare, based on the true story of a young Black con man who tricked his way into the apartments and lives of rich white people by pretending to be the son of Sidney Poitier. Some critics found in this a wicked parable for the way Poitier himself had been permitted to become a house guest in the white world of American culture. There is no doubt that he could be a little over-controlling in his choice of roles. Bafflingly, he refused to play Othello – a role in which he would surely have been tremendous – because of the negative image of Black people it promoted, preferring projects such as his sonorous LP recording of readings from Plato. But in the 21st century, Poitier’s achievements have been reassessed. Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner was, after all, about interracial marriage and sex – a subject from which modern Hollywood now runs a mile. Poitier tackled it with dignity and candour. If he was upscale and aspirational, so what? That was reality; he connected with something that white Hollywood rarely acknowledged: the vast swath of Black America’s upwardly mobile educated class, people who would always face insidious prejudice and condescension. Poitier created a space for African American acting that made possible the careers of Laurence Fishburne, Denzel Washington, Forest Whitaker, Terrence Howard, and many more. The richness, strength and immediacy of his performances in Edge of the City, Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner? and In the Heat of the Night make him a screen pioneer and a Hollywood legend.Sherlock Holmes might have balked, but the Royal Mail detectives came up trumps when they correctly delivered a letter with an address that was more like an episode of This Is Your Life than a conventional street name and postcode. Writing on Twitter, the County Antrim musician Feargal Lynn said the postal system deserved “hearty applause” for successfully delivering the letter addressed by following a brief history of his family in the area. Describing his parents and the “Spar his ma and da used to own”, the description of Lynn also included his later move to the nearby Waterfoot and the fact he is “friends with the fella [who] runs the butchers” in the neighbouring village. Lynn said he laughed for about 10 minutes when he first saw the letter and that the description on the front brought back “so many memories from my youth”. The full description on the envelope reads: “Lives across the road from the Spar, his ma and da used to own it, his mother was Mary and da Joseph, moved to Waterfoot after he got married, plays guitar and used to run discos in the parochial hall and the hotel in the 80s. Friends with the fella who runs the butchers in Waterfoot too.” It is not the first time the Royal Mail has defied expectations in deciphering addresses that could, at best, be described as vague. Last year, Catrina Davies, who lives in a shed in Cornwall, was handed a letter in an envelope omitting a town, street name or postcode. The sender had simply addressed it to Katrina Davis [sic], noting that she lived in a shed “near a village 21 miles from Land’s End, as featured on BBC2 Simon Reeve Cornwall programme”. In 2010, a postie rose to the challenge when they were asked to find a couple with an address given as “somewhere near the golf course in Thetford, Norfolk”. But perhaps the most impressive feat was the delivering of a Christmas card to Paul Biggs in Longlevens, Gloucestershire, in 2015 – sent from Germany in an envelope simply marked “England”. At the time, Royal Mail said that although its “address detectives” were renowned for their investigative skills, this effort was “pretty impressive” even by their standards.Japan is to introduce limits on bar and restaurant opening times in three areas in an attempt to stem a surge in coronavirus cases that has been linked to US military bases. The measures – officially described as a quasi-state of emergency – will go into effect from Sunday until the end of the month in Okinawa, home to more than half of the US service personnel based in Japan, and parts of the western prefectures of Hiroshima and Yamaguchi, which also host American troops. The prime minister, Fumio Kishida, has come under increasing pressure this week to address outbreaks that began at US military facilities last month and have since spread to the local civilian population. US military authorities on Thursday announced stricter Covid-19 measures, including mandatory mask wearing off base and stronger testing regimes. New cases have surged in Okinawa, Japan’s southernmost prefecture, since the start of the year, rising from 51 last Saturday to a record 1,414 on Friday. Those numbers do not include new infections found among US military personnel and their families. “This number will likely stay high and steadily increase,” said the governor of Okinawa, Denny Tamaki, who has publicly criticised the US military over its response to outbreaks at local bases. Tamaki now has the power to ask restaurants and bars in Okinawa to reduce their opening hours. While the measures are voluntary, establishments that refuse to comply can face fines. The measures approved on Friday will be the first in Japan since last September, when a dramatic fall in cases prompted the government to end months of restrictions in many parts of the country. Infections have also been on the rise in the larger cities. Tokyo reported 922 new cases on Friday, the most since 15 September, prompting officials to direct restaurants to reduce the number of people in groups of diners from eight to four. While Japan’s coronavirus caseload is much smaller than the US, the UK and other comparable countries, experts said people should expect a steady rise in infections, including those of the highly transmissible Omicron variant. “Given the sudden surge in infections, the medical system runs the risk of suffering a heavy burden in the near future,” Daishiro Yamagiwa, the minister in charge of Japan’s Covid-19 responses, said at a government panel meeting. New infections exceeded 4,000 across Japan on Thursday, compared with an average of about 200 a day last month. The Omicron variant has been identified in 80% of Japan’s 47 prefectures, weeks after the country imposed a ban on all overseas arrivals except Japanese citizens and returning foreign residents. “There are cases where there is no history of overseas travel and the route of infection is unknown, while the Delta strain also continues to spread,” said Shigeyuki Goto, the health minister. “We must be prepared for the rapid spread of infections in the future.”Ralf Rangnick is confident Manchester United’s players still believe in his methods after Monday’s dismal 1-0 defeat to Wolves at Old Trafford. Although the interim manager has only this one loss in his six games, United’s recent performances have been unconvincing, with his wish to implement a high-pressing style not in evidence. Before Aston Villa’s visit on Monday in the FA Cup third round, he was asked whether the players were still buying into his approach. “They’re at least trying,” he said. “I’m sure they are listening and I think we showed in the last games against [Crystal] Palace, Burnley and in parts against Norwich [all wins] and Newcastle [a draw] that they are trying to follow the advice I give them. “We conceded less goals than before – it’s 0.6 in six games. But still, it’s about balance, we need to find the best possible balance between offence and defence and this is still something we have to get better on.” Rangnick would not be drawn on reports of unrest after the Wolves defeat. “I can only tell you about the squad – obviously I don’t know about the atmosphere inside the club,” he said. “I can only speak about the players, locker room, coaching staff: everybody was very disappointed after the game, about the result and the performance, especially in the first half. “Now we have four days of training, yesterday, today, tomorrow, day after tomorrow before the Aston Villa game and my job, our job, is that we make sure we show a different performance against Aston Villa.” He even urged those considering their futures to fight for a place. “We have players with contracts expiring in the summer, we have maybe also one or two players who still want to leave although they are under contract. It’s about the players dealing with that situation in a professional way. Everyone has the chance to show in training they deserve the chance to play. If this is not the case, the player, together with the club and the agents, need to discuss the situation. “As far as I can tell the players have been dealing with that in a professional way. I cannot say anyone else. If I realise this is not the case I will address the players directly.”A police worker who illegally downloaded and took home thousands of images, including those showing murder victims and postmortems, has been jailed for three years. Darren Collins, a digital forensic specialist from Stafford, admitted misconduct in a public office last month after being sacked by Staffordshire police for gross misconduct. Passing sentence at Birmingham crown court on Friday, Judge Henderson, compared the case to that of two police officers jailed last month for sharing photographs of two sisters, Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman, murdered in London in June 2020. He said although Collins’s case was overall “less serious” it was worsened by the fact “there were a very large number of events over a long period”. Collins, 56, accessed more than 3,000 images from police databases between January 2014 and December 2018 and police found more than 60 devices he used to store the images. No evidence was found to suggest the images had been shared. The court heard Collins used a “back door” method to access images of murder scenes, including a deposition site, pictures taken at postmortem examinations, and others relating to road traffic collisions. The judge said relatives of victims pictured in some of the images had been informed. “These people of course suffered dreadfully with the loss of their loved ones,” the judge said. “To discover now that you were looking [at the images] for nothing but gratuitous curiosity is a further grievous insult to them, their memory and their families. The behaviour of this defendant is utterly exceptional in my experience. This is a case which calls out for immediate custody.” After his arrest in 2019, Collins, who had worked for Staffordshire police for 18 years, said he viewed the images to further his knowledge of crime scenes and forensic science to progress his career. His defence barrister, Kelly Cyples, said Collins suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of legitimate work on investigations into child abuse. She said: “The crux of this case is that, at the time, Mr Collins certainly did not realise that what he was doing was criminal. He accepts and understands, with the benefit of hindsight, he should not have and was not permitted to look at other images beyond the parameters he had been given for his actual role. “There was no malicious intent and the images have never been shown to anyone else.” Staffordshire police, in a statement issued after Collins pleaded guilty, said a rigorous and extensive investigation had found no evidence that the images had been shared. Dep Ch Cons Emma Barnett said: “I’m very sorry for the additional distress that Collins’ actions caused to the families of the victims involved. We expect the highest levels of honesty and integrity from all of our officers and staff and anyone who falls below these standards will be held to account.”Dozens of senior officials and legislators in Hong Kong have been sent into a 21-day quarantine after they attended a birthday party despite the government’s own pandemic warning. The embarrassing incident came as the city’s new “patriots only” legislature is scheduled to hold its first meeting next week. Concerns had been raised in recent weeks after a number of Omicron cases were identified in Hong Kong. Health officials say they cannot rule out hidden clusters in the community. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said it was a “deep disappointment” that her bureaucrats ignored the government’s own advice on avoiding large gatherings in the middle of an Omicron outbreak. On Friday, Lam ordered an inquiry into the behaviour of 13 senior government officials who attended party. In a statement, she ordered “detailed” investigations “as to whether the attendance of officials at the banquet constitutes any breach of discipline”. The party, held at a Spanish tapas restaurant earlier in the week, was to celebrate the 53rd birthday of Witman Hung Wai-man, a local delegate to China’s top national legislature. The well-connected politician invited a long list of the city’s political establishment, ranging from the home affairs secretary to the security chief. At least 19 members of the 90-seat legislative council, who were sworn in this week, were also among the 170 attendees. One of the lawmakers, Junius Ho, travelled to Shenzhen two days after the party and met a top Beijing official there. “I am very disappointed, because this anti-pandemic work has persisted for so long, so many of us have been working so hard to fight against the pandemic, so as principal officials of the administration, we should lead by example and refrain from taking part in private events,” Lam said on Thursday. Lam tried to distance her administration from the incident. She said the officials had failed to follow the rules by attending “clearly a private event, and not a function required by public duty”. On Friday, one of the affected officials, Au Ka-wang, the city’s immigration director, offered his apology to the public and said he had “reflected on this incident and shall be more vigilant in future”. Last year, Au was fined for breaching social distancing rules at a hotpot dinner. Critics say this incident is likely to further dent the public’s trust in Lam’s administration, which is already at a low point since the mass protests in 2019. A recent poll showed that less than a quarter of those surveyed in Hong Kong approved of the government’s performance. Days before the incident, Lam summoned top officials from Cathay Pacific airlines and said they must take responsibility for their aircrew breaching self-isolation rules even if “they may not know their employees’ every act”.The UK has reported a further 178,250 Covid cases as the Omicron variant continues to fuel a wave of infections. The latest figures, which reflect infections picked up by testing, bring the UK total for the past seven days to 1,260,535, up 20% compared with the total for the week before. However, the daily figure is lower than those recorded in recent days, with 179,756 cases reported on Thursday and 194,747 on Wednesday. The true number of infections is estimated to be substantially higher as not all infections are captured by the testing programme. The figure also does not include reinfections for most of the countries in the UK, and reflects cases by date reported rather than by specimen date. In England alone, 149,405 new cases were reported on Friday, compared with 152,306 the day before. A further 229 deaths in the UK within 28 days of a positive Covid test were reported, while hospitals around the country remain under pressure. According to updated figures, there were 18,015 Covid patients in hospital in the UK on Wednesday, rising to 18,454 on Thursday. In England there were 16,163 Covid patients in hospital, a 30% increase on the Friday before, while in Scotland there were 1,323 Covid patients in hospital, a rise of 54%. New data from Public Health Scotland (PHS) based on sampling in NHS Grampian and Greater Glasgow and Clyde (NHS GGC) shows the proportion of Covid-positive patients in hospitals who were admitted for another reason is higher than when the Delta variant was dominant last year. The NHS GGC sampling, carried out over two days this month, found 43% of patients with confirmed Covid had not been hospitalised because of the virus. Based on six days sampling by NHS Grampian, which includes Aberdeen, it was 40%. In August last year, when Delta was dominant, PHS data showed 32% of patients with Covid had been admitted for another medical reason. PHS said this data was useful in helping to decide whether to relax or tighten Covid controls. Opposition parties in Scotland have questioned whether the strict controls introduced by Nicola Sturgeon may be unnecessarily onerous. The PHS figures also show elderly people made up a far greater proportion of those hospitalised because of the virus, suggesting younger adults are less likely to be severely ill with Omicron. More detailed figures released for NHS England show 37% of Covid-positive patients in hospital on Tuesday 4 January were primarily being treated for another condition. The percentage has gradually risen as Omicron has spread: on Christmas Day the proportion stood at 31%, and on 1 December it was 26%. Experts have warned that having high numbers of patients admitted to hospital for other conditions who also test positive for Covid puts extra pressure on services as they can require more care, can pass the virus to others and may mean non-Covid bed space is reduced so surgeries are postponed or cancelled. Since Omicron was detected for the first time in the UK on 27 November, it has spread rapidly. According to the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), one in 15 people in England had Covid in the week ending 31 December, rising to one in 10 in London. For Scotland and Wales the figure was one in 20, and for Northern Ireland it was one in 25. The data also shows that the percentage of people testing positive has continued to increase across all age groups, although there are hints of a change among secondary school children and people aged 25 to 49. “This may mean that infections are no longer increasing among these age groups, but it is currently too early to suggest if this is a continuing change in trend,” the ONS said. Similarly, while infection levels have risen in all regions of England, the trend for the final few days of 2021 suggests infections may no longer be increasing. “But it is currently too early to suggest if this is a continuing change in trend,” the ONS report states.NAME THAT TOON Clang! Clang! Clang! Clang! Clang! That was the noise of Wor Eddie How-ay’s massive brass balls banging loudly against each other, as he explained the reasons behind Kieran Trippier completing his move from Spanish champions and Big Cup contenders Atlético Madrid to Newcastle United earlier on Friday. Currently second from bottom of the Premier League but now the World’s Richest Football Club after their purchase by a Public Investment Fund that is in no way connected to a Saudi prince responsible for all manner of atrocities, Newcastle have got their anticipated January trolley dash off to what looks like an eminently sensible start by acquiring the England full-back. It is a statement signing that has prompted much delight on Tyneside, while prompting others to wonder what on earth it could possibly be that convinced Trippier to leave the Spanish capital for a club that has managed to win one league game of 19 so far this season. While more cynical football emails than The Fiver might be tempted to argue that Trippier had almost certainly inked his two-and-a-half year deal for financial reasons – a not-inconsiderable pay rise of £42,000 per week that nobody in their right mind could blame him for accepting – Wor Eddie was at pains to stress that nothing could be further from the truth. “Kieran hasn’t come for the financial benefits of the contract,” he honked, maintaining the commendably straight face that served him so well when he insisted he had no opinion whatsoever on working for a man renowned for using extremely violent measures for “silencing” dissidents at home and abroad. “He’s come for the club and for the challenge that the team faces at this time, but also for the longer term vision.” That vision, after the shorter term one of winning seven or eight games of the next 19 and avoiding relegation to the Championship, is of course the accrual of Premier League and Big Cup titles in the coming years, triumphs you’d bet your bottom dollar neither Howe nor Trippier, 32, will still be at Newcastle to see. Nevertheless, in the usual fit of fan-pleasing posturing, Trippier plastered a rictus they-are-treating-me-extremely-well grin across his chops and weirdly pointed to the sponsor’s logo on his left sleeve for his unveiling, before singing loudly from the same hymn sheet as the manager. “I came here to help the team, the project, everything about it,” he tooted. “If people say it’s about money then everyone’s entitled to their opinion but I’ve got my reasons. I know my reasons why and that’s not one of them.” Trippier’s explanation is ultimately moot because the fact of the matter is that the majority of Newcastle fans don’t give two hoots why he has signed for their club, only that he’s there. Somewhat strangely, the supporters who used to be so vocal in their disapproval of tyrannical multi-billionaire owners … well, they no longer seem to be quite so vocal. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Barry Glendenning from 8pm GMT for hot FA Cup MBM coverage of Swindon 0-0 Manchester City (2-4 on penalties). QUOTE OF THE DAY “It would be unexplainable. The adrenaline would last for a few days, I know that. I’d probably never have to buy another drink in Kidderminster and I wouldn’t sleep for a few days” – Sam Austin is dreaming of FA Cup magic and the potential scalp of Reading, who are coming to Aggborough this coming third-round weekend. FIVER LETTERS “Funny you should mention Whitehawk (Fiver passim), seeing as Hythe Town host them this Saturday. Looking forward to them losing a few balls in the MoD firing ranges next door going on that footage. It might even give Hythe a chance to win. I’m a new convert this year to non-league football, having moved from the ‘smoke’ to the Kent coast, and I’m loving it. All of the action, even more heartache and stress (and arguments over offsides from the touchline – no VAR here), and all for a tenner on the gate. I can’t think of a better way to spend a rainy, blustery, winter afternoon” – Adam Williams. “With the hope allegedly being what kills you, let me offer some to Manchester United fans (yesterday’s Fiver). While on the face of it, Ed Woodward and Richard Arnold being cut from a similar cloth (same uni, course, employment history) doesn’t bode well, I went and looked back at my old university to see if there were any parallels. Sure enough, former Labour MP Alan Milburn went to Lancaster University, studied history and worked for a council. He went on to become a cabinet minister whereas I … er, left the council I worked for and read The Fiver for entertainment. This hasn’t helped, has it?” – Ferg Slade. “Jonathon Buss’s recollection of the Dean Saunders’ show and tell (yesterday’s Fiver letters) reminded me of Matthew Brimson’s – ahem – exposure in the Wisden Cricketers’ Almanac. Posing for the Leicestershire CCC team photo, he proceeded to have more success than he did at whipping out the opposition. Helpfully, Brimson’s Wikipedia page reminds us that ‘the offending photograph can be found on page 657 of the 2000 Wisden Almanack’. You’re welcome” – Nick Austin. “Re: yesterday’s letters. The Brighton Argus had a pomp?” – Iain Moore. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Ferg Slade. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Calls for a “Hillsborough law” to rebalance the UK’s justice system and ensure fairer treatment for bereaved families are being made at a high-profile event. A new academic study claims that playing fantasy football can lead to a decline in mental health that worsens significantly the more time you spend playing. $tevie Mbe has only gone and persuaded 2017’s Philippe Coutinho to join him on loan from Barcelona, with Aston Villa stumping up around 65% of his gigantic salary. Southampton boss Ralph Hasenhüttl wants the Premier League to stop January signings from playing in rearranged games. “You cannot stop playing in December and wait for a signing in January to play,” he roared. Lucas Digne has made a formal request to do one with haste from Everton. “I have no explanation [for why he wants to leave],” honked Rafa Benítez, to the sound of distant jeers. And The Athletic have been sold to the New York Times for $550m. Which is great news for the pockets of their founders who hoped to “wait every local paper out and let them continuously bleed until we are the last ones standing”, but arguably less so for the NYT, who presumably missed out on some $1-a-month deal for the first year. STILL WANT MORE? The magic of the 10 FA Cup things to look out for this weekend. Meet Paul Barry, the Cambridge fan turned owner whose mum still watches at 85. There was more fixture chaos in Serie A, but Nicky Bandini helpfully explains who emerged as the winners from the latest round of games. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ‘TWO SUMMERS WITH THE LIGHT ON’“A global shift will occur when each individual finds the courage to awaken from the mass amnesia.” Yes, I read the personal manifesto of Novak Djokovic’s wellness guru so you don’t have to. It is no secret that the world’s No 1 celebrity Covid outlaw, currently awaiting his fate in an agreeably everyday Melbourne hotel, is a long-term student of somebody called Chervin Jafarieh, described, on his own website, as “one of the most respected and influential health experts in the world”. Jafarieh is a familiar type, the magnetic personality, the handsome and piercing spirit guide who accepts all major credit cards and looks like he might smell of musk and whale-song and concentrated human-power while he stands slightly too close to you in the lift. The manifesto is lush and persuasive and, frankly, bang on about lots of stuff. Novak’s guy is worried about pollution and climate change, also “militarism, urbanization, carbon combustion, mining of metals and toxic materials, manufacturing of chemicals and biological poisons”. Mainly he’s obsessed with intake and the body, and this seems to be the thing about Djokovic’s vaccine hesitancy, at least in public. Djokovic has staged his own super-spreader event, has provided an anti-science role model, but he has also bought ventilators for hospitals, set up a Covid fund and done generous, charitable, believer-type things. This is not alien lizard stuff. It’s not the great human cull or the fake-a-demic. Instead the resistance seems to come from somewhere else, from sunlit pagodas where magnetic people in crisp linen robes talk about their energy, their aura, their yacht, from a place of mind power and blood purity, of bamboo silica supplements and chocolate-flavoured Organic Longevity Mushrooms. For Djokovic physical control is a kind of religion in itself, the superpower that transformed him into a miracle of sporting middle age, a marvel of twang and flex and tensile energy. This is an all-time athlete who has kicked gluten, dairy, sugar and meat, who starts the day with celery juice and yoga before dawn, who believes it is us, those still slaughtering animals, eating chemicals, pumping out the carbon, who are, frankly, the problem, who says things like “our entire body is a harmonic system that is perfectly managing all its metabolic functions”. So, is he going to have that man-made chemical injected into his biceps, the one he uses to dole out his hyper-organic uber tennis? The same substance unhealthy, McNugget-quaffing people like me and you keep telling him is species-duty? No. No he’s not. And yes it’s annoying and weird and based on a spectrum of Übermensch pseudo-science. But being weird isn’t, as yet, a crime, just as not taking a vaccine isn’t a crime, even when you combine it with the maddening overclass arrogance of trying to enter Australia under a medical exemption, rather than just staying away out of basic good manners. And really, why even go into all this? Why try to humanise and understand the world’s current most divisive athlete? Firstly, because it’s better than the default options of blanket condemnatory rage or unquestioning hero-worship. And also because there are two points that can easily get lost. The first is that sport is being used as an amplifier here, the stage for an ugly and manipulative piece of political theatre. How dumb is Novak Djokovic? Dumb enough to allow himself to be used as a pawn by Scott Morrison, an organically reared dead cat hurled on to the table as a welcome election-year distraction. Morrison offered a revealing aside during a TV interview this week. Yes, the Aussie PM confirmed, chuckling quietly, his border force does operate on intelligence, hunches and previous public statements. And so, this is, by extension, a showy piece of opportunism, a staged humiliation. Morrison has been under pressure over fragile administration, an absence of testing kits, a wildfire of new Covid cases. How to appear both strong and big on detail at a single stroke? Enter, yogurt boy. And all the while positions are entrenched. Nobody learns or changes their mind. Why am I even trying to explain and humanise the anti-vaccine creed of the world’s most-reviled refusenik? I guess because the most radical thing you can currently do is try to see both sides. Personally I’m a vaccine ultra. Hook me up baby. Protect me and my immediate contacts with the best available science. I’ll swallow it and (probably) fail to run a mile. But it is also vital to understand that some might have another view, that being wary about what you put into your body is not beyond comprehension. Sports people live strange cosseted lives. But in the UK, at least, the low take-up of Premier League footballers also reflects precisely the distrust and vulnerability to “alternative truths” of all people their age, particularly those from economically and socially disadvantaged groups. Coercion and scolding, going on about ignorant millionaires: this gets us nowhere. This is the most practical point. Sport really does need clarity and forward planning or it will continue to magnify these problems, to be weaponised by those with agenda. Most obviously all sporting bodies need to resist the urge to meddle and lobby on the issue of who gets to enter a particular country. This applies to various upcoming events, from the French Open, which offers the chance for a reprise of the current theatre, to Chelsea’s trip to Lille in the Champions League. Beyond that we have the tricky prospect of the 2022 Fifa World Cup. The latest word, not yet publicly confirmed, is that unvaccinated players will receive an exemption to the rules in Qatar, which demands the jab. Perhaps all involved are hoping this will simply go away. The lessons of Melbourne and the trials of tennis-Jesus are that without clarity sport will remain a megaphone for rage and confusion; just another note, as Chervin himself might put it, in the great amnesia.Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert observed the first anniversary of the 6 January assault on the Capitol on Thursday evening, a year after he reacted to the insurrection on live television. “The thing I remember from that day is how shocked I was at this grotesque tragedy,” he said, recalling how the Late Show writing staff scrapped a planned monologue on the certification of Biden’s victory after seeing footage of the siege during a script rewrite Zoom meeting. Colbert echoed Joe Biden’s furious remarks to acknowledge the occasion, in which the president invited Americans to recall the events of 6 January and lamented the rioters “defecating in the hallways”. “Defecating: that is a very delicate, presidential and high-minded way to describe Maga maniacs smearing poop on the walls,” said the Late Show host, imitating the president’s voice: “These ignoble miscreants absconded with Madam Speaker’s rostrum, set alight their cannabis cigarillos and besmirched these hallowed corridors with their human detritus.” Then Biden “took the gloves off”: “The former president of the United States of America has created and spread a web of lies about the 2020 election. He’s done so because he values power over principle. Because he sees his own interest as more important than his country’s interest, than America’s interest. And because his bruised ego matters more to him than our democracy or our constitution. He can’t accept he lost.” “Hell yes! Tell it like it is, Joe!” Colbert cheered. “I loved that speech today, truly a powerful speech. That is the Joe Biden I remember, that is the Joe Biden we stole this election for – I mean voted for,” he joked. Not everyone marked the occasion with solemnity; only two House Republicans attended a memorial service in Congress for the Capitol police officers who died during the violence. “The other Republican legislators chose to re-enact January 6th by hiding in fear,” Colbert quipped. But the former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows appeared on Sean Hannity’s Fox News show, “and instead of discussing their now public pants-crapping, terrified text exchange from a year back, Meadows complained in advance about how the media would cover it”, Colbert said. Said Meadows: “You’re right to point out that tomorrow is going to be spent on January 6th.” “Keen analysis,” Colbert deadpanned. “Meadows went on to predict the next day would be spent on January 7th, the day after might focus on January 8th, and by the weekend, we could see numbers as high as 9 or 10.” Jimmy Fallon On the Tonight Show, Jimmy Fallon also cheered Biden’s address on the insurrection, which had a “high school principal after a food fight vibe”. “He’s not just a former president,” Biden said of Donald Trump. “He’s a defeated former president.” In other news, BMW unveiled a new SUV with the capability to change color, and “experts say it’s going to revolutionize the way you forget where you parked your car,” Fallon quipped. The appliances brand Kohler also announced a new luxury product: a bath that produces fog, to create a home spa. “To make it even more spa-like, the bath also emits a hologram of a naked old guy who sits two feet away from you,” Fallon added. And Taco Bell revealed a new subscription service that will send people a taco every day for $10 a month. “Well, looks like we’re about to go through another toilet paper shortage,” Fallon joked.And with that, I’ll bid you good evening. Enjoy any games you go to, stay safe, have a good weekend and may your Cup overflow with good cheer. Stay on the site for live MBM coverage of Swindon v Man City tonight, and lots of action tomorrow and Sunday. Thanks for your company and comments. Bye “Re Coutinho’s questionable badge-pointing prowess, earlier,” writes Peter Oh. “To be fair, in the photo his finger does seem to be homed in on the crest, albeit from a distance. For his sake I hope this will be the only fingerpointing that he will be subjected to at Villa.” Of more importance, I’d contend, that a clause be imposed whereby he promises not to performatively non-celebrate any goals he might score against Liverpool. No time for any of that. Just sweeping up some other bits of transfer tittle-tattle scattered around the floor, along with discarded Christmas tree pine needles. Newcastle have submitted an “improved offer” for the Lille defender Sven Botman. Manchester United continue to be linked with Wolves’ Ruben Neves, while Real Madrid and PSG sniff around Chelsea’s Antonio Rüdiger, though Thomas Tuchel is confident the defender can be persuaded to stay and does not need “pampering”. The Fiver has landed, with its take on inaccurate badge-pointer Kieran Trippier’s arrival on Tyneside. Clang! Clang! Clang! Clang! Clang! That was the noise of Wor Eddie How-ay’s massive brass balls banging loudly against each other, as he explained the reasons behind Kieran Trippier completing his move from Spanish champions and Big Cup contenders Atlético Madrid to Newcastle United earlier on Friday. Currently second from bottom of the Premier League but now the World’s Richest Football Club after their purchase by a Public Investment Fund that is in no way connected to a Saudi prince responsible for all manner of atrocities, Newcastle have got their anticipated January trolley dash off to what looks like an eminently sensible start by acquiring the England full-back. Sign up now! Here’s Jamie Jackson’s full report on that presser with Ralf Rangnick, who’s confident his players are trying to buy into his approach. “I’m sure they are listening and I think we showed in the last games against [Crystal] Palace, Burnley and in parts against Norwich [all wins] and Newcastle [draw] that they are trying to follow the advice I give them. We conceded less goals than before – it’s 0.6 in six games.” Ainsley Maitland-Niles is closing in on a loan move to Roma from Arsenal, and the chance for fun time under José Mourinho, on which he is keen, according to the Metro. “Ainsley came to me and explained the reasons why he thought the best thing for him and his career was to move away,” said his Arsenal manager, Mikel Arteta. “He felt the opportunity to go to Rome and work with José was a good one.” Bournemouth’s David Brooks has been talking about the progress of his cancer treatment. The Wales midfielder, who was diagnosed with stage two Hodgkin lymphona in the autumn, says “the outlook is promising and positive” as he continues treatment. “I feel that now is the right time to update you all on my progress following my diagnosis in October last year,” he said in a statement. “I want to thank everyone who got in touch after the announcement. I was overwhelmed by the incredible messages of support from family, friends, team-mates and across social media during this difficult period. “I’m currently undergoing treatment and although I’m only halfway through, the progress is good and the outlook is promising and positive! I’m keeping in touch with everyone at Bournemouth and the national team and looking forward to an exciting finish to the season for club and country.” “Hey Tom, So, I don’t know where you stand on discussing silly transfers when there is proper old fashioned football on, in the form of the third round of the cup,” writes Ben Lake. I tut with the moralising disapproval of a Victorian dad, since you ask. Nevertheless, he persists. “Thought I’d chance my arm anyway. I’d just end having to do my job otherwise. “Coutinho, is he, like, good? He’s played for some of the of biggest clubs in the world but from his time in Liverpool, I remember being consistently underwhelmed. He would occasionally pop up with a spectacular goal but then you’d barely see anything of note from him otherwise. “Now, a complete lack of money (or friends willing to meet me outside) means I rarely ever see full matches. Was he doing a lot of note that doesn’t show up on highlights? His time at Barcelona could be charitably be described as disappointing but then Barcelona were hardly a well run club during his stint. Just seems like an odd gamble by Villa, I know it’s a loan but that’s one hell of a wage burden to be taking on when you have a young promising manager you could surround with equally hungry players.” He’s undoubtedly had his moments, many of them, though Liverpool became more of a force after he went. While plenty of good players have struggled at the basketcase that has been Barcelona in recent seasons. I guess Villa see him as filling the star-vacancy left by Jack Grealish though I wonder how he’ll slot in alongside the likes of Emi Buendía and John McGinn. Will be an interesting poser for Steven Gerrard Aston Villa are reportedly interested in Yves Bissouma, currently with Mali for the Africa Cup of Nations, though Brighton’s Graham Potter wants him to stay. Elsewhere, the rift between Rafa Benítez and Lucas Digne looks unresolvable, with the Everton manager accusing the full-back of putting his own interests above the club’s. Andy Hunter has the story: The Manchester City defender, accused of rape, has been bailed until 24 January. “Following on from Kidderminster pies earlier,” scoffs Phil Malayan, “one of the best days out is at Crook Town FC in the Northern League. Their Millfield ground match day luxury takeaway, ‘Only Foods and Sauces’, does the best chip buttie and black and amber burger in the North East.” Tell us more about the black and amber burger … More awards: the Fifa women’s player of the year shortlist comprises Chelsea’s Sam Kerr and the Barcelona and Spain pair Jennifer Hermoso and Alexia Putellas. The award winners will be announced in a virtual ceremony on January 17. Meanwhile, a PA Media take on Rangnick’s presser: Ralf Rangnick downplayed talk of dressing room discontent as the interim Manchester United manager looks to recover from the shock loss to Wolves. There has been intense scrutiny on the Old Trafford giants in the wake of a 1-0 home loss on Monday that was more one-sided than the scoreline suggests. It has been reported that as many as 17 players are unhappy with the current situation but interim manager Rangnick seemed unperturbed by talk of dissatisfied fringe players. “Well, I mean this is not only an issue with a club like Manchester United,” he said. “When you have a big squad, in the last two games we had most players available. “Yes, we had an issue with three centre-backs missing out against Wolves but - in general - we had most players available, apart from Paul Pogba. If you have that many players and 10 outfield players can play and three being substituted, then of course you have quite a number of players - in our case 12, 13, 14 players who don’t even play, or not even being in the squad. “Then those players are not happy about that situation. It’s obvious, it’s clear. In total, we have a big squad. I tend to explain to players every two or three weeks why they are not playing but obviously I cannot do that every game and that is an issue in our team as well as in other clubs.” Got a feeling he’s making the phrase “this is not only an issue with a club like Manchester United” do a lot of heavy lifting there. Anyway, this is the kind of Content we’re about. Ian Haskins trumps me on the subject of Swindon v Man City nostalgia: “You can forget 1993, it’s 1910 the boys at the County Ground will be channelling tonight …” More from Spurs, and Antonio Conte has revealed that Son Heung-min has sustained an injury that could rule him out until at least the end of the month. The South Korea international has had a scan on a muscle problem he first suffered at Chelsea on Wednesday and Conte says he will not train before the international window at the end of the month. Here’s a curious one: Chester, who play in the English pyramid, may have breached Welsh coronavirus regulations when they hosted crowds at two matches over Christmas and new year. PA Media takes up the story. The National League North club’s Swansway Chester Stadium straddles the border of England and Wales, with the front gates and main office in England but the pitch in Wales. Sporting events in Wales must currently be played behind closed doors under rules to tackle the spread of the Omicron variant which came into force on Boxing Day. There are presently no such restrictions in England. Chester’s home matches against Fylde and Telford on December 28 and January 2 were attended by crowds of 2,075 and 2,116 respectively. The club have announced they have been informed by authorities of the potential breaches and that they risk more by hosting further games in front of fans. This could mean them having to play matches behind closed doors while the current Welsh rules remain in place. Chester, who are next due to play at home when they face Brackley Town on January 15, are seeking legal advice. Antonio Conte speaks ahead of Tottenham’s home tie with Morecambe on Sunday, about what sort of backing he might get in the transfer market in the light of reports of chairman Daniel Levy and owner Joe Lewis having squad-related chinwags, without offering too many hints. “I’m sure we all want the best for Tottenham and the first person who wants to improve is for sure our owner and I would have time to speak with the people that work in the club to try to understand well the situation. It’ll be a good opportunity after two months here to think about the situation now and what we want clearly. We want to improve the level of the players we have in our squad but as you know January is not easy for anyone and we’ll see.” Should we really care about individual awards in a team game? Whatever, we have another shortlist for you folks, with the Fifa Best Men’s Player award. And 2021’s nominees are Mo Salah, Robert Lewandowski and Lionel Messi. The same top three as the Guardian’s own. More from Rangnick, Jamie Jackson reports: “They [the players] are at least trying, I’m sure they are listening and we showed in the last games against Palace, Burnley and parts against Norwich and Newcastle they are trying to follow the advice I give them.” Ralf Rangnick press conference incoming, amid talk of player dissatisfaction at the well-oiled high-functioning corporate machine that is Manchester United: Looks like more legacy issues: Another nudge on the revolving door at Aston Villa – Wesley is leaving the building (that he’s not been in it much) to join the Brazilian club Internacional on a 12-month loan. The Brazilian had spent the early part of this season on loan at Club Brugge, and has struggled for fitness since moving to Villa in 2019. This from the Bruno Lage presser. He summed up Wolves’ stance well, and the questions that might arise if someone were to come in with a gigantic bid for, say, Rúben Neves. “When you want to do the next step and every time you are selling your best players, then the next step can never happen. We are here with the project and our ideas – that’s everyone: the chairman, sporting director and the manager – and the main point is to continue with the same players, try to improve them and go to the next level. “But you know this model of football: If one big transfer appears – I can compare with when I was at Benfica and a team came and paid 120 million for one player - you cannot say no. Or you can say no but you have to balance it: do you receive the money and use it to improve the team or do you continue with the same player? That’s the thing.” Thanks Gregg, festive cheeseboard duly polished off (almost). And I return with some grim injury news for Leicester, with Jamie Vardy out for eight weeks with his hamstring injury and Jonny Evans now sidelined until April after hamstring surgery. Elsewhere, Michail Antonio has signed a contract extension at West Ham keeping him at the London Stadium until 2024. Here’s a story that is worth reading if, like me, you play Fantasy Football. And Tom is back from his lunch now so I’ll hand back over to him. Bye! Here’s Newcastle’s new full-back on why he made the move from a Champions League club to one that could be in the Championship if they don’t start winning more games. I think I made it clear that if I had the opportunity to come back to the Premier League I would do. It’s important for my family. I like challenges. I know the position they’re in and I want to help them on and off the field. I’m excited about it. It was important [that I’d worked with Eddie Howe before]. I know what he demands in training, I know what he expects. Managers who have coached me know what character I am. I’m still ambitious. I still want to get in the England team. I still feel like I’m in very good shape. Thomas Tuchel has been previewing Chelsea’s FA Cup tie against Chesterfield and was asked whether he was considering trying to get Emerson Palmieri back from his loan spell at Lyon. These quotes suggest he might just give it a go: In general, I will not hide from the fact we have a long-term injury with Ben Chilwell who will miss the whole season. I won’t go into details. We appreciate him as a player and person. He’s a top guy and professional, and still a Chelsea player. It’s not what I wish for, but we need to evaluate the situation. We are looking into it. It’s an option. To be fair to Maxwell Cornet, he hasn’t missed much else since joining Burnley. Here’s what Rafael Benítez had to say about Lucas Digne’s request to leave Everton. I have no explanation [for why he wants to leave]. We are professional and are paid big money to do our job. If someone is happy or not happy, it is up to you because are paid big money and have to perform. You have to put your interests behind those of the club. In modern football, maybe the stats and the priorities have changed and maybe people think about themselves before the team. It’s very simple. The 31st January, if we finish the transfer window and he is still here, we will do what we have to do. We were trying to manage the situation. We have interest but nothing concrete. What I cannot do is bring players who want to be here, and then give priority to players who are not really interested. Benítez also spoke more generally about the club’s progress and hinted at a few battles he might be having in the dressing-room. I don’t want to finish 10th, I want to finish as high as possible. I want to be sure that Everton is growing and improving and creating a winning mentality. Do we want to grow and improve or just to manage the egos and leave the team behind?” Willy Caballero has extended his short-term Southampton deal until the end of the season. Will Caballero is 40! He’s clearly a good vibes man as well as a decent backup goalkeeper. Here’s what Ralph Hasenhüttl had to say about the veteran stopper. Willy is a fantastic character who has freshened up our goalkeeper group massively. With the experience he brings, he is absolutely an important part of that group, and that was the reason we wanted to convince him to stay with us until the end of the season, and I am very happy he has decided to do this. Some more news out of Aston Villa. Their Brazilian striker Wesley, who suffered a dreadful knee injury last season at Burnley, has joined Internacional on a 12-month loan deal. Hello! Hope we’re all doing well. Let’s kick off with a a piece about the lowest-ranked club in the FA Cup third round, Kidderminster Harriers, who will not be live on screen but that has not hit their feeling of excitement. Here’s Jamie Jackson’s piece: Lucas Digne has asked to leave Everton, Sky is now reporting, to no great surprise. And on that bombshell, I’m going to run away for a spot of lunch, and leave you in the capable hands of Gregg Bakowski. See you later. Back on the topic of transfers, Southampton manager Ralph Hasenhüttl believes the Premier League should consider preventing January signings from featuring in matches that have been rearranged from the past month of Covid disruption. Ben Fisher has more: Covid has been causing all manner of havoc in Italy, with four games not happening this week in somewhat farcical circumstances. Nicky Bandini’s Serie A blog has more: Bologna, Torino, Salernitana and Udinese were each ordered to quarantine following outbreaks in their respective squads. Their opponents – Inter, Atalanta, Venezia and Fiorentina – still each showed up to the relevant stadium and performed the surreal but increasingly familiar ritual of pretending to get ready for football matches that could not take place Arsenal will wear all-white tops for Sunday’s FA Cup match at Nottingham Forest as part of a campaign against youth violence after London saw a record 30th teenage murder in a year. The north London side will roll out their “No More Red” campaign, which will see their jersey stripped of its traditional red. The former Arsenal striker Ian Wright is a part of the initiative and said on Friday: “We can never accept loss of life through youth violence as ‘normal’ in our city and it’s so important that we all work together to create a better environment for young people. The shirt will become a symbol of positivity in the community, given to individuals and organisations who are giving back to the community and creating a positive environment for young people.” “It’s sad that this Friday live blog has lowered itself to comments about football,” sniffs coldcut BTL. “Where are breakfast updates? Live blog of the live blog? This nonsense needs to stop.” Breakfast!? Luxury – not had time for that, which is probably why my mind drifted into Kidderminster pie-based reverie just there. Happy to exchange more pastry-based hot takes. Perhaps the best food I’ve ever had at a football ground was in the away end at Kidderminster, around 20 years ago. Those pies were lush. Though those catering arrangements appear to have been controversially changed of late. All of which is an indulgent preamble to mentioning that Harriers are the lowest-placed side in the FA Cup third round, and host Reading, who’ve had a rough old season, so anything could happen. Jamie Jackson has a more detailed preview At 3pm on Saturday, Kidderminster, fifth in sixth-tier National League North, will hope to add another dream-come-true tale to the FA Cup story by knocking out Reading, the domestic game’s 41st-ranked side. “That’s exactly what we want,” says Sam Austin, the Carpetmen’s longest-serving player, who joined in 2016 and will line up as the No 10 in Russell Penn’s 4-2-3-1. The 25-year-old, though, was not always a creative force with a penchant for ‘wordly’ goals such as the 20-yard left-foot volley he blazed in against Manchester United during a pre-season friendly in the summer. “When you get one, you gain the confidence to try again, don’t you?” he says. “You carry it on, you take a few more chances than you probably would if you’re low on confidence. But when I first joined it was all about earning experience, trying to get into the team. A chance arose at full-back and I thought: ‘Well, to get games I’ll have to adjust my playing style.’ I played there for a few seasons and I always loved the attacking aspect of full-back.” Read more here. A reminder that Covid has forced the postponement of three Women’s Super League matches this weekend – Chelsea’s home game against Spurs tonight, Aston Villa v Everton tomorrow and West Ham’s fixture against Manchester United on Sunday. Brighton v Man City looks the pick of the WSL matches that have survived. A contribution from below the line from regular vsbain, about the Bundesliga, which resumes this evening: Dropping by to say hi because I am on winter break until next week. The top Bundesliga resumes tonight and, as tradition, we get a free to air game. It is inevitably Bayern and they are playing Gladbach. Not so quick to yawn because the last time we got fed that - in the autumn - the latter totally surprised us with a 5-0 win. There was a lot of speculation that this would be postponed because Bayern have a lot of covid but it is currently scheduled. Fair enough. My team had it at the start and had to complete fixtures anyhow, such as with juniors. Duly lost all games and did not score. You just move on. It’s a big day for Chesterfield tomorrow when they visit Chelsea. Riding high at the top of the National League under James Rowe, the Spireites are a team transformed after years of decline. Rank outsiders against last year’s runners-up they may be but Rowe says his side “have to dream”. “A lot of players are fulfilling their dreams tomorrow, as well as myself, it is just a really great day to be a part of,” he told the Derbyshire Times. “If there was not a chance I would not be getting on the coach this afternoon. “It is a bonus game and it really puts us back on the map. I have some comments around the town saying ‘we are getting our club back’.” And they’ve sold 6,000 tickets for tomorrow’s tie. There’s a tasty old south London derby at the Den tomorrow lunchtime, when Crystal Palace visit Millwall. And Patrick Vieira intends to play Palace’s “best team”. Cheikhou Kouyate, Jordan Ayew and Wilfried Zaha are absent on Africa Cup of Nations duty, but the Premier League club have no plans to rotate. “For me, it was always clear to put the best team on the field to compete,” Vieira said. “It is a derby, it is the FA Cup and it will be challenging. We will need our best starting XI to compete and to try to win the game.” Conor Gallagher will return at the Den but James McArthur (hamstring) remains absent. Vieira was coy over Palace’s transfer activity for this month, insisting Jean-Philippe Mateta “will be part of the group” for the Cup tie despite speculation linking him with a move to St Etienne. On reported interested in Eddie Nketiah and Aaron Ramsey, the manager added: “There is not much to say about those players because for us what is really important is to concentrate and focus on the players we have.” Some more from PA Media on Kieran Trippier joining Newcastle, with Eddie Howe obviously expecting the full-back’s arrival to pave the way for further January signings after insisting he has not joined the club for the money. Speaking at his pre-match press conference ahead of Saturday’s FA Cup third round tie against Cambridge, in which Trippier could feature, Howe said: “It’s a sign that the club has a huge pull - and I’m not talking financial here. “Kieran hasn’t come for the financial benefits of the contract. He’s come for the club and for the challenge that the team faces at the current time, but also the longer-term vision, so I think that’s a massive thing for the football club. “Hopefully with his signing, other players around the world will potentially look at that and share his dream and his vision for what he sees. That’s a big thing for us.” Asked if he was confident about further signings, he replied: “Yes, I’d say at this moment I am. But we’re in the hands of clubs selling players, we’re in the hands of agents and players wanting to come. There are no guarantees. It might sound simple from the outside; it’s very, very different when you’re on the inside, so I’m confident, but there are no promises.” The threat of relegation may not help Newcastle as they attempt to bolster their squad over the remaining weeks of the winter transfer window – Callum Wilson is due to undergo a scan to determine the extent of his calf injury which could yet impact on their plans – although Howe indicated his distaste for escape clauses in contracts. He said: “Offering relegation clauses is a sure-fire way to potentially bring players in who don’t have the correct motivation. I want players who are absolutely committed and have no way out, to say ‘I’ve got to make that work’, and that’s the only way we’re going to get success anyway.” Covid infections continue to jolt Africa Cup of Nations preparations, with Gabon and Arsenal’s Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang among the players to test positive. Reuters also reports that Egypt have cancelled training and delayed their departure to Cameroon while Guinea were forced to leave three players behind at their training base in Rwanda. Aubameyang tested positive on arrival in Cameroon on Thursday, along with his teammate Mario Lemina. They are now awaiting the results of PCR tests but both missed the country’s first training session on Friday. If confirmed positive, they will have to go into isolation and would almost certainly miss Gabon’s opening game in Group C against the Comoros Islands on Monday. The Guinea Football Federation said on Friday that the defender Mikael Dyrestam was isolating in accordance with local Covid protocols, together with the goalkeeper coach Kemoko Camara, who also tested positive, while the rest of their delegation departed for Cameroon. The striker Seydouba Soumah was already in isolation after testing positive. Guinea play their opening Group B match on Monday against Malawi. The Cape Verde Islands were also waiting for the results of PCR tests on two of their players – defender João Paulo Fernandes and midfielder Nenass – after they tested positive on arrival on Thursday. Squad sizes have been increased to 28 players for the tournament. Get in the mood for tonight’s tie with footage of Manchester City’s Premier League visit to Swindon in 1993, where luminaries such as Nicky Summerbee and Niall Quinn turn it round against the top-flight newbies before a blatantly offside third. Thems were days … And Paul Doyle had a chinwag with Jan Åge Fjørtoft about that season earlier in the week. Read here: Staying in Liverpool, the moving TV drama series this week about the Hillsborough campaigner Anne Williams has put the injustices of the disaster back in the spotlight. Calls for a “Hillsborough law” to ensure fairer treatment for the bereaved in the justice system will be made later today. Mark Brown has the story: Calls for a “Hillsborough law” to rebalance the UK’s justice system and ensure fairer treatment for bereaved families will be made at a high-profile event on Friday. The Hillsborough Law Now summit will be co-hosted by the mayors of Greater Manchester and Liverpool, Andy Burnham and Steve Rotheram, and will have speakers who include representatives of bereaved families from tragedies past and present. It has been timed to build on the extra awareness of the issue, which has been revived by the powerful ITV drama Anne that tells the story of Anne Williams’ fight for justice for her teenage son Kevin. The actor Maxine Peake, who played Williams, is expected at the event, which will be livestreamed on Facebook. Liverpool will reopen their first team training ground today and have confirmed assistant manager Peter Krawietz is to take charge of preparations for Sunday’s FA Cup third round tie against Shrewsbury. Liverpool closed the first team facilities on Wednesday amid an escalating Covid outbreak that led to the postponement of the Carabao Cup semi-final first leg at Arsenal. Those first team players who are available will train today. Krawietz is leading preparations for the game while Jurgen Klopp and Pepijn Lijnders isolate. Liverpool expect to pitch a smattering of youth and academy players into their tie at Shrewsbury on Sunday. Virgil van Dijk, Fabinho, Curtis Jones, Alisson and Joel Matip could be available but the likes of Kaide Gordon, Harvey Davies, James Balagizi, Harvey Blair and James Norris from the academy could also feature. Whispers have it that Crystal Palace are sniffing around Arsenal’s Eddie Nketiah while Norwich’s Todd Cantwell is among those players being linked to the Saudi Newcastle project, though Dean Smith was saying nothing either way in his weekend presser. “I know there is an awful lot of speculation about Todd at the moment and there always is about good players,” the Norwich manager said. “He has been in a situation where when we arrived he had not been training with the first team for a while, so we had to build up his fitness and he is in a good place now. “He is contention to play on Sunday [in the FA Cup at Charlton], but I don’t deal with the speculation, Stuart [Webber, the sporting director] does, so I don’t know is the honest answer.” Such is the mood on Tyneside that a home tie against a third-tier club is a sell-out, but that 52,000 crowd will include 5,000 from Cambridge, who’ve been on an upward curve in recent seasons. Louise Taylor has been talking to their owner, Paul Barry, about the resurgence of a proper community club. A bit of news from Southampton, where Willy Caballero has agreed to extend his short-term stay at St Mary’s until the end of season. The 40-year-old keeper joined last month as cover after injuries to Alex McCarthy and Fraser Forster. And we’ve got a bucket-full of speculation courtesy of today’s Rumour Mill. Luis Diaz to Liverpool? Nat Phillips to Watford? Issa Diop to Newcastle? Read on … Morning everyone. And welcome to third-round weekend. While lamentations about the fading magic of the FA Cup don’t have the same allure that lamentations about the fading magic of the FA Cup had 15 or 20 years ago, it’s still a big date in the calendar for many fans. There’ll be an extra spring in the steps of fans at places such as Kidderminster, Yeovil, Chesterfield and others. So while many teams – and not just those at the top – may field much-changed sides on third-round day, the fact that Covid means practically no one can field their first-choice XIs anyway adds a certain unpredictability. Starting tonight, when League Two promotion-challengers Swindon host a youthful Manchester City side. I saw Ben Garner’s revitalised Swindon last month and they looked slick and enterprising, if porous at the back. It won’t be 0-0 at the County Ground this evening, and should be worth watching. And we have transfer activity in abundance. Two big deals have been confirmed already this morning – Kieran Trippier becoming the first big-name signing of the new Newcastle regime, and Philippe Coutinho’s loan move to Aston Villa sending out a statement. And you can track every deal in Europe’s top five leagues, for men and women, with our transfer interactives:David Mamet sent his script of Glengarry Glen Ross to Harold Pinter and asked what was wrong with it. Pinter said: “Nothing. All it needs is a production.” And it certainly got one of those. Pinter had already passed the script on to Bill Bryden, who has died aged 79, a colleague and fellow associate at the National Theatre in the Peter Hall era, and Bryden’s 1983 landmark production of seedy deals among the estate agents of Chicago took off like a rocket. Bryden had arrived at the new National on the South Bank in the mid-1970s as one of Hall’s chief allies and most distinguished directors. He created an ensemble company within the NT that has never been equalled, an unapologetically macho, brazenly hard-drinking troupe who ripped through Mamet, Eugene O’Neill and the medieval Mystery Plays of York and Wakefield as rewritten by poet Tony Harrison, creating theatrical events of high voltage and poetic density. The Mysteries, as they became known, comprised three plays over eight years – The Passion (1977), The Nativity (1980) and Doomsday (1985) – in the small Cottesloe auditorium with promenade audiences, folk-rock music, and a hand-picked company of actors – often known as the rugby team – including Jack Shepherd, Dave Hill, Brenda Blethyn, Robert Stephens and Brian Glover (who played God in a flat cap on a forklift truck). The director John Dexter described the show as “the high point of the National’s first decade on the South Bank”. It was the high point, too, of Bryden’s style of popular ensemble playing, fitted out with rudimentary but spectacular design and lighting by regular collaborators such as William Dudley, Hayden Griffin, Andy Phillips and Rory Dempster, and writers Harrison and Keith Dewhurst. It was performed among the audience under a constellation of twinkling orange braziers and lanterns, transferred to the reopened Lyceum theatre in 1985, almost half a century after the venue hosted its last play, John Gielgud’s 1939 Hamlet, and was filmed by Channel 4. Bryden and his company produced 12 shows in the Cottesloe, including a second saga of magical conjuration, Flora Thompson’s Lark Rise to Candleford (adapted by Dewhurst), making contemporary joy and tragedy from a vanished agrarian world in 1870s Oxfordshire. He had already established himself at the Royal Court, where, as a dashing, always voluble figure in the early 1970s, he brought a bracing Glaswegian fizz and glamour to new work and began assembling that glorious roster of colleagues that travelled with him down the years. His musical affiliations were with the folk-rock of Steeleye Span and the Albion Band, singers Maddy Prior and Martin Carthy, and composer John Tams. Before arriving at the National, he was an associate director at the Edinburgh Lyceum, where he directed three extraordinary “folk” plays: his own Willie Rough (1972), about his maternal grandfather, a Clyde docker; The Bevellers (1973), by actor Roddy McMillan, recalling his days in the glass-bevelling business; and Benny Lynch (1974), about a world champion boxer on skid row in the 1930s. The latter, which he also wrote, was a pet project he was hoping to translate to the large screen, but it never happened. There was a moment when it seemed Bryden would reignite the long-nurtured dream of a Scottish National Theatre. But when Hall came calling, he upped sticks and headed south. After 10 years at the NT, he was appointed head of drama at BBC Scotland (1984-93) – he had served on the board since 1979 – where his production triumphs included his own film, The Holy City (1985), a Glaswegian Easter Passion, and John Byrne’s delirious, delightful Tutti Frutti, (1987) starring Robbie Coltrane, Emma Thompson and Richard Wilson in a saga of low-rent rock and rollers on the road. Bryden was born in Greenock, near Glasgow, the son of George Bryden, a bus driver and engineer, and his wife, Catherine (nee Rough), a shop assistant. He was educated at Hillend primary school and Greenock high school, finding work as a trainee at Scottish Television in 1963 and directing his first play, Shaw’s Misalliance, at the Belgrade, Coventry, in 1965. His first London productions were at the Royal Court, where he was William Gaskill’s assistant for two years before asserting himself with a buoyant account of Keith Dewhurst’s Corunna (British soldiers fighting the French in 1808), Bertolt Brecht’s Baby Elephant with Bob Hoskins, and Edward Bond’s Passion (1971), commissioned by CND for Easter Sunday in Alexandra Palace. In Edinburgh, at the festival in 1975, he wrote (and directed) the libretto for composer Robin Orr’s Hermiston, based on a last unfinished novel by Robert Louis Stevenson. Alongside the long-term project of The Mysteries, he and Dewhurst gave an ebullient account of The World Turned Upside Down (1978), based on Christopher Hill’s English civil war book, and he directed three remarkable American pieces: Mamet’s earlier American Buffalo, Michael Herr’s Dispatches, adapted by Bryden and the company from Herr’s devastating reports from the Vietnam war, and O’Neill’s four short plays of the sea, The Long Voyage Home. He also served up fine revivals of O’Neill’s The Iceman Cometh (Jack Shepherd as a mesmerising Hickey), Arthur Miller’s The Crucible (Mark McManus as John Proctor) and Stacy Keach in Hughie, also by O’Neill. Keach gave a towering performance as a wiped-out gambler returning, after a five-day bender, to a favoured haunt of a shabby hotel, where the old night porter, Hughie, has just died. Keach would feature in a mid-western movie about Jesse James and his gang, which Bryden proudly co-scripted, Walter Hill’s The Long Riders (1980), alongside his brother James Keach, Dennis Quaid and his brother, Randy, and three Carradines – David, Keith and Robert. Bryden loved westerns, and all the great Hollywood epics, and wrote a play for the National, Old Movies (1977), in which an ageing producer, played by EG Marshall, is trying to set up a biblical extravaganza. His larger exploits on the NT’s Olivier stage were not always successful – the official opening production of Carlo Goldoni’s Il Campiello, in the presence of the Queen, in 1976, was a disaster. But he made good in the Olivier in 1983 with Dewhurst’s great rendering of the episodic mock grandeur in Cervantes’ Don Quixote, with a gloriously delusional Paul Scofield riding his Rosinante as a knackered penny farthing tricycle, oblivious to the attentive blustering of Tony Haygarth’s Sancho Panza. And there were two unforgettably spectacular events on his home territory of the old Harland &amp; Wolff shipyard in Govan. The Ship (1990) made drama both cinematic and realistic of the last great liner to be built on the Clyde; the ship literally slid from its timber supports away from the audience, who were abandoned to celebrate/lament the end of an era. And The Big Picnic (1994) was the Starlight Express of the first world war, the incredible vision of the Angel of Mons leading the risen dead from the muddy battlefields back home to Govan. Along the way there were more fine productions, such as the best I have seen of Ivan Turgenev’s A Month in the Country, starring Helen Mirren and John Hurt at the Albery (now the Noël Coward) in 1994; a return to the National in 2001 with The Good Hope, a Dutch classic about the fishing industry, adapted by Lee Hall, a salty socialist tragedy with Frances de la Tour; and more bar-room poetic blather from Tennessee Williams in Small Craft Warnings at the Arcola, Dalston, in 2008. His work in opera was limited but critically acclaimed: at Covent Garden, he directed Parsifal in 1988 and a beautiful version of Leoš Janáček’s The Cunning Little Vixen in 1990. And for the ENO, he directed the Olivier-award winning The Silver Tassie (2000), with music by Mark-Anthony Turnage and a libretto by Amanda Holden. Bryden did not enjoy the best of health in the past 10 years, but he never stopped planning and writing. He was made CBE in 1993 and received honorary fellowships from Rose Bruford drama school, Queen Margaret College (now Queen Margaret University) in Edinburgh and the University of Stirling. His first marriage, to Deborah Morris in 1971, ended in divorce in 1988. Bryden is survived by their two children, Dillon and Kate, and by his second wife, Angela Douglas (the widow of Kenneth More), whom he lived with from 1988 and married in 2009. • William Campbell Rough Bryden, director and writer, born 12 April 1942; died 5 January 2022Faced with a popular uprising, Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, has responded in hardline fashion. He has ordered a security crackdown, called protesters “terrorists” and said those who take to the streets deserve to be wiped out. Tokayev has also cryptically hinted that “foreigners” are behind the unrest. It is unsurprising that the veteran politician and diplomat has taken a leaf from the Kremlin’s conspiratorial playbook. Tokayev spent his formative years in the service of the Soviet foreign ministry. After graduating from school in Almaty – the scene of the worst disturbances this week – he studied foreign relations at a Moscow state institute. Tokayev specialised in Chinese. He mastered the language, joined the far-east division of the Soviet foreign ministry and spent much of the 1980s at Moscow’s embassy in Beijing. When the USSR fell apart, he quickly became an adviser to Nursultan Nazarbayev, leader of the newly independent Kazakhstan. It was Tokayev who persuaded other nations to recognise Kazakhstan diplomatically. China was especially enthusiastic. Narzabayev rewarded Tokayev by making him deputy foreign minister, as well as interpreter-cum-adviser on official delegations to Beijing. By 1999 Tokayev became prime minister and in 2002 foreign minister. A staunch Nazarbayev loyalist, he was responsible for improving relations with Kazakhstan’s three key partners – Russia, China and the US. He met regularly with US envoys and helped Kazakhstan relinquish its inherited communist-era nuclear bombs. Some of Tokayev’s private comments now seem ironic. At a 2005 lunch he told the US ambassador a popular Orange Revolution of the kind seen in other post-Soviet Republics was “unlikely” in Kazakhstan. The country, he claimed, was committed to “political reform” and decentralisation, according to a leaked US cable. Further high positions followed. He became speaker and then chairman of Kazakhstan’s senate. When Nazarbayev retired in 2019 – formally at least – Tokayev succeeded him as president. Two-and-a-half years into the job, he is facing a crisis graver than anything seen by his authoritarian predecessor. Tokayev’s decision to invite in Russian troops to restore order reverses years in which Kazakhstan has cautiously sought to tread an independent foreign policy, triangulating between Moscow, Washington and Beijing. From now on, relations with the west will be cooler. Those with Russia suddenly appear more fragile and subservient. Tokayev’s family connections are bound up with Soviet history. His father, a writer of detective stories, fought in the second world war – the Great Patriotic War, as Russia calls it. His mother was a university languages teacher. He is divorced with a son, Timur. His hobbies include reading novels, memoirs and books about politics. According to his official biography, Tokayev – now 68 – has written 10 books on international relations. He also “supports a healthy lifestyle” and was the head of Kazakhstan’s table tennis association.US winter weather is wreaking havoc coast to coast, with more than 90 million people affected by potentially hazardous weather from Thursday and into Friday. More than 2,300 flights were canceled in the US on Friday morning. Schools and offices in the north-east were shuttered, by a fierce overnight snowstorm, if not only by the Omicron coronavirus surge, and parts of the north-west were under an avalanche warning. No sooner had gigantic delays on the east coast I-95 road artery in Virginia been cleared earlier this week caused by weather and crashes, a more than 20-car pile-up in more stormy weather stranded drivers for hours in Kentucky. Tens of millions nationwide were hit by hazardous weather in the past 24 hours, ABC News reported, while a whopping 37 states faced winter weather alerts by Thursday evening. In New England and the larger north-east region, the National Weather Service (NWS) forecasted a “quick hitting nor’easter” storm would cause “disruptive snowfall” for the end of the week, with 4-8in falling in parts of Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts and Maine. New York City received a quick dump of snow overnight, with New Yorkers waking up early Friday to the sound of snow plows for the first time this winter, followed by bluebird skies and sunshine on the freshly-dusted landscape. Public schools in Boston and Washington DC declared snow days Friday, while federal offices in the DC area closed amid the winter weather. In Connecticut, Governor Ned Lamont shuttered executive branch state offices to the public, and residents were advised to stay home. New Jersey’s governor, Phil Murphy, declared a state of emergency because of the winter storm. “We urge all New Jerseyans to stay off the roads, stay updated, and stay safe,” Murphy wrote on Twitter. Further south, a huge pile-up of vehicles beleaguered the snow-covered Western Kentucky Parkway on Thursday, where drivers barely moved, if at all, for four to five hours. Known injuries were minor, police told CNN. On the other side of the country, in the Pacific north-west and northern Rockies, the NWS warned of “heavy mountain snow and gusty winds” after “a stretch of very active and wintry weather” in the region. “Additional snowfall amounts up to 1-2ft are possible throughout the high terrain, which will exacerbate the already growing concerns for avalanches,” the NWS wrote. As well as flight cancelations, another 931 services were delayed by Friday morning, according to FlightAware.com. Mass cancellations have been dogging the airline industry for weeks because of Covid-related staffing shortages and inclement weather.With the start of a new year came a new haircut and suit for Boris Johnson as he fronted his first press conference of 2022 to reject calls for new coronavirus restrictions. The prime minister’s flagging Downing Street operation had looked in dire need of a reset before Christmas after months of sleaze scandals, anger at Covid laws and the shock resignation of his Brexit negotiator, David Frost. No 10 was hoping the festive break would stop talk of a Conservative leadership challenge and that Johnson’s decision to hold off restrictions would earn him a breather. However, any reprieve looked to be shortlived, with growing unease among his MPs about the impending cost of living crisis, a further onslaught of sleaze allegations over the No 11 flat refurbishment this week, and continuing inquiries into lockdown-busting parties in Downing Street – all against a backdrop of Omicron. Tory insiders believe a leadership relaunch full of hope and optimism would be difficult to pull off at this stage. These are some of the key challenges he will have to navigate in the months ahead, if he wants to avoid placing his political fate in the hands of his own backbenchers. 26 January: review point for Covid restrictions Johnson came down on the side of Tory backbenchers and against some medical and scientific voices calling for more restrictions in the new year. But the real crunch point will be later this month. Far from being mollified, his backbenchers are going further in their calls for Covid restrictions to be lessened or scrapped completely. Andrew Bridgen, Tory MP for North West Leicestershire, said: “Given it’s now endemic, we should be stopping all restrictions, stopping all testing outside of hospitals, we don’t need self-isolation any more. “Get our economy moving, and save a fortune on testing by not doing it any more. And use these savings and extra revenue to cut the VAT on heating and also scrap the NICs [national insurance contributions] rise in April.” Bridgen is not alone in believing all curbs should end. Should Johnson want to introduce further restrictions or just continue with current ones on masks and working from home, he will face a battle with his own party. January: the long-awaited levelling-up white paper Johnson’s central idea guiding his premiership has been the principle of levelling up. However, it has been more than two years since the 2019 election and ideas in this area have been sorely lacking. Michael Gove currently holds the levelling up brief and is charged with bringing key ideas from the Johnson administration to life. If it is disappointing or too technocratic, Johnson will be open to charges that his premiership is lacking in focus and fresh policies. “What are we going to do with the next two years to convince people it was worth voting for us?” as one MP put it. February and April: energy price cap decision and NICs rise Johnson is coming under growing pressure over the price of energy, with warnings that bills may rise by 50% to keep suppliers afloat when the price cap is reviewed by the regulator, Ofgem, in February. No 10 and the Treasury are examining possible mitigations but are focusing their attention on ways to help the poorest, such as increasing the warm homes discount, rather than a measure that would ease the cost for everyone – slashing VAT on gas and electricity bills. This is particularly tricky for Johnson as he boasted in 2016 that scrapping the sales tax on utility bills would be possible after Brexit – and Labour has taken up the cause with gusto since then. Calls from the Telegraph-reading right of the party for the NICs rise to be cancelled will also sting Johnson with the criticism that the move was fundamentally unconservative. It remains to be seen whether he will manage to hold his ground as the moment approaches when voters will really feel pain in their pockets. Timing unknown: review of No 10’s lockdown busting parties The revelation that No 10 held gatherings during lockdown from as early as May 2020 to Christmas parties last year severely hit the prime minister’s poll ratings. This in turn has enraged backbenchers, less over the rule-flouting but more over the carelessness and attempted cover-ups. The inquiry, now led by Cabinet Office veteran Sue Gray, has been collecting testimony. Those who know her methods believe she may find ways of being critical without causing serious damage to the prime minister. Nevertheless, anything that keeps the lockdown parties in the headlines is bad news for the Conservatives’ popularity. Spring: a reshuffle of his top team There has been persistent speculation about a possible reshaping of Johnson’s operation. Some Tory MPs believe there will have to be a “sacrifice” for missteps over the lockdown party furore and many would like to see a return to the ascendancy of the Brexit-focused wing of the party, which is now underrepresented since the departure of Dominic Cummings and Frost. Tories have long grumbled about the prime minister’s chief of staff, Dan Rosenfield, a former banker and civil servant, who they believe is insufficiently political. If Johnson does decide to go for a spring reshuffle coinciding with good news on a waning Covid wave, it could be accompanied by a staff shake-up. May: local elections The May elections are a key point for assessing how the government and opposition are doing with voters. Robert Hayward, a Tory peer and elections expert, said all eyes will be on whether the Tories can hang on to key London boroughs, including Westminster and Wandsworth and Johnson’s own territory of Hillingdon – and equally whether Labour’s Keir Starmer has enough appeal to take them. He said the metropolitan elections were also worth observing to see if the Tories are holding firm or receding in crucial red wall areas across the north of England. The performance relative to other years – bearing in mind Johnson is running a midterm government after 12 years of Tory rule – are always a litmus test in the minds of MPs. “My view about political leaders is that you lose power by attrition. There are very few that lose power on one specific event,” said Hayward.Once obscure diagnostic devices, lateral flow tests have had a rocky path to mainstream use, but some experts now view their rise to ubiquity as a “heroic” step in the fight against Covid-19 and say they could be here to stay. As the first wave of Covid crashed down in early 2020 and governments scrambled to secure PPE, ventilators and reagents for laboratory testing, behind the scenes some had already foreseen a role for the pregnancy test-style kits. “We started thinking about it in late 2019 when we were at international trade shows where it was becoming a hot topic,” said David Campbell, the director of the Derby-based diagnostics company Surescreen, which has been in the lateral flow business for more than 25 years and brought one of the first antigen tests in Europe to market. “We’d done a lot of work on influenza and some work on Mers. We thought initially that it would be a niche product.” The first Covid lateral flow tests were designed to detect antibodies. At the time governments optimistically – and wrongly – hoped that proof of prior infection could act as a “freedom pass” allowing people to return to life as normal in the knowledge that they were immune to the virus. By April 2020 the UK government had announced the purchase of 17.5m lateral flow testing kits, describing them as a “gamechanger”. But this proved to be a misstep. “They absolutely didn’t work – they were awful,” said Prof Sir John Bell, Regius professor of medicine at Oxford University. (He noted that Surescreen’s test was not among these.) “There were a lot of people running around trying to sell tests that didn’t work trying to make a fast buck. It was pretty scandalous. That was the starting point for lateral flow tests.” The orders were quietly cancelled, and Bell said one valuable lesson was the need for a robust validation process. The government established a group of Porton Down scientists, chaired by Bell, to validate tests for use. By early autumn 2020 many companies had switched their focus to antigen tests, which use synthetic antibodies to detect proteins from the virus itself. The UK government had also moved on to Operation Moonshot, which aimed to deliver millions of these kits to people’s homes. “Whenever I hear the word ‘moonshot’ from No 10 my heart sinks,” Bell said. “But the reality is that lateral flow tests have delivered. It’s been one of the more heroic moments of the pandemic.” This time the government fast-tracked a pilot of community testing of about 125,000 people in Liverpool using Innova’s lateral flow antigen test, and found that 897 people who did not know they had the virus tested positive and were stopped from spreading it further. However, the tests in the field missed 60% of infections in people who were self-swabbing, and even in those with high viral loads 30% of cases were missed. The results were controversial, with a vocal group of scientists warning that reliance on LFTs to open up schools and the economy risked providing false reassurance. “We were being attacked left, right and centre,” said Prof Iain Buchan, the chair in public health and clinical informatics at the University of Liverpool, who led the pilot. “It was almost a religious argument about whether you were for lateral flow testing or not. We even received death threats.” Buchan and others saw things differently. “Those who were criticising it were seeing it as a clinical diagnostic tool, not a public health tool,” he said. He and others argued that comparing the tests with the “gold standard” of laboratory-based PCR tests, which detect viral RNA, missed the point. Lateral flow tests aimed to spot people who would never have come forward for a PCR test in the first place and provide results at a fraction of the cost, in minutes rather than days. According to analysis by Buchan and colleagues, hospitalisations in Liverpool during the second wave were around a third lower than they would have been without the use of lateral flow tests. He said this reduction could not have been purely the result of people who tested positive self-isolating, but that doing the tests prompts wider behaviour changes such as other household members behaving more cautiously. Evidence also emerged that LFTs are most sensitive during the period when people have a high viral load, which has led some to argue they are a better test of when people are actually infectious. However, there is no established threshold for “infectiousness” and the sensitivity to low levels of antigens varies considerably between different brands of test. “The supposed ability of LFTs to detect people while they are ‘infectious’ seems to have become accepted dogma, but we know from our latest review that although pretty much all LFTs are very reliable when used in people with the very highest viral loads, there is considerable variation in assay performance at lower levels,” said Jac Dinnes, a senior researcher at the University of Birmingham who is leading a review of the accuracy of lateral flow tests. As case numbers fell in 2021, lateral flow tests also came under criticism for delivering false positives. This reflects a classic statistical conundrum: if you test positive, the chances that you really have Covid depends on not only the quality of the test but also the current prevalence of the virus. For instance, if an LFT delivers a false positive result for one in 1,000 tests at a time when just one in 1,000 people have Covid, the chances that someone with a positive is truly infected are only 50%. But if the prevalence is one in 10 people, as it was in London last week, that person can be 99% sure they are infected. The latter may be the clearest explanation for why lateral flow tests have come into their own at this particular juncture in the pandemic. Since the emergence of Omicron, case numbers in the UK have risen to such extraordinary levels that the issue of people having to isolate unnecessarily due to false positive results is negligible (and makes confirmatory PCR tests redundant). Vaccination has lessened the risk of severe disease and weakened the case for full national lockdowns. Yet we are still facing a pandemic that needs to be brought under control. Experts say the UK is in effect performing a huge public health trial on the extent to which mass testing can achieve this goal. “The way that these tests have gone from a tool intended to help diagnose, or at least triage, people with symptoms of Covid-19 to something recommended for daily use in people without symptoms is really quite the story,” said Dinnes. “I have not seen any published evidence from primary studies, as opposed to modelling studies, that fully supports this policy.” The jury is out on whether government advice to “flow before you go” will be recalled as another surreal episode of the pandemic, like Zoom quizzes and clapping for the NHS on our doorsteps, or whether it will become part of the fabric of daily life. Some say that as case rates come down, mass testing will be less valuable as a public health tool. Others believe that the pandemic will pave the way for LFTs for a wider range of respiratory viruses. In the future, they say, parents might do a quick test on their child before sending them to school when they wake up with a slight cough, or an elderly person might test for flu and take antiviral tablets before the symptoms really kick in. “There’s a world where these could be quite transformational … in which you could change the impact of respiratory viruses in society generally,” said Bell.Horses at opposite ends of their careers are centre stage at Sandown on Saturday and while the Grade One Tolworth Hurdle at 2.25pm (all times GMT) should be a useful pointer towards the Cheltenham Festival in March, the final of the Unibet Veterans’ Handicap Chase Series offers weekend punters a more immediate chance of a decent payout. Aso, second in the Ryanair Chase at Cheltenham in 2019 and a runner in the Gold Cup 10 months ago, is an obvious favourite, not least as his form behind Blaklion at Haydock in December was franked when the winner went in again last week. In the debit column, though, Venetia Williams’s gelding is giving at least 9lb to the field and has done all his winning over fences at around two-and-a-half miles. A price around 11-4 looks too short and Indy Five (3.00) could be the best of several each-way alternatives at the other end of the weights at around 12-1. David Dennis’s 12-year-old is 1lb out of the handicap but has been competitive off higher marks in the past and was a comfortable winner in a useful time at Doncaster in December. He appreciated a return to front-running tactics there and should go well at a track where it often pays to be up with the pace. Wincanton 1.30: He did not beat a strong field but Planned Paradise had plenty to spare on his handicap debut at Newcastle last time and his time was decent in the circumstances. Sandown 1.50: Gunsight Ridge gave L’Homme Presse, a subsequent Grade Two winner, a serious race until the run-in at Exeter in December and is just 3lb higher here. Wincanton 2.05: A closely-handicapped field for the most part but Belle De Manech is the obvious candidate to improve having made a smooth switch to chasing at this track in December. Sandown 2.25: The visual impression of Constitution Hill’s successful hurdling debut over course and distance last time was backed up by the clock and it will be a big disappointment if the current second-favourite for the Supreme Novice Hurdle cannot justify his short price here. Wincanton 2.40: Getalead failed to land a four-timer at Taunton last time but was dropping back slightly in distance and ran as though he could still be competitive off his current mark over this trip. Wincanton 3.15: Occasional flashes of talent have been followed by disappointment for much of Mont Des Avaloir’s stop-start career, but few trainers can get one ready first time up like Paul Nicholls and he could get off the mark over fences at the fifth attempt here. Sandown 3.35: There was not much depth behind the winner when Hermes Boy won at Exeter in December but he had something in hand and an opening mark of 124 looks more than fair.Chester FC have been warned by police over a possible contravention of Covid regulations, after it was determined the club’s ground is in Wales. The National League North club were summoned to a meeting with North Wales police on Friday, after staging two fixtures in front of spectators over the festive period. Whereas there are no limits on crowds at events in England, a maximum of 50 people, plus players, can attend a sporting event in Wales. Chester recorded a crowd of 2,075 at their 2-2 draw with AFC Fylde last week. The club said they had been presented at the meeting with a joint letter from police and Flintshire county council which outlined “potential breaches of Welsh coronavirus regulations at our fixtures on 28th December 2021 and 2nd January 2022”. They were also warned over future breaches if crowds were allowed in again. In a statement on the Chester FC website, the club said they “had been informed this was based upon direction from the Welsh government” and that they would be consulting lawyers on what steps to take next. Although Chester is an English city with a history that dates back to the establishment of a Roman fort in 79 AD, the border with Wales runs through the city. It splits the Sealand Road park and ride in half and cuts through the Chester West employment park. It also runs across the Deva Stadium, with the ticket office in England and the pitch in Wales. A crowd could legally gather in the car park for the fixture with Brackley Town next weekend but they would be in contravention of Welsh rules if they entered the ground. The inverse situation is being experienced by The New Saints, a Welsh Premier League side whose stadium is in Shropshire. The issue of divergent regulations has come to a head in Chester before, when the Deva Stadium car park was the proposed site of a drive-in cinema in 2020. Cestrian cineastes ultimately had to get their kicks elsewhere after organisers discovered they would be contravening Welsh Covid rules if they used the stadium’s toilets. A Welsh government spokesperson said: “Chester City Football Club’s stadium is in Wales therefore Welsh regulations apply.”Time to wrap up for the week - here are today’s main business stories: We’ll be back on Monday. Have a lovely weekend. GW European stock markets have ended the day lower, although the UK bucked the trend. London’s FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has jumped 0.5% today to end at 7485, up 34 points, towards this week’s 22-month highs. Mining companies and banks led the rally, with financial stocks benefiting from expectations of higher interest rates. Germany’s DAX fell 0.65%, though, while France’s CAC lost 0.4%, as jitters about a looming rise in US interest rates weighed on investors. At the White House, president Joe Biden is explaining that it’s a ‘historic day’ for the US economic recovery, and that America is back to work. Biden says the fall in the unemployment rate, to 3.9% in December, is the sharpest one year drop in unemployment in United States history, and happened much faster than experts predicted. The 6.4m jobs added in 2021 is more than any other president has managed ever in a calendar year, Biden points out [although hiring in December was weaker than hoped]. Biden argues that this record job creation shows his economic plan is working, and that the American Rescue Plan got people vaccinated, back on their feet and back to work. Biden also flags that America is the only leading economy that’s stronger than before the pandemic. (US GDP is now larger than its pre-Covid levels, while other G7 nations, such as the UK, are still smaller than before the pandemic). President Biden points out that dire warnings that supply chain issues would lead to a crisis during the 2021 holidays weren’t fulfulled, after the White House took action: “The Grinch did not steal Christmas ... nor any votes.” Biden also insists he will keep pushing for healthy competition, warning that capitalism without competition is exploitation. And in an echo of president Trump, Biden points out that the US stock market has gained around 20% in his first year [the S&amp;P 500 index jumped over 26% during 2021] Our US Politics blog are covering all the political action: The US economy ended the year with disappointing jobs growth figures for December, adding just 199,000 workers to the non-farming labor force. Economists had been expecting more than double that number – 422,000 – suggesting that the US economy was improving, but erratically, as worker shortages troubled employers even before the Omicron coronavirus variant arrived, threatening another recovery stall. Figures released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics showed that the US unemployment rate fell to 3.9%, and that job creation was highest in leisure and hospitality, a key recovery sector, which added 53,000. Professional and business services contributed 43,000 while manufacturing added 26,000. Michael Pearce, senior US economist at Capital Economics, noted: “The muted 199,000 gain in non-farm payrolls and the more muted increase in labor force participation suggest that worker shortages were becoming a bigger restraint on employment growth, even before the Omicron surge in infections, which could knock hundreds of thousands off payrolls in January, But the slower-than-anticipated pace of hiring is offset by the record number of positions in 2021 and jobless claims registered at 207,000 last week close to the lowest level in 50 years. But the latest numbers suggested continued uncertainty over the course of a US economy that had begun rebounding strongly between waves of Covid disruption. Stocks are now heading lower in New York, as investors fret that US interest rates could rise soon. The tech-focused Nasdaq Composite index has now dropped by 1.2%, adding to losses earlier this week. Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at OANDA, says today’s jobs report could spur the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates or unwind its asset-purchase programme, even though fewer jobs were created in December than forecast. Stock markets are back in the red on the final day of the week as investors continue to fret about the prospect of higher interest rates this year. Whether this is just an exhaustion of the omicron relief trade, a case of January blues that will quickly be forgotten once earnings season gets underway next week, or something more significant will only become clear later this month. But the data isn’t offering investors much chance for relief and the jobs report is just another example of that. The headline NFP miss was never going to generate too much relief as signs of tightness elsewhere is always going to take priority. That said, investors may feel they’ve dodged a bullet as the million new jobs that some predicted could have further convinced policymakers that the US is close to, or at, full employment. But the average earnings numbers, higher participation, and drop in the unemployment rate will surely overshadow the NFP number as far as the central bank is concerned. Higher participation is encouraging, as the slow recovery on this front is a major contributor to the tight labour market. But wages rising faster than expected will add to the prolonged inflationary pressures which will concern the Fed. Apple’s chief executive, Tim Cook, was paid nearly $100m (£74m) last year, a 570% increase on the previous year, according to regulatory filings. Cook, 61, who took over as chief executive from the Apple founder Steve Jobs in 2011, also gained access to share awards worth about $750m as the iPhone maker’s market value approached $3tn. His total compensation for the year to September 2021 was $98.7m, up from $14.7m the previous year, filings with the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) show. Cook’s pay was 1,447 times that paid to the average Apple employee, who collected a median average of $68,254, the company said. More here: December’s jobs report indicates that hiring was cooling before America felt the full impact of Omicron. Here’s Greg Daco of Oxford Economics on the jobs slowdown: December’s employment report contains three messages, says Ron Temple, Co-Head of Multi Asset and Head of US Equities at Lazard Asset Management: job creation in 2021 was the strongest in US history at 6.4 million, nominal wage gains are strong at 5.8% for nonsupervisory and production workers, despite labor strength, employment remains 3.5 million below pre-pandemic levels. While the first two points support the Federal Reserve tightening monetary policy, the latter should give the Fed comfort that it is not behind the curve, Temple adds. Wall Street has taken the jobs report in its stride. The Dow Jones industrial average, which tracks 30 major US companies, is flat in early trading while the tech-focused Nasdaq Composite has gained 0.3%. Janet Mui, head of market analysis at wealth manager Brewin Dolphin, says the jobs report gives the Federal Reserve the green light to hike interest rates as early as March. “Headline number job creation disappointed (199K vs 450K) in December but everything else surprised to the positive side. There were large upward revisions (+114K) to prior two months payroll numbers, wages rose more than expected (+4.7% YoY vs +4.2%), unemployment rate dropped to the lowest since Feb 2020 (3.9% vs 4.1% expected). “Even before today’s report the Fed has shifted to a more hawkish stance because of concerns on high inflation. Today’s data further cements the expectation that the Federal Reserve will start a journey of gradual rate hikes in 2022, as near-zero interest rate is no longer appropriate. Financial markets are now pricing in a first rate hike at the March meeting, much earlier than previously projected. “With higher bond yields and less supportive liquidity, as the Fed looks to wind down its asset purchase program, the more speculative and frothy areas of the market are likely to face more challenges and volatility.” The drop in the US unemployment rate to 3.9%, and the 0.6% rise in hourly earnings, could prompt America’s central bank to raise interest rates in the coming months. Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors, says: “Although today’s jobs report shows yet another disappointing top line jobs number, it’s the higher than expected rise in earnings growth which will grab the spotlight. A 4.7% gain in annual hourly earnings, coupled with a drop in the unemployment rate to a fresh pandemic low of 3.9%, is a clear sign of a tight labour market if ever there was one, and will likely give the Fed a green light for monetary tightening. The unemployment rate already is only a few skips away from the pre-pandemic low. “Today’s report is not going to take the steam out of bond yields, nor is the headline payrolls number strong enough to reassure markets of a very strong economy. Equity markets are on the line for a volatile month.” December’s weak non-farm payroll gains shows that firms are struggling to find workers, argues Michael Pearce, Senior US Economist at Capital Economics: The main disappointment was service sector employment, which rose by a subdued 157,000. That weakness was widespread, with the retail sector cutting 2,100 jobs and the leisure and hospitality adding 53,000 jobs, much weaker than the average 200,000 monthly gain over the past six months. That could reflect some impact of the renewed rise in virus cases but, with the December payroll week predating the big surge in Omicron-linked cases, we suspect the simpler explanation is it’s getting increasingly difficult to find workers. America has racked up its biggest annual increase in jobs on record, points out Heather Long of the Washington Post: Job growth averaged 537,000 per month in 2021, as the reopening of the economy spurred firms to hire staff. But while nonfarm employment has increased by 18.8 million since April 2020, it is still 3.6m below its pre-pandemic level in February 2020. Data earlier this week showed that the number of Americans voluntarily quitting their jobs surged to a record 4.5 million in November, and that there were over 10 million job vacancies. Robert Frick, corporate economist at Navy Federal Credit Union, explains: “The December jobs report was mixed, including a disappointing number of jobs added but a lower unemployment rate. Overall, the numbers point to a tight labor market given that plenty of jobs are available, but millions of Americans are reluctant to take them due to COVID-19 concerns and cash cushions, which give them the luxury of waiting for higher pay. And pay continues to rise strongly, while the number of people underemployed continues to drop, showing workers have gained bargaining power. But a tight labor market doesn’t mean we’re close to the pre-pandemic number of Americans working. We’re about 3.5 million below that mark.” Economics professor Justin Wolfers of University of Michigan has a handy thread on today’s jobs report: Interestingly, a separate survey of households from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics shows a larger increase in employment than the non-farm payroll report. The household survey found that 651,000 people found jobs in December after a 1.1 million gain in November. That data is used to calculate the unemployment rate, which dropped from 4.2% to 3.9%. Daniel Zhao, senior economist at Glassdoor, says the worsening pandemic has hit employment growth in recent months, while Omicron could send job gains into reverse in January. The labor force participation rate, which tracks the number of Americans working or available to work, was 61.9% in December. November’s reading was revised up to 61.9%, from 61.8%. It remains 1.5 percentage points lower than in February 2020, which shows that many people still haven’t returned to the jobs market. Some will be sheltering to avoid catching Covid, or unable to work due to childcare issues. America’s leisure and hospitality firms added 53,000 jobs in December, much slower than last autumn. Leisure and hospitality added 2.6 million jobs in 2021, as the reopening of the US economy drove job creation. However, employment in the industry is still down by 1.2m jobs, compared to February 2020. Professional and business services firms added 43,000 jobs, manufacturing added 26,000 jobs, construction employment rose by 22,000, while transportation and warehousing increased by 19,000. Average hourly earnings rose by 0.6% in December, higher than forecast, and up from an upwardly-revised 0.4% in November. They rose by 19 cents to $31.31. Over the past 12 months, average hourly earnings have increased by 4.7% (below inflation, which hit 6.8% in November). Newsflash: America’s economy added just 199,000 new jobs in December, much weaker than expected. But...the US unemployment rate has dropped to 3.9%, though, from 4.2% in November. November’s NFP has been revised up, to show that 249k jobs were created (up from 210,000 initially), while October’s has been lifted to 648k, from 546k. It’s nearly time for the latest US jobs report, due at 8.30am New York time or 1.30pm in the UK. December’s non-farm payroll report is expected to show that around 400,000 jobs were added last month, which would be a decent improvement on November’s 210,000. The US jobless rate is expected to drop to 4.1%, from 4.2%, as the labor market continued to recover from last year’s plunge in employment when the pandemic hit. Average hourly earnings are tipped to rise 0.4% in December (up from 0.3% in November), and by 4.2% year-on-year. On Wednesday, payroll operator ADP reported that US businesses added 807,000 jobs in December despite the emergence of the omicron variant. That could be a sign that today’s NFP will be stronger than forecast. The jobs report could move the markets, as high employment gains or wage increases could encourage the US Federal Reserve to raise interest rates sooner. Oil prices have risen today, which could put further pressure on households and businesses. Brent crude, the international benchmark, hit $83 per barrel for the first time since 24th November (shortly before the Omicron variant was identified as a threat). US crude is back over $80 per barrel, rising towards the seven-year highs of $85/barrel set in October. The ongoing violence in Kazakhstan and outages in Libya have both spurred concerns over supply. Rystad Energy analyst Louise Dickson said (via Reuters) “The upward jump in oil prices mostly reflects the market jitters as unrest escalates in Kazakhstan and the political situation in Libya continues to deteriorate and sideline oil output.” Libya’s largest oil field, at Sharara, was shut down by a militia group last month, while maintenance work to a key pipeline has also hit output. The country’s first presidential elections, scheduled for 24 December, have been postponed. Speaking of inflation... organic food retailer Riverford has increased the price of its veg boxes by 5% as costs, including wages and transport, soar “across the board”. The Devon-based company told its customers that after holding its prices for two years, widespread cost pressures meant “reluctantly, we need to increase our prices”. Riverford delivers 80,000 veg boxes a week and this week’s changes mean a small seasonal veg box now costs 60p more, at £13.25, while a large fruit and veg delivery has risen £1.20 to £24.75. The increase is the latest example of the cost of living squeeze hitting UK households as food and energy bills increase. Figures released on Wednesday from the supermarket analysts Kantar put grocery price inflation last month at 3.5%. Rob Haward, Riverford’s managing director, said putting up its prices would enable it to ensure everyone in its supply chain was being treated fairly. The company has been employee-owned since 2018. “The two biggest costs for us are pay for our co-owners who grow, pick, pack and deliver, and the prices we pay for fruit and veg from our farmers and growers” Estonia saw the highest inflation rate among eurozone members, with the cost of living jumping by an estimated 12% year-on-year. Lithuania was second, with annual CPI inflation around 10.7%. Malta, at 2.6%, and Portugal, at 2.8%, saw the smallest annual increase in prices. Jonas Keck, economist at the CEBR economic consultancy, says: Today’s flash estimate of eurozone inflation takes the rate of price increase to yet another all-time high, as energy prices continue driving up the cost of living. Whilst heterogeneity across eurozone member states has already been noted in recent months, the spread has become even more drastic, with two countries now recording double-digit rates of inflation. The Omicron variant may give central banks justification to delay further monetary tightening, but such policy adjustments are expected over the new year given this mounting inflationary landscape.” M&amp;C Saatchi’s biggest shareholder has proposed an all-share exchange merger with her acquisition vehicle, arguing that the deal would enable one of the biggest names in British advertising to become more digitally-led and better funded to seek out acquisitions. London-listed shell investment firm AdvancedAdvT, set up and run by M&amp;C Saatchi’s deputy chair Vin Murria, said on Friday that it is “interested in exploring a share merger between M&amp;C and the company”. Shares in M&amp;C Saatchi, co-founded in 1995 by brothers Maurice and Charles as a breakaway from their first agency Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, slumped as much as 11% as investors hoping for a cash offer for the firm, which was valued at £250m, were disappointed by the all-share proposal. “The combination of the M&amp;C brand and platform with the company’s funding and experience is expected to increase the merger and acquisition opportunity pipeline,” said AdvancedAdvT, which raised £130m last year and took a 9.8% stake in M&amp;C Saatchi on Wednesday. “A merger would create an opportunity to build a data, analytics and digitally focused creative marketing business with a strong balance sheet and additional management expertise in transforming businesses at pace.” Tech entrepreneur Murria, who sold her company Advanced Computer Software for £725m in 2015, holds a 12.5% stake in M&amp;C Saatchi and is executive chair of AdvancedAdvT. Murria, who became deputy chair of M&amp;C Saatchi after the last three founders still working at the agency were ousted following an accounting scandal, owns 13% of AdvancedAdvT. Investment company Marwyn, which has previously owned Peppa Pig parent Entertainment One and the owner of WeBuyAnyCar.com, holds a 15.4% stake in AdvancedAdvT. Aston Martin warned today it would miss its annual profit target by about £15m after failing to deliver as many of its limited edition Valkyrie hypercar models to customers as planned. The British luxury car manufacturer said it had delivered 10 of the £2.5m vehicles in the fourth quarter, fewer than planned. “The impact is timing only, all Aston Martin Valkyrie Coupes are sold and remain allocated to customers with significant deposits,” the company said in a full-year trading update. Lawrence Stroll, the executive chairman of Aston Martin Lagonda, said that the Valkyrie project had proved challenging since he inherited it when he led a consortium to buy the company in 2020. “We inherited a challenging project with Valkyrie but we are now producing these fabulous hypercars,” Jesús Cabra Guisasola, senior associate at Validus Risk Management, says surging electricity prices pushed up the cost of living in the eurozone: The euro area’s headline inflation rate accelerated unexpectedly to 5% vs 4.8% estimated during the last month of 2021, and at a faster pace compared to November when it was reported at 4.9%. “Some of the contributors for this increase can be found in the Spanish and Italian inflation figures which increased at the fastest pace in decades. Both economies reported inflation at 6.7% and 4.2% compared to a year ago, mainly driven by the surge in electricity prices which continue pushing households’ expenses up. “In contrast, Germany and France reported a slowdown in the inflation figures, with an increase of 5.7% and 3.4% in prices compared to a year ago, and down from the previous month’s 6% and 3.5%. Here’s more eurozone inflation analysis from ING’s Bert Colijn: Another slight tick up for eurozone inflation means that the highest rate since 1985 has now been reached. Energy is still the dominant driver of the high rate, but the energy inflation rate did drop from 27.5 to 26% in December as oil price base effects have finally started to drive down year-on-year price growth. The rise was mainly due to higher trending food and goods prices, which have been affected by higher transport costs and shortages. Is this peak inflation? This depends to a significant degree on gas price developments, which have been incredibly volatile in recent weeks and a dominant driver of the recent inflation surge. Still, at current futures prices for natural gas and oil, energy inflation is likely to have peaked and is set to trend down from here. On top of that, the German VAT effect, which lifted inflation for a final month in December, will shave off about 0.5% from headline inflation from January onwards. But the downtrend could be slow, given the pressures facing goods producers, Colijn adds: Non-energy industrial goods inflation already jumped from 2 to 2.9% in the past two months, showing clear signs of costs being priced through to the consumer at a faster pace. We expect this to continue at the start of the new year. Mild restrictions in place to combat the fourth wave of the virus will curb service sector price growth moderately, but ultimately it is safe to expect core inflation to remain above 2% for the first half of 2022. That would mean real wages (pay after inflation) remain under pressure, as earnings aren’t yet rising to keep pace with prices. Bert Colijn, senior economist at ING Bank, points out that rising food and goods prices nudged eurozone inflation up to 5% last month: Inflation across the euro area has jumped again, intensifying the pressure on the European Central Bank as prices continue to surge ahead of its target. Consumer prices in the single currency region rose by 5% in the year to December, up from 4.9% in November - which was already the highest since the euro was introduced. Energy prices drove the cost of living higher, rising by 26% over the last year due to the rise in oil and the surge in gas prices. But price pressures were broader-based too - with food, alcohol &amp; tobacco prices rising by 3.2%, non-energy industrial goods by 2.9%, and services by 2.4%. Firms have been passing on their higher costs to consumers, with supply chain bottlenecks pushing up raw material costs and restricting product availability. The ECB’s goal is to keep inflation at 2% in the medium term, and predicts that CPI will fall below 2% by 2023. Last month the ECB decided to end its pandemic bond-buying stimulus programme in March, but it will maintain another asset-purchase programme to spur growth, and kept interest rates at 0%. Duncan Brock, group director at the Chartered Institute of Procurement &amp; Supply, says the supply chain crisis facing builders may have abated last month, despite the growth slowdown: “Though the overall index moved down slightly in December there was light at the end of the tunnel for builders in terms of the strongest order numbers since August, reduced pressure on business costs and some improved delivery times for essential materials. “Residential building has powered on every month since June 2020 and was the best performing category in the last month of 2021. Commercial building struggled to gain a stronger footing in a weakened UK economy and civil engineering activity fell back into contraction. “Though supply constraints were still hiking up prices, inflation was the lowest since March as materials production carried on apace reducing supply restrictions. It was shipping delays and haulage shortages that remained the significant gripes in the industry as over a third of supply chain managers faced longer wait times. Though this was an improvement on the previous month and the best since November 2020, it was still a factor affecting builders’ forecasts for 2022 as business optimism fell to the joint-lowest for almost a year.” Joe Sullivan, partner at MHA, says worker shortages are the top challenge for builders: “The availability of labour is now the number one issue within the UK construction sector, with wages continuing to rise. Staff mobility is high as people look for the best pay packets, causing further disruption. In addition, the spread of the Covid-19 Omicron variant has inhibited progress on building sites, dampening output and making planning even more difficult. Max Jones, director in Lloyds Bank’s infrastructure and construction team, agrees that that the surge in Covid-19 infections could hit builders: “While Omicron is front of mind for contractors, it’s not the threat of a full lockdown, which looks peripheral, but a surge in cases that could halt work on projects that’s the worry. If that combines with a weather-induced slowdown it could make for a volatile start to the new year. Elsewhere skills shortages remain and many are struggling to fill the gaps in capacity this is throwing up, while boardrooms are making plans for a full year of materials inflation. Growth at UK building firms fell to a three-month low in December as Omicron disruption hit the sector. But there are signs that the supply chain crisis is easing, with fewer firms reporting disruption to deliveries. Data firm IHS Markit’s construction PMI, which tracks activity in the sector, dropped to 54.3 in December, down from 55.5 in November, showing the slowest growth since September. House-building accelerated, but commercial property growth slowed and the civil engineering sector contracted. Some survey respondents noted that tighter pandemic restrictions and rising COVID-19 cases had acted as a brake on recovery, especially in the commercial sector. On a more positive note, the number of construction firms reporting supplier delays dropped from 47% in November to 34% in December, with 5% of firms reporting shorter lead times among vendors. That could help ease the cost pressure hitting UK builders, with input price inflation slowing to its lowest in nine months. Tim Moore, director at IHS Markit, says: “UK construction companies ended last year on a slightly weaker footing as renewed pandemic restrictions held back the recovery, especially in commercial work and civil engineering. Some firms commented on disruption from rising COVID-19 cases, while others noted a lack of new work to sustain the rapid growth rates seen earlier in 2021. “The worst phase of supplier delays seems to have passed as the availability of construction products and materials continued to turn a corner in December. While suppliers to the construction sector have caught up on backlogged work and boosted capacity, there were still widespread reports citing unresolved transportation issues and driver shortages. Input cost inflation moved down another notch in December, helped by the alleviation of some supply chain pressures. The latest rise in purchasing prices was far slower than the 24-year peak seen last June.” Oil giant Shell is pressing on with its $7bn share buyback programme, as it benefits from the surge in gas prices this winter. Shell said this morning that its cash return to shareholders, using the proceeds of last year’s sale of its Permian Basin business to ConocoPhillips, would continue “at pace” in 2022. Some $1.5bn was returned to investors in December, and the remaining $5.5bn “will be distributed in the form of share buybacks at pace”, Shell said this morning in a trading update. Shell also reported that its LNG (liquified natural gas) trading results in the fourth quarter of 2021 are set to be “significantly higher” compared to the third quarter, as it benefits from the surge in European wholesale prices to record highs. That’s despite production and liquefaction volumes being hit by unplanned maintenance, mainly in Australia, where its giant Prelude floating LNG vessel had a power outage. UK house prices rose by 9.8% last year, the fastest rate since 2007, but the boom is predicted to end this year as household finances come under increasing pressure, according to Halifax. The price of the average UK home hit a record high of £276,091 in December, up more than £24,000 over the year, the biggest annual increase since 2003. Halifax said the housing market “defied expectations” last year, ending with a 3.5% increase in prices in December, a level not seen since the end of 2006. Russell Galley, the managing director of Halifax, said “In 2021 we saw the average house price reach new record highs on eight occasions despite the UK being subject to lockdown for much of the first six months of the year,” Factors that have helped fuel the homebuying boom include the government’s stamp duty holiday, which came to an end in England and Northern Ireland in September after finishing earlier in Scotland and Wales, historically low interest rates and the “race for space” sparked by the pandemic-fuelled shift to remote and flexible working. Halifax expects UK house price growth to slow considerably compared with the red-hot rates of the past two years of the pandemic. “Looking ahead, the prospect that interest rates may rise further this year to tackle rising inflation, and increasing pressures on household budgets, suggests house price growth will slow considerably,” Galley said. “Our expectation is that house prices will maintain their current strong levels but that growth relative to the last two years will be at a slower pace.” Bitcoin has had a bad start to 2022. The world’s largest cryptocurrency fell below $41,000 today for the first time since late September 2021 It’s now down 40% from the record high just below $69,000 set in November. Ethereum is also under pressure, dropping by 5% today and down over a quarter in the last month. The prospect of earlier, faster US interest rate rises has hit the crypto market, with other riskier assets also weakening this year (fast-growing but unprofitable tech stocks, for example). John Hardy of Saxo Bank says the shutdown of the internet in Kazakhstan, a key area of bitcoin mining, is another possible factor. Cryptocurrencies continued to stumble as the price action in Bitcoin pushed toward the next key chart area into 40k, and with Ethereum also continuing to lose altitude. One theory for the weakness in price action this week is that the shutdown of the internet in Kazakhstan due to protests has pulled as much as 15% of the bitcoin mining network off-line. With the country declaring that order has been restored, the eventual renewal of internet access there will be important for establishing the attribution to the price action from this source. Bloomberg argues the bitcoin selloff may not be over, saying: Lack of interest and demand due to the holiday season, tax-based selling and concern in the markets about the Fed’s potential actions are resulting in turn-of-year weakness, said Vijay Ayyar, vice president of corporate development and international at crypto exchange Luno in Singapore. He expects levels between $38,000 to $40,000 to come into focus. The bosses of Britain’s biggest companies have just earned more money in 2022 than the average UK worker will earn in the entire year, according to analysis of the vast gap in pay between FTSE 100 chief executives and everyone else. The High Pay Centre, a thinktank that campaigns for fairer pay for workers, said that by 9am on 7 January, the fourth working day of the year, a FTSE 100 chief executive will have been paid more on an hourly basis than the UK worker’s annual salary, based on median average remuneration figures for both groups. The country’s biggest unions said it was disgraceful that “greedy executives are taking home millions while ordinary workers face yet another year of pay squeezes”, and they demanded that firms be forced to appoint a frontline worker to executive pay committees. FTSE 100 chief executives were paid £2.7m on average in 2020 (the latest full-year figures available), which works out at 86 times the £31,285 average salary for full-time UK workers, according to Office for National Statistics figures. More here: European stock markets have opened lower, as investors await this afternoon’s US jobs report. The FTSE 100 has dropped by 6 points, or 0.1%, to 7443 points, with veterinary pharmaceuticals business Dechra (-2.5%) and industrial software group Aveva (-2%) leading the fallers. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index has lost 0.5%, as investors ponder how quickly America’s central bank will raise interest rates this year. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at Swissquote, says: On Wednesday, the ADP report revealed a much better than expected number with a print of 800,000 new private jobs in December. Today, the Non-Farm Payroll (NFP) is expected to reveal that the US economy added 400,000 new nonfarm jobs. But the jobs data doesn’t matter much for the Fed policy expectations right now, what matters for the Fed is inflation. Therefore, a low figure, around 100-200K, wouldn’t change the direction the Fed is preparing to take. However, a strong NFP print, and a beat on unemployment rate, have the power of boosting the Fed hawks, on the idea that the US jobs market no longer needs the Fed’s support, and the Fed could pull away support faster if it believes that there is no harm for the jobs leg of the equation. In this sense, a strong jobs data could wreak havoc in risk markets. Remember, investors like good data only and if only it boosts asset prices, and when it doesn’t, they mourn. The prospect of higher UK interest rates could ease house price pressures this year, says Myron Jobson, personal finance campaigner at interactive investor. The Omicron variant could also dampen demand, with economic growth taking a hit from the restrictions to fight the pandemic. But Omicron could also deter people from putting their homes on the market and inviting buyers in. If Omicron proves to be a lingering and disruptive problem, it could widen the mismatch between housing demand and supply which could put upwards pressure on prices. “The end of the stamp duty holiday has taken some of the heat out of the UK housing market, which may cool further if the Bank of England follows December’s interest rate rise with further increases in the year to guard against increases in inflation. The Omicron variant could also reinforce the slowdown if it results in a weaker labour market. The 9,8% jump in prices over the last year also makes it even harder to get onto the housing ladder, Jobson adds: House prices continue to outstrip the rate of wage growth, making it difficult for wannabe first time buyers to raise a deposit – the hardest aspect of getting onto the property ladder. The likely increase in mortgage rates over the year will contribute further towards the unaffordability of homeownership. Industrial production in the eurozone’s two largest economies stumbled in November, new data this morning shows. Industrial output in Germany dipped by 0.2% during the month, missing forecasts of a 1% gain, as supply chain frictions continued to hit German industry. Carsten Brzeski, ING’s chief economist for Germany, says German industrial revival in October proved to be short-lived. He also warns that the latest wave of Covid-19 across the globe means things for German industry will get worse before they get “structurally and sustainably” better. The fourth wave of the pandemic and Omicron should send industrial activity back into hibernation. German industry remains in the stranglehold of global supply chain frictions. It is not only semiconductors but all kinds of input goods, ranging from bottom brackets for bikes to magnesium needed in automotive and aircraft construction. Supply chain frictions are not only leaving their mark on actual production but have started to spread and to undermine production prospects as reflected by dropping orders and weakening production expectations. Looking ahead, it will take until spring next year before German industry is back on a fully sustainable recovery path. In France, industrial production dropped by 0.4%, also weaker than expected, Irish drinks producer C&amp;C Group suffered a hit to sales last month as the Omicron variant hit demand. C&amp;C, which produces Bulmers and Magners cider, and Tennent’s lager, says sales in December missed expectations. New restrictions imposed in the UK and Ireland in December had a significant impact on its ‘on-trade business’ which sells drinks to pubs, bars and restaurants. C&amp;C told the City that: In the month of December, the key festive trading period, C&amp;C traded directly with 81% of on-trade outlets vs FY2020, delivering 64% of the volume against an expectation of 90% and 90% respectively. While December’s performance was consequently behind expectation, the Group generated a modest profit for the month. Before Omicron stuck, C&amp;C was seeing a recovery. Trading in September to November was modestly ahead of expectation, thanks to customers returning to hospitality venues. C&amp;C also lifted its prices “to manage inflationary cost pressures”. Shares have dropped almost 3% in early trading. After a strong 2021, the UK housing market faces an uncertain 2022, says Jan Crosby, head of infrastructure, building and construction at KPMG UK: The stamp duty holiday that partially fuelled last year’s increased demand is long gone, but concerns around house price inflation, ongoing supply chain issues and the impact of the Omicron variant are creating an unwelcome climate of uncertainty. “Hopefully these pressures on the market ease sooner rather than later, although the price rises seen last year will continue to impede first-time buyers in particular. “At some point the market has to moderate, either through an increase in supply or – perhaps more likely – a drop-off in the pandemic-era trend of people looking to move as what they want from their home has changed.” Martin Beck, chief economic advisor to the EY ITEM Club, reckons the markets will cool this year, but prices won’t fall: The end of the stamp duty holiday has been followed by signs of the housing market returning to more normal levels of activity. And the fundamentals facing the market are looking less supportive of continued growth in prices. Higher inflation and tax rises will affect households’ spending power and mortgage rates are likely to rise in response to the Bank of England’s decision to increase the policy rate. Moreover, pandemic-driven changes in housing preferences, and the resulting boost to demand, are likely to fade over time. But mortgage rates will be increasing from a very low level. Unemployment is low and households, overall, are still sitting on substantial unplanned savings accumulated during the pandemic. So, while the EY ITEM Club expects house price growth to decelerate significantly this year, an outright fall in prices is unlikely. North London estate agent Jeremy Leaf reports that a shortages of houses for sale is holding the market back: ‘Buyers are clearly still emerging following their short hibernation to carry on where they left off, quickly snapping up new properties which come onto the market. Most are choosing to forget worries about rising inflation, interest rates and taxes to say nothing of Omicron. ‘However, lack of stock is reducing the number of transactions and supporting prices. Market appraisals and new instructions are improving but not quick enough yet. ’Stretched affordability means that prices are unlikely to rise as quickly as they did for a large part of 2021 but prices of family houses in particular will continue to do well.’ Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. UK house prices have posted their strongest year since the financial crisis, but a slowdown may be looming. Monthly figures just released by mortgage lender Halifax show that UK house prices jumped 9.8% during 2021, hitting record highs. That’s the sharpest annual increase since July 2007, Halifax says, as demand for larger homes, record low interest rates, and the stamp duty tax break drove up prices. House prices rose by 1.1% in December alone, the sixth monthly rise in a row, as the market ended the year strongly. But the market may cool during 2022, Halifax argues, as the cost of living squeeze and higher interest rates hit household budgets. Halifax reports that: Average UK property price hits a new record high of £276,091 House prices have increased by over £24,500 in 2021 -- the highest year-on-year cash rise since March 2003 House price growth expected to slow in 2022 Russell Galley, managing director at Halifax, explains: “The housing market defied expectations in 2021, with quarterly growth reaching 3.5% in December, a level not seen since November 2006. In 2021 we saw the average house price reach new record highs on eight occasions, despite the UK being subject to ‘lockdown’ for much of the first six months of the year. “The lack of spending opportunities afforded to people while restrictions were in place helped boost household cash reserves. This factor, alongside the Stamp Duty holiday and the race for space as a result of homeworking, will have encouraged buyers to bring forward home purchases that may have been planned for this year. The extension of the Government’s job and income support schemes also supported the labour market and may have given some households the confidence to proceed with purchases. “A lack of available homes for sale, and historically low mortgage rates, have also helped drive annual house price inflation to 9.8%, its highest level since July 2007. “Looking ahead, the prospect that interest rates may rise further this year to tackle rising inflation, and increasing pressures on household budgets, suggests house price growth will slow considerably. Our expectation is that house prices will maintain their current strong levels but that growth relative to the last two years will be at a slower pace. However, there are many variables which could push house prices either way, depending on how the pandemic continues to impact the economic environment.” Last month, Halifax reported that the “race for space” between homebuyers has pushed up prices in some UK towns by about a fifth this year, with Taunton topping a list of areas with the biggest increases. Also coming up today, Markets are bracing for the latest US non-farm payroll report, which is expected to show that around 400,000 new jobs were created in America last month. A strong reading, and a jump in earnings, could increase the chances the US Federal Reserve raises interest rates as soon as March -- a prospect that knocked markets this week. Kyle Rodda of IG explains: Today’s trade in global markets will be about US Non-Farm Payrolls data, the anticipation of which has probably exacerbated this increased uncertainty around US Fed policy this week. Forecasters are tipping a solid 426k jobs gain, a drop in the unemployment to 4.1%, and – crucially – a rise in average hourly earnings of 0.4%. It’s that final detail that may prove most pertinent for market participants, as they remain wary of signs of an emerging wage-price spiral. If the wages number does come in hotter than expected, then it may add to those fears of a more aggressive Fed, and add to this recent bout of elevated volatility and weakness in equities. We also get December’s eurozone inflation report - in November, inflation across the 19-member eurozone soared to 4.9%. The latest construction PMI report will show how UK builders fared last month. The agenda 7am GMT: Halifax UK house price survey 9.30am GMT: UK construction PMI 10am GMT: Eurozone inflation report for December 1.30pm GMT: US non-farm payroll jobs report for DecemberThe problem with coverage of this week’s anniversary of the events of 6 January 2021 is that too much of it was written in the past tense. True, the attempted insurrection that saw a violent mob storm Capitol Hill in order to overturn a democratic election was a year ago, but the danger it poses is clear and present – and looms over the future. For the grim truth is that while Donald Trump is the last US president, he may also be the next. What’s more, the menace of Trumpism is darker now than it ever was before. This grim prognosis rests on two premises: the current weakness of Joe Biden and the current strength of his predecessor. Start with the latter, evidence of which comes from the contrast in how Trump’s fellow Republican politicians talked about 6 January at the time and how they talk – or don’t talk – about it now. At the time, they were clear that the outgoing president had crossed a line, that he was “practically and morally responsible” for the rioters who had marched on Congress and built gallows for those politicians who stood in their way. Many of those Republicans had pleaded with Trump, sending text messages begging him to call off the mob. Now, though, they either say nothing – refusing even to show up for a moment’s silence in memory of those killed on 6 January – or they rush to apologise for having, rightly, branded that day a “violent terrorist attack”. That’s because they fear Trump and they fear his supporters. In order not to rouse their fury, they have to mouth the new shibboleths: they have to accept the big lie that the 2020 presidential election was stolen and accept that political violence is not to be condemned but indulged when it comes from your own side. It means that Trump’s tactics, his authoritarianism, have not shamed or repelled Republicans – as some hoped might be the result of 6 January – but infected them. What was once the eccentric stance of the lunatic fringe – that Trump won an election that more than 60 different court judgments ruled he had lost – has become the required credo of one of America’s two governing parties, believed by two-thirds of Republican voters. More alarming still, surveys show 30% of Republicans say that “true American patriots may have to resort to violence in order to save our country.” Word the question slightly differently, and that figure rises to 40%. Not for nothing did the editor of the New Yorker this week ask if a second American civil war is coming. You might imagine that all this should secure Biden’s position. Surely the majority of the US electorate will rally to the message he set out so trenchantly in a speech on Thursday taking direct aim at Trump and the “web of lies” he had spread to soothe his own “bruised ego”. Surely they will recoil from a Republican party that is breaking from the fundamentals of democracy. Surely they’ll turn away from the party of Trump and flock to the Democrats as the only reliable democrats. But that is not how it’s playing out. Biden has the lowest approval rating of any US president at this stage of his term, barring Trump himself. He is trailing especially badly with the independent voters who decide elections. Polls suggest that Democrats will lose seats in November’s midterm contests, thereby losing control of the House of Representatives and perhaps the Senate too. That will leave Biden paralysed, unable to pass any legislation at all without Republican approval. Which is why 2022 is the make-or-break year for the Biden presidency. If it breaks, the ground will be laid for the return of Trump in 2024. Except this will be a Trump with fewer restraints than held him back before, one who now openly espouses the autocrat’s creed that elections are illegitimate unless he wins them, that he alone should hold office and that violence is justified to maintain his power. Republicans are working hard to unlevel the playing field in Trump’s favour. Republican-run states are rewriting electoral law to make it harder to vote – curbing the early or postal balloting often used by low-income and minority voters – and handing Republican-controlled state legislatures extra powers over the running of elections. They want to remove one of the safety mechanisms that ensured the integrity of the 2020 contest: fair-minded election officials. To that end, they are setting about filling those all-important positions with Trump loyalists. Put simply, they want fewer people voting and their people counting. Current Republican strength is a combination, then, of both the resilience of public support, despite the party’s submission to Trumpism, and its ability to game the system in its favour. But it is also a function of Biden’s weakness. It’s worth recalling here how shaky the president’s position was from the start, seeking to govern with a diminished, razor-thin Democratic majority in the House and a 50-50 deadlocked Senate. Despite that, he has passed some major bills and made some big, even transformative moves. As the former speechwriter to George W Bush David Frum puts it: “In 11 months, Biden has done more with 50 Democratic senators than Barack Obama did with 57.” And yet, it’s not enough. Biden passed a vital infrastructure bill, but his larger package of social spending and action on the climate crisis is stalled. His poll ratings took a hit with the speed of the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan after August’s chaotic US withdrawal. And his 4 July declaration that America could celebrate its “independence from Covid-19” now looks horribly premature. You can make a strong case that none of these things is Biden’s fault. His spending bill is stalled thanks to two Democratic senators who simply refuse to get on board. (Given their politics, Biden probably deserves credit for getting them to back him as often as they have.) The withdrawal from Afghanistan was under a deal agreed by Trump; indeed, Trump’s exit would have come earlier. As for Covid, what could any president do when more than a quarter of the country – overwhelmingly Trump supporters – refuse to get vaccinated? But politics is an unforgiving business. Voters are used to blaming the man in the White House, especially when they face rising bills and daily costs as they do now. To turn things around, Biden can start with passing that key spending bill, even if it means stripping it of some cherished, and necessary, programmes. Voting rights legislation, to block those continuing Republican efforts to load the dice yet further in their own favour, is also a must. One way or another, Democrats have to go into the autumn midterms with a record to run on. Defeat would not guarantee the return of Trump two years later, but it would make it much more likely. That is a prospect to chill the blood of all those who care about America – and democracy. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistThe richest 1% of households in the UK each have fortunes of at least £3.6m, according to new official figures that show the inequality gap was yawning even before the pandemic struck. At the other end of the scale, the poorest 10% of households have just £15,400 or less, with almost half burdened with more debts than they had in assets, according to figures released on Friday by the Office for National Statistics (ONS). It means the gap between rich and poor has widened to the largest in more than a decade. The ONS said the income inequality gap as measured by the Gini coefficient had “steadily increased to 36.3%”, which was “the highest level of income inequality since 2010”. A Gini coefficient of 0% represents total equality where everyone has the same and 100% represents total inequality, where one person owns all the wealth. “The gap between the richest in society and the rest of the population has widened over the 10-year period,” the ONS said. “The wealthiest 10% of households held 43% of all the wealth in Great Britain in the latest period; in comparison, the bottom 50% held only 9%.” There are an estimated 27.8m households in the UK. In Great Britain there are just 263,000 in the top 1%. The ONS figures released on Friday cover the financial year to the end of March 2020, and economists said the gap between rich and poor is likely to have increased further during the pandemic as the already wealthy benefited from soaring stock markets. More than 258,000 British people became millionaires last year, according to research by investment bank Credit Suisse, taking the total number in the UK to a record 2.5m. Robert Palmer, executive director of lobbying group Tax Justice UK, said: “Even before the pandemic it was clear that wealth inequality was entrenched. Since Covid hit the wealthy have seen their riches grow, while those with less have struggled.” Krishan Shah, researcher at the Resolution Foundation, said: “With limited financial resources to protect them from economic shocks, the poorest households were undoubtedly in the worst position heading in to the pandemic. Policymakers need to help those worst-affected build financial resilience ahead of future shocks.” The median average household wealth across the UK was £302,500, only a marginal increase on previous years. However, the report revealed stark divisions between the old versus the young, the south compared with the north, and the gulf between white people and those of other ethnicities. In families where the head of the household was aged 55 or over and still in work, the average household wealth was £553,400. “The wealth of this group was 25 times higher than those aged 16 to 24 years,” the ONS said. In the south-east, median household wealth was £503,400, up 43% since 2006 when adjusting for inflation. While in north-east England median wealth was £168,500, which the ONS said was lower than in 2006. Arun Advani, an assistant professor at the University of Warwick’s economics department, said the data revealed “stark” differences between different ethnic groups. “Households whose ‘household reference person’ is of white ethnicity are four times more likely to have wealth in excess of £500,000 than households with a black African HRP,” he said. Advani also said ONS data was likely to vastly underestimate the share of wealth going to the richest households because the data does not include business wealth, and because “the very wealthy do not tend to respond to such surveys”.Gordon Brown and Theresa May have thrown their weight behind the campaign for a “Hillsborough law”, designed to rebalance the justice system and ensure fairer treatment for bereaved families. The former prime ministers joined speakers from academia, sport, journalism and the arts at an event on Friday afternoon to express support for measures aimed at preventing others from going through the fight for justice faced by the families of the tragedy’s victims. Some of the most powerful testimonies came from people who lost relatives not just at Hillsborough, but also at Grenfell Tower, the Manchester Arena bombing and other major tragedies and scandals. May said what happened at Hillsborough, “the death of 97 Liverpool fans failed by the state”, was tragedy enough for the families. “But what followed was injustice heaped on injustice. Years of beating their heads against a brick wall of government and the legal and judicial system which added untold pain and suffering.” Brown said the Hillsborough law was needed now. “No delays. No prevarications. No excuses to secure justice for you [bereaved families] and everyone who in future may face the same challenges. “No one. No one should ever have to go through what Hillsborough families have had to live through. No one should be denied the truth, as you were denied the truth. No one should have had to wait so long to be heard, as you waited so long. No one should be kept in the dark by bureaucratic indifference and deceitful lies, like your families.” One strand of the new law would be a statutory duty of candour on all public servants during public inquiries and criminal investigations. “That means no cover-ups, no concealments, no closing of ranks,” said Brown. A Hillsborough law would also make greater resources available to survivors and bereaved families after a major incident. It would aim to ensure their proper participation at inquests, through publicly funded legal representation, and the provision of a public advocate to act for families of the deceased after major incidents. The Labour politician Lord Falconer, a former secretary of state for justice, said he had always trusted the law. “But the law deserves absolutely no trust in relation to what happened in the Hillsborough case. The extraordinary thing about it is that people kept going for 33 years … They did not get justice. “Truth came out, but no justice. The law, in effect, damaged and destroyed people it was supposed to protect and it utterly ravaged and vilified families who were fighting for justice.” Margaret Aspinall, who lost her son James in the Hillsborough tragedy, said the law would not do any good for the families. “What we are here today is for all of us to be united to change things, because those 97 victims who died at Hillsborough, they deserve the respect and a Hillsborough law in honour of their name. If that does any good for the likes of other people going forward, that’s all that matters. They have not died in vain.” Most of the speakers, who included the Liverpool legend Sir Kenny Dalglish, appeared virtually from their homes and offices. A small number spoke in person at the event, held at the People’s History Museum in Manchester, co-hosted by the mayor of Liverpool, Steve Rotheram, and the mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham. Burnham asked why the galleries were so packed with artefacts telling stories of ordinary people struggling to fight for rights, fairness and justice. “It’s because when things go wrong in this country, the fight that people face is too long and too hard. When things go wrong, the authorities close ranks. They blame victims. They sometimes create false narratives that can be very hard to shift.” He said access to justice was still linked to your class, your accent and whether you have access to a social connection, and praised Brown and May for their roles in helping to bring truth for the Hillsborough families. The event, livestreamed on Facebook, was timed to build on the heightened awareness of the issue that has been revived by the powerful ITV drama Anne, which tells the story of Anne Williams’ fight for justice for her teenage son, Kevin. Many of the measures being called for were contained in a 2017 report by Bishop James Jones titled The Patronising Disposition of Unaccountable Power. It was commissioned by May and, the event heard, still has not received a formal government response. Ninety-seven men, women and children died in the tragedy at the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in Sheffield on April 15 1989. New inquests, which concluded in 2016, found the victims were unlawfully killed. The match commander, David Duckenfield, was cleared of gross negligence manslaughter in 2019 and a trial of the retired police officers Donald Denton and Alan Foster and the former force solicitor Peter Metcalf, who were accused of perverting the course of justice, collapsed last year after a judge ruled there was no case to answer.As a young kid, there really weren’t many black figures to aspire to, to mould yourself to. I was always glued to the telly and one night my dad put on this film, In the Heat of the Night. I will always remember the moment when Sidney Poitier came on screen as Virgil Tibbs. Seeing any black person on TV was extraordinary, but seeing someone with such ability, such grace, such style, changed me. I knew how bad racism was in the US at that time, and watching that film I feared for this black character in that world. But there’s a moment where an older white gentleman, Endicott, slaps Tibbs, and he immediately slaps him back in the face. There was an audible gasp in our living room, quickly followed by cheers. It was a thing we’d never seen before – he was standing up, he was strong, and he wasn’t taking any shit. It was revolutionary for me as a young black man to see that sort of defiance in the face of overt racism, a defiance that was mirrored in Poitier’s role in the civil rights movement and his humanitarian work. I was quite ashamed at the time of how scared racism, and even the thought of being racially abused, made me feel. So to have him stand there as this kind of gladiator, unafraid to strike this old white man back, was groundbreaking. I’m emotional even thinking about it. Poitier at the time was playing the kind of roles that people still aren’t even writing in England today. I still haven’t played one, even at this point in my career. It’s incredible that America even back then had black characters imbued with such beauty and charm – almost disarming the view of what black actors or black people were capable of. To Sir, with Love, Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner – Poitier’s roles in those films mirrored my own experiences, because I grew up in a moment when assimilation was the theme of the day. This was followed by a much more forthright, much more in-your-face version of what black people were like in the blaxploitation films of the 1970s, which Poitier himself fell victim to, to some extent, but he remained for me this graceful figure who was beloved by everyone. Looking at the tributes pouring in from black actors, it’s clear how he inspired all of us to rethink what was possible. Every time I go onstage, every time I make a film or TV programme, he is one of my leading lights. I bumped into him at the Golden Globes many years ago. Two months before I had been skint, but then I got the part in Homeland, and was whisked off into this world of fame. I was looking around at all these stars, and then I turned around and there he was. I leaped out of my chair and charged across the room. He must have thought I was a complete fruitcake, but he was graceful and generous as I bleated out how much I admired him. I shook his hand – an experience I will never forget. David Harewood is an actorBoris Johnson’s former top adviser Dominic Cummings has alleged there was a lockdown-breaking party in the Downing Street garden in May 2020 after an emailed invitation to “socially distanced drinks”. The NHS in England is experiencing the highest number of Covid absences since the vaccine rollout, with more than 40,000 staff unable to attend work on two days in the past week, prompting claims that hospitals are “simply not safe”. The UK has reported a further 178,250 Covid cases as the Omicron variant continues to fuel a wave of infections. Labour has challenged Lord Geidt, the PM’s independent adviser on ministerial standards, to explain why he thought it was acceptable for Boris Johnson to receive financial help from someone also lobbying him over policy. In an open letter to Geidt, Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, said that even though Lord Brownlow may have had altruistic interests for trying to get the PM to back his “Great Exhibition” plan, there was still a conflict of interest. She wrote: Do you stand by your original conclusion that there could be “no reasonably perceived conflict” in the prime minister seeking the support of a donor who at the same time is lobbying him for government support of a project they are promoting? It is irrelevant in this regard whether Lord Brownlow’s motives are altruistic; the issue is that a reasonable person could surely perceive that his financial relationship with the prime minister has provided him with privileged access to government, and that relationship was undeclared at the time. This leads me to a more serious and general point. You appear to set the standard for a potential conflict of interest as being that in your personal judgement any third party was acting with altruistic motives. This is not the test that is set out by the ministerial code. It is also a far weaker one than is set, for example, by the House of Commons members’ code of conduct. This suggests that you will hold ministers to a lower standard of transparency than backbench MPs. The full text of Rayner’s letter is here. The attorney general has said she is “carefully considering” whether to refer the Colston statue case to the court of appeal after a jury cleared four protesters of criminal damage over the toppling of the monument. The Labour MP Jack Dromey died suddenly in his flat this morning, his family has said. That’s all from me for today. But our coronavirus coverage continues on our global live blog. It’s here. The number of deaths in Northern Ireland linked to Covid-19 has now topped 4,000, PA Media reports. Another 18 fatalities were recorded in the week December 25-31, according to data compiled by the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (Nisra). They take the total number of coronavirus-linked deaths recorded by Nisra during the pandemic to 4,024. NHS Grampian in Scotland has said it could declare a major incident next week as Covid case numbers continue to rise sharply. In a briefing to staff it said that due to “an exponential growth” of cases in the last fortnight, it could declare a “major incident” as early as next week. It said: Based on our modelling data, we anticipate a continued and significant growth in the levels of the disease placing even more significant pressure on care homes, primary care teams, community teams and hospitals. Our planned response will include a declaration of a major incident when a number of key trigger points are reached. Looking at our local data, these triggers could be met as early as the end of next week. A total of 18,454 people were in hospital in the UK with Covid-19 as of 6 January, PA Media reports. PA says: This is up 40% week on week and is the highest number since 18 February 2021. During the second wave of coronavirus, the number peaked at 39,254 on 18 January 2021. There were 2,434 Covid-19 hospital admissions on 3 January, the latest UK-wide figure available, up 26% week-on-week and slightly below the 2,590 admissions on 29 December. Admissions during the second wave peaked at 4,583 on 12 January 2021. Keir Starmer has issued this tribute to Jack Dromey. The proud son of Irish parents, Jack Dromey dedicated his life to standing up for working people through the Labour movement, becoming deputy general secretary of the UK’s largest trade union and then a Labour MP. From supporting the strike at the Grunwick film processing laboratory, when he met Harriet, through to being elected to represent Birmingham Erdington in 2010, Jack lived his commitment to social justice every day. Jack was recognised for his determination to stand up for his constituents and he was highly respected and warmly regarded across parliament. My thoughts and those of the whole Labour movement are with Harriet, their children and all those who knew and loved Jack. The Labour MP Jack Dromey died suddenly today in his flat in his Birmingham Erdington constituency, his family has announced. He was 73. Dromey was married to Harriet Harman, the party’s former deputy leader, and was shadow immigration minister. Before he became an MP in 2010 he was deputy general secretary of the Transport and General Workers Union. In their statement Dromey’s family said: Jack Dromey MP died suddenly this morning aged 73 in his flat in Erdington. He had been a dedicated Member of Parliament for Birmingham Erdington since 2010. He was a much loved husband, father and grandfather, and he will be greatly missed. Opposition leaders have called for far more detailed data on the number of Scottish hospital patients with Omicron after criticising the size of a small sample involving two health boards published today by Public Health Scotland. (See 12.56pm.) Alex Cole-Hamilton, leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, said the PHS data covering only 126 Covid-positive patients in Grampian and Greater Glasgow and Clyde (GGC) hospitals, taken over periods lasting six days and two days respectively, was inadequate. He said: Opposition parties have been calling for clearer data on the impact of Omicron on hospital admissions for weeks. An analysis of two health boards doesn’t really satisfy that request. Furthermore, we know that Delta still accounts for 10% of Covid infections in Scotland, but there is no breakdown on acute admissions by variant type. That information is crucial to understanding the impact of Omicron on our lives. The first minister promised parliament that Friday would be the day we learned how many people were in hospital because of Omicron severity, but the data published today doesn’t answer that question. Jackie Baillie, deputy leader of Scottish Labour, said: The publication of this data is welcome as it allows us to understand how the Omicron variant is affecting the people of Scotland and the NHS. But the data remains incomplete for the whole of Scotland and only a wider study will provide the conclusive findings that we need. The UK Health Security Agency has published new figures for R, the reproduction number, and for the growth rate for coronavirus in England. These are the first estimates since 23 December. The growth rate is now estimated to be between +3% and +6%. That means new infections growing at a rate of between 3% and 6% per day. The previous estimate was between 0 and +3%. And R is estimated to be between 1.2 and 1.5. That means every 10 people will infect between 12 and 15 people. The previous estimate was between 1 and 1.2. But although these figures have just been published, because of the time it takes to assess how the virus is spreading by these measures, these figures are a guide to what was happening with transmission two or three weeks ago, UKHSA says. The UK has recorded 178,250 new coronavirus cases, and 229 more deaths, according to the daily update to the government’s Covid dashboard. The total number of new cases over the past week is still up on the total for the previous week, by 19.8%. But yesterday the equivalent figure was up 29.3%, and for the third day in a row now the figure for reported cases has gone down. That explains the tiny kink downwards in the graph, which could be early evidence of cases starting to plateau. Council workers in North Yorkshire are being asked to volunteer for social care roles to cover for staff absent as a result of Omicron, PA Media reports. PA says: North Yorkshire county council is asking staff in “non-critical services” such as highways, planning, and other office roles to help keep vulnerable people safe. Volunteers will be asked to cook, clean, and help older people to eat, as well as assist them to speak to relatives on the phone or online. The council said training will be given and it will match new duties with workers’ normal working patterns. Richard Flinton, chair of the North Yorkshire Local Resilience Forum, said: “These emergency plans will only be used if needed but will hopefully provide sufficient volunteers to get us through the Omicron wave, which may see as much as a 40% reduction in available care staff due to illness or self-isolation. “Staff would be deployed in such circumstances on a range of different duties supporting care delivery in our elderly persons’ homes and extra care settings to free up care colleagues to deliver direct care.” A report in the Times (paywall) says that Sajid Javid, the health secretary, strongly opposed the government decision to abandon pre-departure tests for people flying into the UK, and compulsory PCR tests two days after arrival. In his story Steven Swinford says: The Times can disclose that Javid, the health secretary, strongly opposed the move, telling the Covid-O committee of senior ministers that removing the requirement for PCR tests would limit the government’s ability to detect future mutant strains. He argued that it increased the risk that a more deadly and transmissible strain of coronavirus could circulate in the UK undetected. A government source said: “Sajid was very unhappy about the decision to remove the requirement for PCR tests. He argued they are instrumental in spotting new variants sooner. He said that by scrapping them you increase the risk of having to shut down the entire economy. But he lost the argument.” Javid did not really deny the story when he was asked about it on a visit to a hospital today. Asked if the report was true, he replied: I want to see travel open up. I want to see it be made as easy as it possibly can be. And it should always be a balanced and proportionate approach. I think that the approach that we’ve taken, where we require people still upon their return to take a lateral flow test, and if they are positive to take a confirmatory PCR test, I think this the right balanced and proportionate approach. A total of 231,856 booster and third doses of Covid-19 vaccine were reported across the UK on Thursday, PA Media reports. More than 35 million booster and third doses have now been delivered in the UK, with just over one million in the past seven days. Nearly 66% of all adults in the UK have now received a booster or third dose. The latest Scottish data continue to suggest the steep surge in Omicron-variant Covid cases has begun to level off, after the NHS reported 14,486 new cases and a test positivity rate of 21.7%. After a sharp rise in patients hospitalised with Covid over the Christmas and New Year holidays, when Covid-positive patient numbers doubled in a week, the numbers admitted each day has markedly reduced. There were 1,323 Covid-positive patients in Scottish hospitals today, a rise of 56 on yesterday. There are now 61 people now in intensive care with Covid, compared to 51 a week ago. The test positivity rate hit 35% earlier this month. A separate study released by Public Health Scotland on Friday shows only 1% of Covid-positive people are being hospitalised, compared to 12% in January 2021. Friday’s data bulletin also said the deaths of 15 more Covid-positive people in Scotland had been registered, taking the total under that measure to 9,905. However more than 3m Scots have now had their third or booster vaccination. The Mark Drakeford press conference went on for more than an hour. Here are some of the other lines, following his warning at the start that Omicron cases may not peak in Wales for another fortnight. (See 12.34pm.) Drakeford, the Labour Welsh first minister, claimed that England was a “global outlier” in its handling of Covid policy. Referring to the UK government (which, for Covid health policy, is effectively the English government), he said it was out of step with other countries around the world. Asked why Wales was applying restrictions not in force in England, he replied: I would put the question in exactly the opposite way. The outlier here is not Wales. Wales is taking action, as is Scotland, as is Northern Ireland, and as are countries right across Europe and right across the globe. The one country that stands out as not taking action to protect its population is England. So the question is not why is Wales not following what is going on in England. The real question is why is England such a global outlier in the way in which governments elsewhere are attempting to protect their populations from coronavirus. Drakeford then proceeded to answer his own question. He said in England the government was “politically paralysed with a prime minister unable to secure an agreement through his cabinet to take the actions that his advisers have been telling him ought to have been taken”. Asked later in the press conference to justify calling England an outlier, Drakeford said other governments were imposing restrictions on gatherings, going beyond the rules in place in Wales. He went on: Right across the world governments have been taking action, not to simply deal with the consequences of an Omicron wave, but to try to mitigate that wave and to protect their populations against it. The prime minister has chosen – in my view, because he has no viable alternative available to him – to ride it out, as he says, and that really does make that government an outlier. Asked what evidence he had to show Wales had got it right, and England wrong, Drakeford said that the Sage advice was available to everyone and it showed action was necessary. Drakeford said he expected current restrictions in Wales to remain in place for at least a fortnight. He insisted Parkrun events were not banned in Wales. Parkrun has cancelled its runs in Wales, prompting Sajid Javid, the health secretary for England, to criticise the Welsh government restrictions that led to this. But, when asked about this, Drakeford said Parkrun runs were not banned. Up to 50 people could take part in a run under the rules, he said, and another 50 people could help with the organisation. He said no decision had yet been taken about whether the Six Nations rugby matches that Wales is meant to be hosting in February and March will be able to go ahead in the country. Currently large sporting events of that kind are banned in Wales. He said: It’s always been the case that the risks in major events are less at the event itself, particularly when those events are well run, as certainly the autumn internationals were. It is how people travel to the stadium, it is how people gather around the stadium, it is how people behave – not at the game but around the game. So there are further measures that could be adopted that would help to mitigate those risks. Of course, we would all far prefer to be in a position where the Six Nations could go ahead with people watching the game here in Wales. That is not a matter of dispute between any party. The issue that is under the microscope is whether we can do that safely. Drakeford also said he had no problem with the decision of the Welsh RFU to explore hosting the matches outside of the country. He said the latest figures showed more than 2,300 Covid cases per 100,000 people across Wales and that cases were highest among 20 to 40-year-olds. He said 994 people were being treated with coronavirus in Welsh hospitals – a rise of 43% compared with last week and the highest number since last March. He said the latest figures suggested staff absences from illness and isolation across the NHS were 8.3% in Wales, as high as 16.5% in some NHS organisations. The North West ambulance service has announced that around 150 military personnel will start supporting it from next week as it deals with pressures caused by the Omicron surge. NWAS director of operations Ged Blezard said: It is no secret that the ambulance service, along with the NHS as a whole, has been under extreme pressure for several months. Now we are also experiencing high numbers of staff absences due to confirmed Covid-19 cases and isolation, with around 25% of the workforce currently affected. We worked alongside the military last February and March, and it allows us to have more of our vehicles on the road, getting people the treatment they need sooner. This frees up emergency ambulances to attend to urgent, life-threatening cases. A system-wide major incident has been declared in Northamptonshire by health, public and emergency service leaders because of the impact of coronavirus in the county, PA Media reports. The Northamptonshire Local Resilience Forum, which is made up of NHS organisations, local authorities, Northamptonshire fire and rescue service and Northamptonshire police, issued the alert due to “rising demand on services and staffing levels”. Chair of the forum, chief fire officer Darren Dovey, said: There is already exceptional working together between partners to help the county face up to this challenge. Declaring this incident is a necessary step to make sure we are able to share resources where necessary which is increasingly important as more staff need to self-isolate. Yesterday Staffordshire also declared a major incident, for the same reason. Suella Braverman, the attorney general, has announced that she is considering referring the “Colston four” case to the court of appeal. She says this would not overturn the verdict, but that some legal matters may need to be clarified. Emily Thornberry, Braverman’s Labour shadow, has accused her of playing “political games” and undermining the sanctity of the jury system. The Barnard Castle point is a reference to Braverman posting a tweet in defence of Dominic Cummings after his lockdown-busting excursion last year. This was widely criticised because her status as a government law officer meant that the tweet could be seen as putting undue pressure on the police, who at the time were having to make a judgment about whether an offence had been committed. My colleague Haroon Siddique has more on Braverman’s latest intervention here. Jamie Jenkins, a former ONS statistician, has posted a graph on Twitter showing how the proportion of Covid patients in hospital in England primarily being treated for something else has been rising. (See 11.56am.) At the Downing Street lobby briefing the No 10 spokesperson confirmed that the proposal to the PM from David Brownlow, the Tory donor who initially funded the Downing Street flat refurbishment, for a “Great Exhibition” was passed on to the culture department by No 10. The spokesman said: As is quite usual, when any suggestions such as this are put forward, it is right that it is passed on to the relevant department to take forward. And as you’re aware, Oliver Dowden [the then-culture secretary] met with Lord Brownlow at the Royal Albert Hall on the joint proposal and you’ll have seen that was declared in the regular DCMS transparency returns. As I say, it is normal practice that when an idea or proposal is put to the Prime Minister, it is referred to the relevant departments to take forward, and in this case the decision was taken not to take this any further. Labour claims that this amounts to “cash for access” corruption. Asked why the Great Exhibition proposal was dropped, the spokesperson said: We’ve taken forward the idea of Festival UK and Unboxed 2022, which you can see all the details off on the website and is available for everybody to see. We went with that, which we confirmed in 2018 and was set out in the manifesto in 2019. New data from Public Health Scotland (PHS) suggests at least 40% of Covid-positive patients in Scottish hospitals were admitted for another medical reason, and that in some areas, the proportion could be higher. After mounting calls from opposition parties for proper data, PHS said sampling in Grampian and Greater Glasgow and Clyde (NHS GGC) had confirmed the proportion of Covid cases in hospitals with clinically-significant Covid infections is now lower than it was when the Delta variant was dominant last year. The NHS GGC sampling, carried out over two days earlier this month, found 43% of patients with confirmed Covid were not hospitalised because of the virus. Based on six days sampling by NHS Grampian, which includes Aberdeen, it was 40%. Public Health Scotland said this data was very useful in helping decide whether to relax or tighten Covid controls; opposition parties have questioned whether the strict controls introduced for Scotland by Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, were unnecessarily onerous. The agency said: Knowing this information can help signal whether population-level changes in public health measures may be warranted, such as a tightening or easing of restrictions. It can also help us to predict whether we are likely to see future pressures on hospital systems based on recent patterns of infections in the surrounding community. Those data compare to much more detailed figures released for NHS England showing 37% of Covid-positive patients were admitted on Tuesday 4 January for another reason. (See 11.56am.) In August last year – when the harsher Delta variant was dominant, PHS data showed 32% of patients with Covid were admitted for another medical reason. The PHS figures also show the elderly made up a far greater proportion of those hospitalised because of the virus, suggested younger adults were not ill due to Covid. People aged 65 or over made up 42% of all admissions because of Covid-19, and just 26% of those with it. The agency added that as of 5 January, 91.1% of all Scotland’s Covid cases were now Omicron, some six weeks after it first emerged in Scotland. Downing Street has insisted that there is no need for further Covid restrictions in England, despite military personnel being drafted in to help out in hospitals in London. (See 9.15am.) The No 10 spokesman told journalists at the daily lobby briefing: The prime minister has been clear on controls. Plan B is balanced and proportionate to respond to the Omicron variant. It is continuing to help reduce its spread. But the important thing is the booster programme and the effectiveness it has in stopping the disease. The military have helped out throughout the pandemic and they will do so again. We know that staff absences are contributing to the pressure the NHS is currently facing. Of course we will continue to take appropriate measures to ensure the NHS has the support they need. When it was put to the spokesman that the need to call in the army suggested the NHS was at risk of being overwhelmed, which should be the trigger for a move to Covid alert level 5, the spokesman said that decisions about changing Covid alert levels were a matter for the chief medical officer for England (Prof Chris Whitty) and his Scottish, Welsh and and Northern Irish counterparts. Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, is holding a Covid briefing now. There is a live feed here. In his opening remarks Drakeford said that Covid cases in Wales were much higher than in previous waves and that the peak of the Omicron wave could be up to two weeks away. He said: Omicron is now the dominant form of the virus in Wales and cases are rising rapidly every day ... Cases are far higher now than they were at the peak of the previous waves. Unlike previous waves, which have lasted many months, we believe this one will be short-lived. This is because of the speed Omicron is moving at. We haven’t reached the peak of this wave yet. This could be another 10 to 14 days away. Drakeford also confirmed that the Welsh government was making no changes to the current restrictions in place. The Office for National Statistics has published its latest coronavirus infection survey bulletin. It is now publishing early headline results on Wednesdays, and the main figures out today, for the week ending Friday 31 December, are the same as those on Wednesday. The ONS says infections were increasing in all parts of the UK that week. The figures were: England: around 1 in 15 people had coronavirus Wales: around 1 in 20 people had coronavirus Northern Ireland: around 1 in 25 people had coronavirus Scotland: around 1 in 20 people had coronavirus But today’s report has more detail. It includes this chart, showing the trend in the English regions. And this chart shows Covid rates in England by age. NHS England has this morning published its latest “primary diagnosis” supplement. This is a dataset that shows how many of the daily Covid hospital cases are patients being treated in hospital for Covid, and how many are patients with Covid being treated primary for something else. The hospital figures that are published daily do not make this distinction The latest figure is for Tuesday 4 January and it shows that in England 13,045 patients were in hospital with Covid on that day, but only 8,200 for Covid. That means only 63% of Covid cases were in hospital primary because of Covid. This figures has been drifting down. The equivalent figure for the previous Tuesday, when total Covid cases were 8,321, was 67%, and the Tuesday before that, when overall cases were 6,245, 71% of them were people being treated primary for Covid. At the start of December the figure was 74%. As PA Media reports, the number of patients being treated primarily for Covid rose from 5,578 on 28 December to 8,200 a week later (a jump of 47%), while those with Covid but being treated primarily for something else rose from 2,743 to 4,845 (a jump of 77%). The figures cover acute hospital admissions only. This morning Paul Scully, the minister for London, said the Covid trend in London was “encouraging”. (See 9.56am.) But, as the BBC’s Robert Cuffe points out in a helpful Twitter thread, they are rising everywhere else - and even in London the picture is not straightforward. The thread starts here. Here is our news story about the rise in Covid-related staff absences affecting NHS England. As this graphic shows, Covid-related absences are now at their highest level for a year. Steve Reed, the shadow justice secretary, has said that Labour is asking the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, to investigate the text messages between Boris Johnson and Lord Brownlow, the Tory donor who initially funded his flat refurbishment. Reed said the WhatsApp message from Johnson to Brownlow that included both a request for help with the refurbishment costs and an assurance that Brownlow’s plans for a “Great Exhibition” were been looked at suggested a “cash for access” arrangement. Reed told the Today programme: What we’re seeing here is a case of, potentially, cash for access where Lord Brownlow was given access to ministers to try and influence them over decisions of spending taxpayers’ money - that is why this matters so immensely. Those very cosy text messages show there was a quid pro quo in operation between the prime minister and Lord Brownlow, and we need to get to the absolute bottom of this. Paul Scully, the business minister, dismissed claims the message was inappropriate, stressing that the “Great Exhibition” is not going ahead anyway. (See 10.44am.) But Reed said that was irrelevant. He told Today: The issue is not whether it happened, it is whether rich people can pay to get access to government ministers to try and influence them over how they decide to spend taxpayers’ money. Travel companies say demand for foreign holidays is returning to pre-pandemic levels following the government’s decision to relax travel rules. As PA Media reports, Steve Heapy, chief executive of tour operator Jet2holidays and leisure airline Jet2.com, said: We have seen an immediate and dramatic spike in bookings, with volumes since the government announcement heading towards pre-pandemic levels, which demonstrates just how much demand is out there among people wanting to get away for a much-needed holiday. A spokeswoman for the tour operator Tui said: We’ve already seen an immediate and strong uptick in bookings and we now expect summer 2022 bookings to be normalised. January is traditionally the busiest month for holiday bookings and demand is yet to reach pre-Covid levels, so we need to see sustained confidence in travel so the industry can fully recover. And Derek Jones, chief executive of luxury travel company Kuoni, said: I predict travel will be 90% back to 2019 levels before the end of spring. We’re already seeing increased call volumes and inquiries about trips for the year ahead as confidence builds. On Wednesday the UK government announced that pre-departure tests for people coming to England from abroad were being abandoned. As the Scottish government said yesterday, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are also adopting the same rules. There was “nothing untoward” in the prime minister discussing a proposed “great exhibition” with a Conservative donor who was helping to fund his Downing Street flat refurbishment, Paul Scully, the business minister, said this morning. My colleague Jamie Grierson has the story here. Today’s figures from NHS England also show that on average there are almost 10,000 patients in hospital each day who no longer needed to stay in hospital but who were not being discharged. On average, only 42% of patients meeting the discharge criteria were being discharged per day in the week ending 2 January, NHS England says. The problem is caused largely by the lack of places available in social care. NHS England says this is a particular problem for long-stay patients (who have been in hospital for at least three weeks). It says that last week on average there were 4,495 long-stay patients in hospital every day who no longer needed to stay, but on average only 440 of them were actually discharged per day. Covid-related staff absences at hospital trusts in England have risen by 59% in a week, according to figures released by NHS England this morning. As PA Media reports, a total of 39,142 NHS staff at hospital trusts in England were absent for Covid reasons on 2 January, up 59% on the previous week (24,632) and more than three times the number at the start of December (12,508), according to the figures. PA says: The total includes staff who were ill with coronavirus or who were having to self-isolate. In north-west England, 7,338 NHS staff at hospital trusts were absent due to Covid on January 2, up 85% week-on-week from 3,966, while in north-east England and Yorkshire there were 8,788 absences, more than double the number a week earlier (4,179). In London absences were up 4% week-on-week, from 4,580 to 4,765. Taking into account non-Covid absences, there were 82,384 NHS staff at hospital trusts in England who were absent for all sickness reasons (including isolation) on 2 January, up 21% on the previous week (68,082) and up 37% from the start of December (60,136). Commenting on the figures, Prof Stephen Powis, the NHS national medical director, said: Omicron means more patients to treat and fewer staff to treat them. In fact, around 10,000 more colleagues across the NHS were absent each day last week compared with the previous seven days and almost half of all absences are now down to Covid. While we don’t know the full scale of the potential impact this new strain will have, it’s clear it spreads more easily and, as a result, Covid cases in hospitals are the highest they’ve been since February last year - piling even more pressure on hard working staff. Paul Scully, who is minister for London as well as a business minister, told LBC this morning that he thought the situation in the capital was “encouraging”. Asked if Omicron was easing there, he replied: I think it is looking encouraging, the trend at the moment, but clearly we need to be on our guard because there is still pressure on the NHS in London. It is not just about the case numbers - there is a clear disconnect between case numbers and hospitalisations - but you’ve also then, because of the increased testing and the increased awareness by people, you’ve got bigger absences as well, and that’s obviously putting extra pressure on the NHS and other public services. This chart, from the government’s UK Covid dashboard, shows how case rates in London are starting to fall. And Covid hospital admissions in London seem to be falling too. Dr Chaand Nagpaul, council chairman of the British Medical Association, told Sky News this morning that he had never known a time when the NHS was having to deal with so many staff absences. He said: Every winter of course, the NHS has additional pressures, but I don’t think anyone who’s worked in the NHS has experienced this level of absence of their colleagues and we’re feeling it in very real time because doctors and nurses and healthcare workers are having to cover for their absent colleagues - that’s adding additional, exceptional strain. Asked how close the NHS was to being overwhelmed, he replied: I think that the words like overwhelmed, I mean, I think we should just look at the reality. The reality of the army having been drafted in to London, the reality of 24 hospitals having declared critical incidents, the reality of having some hospitals having to cancel all their routine surgery, the reality of general practices having to cancel clinics on the day. I’m a GP, I’ve never known it this bad. We’re having to literally contact patients without notice that the staff member or a doctor or nurse just isn’t in today because they’re self-isolating. This is not normal, and therefore, the government does need to recognise this is clearly an NHS under extreme pressure and the living reality sadly for thousands of patients is that they’re suffering the consequences of such pressures and also staff absence. Nagpaul said he wanted to see more done to bring Omicron cases down, better protection for health workers, including higher-grade masks, and guaranteed access to lateral flow tests for NHS staff. Good morning. As we report in an overnight story, around 200 military personnel are being deployed in London hospitals to help them deal with the consequences of the Omicron surge. Air Commodore John Lyle, the officer in charge of the deployment, has been giving interviews this morning and he told BBC Breakfast that similar interventions may take place in other regions in the country. Asked about the likelihood of this, he said We can’t really forecast too far ahead, but certainly, throughout this current surge, we know that it’s particularly difficult in London at the minute but we are aware that this is impacting all across the United Kingdom. And so we remain in discussions and there are a number of areas where we’re looking at the potential for more assistance. So, over the coming weeks or months, I think we’ll learn a lot from how the progress is made through London and potentially there could be further military support required in other areas. Lyle also pointed out that the armed forces have already deployed about 1,800 personnel across the UK to help with the Covid response, mostly with the booster programme, but also helping the ambulance service. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: The ONS publishes new data on the social impacts of Covid. 9.30am: NHS England is due to publish its situation report for hospitals. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. 12pm: The ONS publishes its latest Covid infection survey. 12.15pm: Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, holds a Covid briefing. Lunchtime: Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is visiting a London hospital. I will covering UK Covid developments in this blog today, but for wider coronavirus coverage, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comThe high Arctic saw a dramatic rise in lightning in 2021 in what could be one of the most spectacular manifestations of the climate crisis. In a region where sightings were once rare, the Earth’s northernmost region saw 7,278 lightning strikes in 2021 – nearly double as many as the previous nine years combined. Arctic air typically lacks the convective heat required to create lightning so the latest findings, published in the Finnish firm Vaisala’s annual lightning report, have scientists like Vaisala’s meteorologist and lightning applications manager, Chris Vagasky, worried. “Over the last 10 years, overall lightning counts north of the Arctic Circle have been fairly consistent,” Vagasky said. “But at the highest latitudes of the planet – north of 80° – the increase has been drastic. Such a significant shift certainly causes you to raise your eyebrows.” With temperatures rising in the Arctic at three times the global average, tracking lightning in the region has become an important indicator of the climate crisis. Three things are required to generate thunderstorms – moisture, instability and lift. The disappearance of sea ice means more water is able to evaporate, adding moisture to the atmosphere. Higher temperatures and atmospheric instability create the perfect conditions for lightning. Monitoring how lightning trends change in the Arctic can therefore reveal a lot about how the atmosphere is changing in response to shifts in climate. “Changes in the Arctic can mean changes in the weather at home,” Vagasky said. “All weather is local, but what happens at your house depends on how the atmosphere is behaving elsewhere throughout the world. Changes to conditions in the Arctic could cause more extreme cold outbreaks, more heatwaves, or extreme changes in precipitation to Europe.” The devastating wildfires that raged across Europe and North America last summer were at least in part sparked by lightning. Typically less than 15% of wildfires in any given year are caused by lightning, but these fires burn more acreage than human-caused fires. Identifying the conditions favourable for lightning-triggered wildfires is crucial to react quickly to strikes. The risk of being hit by lightning in the Arctic is still low, but the increased probability of lightning could threaten communities that have not had to deal with frequent lightning in the past. People on the flat tundra or ocean are vulnerable to lightning strikes, and lightning puts electrical and other infrastructure at risk of damage. In the US, which saw the second-highest number of lightning strikes in 2021 after Brazil, Vagasky and his team tracked more than 194m incidences – 24m more than observed in 2020. A 2014 study forecast a 12% increase in the frequency of lightning strikes with every one degree Celsius increase in temperature. “A changing climate may increase the potential for lightning-triggered wildfires,” Vagasky said. “Scientists can’t tie a lightning strike from one day to the changes in our climate, but monitoring trends of lightning in the Arctic is especially important and something that will need to be studied now and in the future.”Trade union leaders are urging ministers to delay making Covid vaccination mandatory for NHS personnel because the feared exodus it will trigger will worsen the health service’s staffing crisis. The government has decided that all NHS staff in England who have direct contact with patients must have had their first dose of a Covid vaccine by 3 February or risk losing their job at the end of March. But the TUC has called for the policy to be delayed “with immediate effect”, to avoid the loss of staff it will create deepening the health service-wide shortage of key workers which is a key reason why dozens of NHS trusts have had to declare a major alert over the last week. The TUC is warning the health secretary, Sajid Javid, that pressing ahead with the plan “will exacerbate this crisis, creating a bureaucratic and staffing nightmare for NHS trusts and making it impossible to maintain safe staffing levels in the coming weeks”. Javid, who has already imposed the requirement on staff working in care homes in England, believes that compulsory jabs for NHS staff will help keep patients safe and reduce the number of people who contract Covid while in hospital. Frances O’Grady, the TUC’s general secretary, said: “We are in the middle of an NHS staffing crisis, born not only from Covid absences but also long-term problems that need long-term solutions. Now is not the right time to introduce more bureaucracy. “As hospitals declare critical incidents amid a surge in Covid cases, the NHS cannot afford to lose experienced and skilled staff”. The NHS already has 93,000 vacancies, including for 40,000 nurses. The government’s own impact assessment of its policy concluded that as many as 73,000 staff may leave rather than get jabbed. Women, people from ethnic minorities and younger workers are among those most likely to quit. The Guardian reported last month that Chris Hopson, the chief executive of the hospitals body NHS Providers, feared that entire units of hospitals may have to close “in extreme circumstances” as a result of the departure of unvaccinated staff. He cited an unnamed maternity unit where 40 midwives are refusing to get jabbed and whose stance had left the trust’s boss seriously concerned for the future viability of the service if they left, given that the NHS in England is short of about 2,500 midwives. O’Grady issued her plea hours after new official data showed that the NHS in England is grappling with the highest number of Covid absences since the vaccine programme began 13 months ago, with more than 40,000 staff unable to attend work on two days in the past week. The disclosure prompted claims that hospitals are “simply not safe”. An average of 35,596 staff were sick with Covid in the past week, a level last seen in January 2021 at the height of the second wave of the pandemic and higher than any week since all priority groups were offered at least their first vaccine in mid-February. The UK reported a further 178,250 Covid cases on Friday, bringing the total for the past seven days to 1,260,535, up 20% compared with the total for the week before. However, the daily figure is lower than those recorded in recent days, with 179,756 cases reported on Thursday and 194,747 on Wednesday. On Wednesday Sir David Nicholson, the former chief executive of NHS England who is now the chair of the Sandwell and West Birmingham hospitals trust, said that it could lose hundreds of staff as a result of mandatory vaccination. “My understanding on vaccines is that, though we may not put it in these terms, we will essentially be giving unvaccinated staff notice at the start of February. “I am sure that’s not quite the right way of putting it but that is the inexorable logic of where we are.” The Homerton hospital trust in east London said last month that its bosses “remain worried” that conversations with unvaccinated staff to persuade them to get immunised “haven’t made an impact yet”. Tom Nettel, the trust’s director of people, told a board meeting: “Unfortunately, if we are not able to vaccinate them, and they do not feel comfortable to do so, we may be faced with an outcome of dismissal.” A spokesperson for the Department of Health and Social Care said the vaccination mandate would not be delayed. “NHS and care staff do amazing work and we are thankful to those who have chosen to get the vaccine,” the spokesperson said. “Vaccinations remain our best defence against Covid-19. This is about patient safety and ensuring we are doing everything we can to reduce risk for vulnerable people. There are no plans to change the implementation dates.”I can’t help but feel sympathy for Lord Geidt (Boris Johnson accused of corruption after ‘great exhibition’ text emerges, 6 January). “Ethics adviser to Boris Johnson” must be an even more thankless job description than “honesty adviser to Richard Nixon”. Tony Green Ipswich, Suffolk • Jake Wallman says he was born in a different millennium to his twin (31 December). But of course he wasn’t: 31 December 1999 and 1 January 2000 are both safely within the second millennium CE, which ended at midnight on 31 December 2000. No doubt there are unsung twins for whom the quoted words are true! Hedley Stone Southam, Warwickshire • Re Margaret Davis’s roses, and others who report unseasonal blooms (Letters, 4 January), last week the lemon tree on my city fifth-floor balcony produced four beautifully scented blooms. While having my morning coffee I noticed something moving in the leaves: it was a tiny wren, busy scoffing the lot. My question is: how did it know? Rosalind Napier Birmingham • The bus services in my boyhood pit village were all labelled with a letter and a number, such as C4 or A2. Hence, while singing at the chapel Sunday school, I believed the Christian soldiers were urged onward to Nottingham as they were “going on B4” (Letters, 6 January). Philip Clarke East Bridgford, Nottinghamshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Activist walkers long predate the Kinder Scout mass trespass of 1932, and some enjoyed considerable local support (Walking is a glorious primal pastime – and far more radical than you think, 26 December). In January 1873, my great-grandfather and his friend, representing the Rawtenstall Ratepayers Association, asserted the public right to a footpath at Pikelaw by demolishing an obstruction set up by the guardians. They were tried and fined sixpence, but refused to pay, so were sentenced to seven days in jail. On their release, they were met at Rawtenstall station by a large crowd and a brass band playing See, the Conqu’ring Hero Comes! They were carried in triumph to a reception at the Co-operative Hall, where they were each presented with an inscribed writing desk to mark the occasion. Peter Overstall Dulas, Herefordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The president of Kazakhstan, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, has promised an uncompromising crackdown on demonstrators in the country, telling security forces they should “use lethal force without warning” against protesters he called “bandits and terrorists”. On Friday, relative calm returned to Almaty, Kazakhstan’s largest city and the centre of recent tumult, and some residents ventured out for the first time in several days. They found looted shops, shattered glass and many burnt-out cars, with the grim atmosphere intensified by the thick mist enveloping the city. Police returned to the central streets for the first time since the clashes turned violent and protesters seized government buildings. The military had sealed off a square where clashes took place earlier in the week, and gunshots rang out occasionally. The interior ministry has said 26 protesters were killed in the clashes as well as 18 people from police and security forces. Witness reports of shootouts and casualties suggest that the real figures may be considerably higher. More than 3,800 people had been detained, the ministry said. In a televised address on Friday, Tokayev said he had personally given the order to use lethal force in recent days, and also blamed “so-called free media outlets” for helping to fan unrest. “Abroad there are calls for the two sides to hold negotiations for a peaceful resolution,” he said. “What idiocy. What kind of negotiations can you have with criminals? We were dealing with armed and well-prepared bandits, both local and foreign. Bandits and terrorists, who should be destroyed. This will happen in the nearest time.” Promising the crackdown would continue, Tokayev said he had created a special inter-agency group to track down violent protesters. He claimed that “all demands made in a peaceful form have been heard”, but appeared to dismiss a large proportion of the protesters as criminals, saying “20,000 bandits” were involved in Almaty alone. This suggested a large-scale operation could be launched to hunt down others. The protests were sparked this week by a sudden rise in fuel prices combined with long-simmering frustrations over the political and economic situation in the country. The peaceful demonstrations turned violent on Wednesday, with crowds seizing government buildings and widespread looting. Tokayev’s response included accepting the resignation of the government and announcing fixed fuel prices, but also ordering the crackdown. The airport in Almaty is closed to all but military traffic until at least Sunday, and is being guarded by “peacekeeping forces” sent by Russia and other nations from the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). With reliable information scarce and rumours rife, there was confusion in Almaty about the exact sequence of events in recent days. Many said initial peaceful protests appeared to have been subverted by seemingly well-organised groups of rioters, particularly on Wednesday when the police seemed to leave key installations in the city unprotected. The Almaty-based journalist Ardak Bukeeva said she had spoken to several people who claimed to have been shot at while standing peacefully on Almaty’s Republic Square on Thursday evening. On Friday, she was told by an employee of one of the city’s hospitals that “very many” victims of gunshot wounds had been admitted. Officially, hospitals have given no information about the number of people being treated. The communications blackout, together with a shutdown of the country’s banking system, has caused difficulties for many in contacting relatives or buying food, as shops were closed, bank cards did not work and the streets were dangerous. A group on the messaging app Telegram offered to help people get in touch with relatives. Its founder said she had received more than 2,000 requests, including from Kazakhs stranded abroad, those with missing relatives, and hospital doctors trying to find the relatives of a police officer in intensive care. Mobile internet and telephone service slowly returned on Friday, though in Almaty it was still sporadic. In his address, Tokayev thanked Russia for sending troops but said they had not taken part in any fighting. The Russian defence ministry said Russian peacekeepers were guarding key infrastructure sites. The ministry said 75 planes were used to transport troops and equipment to Kazakhstan. The force totals about 2,500 personnel, the regional alliance has said. The Kremlin said on Friday that the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, had discussed the situation in Kazakhstan with Tokayev in several phone calls. The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, praised Tokayev for “decisively taken strong measures at critical moments and quickly calming down the situation”. Meanwhile, the response from the west has been muted, a tacit admission that it has little sway over events in the country at a time when diplomatic attention is focused on deterring a Russian incursion into Ukraine. US secretary of state Antony Blinken warned on Friday that Kazakhstan will find it difficult to lower Russian influence after inviting in troops to quell unrest. “One lesson in recent history is that once Russians are in your house, it’s sometimes very difficult to get them to leave,” Blinken said. Tokayev has insisted there was “foreign backing” for the protests, a claim he used to call for the CSTO deployment, and an accusation that has frequently been made by autocratic leaders in the region about protest movements. He has not provided any evidence of foreign backing so far. Some analysts suggest that, along with the violence on the street, there could be a behind-the-scenes battle between different factions in the country’s elite. Nursultan Nazarbayev, the country’s first president who ruled from independence in 1991 until 2019 and handpicked Tokayev as his successor, has not been seen in public since the new year. Much of the anger of the past week has been directed against him, and there are rumours he may have left the country.I was interested to see the prices paid by Liz Truss at a luncheon “event” at 5 Hertford Street (Liz Truss asked for public money to cover £3,000 lunch, 2 January). As of 4 January, independent wine merchants were offering Coudoulet de Beaucastel rouge at £19.99 to £22.23 per 75cl bottle, and Pazo Barrantes Albariño at £17.50 to £18.33, compared with Ms Truss’s expenditure of £130 for two bottles of the former and £153 for three of the latter – out of the public purse. The proprietor of the establishment concerned was a donor to Boris Johnson’s leadership campaign and is related to a Conservative life peer and current minister. What faith can we have in Ms Truss’s judgment in her role as foreign secretary when it comes to striking international trade deals? Should she become prime minister, will public money continue to flow at exorbitant rates to cronies? Would Ms Truss benefit from a crash course in restaurant wine price inflation? Dr Jonathan Punt London • You report that, in the pursuit of a chimerical trade deal, Liz Truss “paid” £153 for three bottles of Albariño. Albariño can be extremely pleasant when paired with the right food, but grand cru it is not. Aldi does a very nice version at £6.99 and I will happily bet Ms Truss a case of the latter that, in a blind tasting, she would not be able to pick out the ridiculously overpriced stuff that she served up at our expense. Michael Pyke Lichfield, Staffordshire • You report (‘I’m always tired, Miss’: the sleepless children of Leeds’ bed poverty crisis, 2 January) how a family had only one chair and one lightbulb, and no beds. Meanwhile, Liz Truss “hosted a £3,000 lunch”. Levelling up? No chance with this government. Alan Lane Abingdon, Oxfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A government department is facing questions over an apparent failure to disclose that Liz Truss and three officials spent more than £2,000 of public money on subsistence and expenses during a three-night trip to Tokyo. The bill relates to a visit by Truss, who was then trade secretary, to Japan in October 2020 to sign the UK’s first post-Brexit trade agreement, which she lauded at the time as a “historic moment” for both countries. The Department for International Trade (DIT) had initially stated in a parliamentary answer to Labour that Truss and three members of staff who travelled with her had spent £182.74 of public money on food, drink and other expenses. However, after a Freedom of Information request by the shadow attorney general, Emily Thornberry, it has now emerged that the party in fact spent £2,080.44. “There is a clear pattern of behaviour emerging here with Liz Truss, which raises serious questions about her character,” Thornberry told the Daily Mirror. “Because if her instinct is to hide the truth and hope that no one asks questions even over these expenses claims, what else is she willing to do that about?” A DIT spokesperson said: “This expense was initially published incorrectly due to an administrative error and subsequently corrected. All DIT expenditure is published routinely in full. “The purpose of this trip was to sign a free trade agreement with Japan covering billions of pounds of trade, supporting jobs and growth across the United Kingdom.” Questions about the Japan trip, which Truss made between 21 and 24 October 2020, follow separate questions about spending associated with Truss, who has emerged as one of the contenders to succeed Boris Johnson as leader of the Conservative party. Earlier this week, Labour called on the government to explain why it claimed Truss had wanted to host a £3,000 lunch at a private members’ club because it was available at short notice, when correspondence later showed that she had insisted on the venue. In a letter to the international trade minister, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, the party also asked why Truss, Trevelyan’s predecessor in the role, had overruled civil servants’ concerns about the cost of the members’ club, owned by a Tory donor. Correspondence disclosed by the Sunday Times showed that Truss “refused to consider anywhere else” and asked that public funds pay for the event with Joe Biden’s trade representative. Truss was said to have “explicitly asked that we book 5 Hertford Street”, owned by Robin Birley, a £20,000 donor to Johnson’s leadership campaign and the half-brother of Zac Goldsmith, the environment minister. Before Truss attended the event with US trade representatives, a civil servant described the club as “obviously incredibly expensive and more than I understand we’d usually expect to pay for such a venue”. It was requested, the official wrote, as the private dining room was “of the appropriate size and standing”. After negotiations between civil servants and the venue, the price was reduced to £1,400. Truss and her companions drank two measures of dry gin; three bottles of Pazo Barrantes Albariño, a Spanish white wine, costing a total of £153; and two bottles of the French red Coudoulet de Beaucastel, costing a total of £130, it was reported. A spokesperson for the department described the event as a diplomatic working dinner. • This article was amended on 8 January 2022 to remove the suggestion from the headline and text that the £2,080 was only spent on food and drink in Japan; the money covered other expenses as well. Also, the section about the lunch at the private members’ club was amended to clarify that while the initial quote for the lunch was £3,000, it was later reduced to £1,400.David Olusoga’s article (Britain’s shameful slavery history matters – that’s why a jury acquitted the Colston Four, 6 January) misses an essential question. There have been instances in recent decades of juries finding defendants not guilty when the facts of an offence appear clear. Examples are Clive Ponting (1984) and Pat Pottle and Michael Randle (1991). In 2004 the prosecution, presumably fearing the same, offered no evidence in Katharine Gun’s case. The parallel factor in each of those cases was that the catalyst had been a shaming decision by our own authorities as immediate background – deceit about the sinking of the Belgrano (Ponting), prosecuting 25 years after the event because initial errors had been exposed (Pottle and Randle) and scrapping standards of probity to be in line with the US (Gun). In this case there was no parallel. The options for Bristol council on how to deal with Colston’s statue were matters for debate. The catalyst was a murder committed by a US policeman. So the question is raised – where does one draw the line? I do not have an answer, but in any democratic society it is important that what citizens can do without being penalised criminally should be predictable. Peter Davis Welwyn, Hertfordshire • The acquittal of the four people in Bristol leaves a somewhat bitter taste in my mouth. Regardless of the rights and wrongs of pulling down the statue of a figure from history who benefited from slavery, taking the law into your own hands is never the right way to proceed. The only way to resolve disputes is through the ballot box. I ask myself where this all might end. John Marriott North Hykeham, Lincolnshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.How refreshing to hear a GP recognising that recovering from illness may depend on going “off-piste”, leaving “the well-trimmed paths of textbook solutions” in favour of “something wilder, more unscripted and perhaps more effective” (‘We need to respect the process of healing’: a GP on the overlooked art of recovery, 4 January). My perspective is hospital medicine and surgery, in which many patients never reach their potential after illness. NHS trusts, eager to empty beds, often invest in specialist rehabilitation units where a small proportion of patients with especially complex needs are put through multi-disciplinary, goal-directed programmes. The vast majority of ill people, by contrast, are hurried home in the expectation that spontaneous healing will somehow work its magic. Even though I devoted my medical career to rehabilitation, I suspect that poor outcomes among NHS patients are due less to a shortage of equipment or therapy than to a failure of imagination. As the article’s author, Dr Gavin Francis, says, the meanings of illness and wellness differ vastly from person to person. Rehabilitation protocols are no substitute for imagination, and nor are routinely prescribed discharge care-packages. In healthcare’s rule-bound culture, it is hard to find the courage to stray from well-trimmed paths. Christopher Ward Emeritus professor of rehabilitation medicine, University of Nottingham • Dr Francis sounds like an intuitive and creative GP. He likes to describe illnesses as stories of the mind and body. He lists many non-medical solutions that help medical problems – to which I would add the benefits of talking, particularly sharing stories with people with similar medical problems. Royal Stoke university hospital and former patient volunteers run such a group for oesophagogastrostomy patients and their carers/partners. The meetings are a safe place where stories of the mind and body of one person help the convalescence of another. My husband, who had such major surgery three years ago, gains much from being able to share anecdotes with those at an earlier stage in their treatment, and from talking to those who had the operation many years before him. It is striking that many surgeons see the benefits too, as usually one or more of them attend the meetings. Annie Coombs Nantwich, Cheshire • As a retired GP, Dr Francis’s piece is music to my ears. I’ve long felt that general practice is an art – the art being when to use the science. Elaine Yeo Enfield, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.For readers whose formative years were enriched by the after-school teatime TV experience, the revival of two coming-of-age classics may be sparking a sudden rush of nostalgia. This week, in an interview with the Guardian, Sir Phil Redmond disclosed that he is updating Grange Hill, the greatest school soap of them all, for a one-off movie version set in the present day. Meanwhile, in America, Disney has rebooted the equally admired The Wonder Years, but with the twist that this time it chronicles the vicissitudes of childhood and adolescence through the eyes of a black boy living in Alabama. Bringing these two televisual gems back to life necessarily entails substantial reinterpretation; the impact of social media, for example, will loom large in the Grange Hill of 2022. But those who witnessed Tricia Yates using a wooden ruler to exact revenge on Tucker Jenkins, in the very first of 601 episodes in 1978, will hope the spirit of the original is kept intact. Sir Phil, who was 29 when that scene was broadcast, is now 72. He is unfazed by the idea of writing a script for a quite different era in which to be young. “Childhood doesn’t really change,” he told the Guardian, “what changes are fashion, haircuts and slang … the actors bring you what’s right at the time.” Since his fictional London comprehensive closed its gates in 1998, successor dramas such as Waterloo Road, Skins and Sex Education have skilfully mined some of the territory that Grange Hill opened up. But for sheer daring, and in the context of its time, Sir Phil’s creation remains in a class of its own. Launched in the pre-Thatcher era, Grange Hill captivated its young audience by grittily portraying the life of a school from their point of view (cameras were even positioned to film at the children’s eyeline). Issues such as bullying, pornography and period pain were treated with a realism that provoked tabloid headlines and parental disquiet. The show’s examination of the dangers of drug abuse led to an invitation to visit Nancy Reagan in the White House. For millions, Grange Hill held up an invaluable mirror to their own daily experience, allowing its challenges to be navigated more easily. The prospect of new and talented school-age actors bringing this long backstory into the Covid era is fascinating; as is the relocation of the gentle lyricism of The Wonder Years from white suburbia to the world of a black 12-year-old in 1968 – where an argument about baseball is interrupted by news of the assassination of Martin Luther King. In the sixth and final series of the original Wonder Years, the middle-aged narrator reflects on a bittersweet New Year’s Eve in 1973, when the adolescent Kevin Arnold crosses the Rubicon into young adulthood. “The future was calling us … there was no turning back now,” says Kevin. That time to put away childish things comes to us all, of course. But reinterpreted and reflected upon, the past can deliver more than just nostalgia, and enlighten us in the present. Let Grange Hill’s famous comic strip opening credits, including the iconic school dinner sausage, roll again.Simon Jenkins rightly derides the notion of the Church of England as “a national corporation of grandees”, for if the church exists at all, in any meaningful sense, it’s at the local, parochial level (Churches could double as banks, or even serve beer. We can’t leave them empty, 31 December). But this is where Jenkins wrongly, in my view, elides two similar terms: congregation and community. The local church “congregation” consists just of those who actively worship in the church building – and in rural contexts it’s often a very small number indeed. The “community”, however, is the much wider population of the parish – the parishioners, all those who live within the parish boundary. Our task in the rural church – if we are to survive locally – is to help revive a sense of popular, community ownership, both of the church building and of the heritage of faith and values it represents. This means setting out not to “convert” people in the parish, but rather help them to own their church, both as sacred space and common ground – a locus of human meaning. Philip Larkin was on to this in his elegiac Church Going: “A serious house on serious earth it is, / In whose blent air all our compulsions meet, / Are recognised, and robed as destinies.” Rev Dr John Caperon Crowborough, East Sussex • Simon Jenkins rightly advocates ways in which redundant churches can be restored and converted for use by charities and social enterprises, but makes no mention of the Churches Conservation Trust (CCT), which does just this. With 356 such churches in its care, it initiates and manages a range of projects that not only inject new life into these buildings, but also funds and protects jobs in the heritage construction sector and underpins the work of specialist professionals and crafts people, many of whom have lost their jobs during the pandemic; a prime example being in Sunderland, where the work has generated much local interest and participation by young people who would otherwise be unemployed. With its experienced staff and expertise in this highly complex area, the CCT is ideally equipped to save and promote these buildings for use by their local communities. All it needs now is proper government funding and better publicity of its work to enable it to apply its innovative approach on a much larger scale. Andrew Hillier London • Simon Jenkins is absolutely right about the strong historic ties between a community and its local church buildings, even if no longer used as places of worship. Not only are these the places where so many were christened, wed, or buried – many (like ours) are also fine buildings that deserve to go on being used and loved by the communities in which they are rooted. Here in Stannington, we are battling to save the former Knowle Top Methodist chapel for our community – to rescue our after-school club and brass band rehearsal space, and to create a fabulous new arts and performance venue that will make best use of the historic tiered seating in its calm and beautiful interior. Jenny van Tinteren Stannington, Sheffield • I was interested to read Simon Jenkins’ article regarding the use of church buildings. In our rural parish of Mursley, we have indeed opened “The Church Arms”. Sparked by the boarding up of our village pub in October, the church opened the door to meet a community need for a place to catch up with other villagers and have a light-hearted or more serious chat. This project has been fully supported by the diocese of Oxford. Judging by the response to our venture, I would encourage other churches to experiment. It’s not all about booze either, we are offering a soup and cake lunch at other times. Andrew Cowell Mursley, Milton Keynes • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The decision by a jury in Bristol to acquit the “Colston Four” of criminal damage, following their role in the toppling of a statue of the slave trader Edward Colston in June 2020, is a welcome sign that Britain is changing. In the 17th century Colston was one of Britain’s wealthiest slave traders. It speaks volumes about what Bristol’s Victorian civic leaders valued when they decided to erect a monument to Colston in 1895, almost a century after the slave trade was abolished (decades before slavery itself). Just 12 years earlier, a second statue of William Wilberforce, who campaigned for slavery’s abolition, was erected in his home city of Hull. Yet in the south-western English port, whose wealth was built on the flesh trade, it was seen as fit to honour Colston with a monument, and a plaque describing him as “virtuous and wise”. The prosecution should never have been brought, and perhaps would not have been had the home secretary, Priti Patel, and other ministers, been less vociferous in their condemnations of the protests, which culminated in Colston’s statue being dumped in the harbour. It is far from clear that this use of the state’s resources was in the public interest. Six other activists were dealt with via a “restorative justice” route, including voluntary work. Objections to the Colston statue, which occupied a prominent position in Bristol’s centre, were longstanding, and part of a wider, local movement to remove tributes to the slave trader from the city (including the renaming of its main concert hall). That feelings among a section of the public finally boiled over was because of the passionate objections to racial injustice aroused by the Black Lives Matter demonstrations following the murder, less than two weeks earlier, of George Floyd. The verdict is not, as one of the defendants herself pointed out, a green light to “start pulling down all the statues in the UK”. Colston was a particular person. His monument belongs to a specific time and place – and is now in a Bristol museum, thus demolishing the idea that taking it down was an effort to “erase” the past. What the jury’s decision shows is that members of the public are more than willing to think about the messages embedded in our built environment, including monuments – so many of them Victorian. They accepted the defence’s case that it was the presence of the statue, and failure to update the plaque, that constituted a moral – if not a legal – offence. Reckoning with the past is difficult. Britain was once an empire that governed vast areas of the world. Astonishing levels of greed and cruelty are part of our history, along with a religiously motivated “civilising” mission that sought to export Christianity across the globe. Everyone who cares about knowledge should support efforts to increase public understanding of all this. In organisations across the country, including the National Trust, good work is being done. Yet up to now, the government has set its face against anything that might make heritage less celebratory, condemning as “woke” all attempts to place artefacts such as those that fill British country houses (and city squares) in a broader context. Its repressive police bill seeks to increase prison sentences dramatically for those convicted of criminal damage (at present, the maximum for causing damage worth less than £5,000 is three months). Statues are symbols, and tackling racism requires more than moving them. But acknowledging historic injustices is part of building a more equal society today. Rather than complaining about the way in which the law has been applied, as some ministers have done, the government as a whole should think again. Britain is better off without Bristol’s monument to Colston.Cyber Ninjas, the firm that was contracted by Arizona Republicans to carry out a widely-criticized review of 2.1m ballots cast in the presidential election, is shutting down amid a legal battle seeking to force the company to make documents from the review public. A judge fined the company $50,000 a day on Thursday – 50 times the amount requested by plaintiffs – for failing to comply with a court order to turn over public records, in a lawsuit brought by the Phoenix-based Arizona Republic newspaper. During the same hearing, a lawyer representing Cyber Ninjas, Jack Wilenchik, begged the judge to allow him to withdraw from representing the firm. He said he had not been paid for his work and that the company was insolvent. Rod Thomson, a spokesman for the company, confirmed in an email on Thursday evening that the company was shutting down. He said Doug Logan, the founder and chief executive who oversaw the review after expressing support for the disinformation pushed by Donald Trump and allies that the 2020 election was stolen by the Democrats, was no longer with the company. “Doug Logan and the rest of the employees have been let go and Cyber Ninjas is being shut down,” he said in an email. He did not respond to questions about why the company was closing. John Hannah, the local judge overseeing the case, warned that the firm could not escape having to turn over documents by shutting down. “The court is not going to accept the assertion that Cyber Ninjas is an empty shell and that no one is responsible for seeing that it complies,” he said, according to the Arizona Republic. The shutdown marks an abrupt turn for a company that led an effort Trump and allies around the country once saw as their most promising effort to prove widespread irregularities in the 2020 election. The effort raised a staggering $5.7m from outside groups. State lawmakers from around the country flew to Phoenix to watch the effort in person and pushed to replicate it elsewhere. This despite other officials at every level declaring the election the most secure in US history, and eventually William Barr, the then US attorney general, saying the Department of Justice had not uncovered evidence of voter fraud that would change the outcome of Biden’s victory in the November ballot. But the Arizona review, which began last April and largely concluded last fall, was quickly beset by shoddy methodology, bizarre practices, and infighting. Its final report in September not only affirmed Biden’s victory in Maricopa county, Arizona’s most populous and the location of the state capital, Phoenix, but also raised questions about election equipment being connected to the internet and mail-in ballot processing procedures. Nearly all of the claims the firm made in its month-long review were debunked on Wednesday in a 93-page document authored by election officials in Maricopa county, where Cyber Ninjas did its review. “Nearly every finding included faulty analysis, inaccurate claims, misleading conclusions, and a lack of understanding of federal and state election laws,” the county wrote in its rebuttal. A claim that there were thousands of suspicious duplicate images of ballot envelopes, for example, was easily explainable, the county said. If a ballot comes in with a missing or faulty signature, election officials contact the voter and help them fix it. When the ballot is resubmitted, it is scanned again before being sent to be opened. “Only one ballot was counted for each envelope,” the county said. The report also includes a lengthy technical analysis debunking claims from Cyber Ninjas that its election equipment was connected to the internet. Out of the 2.1m votes cast in the county, officials acknowledged potentially double-counting 50 ballots and said they were referring 37 cases to the attorney general’s office for further investigation for potential voter fraud. Karen Fann, the president of the Arizona senate who was a staunch supporter of the Cyber Ninjas review, seized on those few irregularities to claim the audit was worthwhile. “From day one, the Arizona senate’s efforts have been in pursuit of a singular goal – identifying and implementing improvements to our election’s processes,” she said in a statement. “Although it took 14 months and a costly audit, Maricopa county yesterday joined us in pursuit of this worthwhile objective.” Her statement did not mention two of the most important, and obvious facts from the audit – that Joe Biden won Arizona and the original election results were accurate.A petition to revoke the knighthood recently awarded to Tony Blair has reached 1m signatures in just six days. Blair was made a Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, the oldest and most senior British order of chivalry, in the new year honours list. But the honour for the former prime minister has provoked controversy. On Friday afternoon, the Labour MP Richard Burgon tweeted: “It says a lot about what is wrong with our system when, after being one of the leading architects of the Iraq war, Tony Blair is honoured with a knighthood while Julian Assange, who exposed war crimes in Iraq, faces extradition to the USA and a lifetime in prison.” However, the current Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has defended his predecessor’s record and said the honour was deserved, highlighting Blair’s achievements including bringing in the national minimum wage, setting up Sure Start centres for families and his efforts over the Northern Ireland peace process. After the petition passed 500,000 signatures on Tuesday, Starmer said: “I understand there are strong views on the Iraq war. There were back at the time and there still are, but that does not detract from the fact that Tony Blair was a very successful prime minister of this country and made a huge difference to the lives of millions of people in this country.” Angus Scott, who started the petition, wrote on Change.org: “Tony Blair caused irreparable damage to both the constitution of the United Kingdom and to the very fabric of the nation’s society. “He was personally responsible for causing the death of countless innocent, civilian lives and servicemen in various conflicts. For this alone he should be held accountable for war crimes.” On Thursday, as the petition approached 800,000 signatures, Scott thanked signatories on behalf of “families of soldiers who died in both Iraq and Afghanistan”. He added: “For this petition to have any chance of having an effect, we must all unite to push it over 1m signatures. We can only do that if each and every one of you does your ‘bit’ to share the petition as widely as you can, to everyone you know and encourage them to do the same.” Petitions on the parliament website are considered for debate by MPs if they pass 100,000 signatories, but petitions on Change.org, which describes itself as “the world’s platform for change”, have no more than a moral force. Blair, who left Downing Street more than 14 years ago, was one of three new appointments to the Garter announced by the palace. Such moves are in the Queen’s gift, made without prime ministerial advice; and they are for life. Among those to have given their backing to the petition is Rose Gentle, whose 19-year-old son, Gordon, was killed by a roadside bomb in Basra in 2004. She told the Daily Record that she had written to the honours committee to ask for an explanation for Blair’s knighthood. “Instead of standing in front of the Queen being made a Sir with that stupid grin on his face, he’d be better going to the cemetery and standing in front of my son’s grave to see what he’s done,” she said.Sidney Poitier, who has died aged 94, was the first black actor to win an Oscar in a leading role, in 1964, for his performance in Lilies of the Field. This simple story about a handyman helping German nuns build a chapel in Arizona was enhanced by its star’s humour and vitality. It led to a string of successes – To Sir, With Love, In the Heat of the Night and Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner (all 1967) – which made Poitier a box-office star and consolidated his growing fame and wealth. But Poitier’s greatest achievement – alongside his friend and occasional rival Harry Belafonte – was to help alter the racial perceptions that dominated not just Hollywood, but also society in general. His success came against seemingly insurmountable odds. He was born two months prematurely into extreme poverty in Miami, where his Bahamian parents, Evelyn (nee Outten) and Reginald Poitier, had gone to sell their tomato crop. The family remained in the US for three months before returning to Cat Island, where Sidney spent his early childhood. They moved to Nassau in a vain search for a better life. Sidney left school aged 13 to help support his family. A couple of years later, his parents sent him to New York to stay with an older brother. After a series of menial jobs, in desperation at the cold weather he joined the army – giving his age as 18. Having worked unhappily in a physiotherapy unit, he engineered a discharge, faking a psychiatric disorder. In an attempt to escape washing dishes for a living, he attended an audition at the American Negro Theater in Harlem where – virtually unable to read – he was firmly rejected largely because of a strong Bahamian accent. According to his autobiography This Life (1980), the turning point in Poitier’s mostly unhappy early years came with this rejection. For months afterwards he worked in restaurants and, through conversation and the radio, changed his speech so dramatically that on a second audition the group accepted him. He agreed to work as a cleaner in the theatre while doing his training. The tall, athletic and dazzlingly handsome Poitier was cast in an all-black production of Lysistrata in 1946, which was followed by another play, Anna Lucasta, and a role in a military documentary, From Whence Cometh My Help (1949), which introduced him to the screen. His Hollywood debut was No Way Out (1950); adding years to his age, he landed the role of a doctor who is racially harassed by a hoodlum. Despite good reviews, Poitier was hardly inundated with offers, since Hollywood was only just creating worthwhile supporting roles for black actors. He moved abroad for his next part, in Zoltán Korda’s rather ponderous version of Alan Paton’s novel Cry, the Beloved Country (1951), in which he played the Rev Msimangu in support of the veteran black actor and activist Canada Lee. The film was partially shot in South Africa, where Poitier was introduced to the horrors of apartheid, when he and Lee were housed outside town and segregated in all respects. A few minor roles followed, but Poitier mainly supported his wife, Juanita (nee Hardy), whom he had married in 1950, and children, by running a restaurant in New York. A turning point came when he was given the role of a student (cast 10 years below his true age) in Richard Brooks’ explosive Blackboard Jungle (1955). As a mixed-up kid, in a mixed-race school, he was at last in a hit movie – made famous by Bill Haley’s soundtrack, which featured Rock Around the Clock. He worked on the engaging Goodbye, My Lady (1956), directed by William Wellman and starring the child actor Brandon De Wilde, then Brooks cast him in Something of Value (1957), set in Kenya. But the parts were few and Poitier believed this stemmed from a political blacklist as well as racial discrimination. Another break came with A Man Is Ten Feet Tall (1957), an adaptation of a TV drama in which he had played the same role. His character, a dockworker, was something of a trademark Poitier part: good-hearted, tolerant (to a point) and a balance to the white lead (in this case, John Cassavetes). As Hollywood, rather than New York, belatedly tackled racial themes, Poitier gradually emerged as a star. After being noble in Band of Angels, and married to Eartha Kitt in The Mark of the Hawk (both 1957), which was funded by a religious group, he was offered a part in The Defiant Ones (1958). At the insistence of his co-star, Tony Curtis, Poitier shared top billing above the title – a breakthrough for the period. He and Curtis gained Oscar nominations for their roles as antipathetic convicts chained together and on the run, and Poitier received best actor awards at the Berlin film festival and from Bafta. A setback came with Porgy and Bess (1959), in which – contractually forced into playing Porgy – he was swamped by MGM’s lavish studio version of Catfish Row and Otto Preminger’s lumpen direction. In contrast, A Raisin in the Sun (1961) was a successful film of the groundbreaking play with which he had triumphantly returned to Broadway in 1959. Now in his 30s, Poitier achieved what other black actors only dreamed of – steady work in leading roles. The low-budget Lilies of the Field (1963) brought him not only an Oscar but also another award at the Berlin film festival. He became busier – to the detriment of his marriage, which ended in 1965 – with films including, that year, The Bedford Incident, in which he was cast as a journalist, a role that, significantly, did not depend upon his race. After a western, Duel at Diablo (1966), he played a teacher in the British-made To Sir, With Love, based on ER Braithwaite’s autobiographical bestseller. The movie proved a huge, unexpected, hit and Poitier, having negotiated a share of the profits to keep the budget low, became increasingly wealthy. That rather naive view of British school life was followed by two major successes. In the Heat of the Night offered him the role of Virgil Tibbs, the Philadelphia cop who falls foul of bigotry in a Mississippi town, where the racist southern sheriff (Rod Steiger) is at odds with the immaculate cool of the black detective. He and Steiger interacted superbly under the director, Norman Jewison. It was arguably Poitier’s best performance, but it was Steiger who got the Oscar nomination (and won). Stanley Kramer’s Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner completed a box-office hat-trick and further challenged race barriers. Poitier played a handsome doctor brought home by the daughter of a wealthy couple; his presence tests the parents’ liberalism, especially when the youngsters announce they are getting married. The movie is now routinely dismissed by critics as contrived and over-earnest. At the time, few considered it soft and Poitier soon found that it held the ring of truth when, after a long relationship with the black actor Diahann Carroll, he married the white actor Joanna Shimkus, provoking hostility from some quarters. Poitier co-wrote and starred in a romantic comedy, For Love of Ivy (1968), and followed it more controversially with The Lost Man (1969), co-starring Shimkus. A revamp of the classic Odd Man Out, it cast him as a black radical on the run – rather than the IRA fugitive of the 1947 original. Twice he revived his most famous role, in They Call Me Mister Tibbs! (1970) and The Organisation (1971). Sandwiched between these mediocre works was Brother John (1971), in which Poitier was cast as an angel descending on an Alabama town to see whether racism had lessened since his mortal time there. One can see why he was tempted by gutsier roles. To escape the rut he turned to direction, taking over Buck and the Preacher (1972), starring as a freed slave with his pal Belafonte (stealing the movie) as a conman priest. The film humorously upended many cliches. Several of the films he directed were as the result of a newly formed company, First Artists, with Poitier, Barbra Streisand, Steve McQueen and Paul Newman each undertaking to make several films within a specified time. Only Newman and Poitier maintained their quota. In fact, Poitier was to direct eight more films, starting with the sentimental A Warm December (1973) and ending with the lamentable Ghost Dad (1990). Few were as enjoyable as his debut, although some – notably Uptown Saturday Night (1974), A Piece of the Action (1977) and Stir Crazy (1980) – were commercial hits. Their greatest, if oblique, value was in giving sustained work to fellow black actors. Towards the end of the 1970s Poitier moved to semi-retirement and his acting parts, including The Wilby Conspiracy and Let’s Do It Again (both 1975), were hardly satisfying. He narrated a documentary about his hero Paul Robeson and stayed off screen for several years. In 1988 he re-emerged in a brisk thriller, Little Nikita, playing an FBI agent on the track of spies. The film co-starred River Phoenix, with whom he reunited in the enjoyable caper Sneakers (1992). The same year he also received the American Film Institute’s life achievement award – the first black actor to receive the accolade. It ushered in another busy period, including To Sir, With Love II, made for television in 1996; a portrayal of Nelson Mandela in Mandela and De Klerk (1997), also for television; and the political thriller The Jackal (1997), in which he played the FBI’s deputy director. He published two more memoirs, The Measure of a Man: A Spiritual Autobiography (2000) and Life Beyond Measure: Letters to My Great-Granddaughter (2008). In 2002, almost 40 years after his groundbreaking Academy Award victory, he was awarded an honorary Oscar for his performances on screen and “for representing the industry with dignity, style and intelligence”. This view was echoed not only in his numerous awards for acting. In 1974 he had been given an honorary knighthood; in 2009 he received, from Barack Obama, the US presidential medal of freedom; and in 2016 he was awarded the Bafta fellowship. He also served as the non-resident Bahamian ambassador to Japan between 1997 and 2007 and was concurrently the Bahamian ambassador to Unesco. A daughter from his first marriage, Gina, died in 2018. He is survived by Joanna and their daughters, Anika and Sydney Tamiia; and by three other daughters, Beverly, Paula and Sherri, from his first marriage. • Sidney Poitier, actor and director, born 20 February 1927; died 6 January 2022British Gas owner Centrica has appointed the former government minister Amber Rudd as a non-executive director. The former home secretary also previously served as secretary of state for energy and climate change from 2015 to 2016 in David Cameron’s government during her decade as a Conservative MP. Her recruitment comes amidan escalating energy crisis, with consumers bracing for household bills to soar in the spring, and as tensions grow between government and suppliers over how to lessen the impact of rising wholesale prices on households. Scott Wheway, Centrica’s chairman, praised Rudd’s “wide range of expertise” and said she would bring a “wealth of real-world experience in energy” which would be “invaluable” to the company. She was energy secretary at the time of the Paris climate change agreement made at the Cop21 summit in 2015. Centrica released news of Rudd’s appointment just hours after the company’s chief executive, Chris O’Shea, said it was not interested in receiving a government bailout to help it reduce the impact of soaring energy bills on consumers. “There are reports that some energy companies want a £20bn handout to keep household bills down,” O’Shea wrote in an opinion piece published in the Sun newspaper. “Not British Gas. We haven’t asked for a bailout, we don’t want a bailout, and we oppose any bailouts.” Consumers are bracing for a spike in what they pay for household energy in April, when the regulator reviews its energy price cap, a move that many expect will mean average annual bills shoot up by as much as £700. This increase would take the annual cost of electricity and gas for households on a supplier’s default tariff to £2,000, compared with £1,300 at present. After 26 UK energy firms collapsed in 2021, O’Shea insisted that “energy suppliers have to pass on higher wholesale costs to survive”. But he suggested the government could help consumers through other means, such as cutting VAT on energy bills, or stripping environmental levies from bills. He calculated that the VAT cut would shave £100 off the average annual bill, although such a move has been dismissed by Boris Johnson. O’Shea also suggested that the government should fund environmental and social levies through general taxation instead of household bills, which he estimated would cut the average annual total by £170. Rudd will join Centrica’s board on 10 January, and will also become a member of the company’s safety, environment and sustainability committee, as well as its remuneration committee. This is not Rudd’s first private sector role. She joined the ranks of former ministers stepping into often lucrative private-sector jobs after government when she was hired as a senior adviser to Cambridge-based cybersecurity firm Darktrace in May 2020, just as it prepared for its stock exchange flotation.Citigroup is set to begin enforcing its “no jab, no job” policy next week, making it the first Wall Street bank to implement a vaccine mandate. The New York-headquartered bank said in October that it would require all US employees to be vaccinated against Covid as a condition of their employment in line with a Biden administration policy requiring workers supporting government contracts to be fully vaccinated. The Biden policy has been widely challenged in the courts, and is currently before the US supreme court following requests by Republican state officials and business groups to block it. Citigroup also said it would examine requests for exemptions on religious or medical grounds, or any other accommodation by state or local law, on a case-by-case basis. More than 90% of Citigroup staff have so far complied with the mandate and that figure is rising rapidly, Bloomberg reported, citing a Citigroup spokeswoman. Citigroup, the news agency said, will place workers who do not comply on unpaid leave, with their last day of employment at the end of the month. The enforcement of “no jab, no job” on 14 January comes as Covid infections have surged in New York to five times last winter’s numbers – 59% thought to be of the highly transmissable Omicron variant. The decision to enforce the mandate comes as Wall Street banks have struggled to get employees back to their office desks after close to two years of remote working. Last month, JPMorgan, the largest US bank, told unvaccinated staff based in Manhattan to work remotely “until alternative solutions are considered” and said it was increasing restrictions on unvaccinated workers. In a memo sent to staff, first reported by Reuters, JPMorgan also urged bankers to get Covid vaccines and to receive booster shots, while relaxing mask policy to require they are worn requiring in lobby areas, elevators and in cafes when not eating. The memo, issued during a relative lull between the Delta variant and Omicron surge, said “it seems unfair” for vaccinated workers to wear face coverings indoors, adding that doing so would slow down its efforts for a return to normalcy. Citigroup’s move comes as New York’s leadership announced a policy designed to hasten workers’ return to their desks in office buildings that are estimated to be just 30% full. On Thursday, New York City’s mayor, Eric Adams, standing beside the state governor, Kathy Hochul, proposed easing workers back into businesses with a three-day working week and then expanding to five days in New York City. “I say let’s start out with a three-day week, to let people see how safe it is to come back to work, then we cycle back into a five-day week,” he said. “We can do this within a three-week period and be up and operating in our city.”The Conservative peer Michelle Mone referred a business to the Cabinet Office for potential multimillion pound PPE contracts before it had even been incorporated as a company, it has emerged. The business, PPE Medpro, was fast-tracked by the government through its “VIP lane” for politically connected firms following the referral by Mone. Within weeks of the company’s incorporation on 12 May 2020, PPE Medpro was awarded contracts worth £203m to supply millions of masks and gowns. The Guardian revealed on Thursday that leaked files appear to suggest that Mone and her husband, the Isle of Man-based financier Douglas Barrowman, were secretly involved in PPE Medpro, despite both consistently denying any “role or function” in the company. It has now emerged that Mone’s referral of PPE Medpro occurred five days before the company was formally registered. Responding to a recent parliamentary question from the late Labour MP Jack Dromey, health minister Edward Argar said: “Departmental records indicate that Baroness Mone identified Medpro as a potential supplier on 7 May 2020 and highlighted this opportunity by email on 8 May 2020.” Mone referred PPE Medpro to the office of her fellow Tory peer Theodore Agnew, a Cabinet Office minister responsible for procurement during the Covid pandemic. PPE Medpro was then added by Agnew’s office to the VIP lane, which analysis later showed gave companies a 10 times greater chance of being awarded a contract. PPE Medpro was not incorporated in the UK until 12 May 2020, five days after the initial referral. The UK company was effectively a subsidiary of another PPE Medpro, registered in the Isle of Man on 11 May. The director of both companies was Anthony Page, who works for Barrowman’s Isle of Man-based financial services firm and runs his family office. Lawyers for Mone, who ran a lingerie company before David Cameron made her a member of the House of Lords, have always said she “was not connected to PPE Medpro in any capacity”. They also said she had no “association” with PPE Medpro, and “never had any role or function in PPE Medpro, nor in the process by which contracts were awarded” to the company. Contacted on Friday, Mone did not respond to questions about why she referred PPE Medpro the week before the company had even been incorporated. Both Mone and Agnew have declined to say what, if anything, she disclosed about her own links to the company when she referred it. A Cabinet Office spokesperson said Mone’s emailed referral is considered “private correspondence” that would not normally be publicly disclosed. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, wrote to Cabinet Office minister Stephen Barclay on Friday, expressing concern about “the lack of transparency around the award of significant sums of public money to PPE Medpro”. “I would ask now that the government … commits now to place all correspondence and records relating to the award in the library of the House [of Commons] for parliamentary scrutiny,” Rayner said in her letter. The timing of Mone’s referral of PPE Medpro also appears to be significant because it seems to have occurred days before the company had even secured the crucial business deal that enabled it to supply PPE to the NHS. Documents seen by the Guardian suggest it was not until 11 May – the same day the Isle of Man PPE Medpro was registered – that the company secured its agreement with a London importing company, Loudwater Trade and Finance. Under the terms of the business deal, documents suggest Loudwater promised to supply the PPE, whereas PPE Medpro appears to have committed to use its “extensive network to seek to secure … contracts with the NHS and other government bodies within the British Isles”. It appears PPE Medpro undertook that commitment just days after Mone had made the referral to the Cabinet Office. Documents seen by the Guardian also appear to show Barrowman was personally involved in setting up PPE Medpro’s deal with Loudwater’s director, Maurice Stimler, as well as related business matters. Barrowman’s lawyers have also repeatedly distanced him from the company, saying he was not an investor, director or shareholder. They have said the Guardian’s reporting amounted to “clutching at straws” and was “largely incorrect”. Mone’s lawyers have said the Guardian’s reporting is “grounded entirely on supposition and speculation and not based on accuracy”, adding: “She is under no obligation to say anything to you.” They have also said that after she took the “very simple, solitary and brief step” of referring the company to Agnew, she “did not do anything further in respect of PPE Medpro”. However, WhatsApp messages believed to have been sent by Mone in late June 2020, over a month after the referral, appear to show her discussing the gown sizes and purchase order details with a person in PPE Medpro’s supply chain. The messages, which Mone appears to have sent shortly before taking off in a private jet, occurred shortly before PPE Medpro secured its second contract with the government. Mone’s lawyers said she could not be expected to comment on “unknown and unattributable WhatsApp messages allegedly sent 19 months ago”. Her lawyers have also refused to be drawn on why, according to a Financial Times report, Mone was in contact with officials as recently as February 2021, and appeared to be “incandescent with rage” over the treatment of PPE Medpro.Senior lawyers have accused the attorney general for England and Wales of politically-driven meddling after she announced that she could refer the acquittal of the Colston Four to the court of appeal. Suella Braverman said she was contemplating the highly unusual move after an outcry from Conservative MPs following the jury’s verdict on four Black Lives Matter protesters who toppled a statue of slave trader Edward Colston in Bristol. A former director of public prosecutions and senior criminal lawyers were among those who warned that Braverman appeared to be acting out of political motivation. When someone has been acquitted of a crime, the attorney general has the power to seek the opinion of the court of appeal on a point of law, under section 36 of the Criminal Justice Act (CJA) 1972. Braverman did not specify the point of law she was concerned about. Four protesters were cleared of criminal damage after admitting that they helped topple the statue of Colston – a member of the Royal African Company, which transported about 80,000 men, women and children from Africa to the Americas – in June 2020, but argued that its existence constituted a public offence or a hate crime. After Wednesday’s verdict, former cabinet minister Robert Jenrick suggested the rule of law had been undermined, while Tom Hunt, a vice-chair of the parliamentary Common Sense Group, said he was “deeply concerned by the precedent set here”, despite the fact that jury decisions do not set legal precedents. Writing on Twitter on Friday, Braverman said: “Trial by jury is an important guardian of liberty and must not be undermined. However, the decision in the Colston statue case is causing confusion. “Without affecting the result of this case, as attorney general, I am able to refer matters to the court of appeal so that senior judges have the opportunity to clarify the law for future cases. I am carefully considering whether to do so.” Simon Spence QC, of Red Lion Chambers, who prosecutes and defends serious crime cases, said: “The issue here as I see it is more that the attorney general does not like the jury’s verdict rather than that any point of law has arisen. The allegation was criminal damage, which is a very straightforward offence [for a judge] to direct juries about. My concern about this particular situation is that it appears to be politically driven rather than legally driven, and that is not what section 36 is intended for.” Spence and other lawyers the Guardian spoke to said they could not recall such a referral by the attorney general in similar circumstances. Ken Macdonald QC, who was director of public prosecutions from 2003 to 2008, said: “It is difficult to think of a case more appropriate to be decided by a randomly selected panel of local people. Juries have always been given the space to do what they think is right, sometimes by using their verdicts to assert changing values or to push back against abuses of power. This dispensation has served our country very well over the centuries, and ministers would be very foolish to try to challenge it – particularly for what appear to be political motives pushed by backbench Conservative MPs.” If the case does go to the court of appeal, the judges will not rule on whether the jury’s decision was correct, only on whether there was an error in law in the directions that were given to the jury. Depending on the appeal court’s opinion, it could affect how juries are directed on a particular point of law in future, but it would not lead to the Colston Four verdicts being overturned or a retrial. Kirsty Brimelow QC, vice-chair of the Criminal Bar Association, said: “A politician is unlikely to have expertise in the laws governing direct-action protest and may not understand the statutory defences within the offence of criminal damage and so this could be a knee-jerk reaction, which is disappointing. I have not seen any specific criticism of the judge’s legal directions and route to verdict, which appear legally sound. “It is a concern that an impression is being given that the jury’s acquittal is being challenged. It is important to emphasise that the jury’s acquittal cannot be overturned and the defendants will remain not guilty – whether the attorney general attempts to utilise section 36 of the CJA or not. “However, it would be helpful for the attorney general to make clear that she respects the verdict of the jury and its right to return not guilty verdicts. After all, these verdicts are a sign of independent courts and a robust rule of law. This should be praised.” The shadow attorney general, Emily Thornberry, tweeted: “The attorney general has a duty to uphold democracy, the rule of law and the sanctity of the jury system, not play political games when she doesn’t like the results. I hoped Suella Braverman had learned a lesson after her shameful intervention on Barnard Castle, but clearly not.” Braverman faced calls to resign last year after she defended Dominic Cummings’ trip to Durham during lockdown. She was accused of pre-empting a police investigation into Boris Johnson’s then chief aide. Juries have an absolute right to acquit, which they have exercised in the past for protesters against climate change and military action, even when defendants have admitted causing disruption or damage, such as in cases of climate crisis protest. People who have used, grown or supplied cannabis for the purposes of alleviating pain have also been acquitted by juries in the past. Braverman, who became attorney general in 2020, was formerly a barrister specialising in planning law and judicial review. Her two immediate predecessors as attorney general, Geoffrey Cox QC and Dominic Grieve QC, were widely regarded as having been removed from office because they put their office’s legal independence above party politics.As Omicron spreads rapidly across Australia, states’ testing regimes have failed to keep up with surging demand and a lack of rapid antigen tests, meaning they are no longer capturing the true number of infections. As a result, data experts are concerned at the reliability of the figures being used to inform our decisions, with one saying that announcing daily case numbers at this point “feels completely arbitrary”. They also warn incomplete information can hamper public health tactics as Australia enters the third year of the pandemic. How high are the actual case numbers? With many people saying over the last couple of weeks that they tested positive to Covid on a rapid antigen test or had Covid-like symptoms but could not get a PCR test, it is difficult to say how many Australians have had the infection. There are estimates case loads could be up to 10 times higher than the daily figures announced. State health authorities have acknowledged their testing systems have not been capable of detecting the extent of transmission. The New South Wales chief health officer, Kerry Chant, reiterated on Friday that “the numbers of tests positive that we report everyday will be an underestimate”. “Across Sydney, we have got clearly a very high case burden,” Chant said. Earlier in the week, national cabinet announced an agreement to transition to accept rapid antigen test results as confirmation of Covid status, following weeks of so-called tourism testers and close contacts crippling the capacity of PCR labs. On Friday, NSW announced it would follow Victoria in introducing an online portal to report positive RAT results to improve accuracy. Why is it still important to capture all infections? Aside from not capturing a true figure for new infections, the lowering of standards for collecting Australia’s Covid data will have flow-on effects on the country’s pandemic experience, says Juliette O’Brien, the data journalist who created covid19data.com.au. “There’s a giant asterisk next to any daily case number now, unless it’s from a state where it’s relatively under control. But on Friday, typing 38,000 for NSW sounds completely arbitrary,” she says. “There’s this huge caveat that we just don’t know what the real case numbers are, and an immediate issue is that we can’t calculate the true positive rate and reproduction rate. These are key metrics that show us when outbreaks are starting and when they slow down.” She says this changes the reliability of the data Australia contributes to international disease reporting efforts, and limits how much we can understand about the nature of the Omicron variant and future strains. Who are we missing? O’Brien adds that while states are moving to record positive RAT results, the serious problems with cost and accessibility that have persisted over recent weeks and continue now means we have a less clear picture of the true growth rate. “Even though we see more cases reported each day, for all we know the rate of growth could be slowing. We are blind to that now.” Additionally, the emphasis on symptomatic people getting tested means we have stopped capturing information about asymptomatic cases, which can be important for our understanding of the severity of the strain. This is a departure from earlier in the pandemic, when asymptomatic cases were detected due to a thorough system of contact tracing and isolation. “When the country has abandoned any attempt to capture anything close to the real number of cases, that is the definition of out of control,” O’Brien says. What does this mean for modelling? Australian governments have relied on modelling to make public health decisions throughout the pandemic. However, the accuracy of much of the modelling released by health authorities has been mixed. During NSW’s Delta outbreak, hospitalisation predictions failed to materialise. Meanwhile, a worst-case scenario prediction made in mid-December that the state would reach 25,000 new daily cases by the end of January proved overly optimistic. Dr Michael Lydeamore, a Monash University infectious diseases modeller who is part of the Doherty Institute modelling consortium that advises Australia’s national cabinet, believes deteriorating quality of case number data will make the task “very difficult”. This is because without capturing the full picture of cases, modellers need to “calibrate” their models to other, related information where the data is complete. For example, death and hospital data continues to be “very well reported by the states”, says Lydeamore, and this can be compared with previous points in the pandemic when the accuracy of cases reported was better. That can help calibrate current case data to deliver a more likely number of true infections. Other methods of calibration will help to better understand the true caseload, such as surveying a sample of the population at a point in time, testing them for antibodies – an indication they’ve been infected – and recording their vaccine status. This enables the level of less severe infections to be better understood. However, these surveys have not been conducted in Australia. Lydeamore believes this type of surveying will be necessary in the future for Covid modelling to continue to be accurate and useful for the public health response. In the meantime, modelling will be most useful on near-term forecasting, with Lydeamore warning it will become “too difficult to build good models”. As a result, health experts who provide health advice to governments will likely be more cautious in their recommendations, given the lack of clarity of the true transmission that is occurring. Whether governments adopt those more cautious recommendations is another question, says Lydeamore. “It’s clearly not a great situation.” Will this limit how much we can know about vaccine effectiveness? Lydeamore says that health experts primarily measure vaccine effectiveness via randomised control groups. Participants receive the vaccine and their antibodies are measured at different stages to gauge how they have responded. While large-scale outbreak data is better understood when looked at with vaccine rates, Lydeamore says this is not the method used to determine vaccine effectiveness. However, information about the spread in specific areas where not everyone is vaccinated will be less clear, and “become a bit of a guessing game”.Lying with a cloth over her face, “unable to even look at things” in the worst sinus pain of her life, Johanna Roberts knew she was a “lucky” Covid-19 patient. “I could manage it by myself, I didn’t have to go to hospital.” Despite being as cautious as possible in the run-up to Christmas, Roberts, who lives in Sydney, tested positive for the virus in mid-December. She still does not know if it was the Delta or Omicron variant. With hindsight, there is just one small silver-lining to her experience. She got sick before “everything completely went to hell”. “I had all the help I needed,” she says. “And I worry that people who have it now don’t have that. It’s just so extreme.” As Australia’s confirmed Covid-19 cases climb to dizzying new highs, with real numbers likely far higher, it can be difficult to ward-off a sense of fatalism. A feeling that, as New South Wales health minister, Brad Hazzard, said on Boxing Day, “we’re all going to get Omicron”. But health experts implore public vigilance, rather than defeatism. Federal vice-president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Chris Moy, says: “When Hazzard went out and said we’re all going to catch it, I thought that was one of the most irresponsible statements ever.” He says it felt almost like an invitation, “because it did not have the caveat about what you should be trying to do.” “The idea is to slow this down as much as possible so we don’t all get sick at the same time.” Dr Alexandra Martiniuk, an epidemiologist at the George Institute for global health and the University of Sydney says that while Omicron is “unbelievably infectious”, that “doesn’t mean everyone has to get it, and it doesn’t mean everyone has to get it right now”. How risky is Omicron if you’re vaccinated? Prof Robert Booy, an infectious diseases paediatrician at the University of Sydney, says that taking a lackadaisical attitude toward Omicron is a dangerous gamble, even for the young and vaccinated. “Even if the majority of people will get Covid mildly and recover quickly, there remains an important minority who despite being relatively healthy will still get Covid severely, with hospitalisation and admission to intensive care.” While vaccinations work well for most people, most of the time, their protection against the virus is not flawless, and will not be the same for everyone, Booy says. There is no way of knowing which “healthy young person” will be “the unlucky one who will get Covid severely.” “This is a virus that’s still worse than influenza, it’s still more likely to kill you than influenza.” Right now, Booy says we are dealing with the fallout from “a whole month of dangerous behaviour, 30 days of Christmas and New Year’s Eve parties which have been super-spreader events.” He adds that in NSW, the pressure high case numbers have placed on the healthcare system makes this “a bad time to get sick”. What precautions should you be taking? The most important thing you can do is ensure all eligible members of your household are vaccinated. Booy says “Omicron … in kids or young adults is really worth preventing” and that the “benefit of vaccination is much greater than any side effects”. For adults “there’s a palpable and important difference” between being vaccinated and having a booster shot, so if you are eligible for a booster, get one. Booy says Omicron is “extremely unlikely to be devastating if you’re boosted. Only are you at great risk if you’re immunosuppressed and not able to respond to vaccine.” “A booster gives you great protection not only against severe disease but even against mild infection.” Beyond vaccination, Booy says: “We don’t have to be in lockdown but we have to be careful. You go to fewer events, you make sure they’re outside, ventilated, short in duration and few in number.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Martiniuk says that “we need to get ourselves back to the basics of infectious disease control”. While shoring up public health infrastructure like contact tracing and testing will make the biggest impact, on an individual level, she suggests people in areas with high case numbers limit the amount of time they spend in indoor venues, including grocery shopping, and try to reduce the number of people they see. She also suggests you “put a few days in between social gatherings” because “Omicron infects quite quickly.” Taking a beat between seeing people gives you time to “fall sick in between”, thus lowering the risk of spreading the disease to others before you know you have it. Can you relax if you’ve had a booster shot? The short answer is no. “Even if you’ve had a booster, it’s about protecting other people,” says Moy. “We’ve all got to be in it together and not overcomplicate things.” “We need good, clear, simple instructions. Don’t overthink it, whether you’ve had it or had a booster, just practice good, common sense Covid-safe practices that we’ve known all along.” Booy agrees, saying that while those who have good Covid-19 immunity are a lower risk for transmitting the virus, a lower risk does not mean no-risk. “Your behaviour is not only about yourself, it’s about your community,” he says. What about if you’ve already had Covid? Moy and Martiniuk say that there is not yet conclusive data on how much protection a previous Covid-19 infection, Omicron or otherwise, offers, against future Omicron infections, or other variants. However, Martiniuk says that it is “very clear” from “many people around the world that getting Covid-19 once does not prevent you from getting it again”. Booy says that “there’s no doubt that if you’ve recovered from Covid, on the back of being double vaccinated, you will have longer and stronger immunity”. But he says the risks associated with the illness far outweigh any potential benefits, saying “it would be crazy to have Covid parties”. Roberts, who is double vaccinated, recovered from Covid-19 and was permitted to leave isolation just in time to see her family for Christmas. She says that having already been infected makes her slightly “less stressed” as she awaits her eligibility for a booster shot. But some small peace of mind is negligible compared to the “awful” experience of her mild case. “I would choose to not have it if at all possible,” she says. “I don’t recommend it as a holiday experience.”Patients discharged early, cancer specialists diverted to Covid wards, non-Covid patients mixed in with infected ones: this is the bleak picture from inside New South Wales hospitals despite government officials stressing they would cope with the coming surge without need for another lockdown. The revelation comes as the share of double-vaccinated patients in intensive care units makes up the majority for the first time. Doctors, paramedics and patients say Friday’s decision to halt non-urgent elective surgery until February will only exacerbate health issues. The premier, Dominic Perrottet, released government modelling on Friday that predicted Covid-related hospitalisations will peak between 3,000 and 6,000 patients by the third or fourth week of January. As of 8pm on Thursday, the tally stood at 1,738. “The modelling today is encouraging,” he told Friday’s media conference. “Even on a worst-case scenario, [NSW] is in a strong position to deal with the challenges that we face.” That confidence, though, is not shared by many within the health system. An increasing reliance on a fatigued workforce to perform roles beyond their expertise and experience risks reduced care and the prospect of medical errors, staff say. Even though Omicron is 50-70% less likely than the Delta strain to cause hospitalisations, its far higher infection rate means many more people will get it. Worryingly, as of 2 January, the percentage of those in hospital who were fully vaccinated has risen to 67.4%, according to data compiled by the health department’s critical intelligence unit. As of that date, fully vaccinated people made up 50.5% of the Covid patients in intensive care, becoming the majority for the first time. Hospitals are now being told to discharge patients faster, whether recovering from other ailments, such as strokes, heart attacks and trauma, or even Covid, a senior doctor said. “We’ve got to turn them over faster because there are so many more people needing beds,” the doctor said. Concord hospital, which earlier this week told staff to expect Covid patient numbers to triple, informed them on Friday “to discharge any patients we could”, another senior doctor told Guardian Australia. Senior staff at one of Sydney’s largest teaching hospital at Liverpool, meanwhile, described the current crisis they face as of “epic proportions”. NSW Health deputy secretary Susan Pearce told Friday’s press conference the government was “calling out everyone who is a registered health professional”, and said she would be willing to front up for duties herself if needed. “We’re looking at care assistants who can go in and help the more experienced staff,” she said. “We’re looking at bringing in, if possible, interns early. We’re looking at nursing graduates who may be able to be brought on early.” Pearce predicted “this [surge] will rise quickly and pass quickly. We also need to reassure our community that we will be able to manage this.” The altering of roles, however, is already affecting care. One woman due to undergo ovary removal soon as part of cancer treatment at a southern Sydney hospital now expects the operation to be bumped back. “My oncologist is rostered on [Covid duties] this month,” she said. The patient had hoped to have a lesion on her scalp seen by the specialist, a meeting that now won’t happen. “Just hoping it’s not a metastasis. What if it is?” For Alex Wilks, who took his wife, Kittie, to Gosford hospital’s emergency department on Monday to X-ray her badly swollen ankle, the issue wasn’t of a shortage of staff but a lack of Covid-safe facilities. “The staff were friendly and efficient and had the whole thing wrapped up in under four hours,” Wilks said. “However, they put her in an emergency room where there would normally be a bed and some privacy curtains; this room had three chairs. “They then put two clearly Covid-positive cases in there with her for the remainder of the three-four hours I am assuming this from the symptoms they had – coughing – and a conversation they had with the nurse: ‘So all your other family members who were at the event have tested positive?’ ‘Yes.’ “I have made a complaint with the hospital about it and am expecting a report on why my wife, who showed no symptoms of Covid, was exposed to the virus like this. They have assured me they will look into it and get back to me within 35 days. “I feel people need to know they are putting their lives at risk going to the hospital now.” Guardian Australia has sought comment from Gosford hospital. Patients who need ambulance care to attend hospital may also find wait times are getting longer. Chris Kastelan, the NSW president of the Australian Paramedics Association and a 24-year veteran of the service, said emergency department ramping or “bed block” was the worst for at least a decade. Staff are routinely working shifts up to 18 hours long compared with the normal 12-hour stint. “And sometimes this is without a meal break,” Kastelan said. “That’s a bit of a safety concern.” The waiting period for an ambulance after making a triple-zero call now often stretches beyond 50 minutes because of the workload and crews available. Stage 3 escalation, when all training is halted and all registered paramedics – including executives – are asked to be on duty “was a bit of an anomaly in the past, but certainly it’s being hit more and more regularly”, Kastelan said. “I would suggest south-west Sydney and western Sydney are nearly in a constant state of stage 3 – the highest category before your workload outstrips your ability to provide service,” he said. Staff are being asked to cancel approved leave, while all long-service leave or leave without pay are not being approved, he said. Crews are preparing for the coming peak in Covid cases “with a level of trepidation”. “You can spend billions of dollars on infrastructure and new ambulances and equipment and a new headquarters and all those fantastic things, but I think at this point in time, we’re all recognising that the glue that holds it all together is people,” Kastelan said. Do you know more about pressure in the healthcare system? Contact peter.hannam@theguardian.com. You can remain anonymous.With summer show capacities at 100% and festival season in full flight amid surging Covid numbers, arts lovers have been wrestling with a tough decision: should I use these tickets, or stay home? “The risk of severe disease from Omicron if you’re triple vaccinated is low,” says Hassan Vally, an associate professor of epidemiology at Deakin university in Melbourne, who has 20 years’ experience in epidemiology under his belt. “But at the same time, you should do everything you can to limit your exposure, particularly in the next three to four weeks as case numbers peak.” “The next few weeks will be one of the worst times we’ve seen in terms of case numbers. If I hadn’t bought a ticket already, I wouldn’t be buying one now – especially if I was in an older age bracket or living with co-morbidities.” So what can we do to reduce our personal risks while we support our theatres and cinemas? Prof Vally answers some of our most pressing questions. Is it safe for me to sit in a theatre with 900 other people for three hours right now? If you choose to do this, you should be triple vaccinated, Vally advises. If you’ve just got your booster, wait a week. “The booster is an extra level of protection that would give you assurance over and above wearing a mask and socially distancing,” he says – although you should wear a mask and socially distance too. “And weigh up your personal circumstances. Are you in a vulnerable group or do you have regular contact with someone vulnerable? If that is the case, I would seriously consider staying home.” Am I safer in a big theatre with more air, or a small theatre with fewer people? Density matters, says Vally. “If you have 50 people in a small room and they are squashed together, that’s less safe than 1000 people in a big theatre if they are more spread out.” The riskiest time for infection is getting into your seat and getting out after the show, he adds. “That’s when people crowd together. A lot will depend on how theatres manage that.” What about eating and drinking in the foyer, and during the show? Skip the wine and skip the snacks, says Vally. Seriously. Particularly in the foyer. “The foyer is one of the highest risk areas. If you are serious about reducing your risk, keep a low profile in the foyer and don’t socialise. Just enjoy the show or movie and then get out.” “If everyone has their mask off in the foyer, and they are crammed together, it’s pointless taking all the other precautions,” Vally says, adding that conditions in the foyer are “messy”. What about going to the toilet? “I imagine the theatres have identified toilet queues as a really critical part of being safe in their safety plan,” Vally says. “Hopefully they have someone managing those lines and keeping everyone distanced. But if they don’t it’s back to personal responsibility. Make sure you keep your mask on, keep your distance and obviously wash your hands, for more than just Covid reasons!” What kind of mask should I wear? Any mask is better than no mask, though they do get significantly better from cloth, to surgical, to N95. “With Omicron so transmissible, I’d be using the best mask I could get my hands on,” says Vally. What should I do if the person I’m sitting next to pulls down their mask during the show? “That’s one of the hardest social problems we face,” Vally says. “I would assume the person has pulled their mask down and then forgotten to pull it back up, that’s so easy to do. So you can politely let them know they’ve let their mask slip down.” I have tickets to a standup comedy show. Is it less safe to be in a room of people laughing? This is where density limits are important, Vally says. “You want to keep your distance from people who are laughing a lot, because they are expelling a lot of air from their lungs. Wear the best possible mask and keep your distance as much as possible.” What’s the best way to get to the show? “Everything you do from the moment you walk out of the house, you are exposing yourself to risk,” says Vally. “If you go from your front door, into your car, drive to the car park and walk straight into the cinema or theatre, that is clearly a better situation then catching public transport and then being exposed to lots of people walking through a shopping centre.” It’s safer to drive, even if that’s less environmentally friendly. “In reality, this will be for a short period of time, so on balance, it’s better to drive or get an Uber than being on public transport and potentially being exposed to lots of people before you get to the cinema or theatre.” Is an outdoor cinema on a warm, still night better than an indoor one with air-con? The science is clear on this, says Vally. “Outdoors is much, much better than indoors. Your risks of being infected are reduced significantly by being outdoors. An outdoor cinema or outdoor play is ideal.” One of my children has been pinged as a close contact. Can I still go to the show? Technically, you are allowed to go because you are not a close contact yourself. But … you probably shouldn’t. “What we know about the virus in households, it would be responsible of you to limit all contact with other people until you were sure what their status is,” advises Vally. Check your local health guidelines on when you need to test and when to stop isolating. “A very small percentage of people may test positive beyond seven days because some people have a longer incubation period. But a decision has been made not to keep everyone in quarantine for longer because of that small risk,” Vally says. “This is a numbers game.” My children are under 12. Is it safe for them to see a movie or show without wearing a mask? Again, it’s about levels of risk. “If we are willing to accept some risk,” says Vally, “Then kids pose less of a risk than adults in terms of transmission and getting the virus themselves. It’s not a matter of safe or not safe, it’s just doing what we can to reduce the risks.” What point in my vaccination journey will be the safest time for me to go out? “You shouldn’t assume that just because you had your booster that morning you have increased protection immediately. Wait a few days or a week for it to kick in,” says Vally. “If you’ve already had two doses, you have fantastic protection against severe disease, and the booster is giving you even more.” Can I dance if I stay 1.5m away from anyone else? It depends on the ever-changing restrictions in your state – but if you’re going to that kind of event, take all reasonable precautions. “I hate to quote Greg Hunt, but don’t go into a moshpit,” says Vally. “Don’t do anything silly. If you’re outdoors you are safer … but if it was me, in the middle of a pandemic, I’d keep my distance and not dance among other people for the next few weeks at least.” There are now new indoor hospitality and entertainment density limits in Victoria and some in NSW, except for theatres and cinemas – why is that? Are they safer than other venues? The new rules recognise that theatres and cinemas are more of a “controlled environment” where people are not mingling, like they might be in a pub or nightclub. “In theatres and cinemas, people are masked and mostly seated in one place inside a well-ventilated indoor environment,” Vally says. “It is a pragmatic decision to help people get back to something close to normal.” I tested positive the day after being in the audience. What should I do? Firstly, do what the rules require you to do. “It would be a courtesy to let the theatre know, but the state health departments should do that and they need to factor in whether any further action is required,” Vally says. There is a glimmer of hope. “It’s been a long two years but we are turning the corner and we will be able to do everything again,” he says. “But we have to get through the period we are in right now. We are not in a no-risk environment now, there needs to be a level of tolerance. But it’s about not taking unnecessary risks.” Can you summarise all that for me? In short, your risk is cumulative. Think about going to the theatre or a cinema as involving a series of activities that all have risks associated with them: you have opportunities to reduce your risk. Wear the best possible mask and keep it on in the foyer. Limit your time in the foyer (stand outside) and limit the time with your mask off (skip the wine or the popcorn). Make sure you socially distance when you file into your seat and when you’re leaving the theatre, and don’t be shy asking people around you to remember to pop their masks back on. The aisles are high-risk bottleneck areas. Avoid queues. Do not lower your mask inside when the lights go down: keep it on. Think about how you travel to the theatre and how you get home. And think about other people too.I’ve always been susceptible to bouts of nostalgia. Defined as “sentimental longing for the past”, nostalgia was originally identified as an emotion afflicting people who were separated from their homeland – a familiar feeling to someone who called four cities and two countries home by the age of 12. Modern researchers say nostalgia is experienced more or less the same way by everyone – across countries, ages and genders. “When people experience nostalgia, what they typically are doing is bringing to mind and revisiting memories that are special to them, or cherished, or particularly meaningful,” says Clay Routledge, a psychological scientist and professor at North Dakota State University. Nostalgia appears to have become more prevalent in recent years – from political slogans that appeal to an idealised past to the rerelease of old video games on current devices. Streams of old music increased dramatically during the pandemic; sales of cassette tapes, records and their associated paraphernalia are booming; and even wired headphones are back, according to the Wall Street Journal (just a few months after I finally gave into their wireless counterparts). So what is driving this wave? There are two main triggers of nostalgia, Routledge says. The first are the “sensory inputs” that pull you back into a past experience. I have a plastic toy from my childhood with a very particular smell that for some reason lives in a tin inside my wardrobe. Whenever I open it and breathe in, I am transported instantly back to my bedroom at age six. The same thing might happen when you hear an old song on the radio or if you see a friend post an old photo on social media. The second are psychological triggers, such as loneliness, sadness, anxiety or a lack of meaning in life. “When you’re feeling sad, that makes you more inclined to reflect nostalgically on the past because nostalgia helps you cope with those states,” Routledge says. Nick Bowman, an associate professor of journalism and creative media industries at Texas Tech University, told my colleague Josh Nicholas that playing old video games from your childhood can be a powerful short-term stress release. “In our research we found that people who have social nostalgia memories – memories of playing games with friends in the past – they feel connected to themselves and their friends in the past, and they also feel connected in the present,” Bowman says. The human tendency towards nostalgia has been amplified by rapid technological change. A lot of change has occurred in how we experience sensory inputs – advances in communication tools, photography, the way we watch films and listen to music, which create sensorially rich experiences. Take the old-school mixtape, something that involves spending a bunch of time listening to music you love,to create something unique for someone you love. You can see how you might become nostalgic for such an emotionally heightened experience. And as Routledge points out, “a fair amount of [social media] is geared towards helping people connect with old friends or to share memories, and have these kinds of nostalgic experiences”. Then there is the psychological component. “As much as we like personal growth and development, we also have an orientation towards stability,” Routledge says. “We don’t want the world to feel chaotic … like the way things were five years ago is dramatically different from the way things are now. “And so I think one of the things that rapid technological change can do is make people feel that sense of disorientation or discontinuity.” Add the disruption and extreme changes wrought by the pandemic and you have the ideal psychological soup for nostalgia to arise. “It’s not any type of change – what we found is it’s specifically changes that make us anxious, or negative emotional changes,” Routledge says. “If it feels like a change that’s positive, then that’s fine, but when people feel disconnected in some important way, alienated or they’re just uncertain about the future, they tend to become more nostalgic.” This isn’t necessarily a bad thing, he says. While nostalgia can sometimes be a “barrier to progress” by painting a too-rosy and inaccurate picture of the past that can be “twisted and perverted by politicians”, he says we generally don’t really want to return to the past. “A lot of times, really at the core of it, is seeking some wisdom from the past – that we’ve lost something that maybe we can rehabilitate. People don’t really want to give up modern medicine, they don’t really want to give up automobiles, they don’t want to give up the social progress we’ve made on most things … “What appears to be going on is nostalgia helps restore that feeling of stability. It gives people kind of the confidence, I think, to move forward.”