Ever since governments in Australia started sharing the vaccination status of those people unfortunate enough to have died due to Covid, or to require treatment in an intensive care unit, this information has been taken out of context. The numbers often show that of the people who died, or are in the ICU, a significant number had been vaccinated. Social media accounts of people who routinely share anti-vaccine misinformation, including some politicians, have taken this information out of context to present a false narrative that vaccines are ineffective. However, there’s a simple reason that the argument from anti-vaxxers is wrong – and a relatively simple thing that governments could do to give people important context around these numbers. When the number of vaccinated and unvaccinated people who have died, or ended up in ICU, is shown as a proportion of the total number of people in the state we can clearly see the protective effect of vaccines. Here’s a visual explanation of these “per population rates” using data from the New South Wales government, which publishes figures for deaths and ICU by vaccination status weekly: So because the sheer number of vaccinated people is far larger than the number of unvaccinated people, the total number of “breakthrough” cases outnumbers the number of cases among unvaccinated people. This also means that total number of severe outcomes is potentially going to be larger. However, when these numbers are put into context as proportions of the total number of people in the state, the protective effect of vaccines is obvious. When you plot the data as a proportion of cases by age group, you can see that although the risk goes up with age, it also shows vaccinated people of all age groups are less likely to die or require treatment in intensive care if they catch Covid: Notes and methods Showing these rates is only possible as the NSW government publishes much more detailed information than the federal government or other jurisdictions in its weekly surveillance reports, and makes a hospitalisation and ICU rate for vaccinated and unvaccinated people available in the Covid-19 Critical Intelligence Unit report. As far as I’m aware, no other state or territory has published these outcomes as a per population rate, and the federal health department was unable to provide a national figure when asked, saying it was a matter for individual states and territories. Cases, deaths and ICU numbers by age and vaccination status are from table 7 of the NSW weekly surveillance report. These were aggregated to the 10-plus and 50-plus age groups for the above graphics. Vaccination numbers for the 12-plus and 50-plus groups were averaged from federal health vaccination statistics between 26 November and 1 January. There is a mismatch in the age brackets between the two datasets, but the impact of this is likely to be negligible as there were only five serious outcomes in total in the 10-19 age bracket. Thanks to Gideon Meyerowitz-Katz from the University of Wollongong for providing feedback on an earlier version of this graphic, and any errors remain my fault. You can contact me at nick.evershed@theguardian.com to report any issuesBoris Johnson has been accused of taking a reckless approach to public health by failing to take enough action to get jabs to 3 billion unvaccinated people in poorer countries while lifting all plan B Covid restrictions in England. The prime minister has robustly defended his record on the pandemic this week while awaiting the findings of the Sue Gray report on the “partygate” scandal, insisting he “got the big calls right” on the biggest global health crisis in a century. But now more than 300 leading scientists, health experts and academics have said his failure to take sufficient action to boost vaccination levels worldwide means it is more likely new variants will put thousands of lives at risk across the UK. “We write to you as scientists, academics, and public health experts concerned about the emergence of the Omicron variant and the threat that future variants may pose to public health, the NHS, and the UK’s vaccination programme,” they said in a two-page letter delivered to 10 Downing Street. “Vaccinating the vast majority of the world’s population is the best way to prevent Sars-CoV-2 from mutating. However, as the UK has provided booster doses to up to 1 million people every day, more than 3 billion people across the world have yet to receive their first dose. More boosters have been delivered in rich countries than the total number of all doses administered so far in poorer nations. “Allowing huge numbers of people in low- and middle-income countries to remain unvaccinated is a reckless approach to public health that creates conditions where new Sars-CoV-2 variants of concern are more likely to develop.” Laura Merson, a signatory of the letter and associate director of the Infectious Diseases Data Observatory at the University of Oxford, said protection provided by boosters would be “critically limited” while most of the world remained unvaccinated. “The easing of plan B restrictions may give the impression that the pandemic is coming to an end,” she said. “But this won’t be over until we address the risk of new variants at the root – in populations that have not had access to vaccines.” The letter has been signed in a personal capacity by 13 members of Johnson’s Sage committee and subcommittees, a fellow at the UK Health Security Agency and an adviser to the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. Nigel Crisp, the former chief executive of the NHS in England, Nobel prize winner Sir Richard Roberts, and several World Health Organization advisers are also among the signatories. They called on Johnson to allow low- and middle-income countries to manufacture Covid vaccines, tests, and treatments for themselves. Vaccinating the vast majority of the world’s population was the best way to prevent further coronavirus variants of concern, they added, including variants that could be more infectious or render current vaccines less effective. They urged the prime minister to put public health before the interests of the pharmaceutical industry “to prevent another year of uncertainty and tragedy” by supporting international efforts to suspend intellectual property rules that stop lower-income nations from manufacturing vaccines, tests, and treatments. Vaccines will not be effective at stopping new variants of concern from arising “unless we share this technology with the world and increase global vaccination coverage”, they added in the letter coordinated by science and health experts working with groups including Global Justice Now. Crisp said: “Throughout this pandemic, the government has pledged that it will follow the science. The scientific evidence has been clear since the start of the pandemic that the best way to keep ourselves and our NHS safe from new variants is to vaccinate the world. “However laudable donations of vaccines might be, they will never be enough to end the pandemic. There is untapped manufacturing capacity in the very nations that need vaccines and treatments most. For the sake of people’s lives in those countries and our own, we must use it.” Maryam Shahmanesh, professor of global health at UCL, added: “By ignoring the demands of low- and middle-income countries and stifling global vaccine production with arbitrary intellectual property rules, the government risks prolonging the pandemic and endangering countless lives. We need a complete step-change if we are to bring this pandemic to an end for everyone.” • This article was amended on 28 January 2022 to clarify that the accusation of recklessness made in the letter was in relation to the failure to get vaccinations to poorer countries.Inflo, the genre-straddling producer known for work with Adele, Little Simz and Michael Kiwanuka, has been announced as producer of the year in 2022’s Brit awards. It is the first time a non-white artist has won the award since the inception of the Brits in 1977. “I feel honoured to be a part of change,” said Inflo, whose real name is Dean Josiah Cover. “All the Black producers before me, I’m in awe and have studied you. I am you. Thank you for both paving the way and for your integral contribution to British music.” Inflo, also a songwriter, musician and label head, came to prominence in 2014 after producing and co-writing the Kooks’ 2014 album Listen. He has since worked on award-winning projects including Michael Kiwanuka’s Mercury-winning 2019 album Kiwanuka. Two of the five albums nominated for album of the year at this year’s Brit awards, Adele’s 30 and Little Simz’ Sometimes I Might Be Introvert, carry credits for Inflo. “Flo is a true creative in every sense of the word,” said Little Simz. “Music is in his DNA. He really loves, lives and breathes this. There is no one more deserving of this award.” Kiwanuka credited him as someone who “helps you find what it is you want to say, and always puts his stamp on the work which always elevates the music”. Alongside his work producing records for other artists, Inflo – who maintains a low public profile – is at the helm of Sault, a semi-anonymous UK collective who explore strands of Black music, culture and history through genre-defying output. The breadth in Sault’s discography, which includes five albums released in two years, is testament to Inflo’s skill as a multidisciplinary artist and collaborator: traces of R&amp;B, soul, funk and house can be heard alongside lo-fi vocal samples and intimate spoken word interludes. All of the group’s work has been released through Inflo’s label Forever Living Originals. Their most recent album Nine, released in June 2021, was a time-limited work, deleted by the group from streaming and download services after 99 days. Also in 2021, he produced the album Mother by soul singer Cleo Sol, who has appeared on Sault recordings. Previous winners of producer of the year include Brian Eno, Peter Gabriel and Calvin Harris. In 2020, the last time it was awarded, it was received by south London-based producer Fred Again. Unlike the other Brit award categories, the producer award is voted by a panel of record label executives rather than the wider industry panel in the Brits Academy, or the public, who are able to vote in four new genre-focused awards this year. Inflo is the first non-white winner of the category in 42 Brit award ceremonies, but there has yet to be a female recipient of the award. Inflo will receive his award at the Brits ceremony on 8 February at the O2 Arena, London. Adele, Ed Sheeran, Little Simz and Dave are top of the nominations, with four each.If you’ve ever signed up to an energy or phone plan, or bought insurance, chances are you’ve logged on to a comparison website in an effort to ensure you’re not being taken for a ride when it comes to rates and premiums. It makes sense: no one wants to get to the end of the year and realise they’ve been paying way more than they need to for electricity, gas, or health, car or life insurance. It’s the very reason why, according to research from Roy Morgan, 3 million Australians visit commercial price comparison websites every month. But while these comparison sites claim to help Australians save money and time, many are actually making handsome commissions from the providers they recommend, driving up market rates and leaving the average Aussie no better off in the long run. A broken system Let’s back it up a bit: commercial comparator sites make a commission from the providers they recommend every time someone signs up for a new policy or plan. Because many policyholders review their energy and insurance plans on an annual basis in pursuit of the best available rate, a single comparison site could feasibly make a commission off the same customer every year. This is called “churn”. How much they make varies. Comparator sites aren’t legally required to disclose their commission models to the public, but here are a couple of examples that illustrate just how lucrative it can be: a 2017 review of comparison sites by Choice found one received up to 60% commission every time it sold a new life insurance product, while another pocketed up to 52% of premiums paid over the expected life of a policy. “[Comparison sites] add absolutely no value,” says Trond Smith, founder of the independent group-buying company Kyco. “The system’s broken and the people paying for it are those that don’t switch – those that are loyal [to a provider]. On the other hand, if you do switch, you’re contributing to the problem.” Seeking an alternative You could be forgiven for thinking the energy and insurance providers recommended by comparison sites are flush with cash as a result. The reality, however, is much murkier: many providers can’t afford to stop participating in the comparison industry, even though they’re copping huge commissions just to get in front of consumers. It’s a vicious cycle. But there is a way out of this mess. “For the consumer to win, we have to be able to make it better for the supplier, too,” Smith says, adding that several providers reached out to them within weeks of Kyco’s launch in November. Rather than charge providers for the privilege of being recommended, Kyco operates on a group-buying model. It negotiates directly with providers based on the number of customers it is sending their way, to maximise discounts and savings across a range of categories, including energy, insurance, phone and internet, and banking. There are no commissions. Instead, Kyco takes a 3% handling fee. “The more people we can take to one supplier, the lower the cost of acquisition for that supplier and the bigger the discount we can pass onto the consumers,” Smith says. Simples! Comparison sites in the crosshairs Kyco isn’t the first to suggest the comparison site industry needs a shake-up. A 2014 investigation into comparator sites by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) expressed concerns about “conduct within the industry that may cause consumer and business harm”. Then, in 2018, an ACCC final report on an inquiry into retail electricity pricing recommended “the Australian Government should prescribe a mandatory code of conduct for third-party intermediaries”. Comparison sites haven’t evaded legal scrutiny, either. Last year, iSelect was fined $8.5m for “making false and misleading representations”, and the ACCC has requested that comparison site Trivago be fined $90m after being found guilty of misleading consumers about its hotel room rates. Making real change Not content to let the legal system do the heavy lifting, Kyco is lobbying the federal government to regulate the commercial comparison industry. Its aim is to see the ACCC’s 2014 recommendations implemented in the near future. If Kyco is successful, comparison sites would be subject to a mandatory code of conduct and penalties for breaches. They’d also be required to disclose any and all commissions, payments and incentives received for recommending a given provider. In a letter sent last month, Smith implored Treasurer John Frydenberg to “promote the best interests of the community and ensure appropriate disclosure of key information”. While he waits for a reply – and, hopefully, meaningful action – Smith says he’ll keep pursuing a fairer deal for Australian consumers. “At the end of the day, these commissions are paid by you and me and everyone that uses electricity, everyone who’s got insurance. It’s a significant amount of money.” Find out more.Russia has said it is willing to continue talks with the US over European security, but is not optimistic about their prospects after Washington and Nato allies again rejected a key part of the Kremlin’s proposed new order for post-cold war security. Tensions have soared in recent weeks as Russia massed more than 100,000 soldiers and heavy weapons at its border with Ukraine, raising fears of an invasion. “We continue to see, including in the last 24 hours, more accumulation of credible combat forces arrayed by the Russians in, again, the western part of their country, and in Belarus,” said John Kirby, the defence department spokesman, on Thursday. Meanwhile, the US is accelerating arms supplies to Ukraine. “We are just at the beginning of a whole new package of assistance material,” Kirby said. “There’s been three shipments. More that will be coming.” Asked about the Ukrainian request for air defence missile systems, Kirby noted that a US air and missile defence assessment team had been in Ukraine recently to discuss the country’s needs. Kirby added: “I think you can understand why we would want to be careful about advertising publicly the kinds of capabilities that we’ve given to Ukraine, given the size and the scale and the capabilities that are arrayed against them on the other side of their border.” Earlier on Thursday, Vladimir Putin’s chief spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said “there isn’t much reason to be optimistic” after the US and Nato rejected Moscow’s demands for a veto on Ukraine’s potential membership of Nato in a coordinated response the day before. Moscow needed time to analyse the US document and would not “rush into assessments”, Peskov added. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow’s main concern – the potential for Ukraine to join Nato – had not been addressed, but there was hope “for the start of a serious conversation on secondary issues”. “There is no positive response in this document on the main issue,” he said. One of Lavrov’s spokespeople appeared to rule out war with Ukraine, in comments that led to a jump in the value of the Russian rouble, as investors gained confidence that conflict could be avoided. “We have already repeatedly stated that our country does not intend to attack anyone. We consider even the thought of a war between our people to be unacceptable,” said Alexei Zaitsev, a spokesman for the foreign ministry. The focus turns again to Putin, who is yet to voice his response and is being briefed on the document. “The most important thing we heard from Moscow today is that the documents are with President Putin, that he is studying them,” the US undersecretary of state for political affairs, Victoria Nuland, said. “From where we’re standing, the ball is in their court, but we are ready for talks … whenever they are ready.” Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, spoke to Joe Biden by telephone on Thursday and said he thanked the US president for ongoing military assistance. “Possibilities for financial support to Ukraine were also discussed,” Zelenskiy said in a tweet after the call. Struggling to access private funds, Ukraine intends to seek $5bn (£3.7bn) in loans from governments and international institutions. According to the White House account of the call, Biden noted the US had provided Ukraine with over half a billion dollars in development and humanitarian assistance over the past year, and was “exploring additional macroeconomic support to help Ukraine’s economy amidst pressure resulting from Russia’s military buildup”. Zelenskiy gave an upbeat assessment on the latest diplomatic moves, noting that his diplomats would meet counterparts from Russia, Germany and France in two weeks’ time in Berlin. Diplomats from the four countries met in Paris on Wednesday and agreed to continue talking. Ukraine has been seeking to downplay reports of an imminent attack by Russia. One of Zelenskiy’s aides told Reuters the borderline “hysteria” about a Russian attack was hindering Kyiv’s attempts to borrow on international capital markets. On a visit to Copenhagen, seeking to marshal support from Nato member Denmark, Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, gave his approval of the US response to Russia. Ukraine, he said, had seen it before it was hand-delivered to Russia’s embassy in Washington. Kuleba emphasised his country’s need for stronger defences and a unified position from the west on economic sanctions. “This crisis is a moment of truth, and this is why we speak about weapons,” he said. “This is why we speak about economic sanctions. This is why we speak about the consolidated position of all of us, so that President Putin sees that there are no weak links in our defensive chain.” Pressure on Russia grew after Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, gave a strong indication that the Nord Steam 2 gas pipeline would be part of the sanctions package if Moscow ordered an invasion. “We are working on a strong package of sanctions” with western allies, and it covers several aspects “including Nord Stream 2”, Baerbock told the Bundestag. In Washington, Nuland restated the US position on Nord Stream 2’s cancellation. “We continue to have very strong and clear conversations with our German allies,” she told reporters. “And I want to be clear with you today: if Russia invades Ukraine, one way or another Nord Stream 2 will not move forward.”Baerbock reaffirmed that Germany would not lift its export ban on weapons, despite pressure from allies. Germany faced criticism from the mayor of Kyiv, Vitali Klitschko, who described Berlin’s offer to send 5,000 military helmets as a joke. Estonia is waiting for permission from the German government to export howitzer guns to Ukraine that were originally made in the Soviet Union, stationed in East Germany, then after German reunification exported to Finland, which passed them on to Estonia. “On the political side, the consultations on sanctions, as well as the military side, giving the Ukrainians additional armaments is all geared towards raising the price of potential aggression,” said the Estonian ambassador to the US, Kristjan Prikk. Meanwhile, Russia has suspended international monitoring of its military exercises which is required under a 1990 agreement called the Vienna Document. The suspension is to last until 28 February so will cover drills in Belarus, which have caused alarm because they include well-equipped combat units from the far east of Russia. “The reason cited by Russia was another wave of the Covid pandemics,” said Łukasz Jasina, a spokesman for the foreign ministry of Poland, which is chairing the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Jasina noted that many states had suspended verification during the pandemic. However, another European official said Russia routinely found ways around the verification obligations. “Considering the currently tense security situation, it is an especially negative signal that speaks volumes,” the official said. “It also raises the question of whether arms control should even be a point of discussion between the west and Russia, whose real actions are based on neither transparency nor reciprocity. “Were there any real concerns about Covid, there wouldn’t be a gathering of thousands of troops from various locations.”Alisson was sent off and reprieved by VAR twice during Brazil’s wild and chaotic 1-1 draw with Ecuador in a World Cup qualifier. The Liverpool goalkeeper somehow managed to complete the game in Quito, during which two players were given their marching orders inside the opening 20 minutes. Casemiro put Brazil ahead in the fifth minute when he hammered home from close range after a goalmouth scramble before the red cards started coming out. The Ecuador goalkeeper Alexander Domínguez was sent off for a reckless challenge before the Tottenham right-back Emerson Royal was dismissed for a second yellow card following a clumsy challenge. Alisson was handed his first lifeline on the the half-hour when he caught Enner Valencia in the head with a high boot. The referee was sent to the pitchside monitor and downgraded the initial red card to yellow after replays showed the keeper had kicked the ball first. Felix Torres headed Ecuador level 15 minutes from time and the hosts looked to have a chance to win the game in stoppage time when they were awarded a penalty after Alisson appeared to punch one of their players in the head as he bore down on goal. The Brazil keeper was shown a second yellow card, before the decision was again overturned on the advice of VAR. For the second time in the match the referee ruled Alisson had played the ball first, but on both occasions he could consider himself fortunate. Brazil, five times world champions, have already qualified for this year’s finals in Qatar along with Argentina. Ecuador are third in the 10-nation South American qualifying standings with 24 points from 15 games, seven points ahead of Colombia and Peru, who have a game in hand. The top four qualify automatically for the World Cup while the fifth-placed side go into a play-off with a team from the Asian confederation.Joe Biden spoke to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy this afternoon. The call came one day after the US delivered its written response to Russia’s demands on Ukraine, as Vladimir Putin builds up his troop presence along the border. Zelenskiy said he and Biden discussed recent diplomatic efforts to avoid a Russian invasion and the Ukrainian president thanked his American counterpart for ongoing US military assistance. The US has asked the UN security council to meet and discuss Russia’s threats to Ukraine. “The members of the security council must squarely examine the facts and consider what is at stake for Ukraine, for Russia, for Europe, and for the core obligations and principles of the international order should Russia further invade Ukraine,” said Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the US ambassador to the UN. Supreme court Justice Stephen Breyer confirmed he will retire after more than 27 years on the bench. In a letter to Biden, Breyer said he will officially step down when the court adjourns for its summer recess in late June or early July. Breyer’s departure will give Biden his first supreme court seat to fill. Biden reiterated his commitment to nominating a Black woman to the court, which will mark a historic first for the US. Appearing at the White House alongside Breyer, Biden said, “I‘ve made no decision except one. The person I will nominate will be someone with extraordinary qualifications, character, experience and integrity and that person will be the first Black woman ever nominated to the United States supreme court.” The White House said Kamala Harris will play a “central role” in selecting the supreme court nominee. “The vice-president will play a central role in this process and the president intends to consult with her very closely,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. “Obviously, she has a long history as a former attorney general, as a member of the judiciary committee and he respects her opinion greatly.” – Joan E Greve and Maanvi Singh After flouting local health guidelines to dine inside a New York restaurant after testing positive for Covid-19, former Alaska governor Sarah Palin has reportedly returned to the restaurant. The Washington Post reports: Elio’s, an Italian restaurant on the Upper East Side, has faced blowback after Palin dined indoors at the establishment on Saturday, in violation of the city’s dining mandate for people to show proof of vaccination. The Manhattan judge in Palin’s defamation trial against the New York Times revealed Monday that the proceedings would be delayed because the Republican tested positive for the virus. It’s unclear when Palin first tested positive. Even though local guidelines advise people who test positive to be in isolation for five days after their positive test, Palin returned to the restaurant on Wednesday night. In photos posted to Mediaite, the first to report the news, the former Republican vice-presidential nominee, who has said she would only get vaccinated against the coronavirus “over my dead body,” was seen dining at a heated outdoor area of the restaurant. The city’s vaccine requirement does not apply for outdoor dining. Luca Guaitolini, a manager for the restaurant, told CNN that Palin dined outdoors on Wednesday so that staff could be protected against infection. Here’s more context: After a Tennessee school board banned the teaching of the Holocaust novel Maus, grabbing international headlines, it responded in a statement defending its decision, saying the novel was removed from the curriculum because “of its unnecessary use of profanity and nudity and its depiction of violence and suicide.” The board said the book was “too adult-oriented” for use in its schools. The board’s decision to remove the Pulitzer Prize-winning graphic novel, which depicts author Art Spiegelman interviewing his father about his experiences in a Nazi concentration camp, comes on Holocaust Remembrance Day, amid a recent rise in antisemitic incidents. It also comes as conservative school boards across the country move to ban the teaching the history of slavery and racism, sex and LGBTQ issues. Read more: The White House is disputing reporting that Biden told Zelenskiy a Russian invasion was certain. The report is “completely false”, said national security council spokesperson Emily Horne. “President Biden said that there is a distinct possibility that the Russians could invade Ukraine in February,” she said. “Reports of anything more or different than that are completely false.” The US has asked the UN security council to meet and discuss Russia’s threats to Ukraine. “The members of the security council must squarely examine the facts and consider what is at stake for Ukraine, for Russia, for Europe, and for the core obligations and principles of the international order should Russia further invade Ukraine,” said Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the US ambassador to the UN. “This is not a moment to wait and see. The council’s full attention is needed now, and we look forward to direct and purposeful discussion on Monday,” she said. Since Russia is a veto-wielding member of the security council, the group has not been able to take any action following its several previous meetings on the Ukraine crisis. In a readout of Joe Biden’s call with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the US president, “underscored the commitment of the United States to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity” and reaffirmed a readiness to “ respond decisively if Russia further invades Ukraine”. “President Biden noted the United States has provided Ukraine with over half a billion dollars in development and humanitarian assistance in the last year, and is exploring additional macroeconomic support to help Ukraine’s economy amidst pressure resulting from Russia’s military build-up,” per the read-out. Here’s not in the official statement: A Ukrainian official told CNN that Biden was anticipating that an invasion is certain, and told Zelenskiy to prepare. As my Guardian colleagues reported earlier today, Russia is, for now, open to more talks but the stakes have escalated: Russia has said it is willing to continue talks with the US over European security, but is not optimistic about their prospects after Washington and Nato allies again rejected a key part of Russia’s proposed new order for post-cold war security. Tensions have soared in recent weeks as Russia massed more than 100,000 soldiers and heavy weapons at its border with Ukraine, raising fears of an invasion. “We continue to see, including in the last 24 hours, more accumulation of credible combat forces arrayed by the Russians in again, the western part of their country, and in Belarus,” said John Kirby the defence department spokesman on Thursday. Alaska’s governor Mike Dunleavy has joined Texas governor Greg Abbott in suing the Biden administration and the Department of Defense over a vaccine mandate for the National Guard. From the AP: The Pentagon has required COVID-19 vaccination for all service members, including the National Guard and Reserve. Attorneys for the two governors, in an amended lawsuit dated Tuesday, say that when National Guard members are serving the state, the federal government has no command authority. The lawsuit said the mandate is an unconstitutional overstepping of bounds. The case dealing with Alaska and Texas guard members is an amended version of the challenge filed by Texas earlier this month. More than 220 members of the Texas Air National Guard and about 40% of Texas Army National Guard members are refusing to be vaccinated for “either religious accommodation needs or otherwise,” according to the lawsuit. About 8% of Alaska Air and Army National Guard members have not received a first dose of any COVID-19 vaccine and of these members, “more than 90% have requested a medical or religious exemption, yet no such exemptions have been granted.” “A small number of additional Alaska National Guard members are refusing any COVID-19 vaccine,” the lawsuit said. The lawsuit names as defendants President Joe Biden, the Department of Defense and military officials. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden spoke to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy this afternoon. The call came one day after the US delivered its written response to Russia’s demands on Ukraine, as Vladimir Putin builds up his troop presence along the border. Zelenskiy said he and Biden discussed recent diplomatic efforts to avoid a Russian invasion and the Ukrainian president thanked his American counterpart for ongoing US military assistance. Supreme court Justice Stephen Breyer confirmed he will retire after more than 27 years on the bench. In a letter to Joe Biden, Breyer said he will officially step down when the court adjourns for its summer recess in late June or early July. Breyer’s departure will give Biden his first supreme court seat to fill. Biden reiterated his commitment to nominating a Black woman to the court, which will mark a historic first for the US. Appearing at the White House alongside Breyer, Biden said, “I‘ve made no decision except one. The person I will nominate will be someone with extraordinary qualifications, character, experience and integrity and that person will be the first Black woman ever nominated to the United States supreme court.” The White House said Kamala Harris will play a “central role” in selecting the supreme court nominee. “The vice-president will play a central role in this process and the president intends to consult with her very closely,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. “Obviously, she has a long history as a former attorney general, as a member of the judiciary committee and he respects her opinion greatly.” Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said that Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s team had seen the US response to Russia’s demands before it was delivered to the Kremlin yesterday. “No objections on the Ukrainian side,” Kuleba said in a tweet earlier today. “Important that the U.S. remains in close contact with Ukraine before and after all contacts with Russia. No decisions on Ukraine without Ukraine. Golden rule.” Joe Biden and Zelenskiy likely discussed the US response during their phone call this afternoon as well. In its response, the White House made clear it still supports Ukraine’s right to pursue Nato membership. Volodymyr Zelenskiy and Joe Biden spoke by phone this afternoon about the ongoing efforts to deescalate tensions at Ukraine’s border and avoid a Russian invasion. “Had a long phone conversation with @POTUS. Discussed recent diplomatic efforts on de-escalation and agreed on joint actions for the future,” the Ukrainian president said on Twitter. “Thanked President @JoeBiden for the ongoing military assistance. Possibilities for financial support to Ukraine were also discussed.” Biden and Zelenskiy were expected to speak this afternoon, but the White House has not yet released its own readout of the conversation. The call came one day after the US delivered its written response to Russia’s demands on Ukraine, as Vladimir Putin builds up troop presence along the border. In its response, the White House made clear that it still supports Ukraine’s right to pursue Nato membership. The Guardian’s Jennifer Rankin and Julian Borger report: Russia has said it is willing to continue talks with the US over European security, but is not optimistic about their prospects after Washington and Nato allies again rejected a key part of Russia’s proposed new order for post-cold war security. On Thursday, Vladimir Putin’s chief spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said “there isn’t much reason to be optimistic” after the US and Nato rejected Moscow’s demands for a veto on Ukraine’s potential membership of Nato in a co-ordinated response the day before. Moscow needed time to analyse the US document and would not “rush into assessments”, Peskov added. Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow’s main concern – the potential for Ukraine to join Nato – had not been addressed, but there was hope “for the start of a serious conversation on secondary issues”. “There is no positive response in this document on the main issue,” he said. One of Lavrov’s spokespeople appeared to rule out war with Ukraine, in comments that led to a jump in the value of the Russian rouble, as investors gained confidence that conflict could be avoided. Joe Biden met with Norwegian Prime Minister Jonas Gahr Store in Washington today to discuss the diplomatic efforts to avoid a Russian invasion of Ukraine. “The two discussed joint efforts, including through Nato and the OSCE, to address Russia’s destabilizing military buildup along Ukraine’s borders,” the White House said in its readout of the meeting. “They also discussed enhancing the US-Norway partnership in tackling a range of challenges, including climate change, ending the Covid-19 pandemic and establishing sustainable health security financing, and humanitarian support for Afghanistan. President Biden thanked the Prime Minister for Norway’s leadership as president of the UN security council this month.” Biden was also expected to speak to the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, this afternoon, but the White House has not yet released any readout from that conversation. Senator Joe Manchin said today that he would feel comfortable supporting a supreme court nominee who may be more liberal than he is. In an interview with West Virginia MetroNews’s Hoppy Kercheval, Manchin said he takes the process of considering a supreme court nominee very seriously and looked forward to meeting the person chosen by Joe Biden. “It’s not too hard to get more liberal than me. So, it would not bother me having a person who was sound in their thought process, had been sound in their disbursement of justice and the rule of law, just because their personal beliefs [are different than mine],” Manchin said. “As far as just the philosophical beliefs, no, that will not prohibit me from supporting somebody.” Because of the 50-50 split in the Senate, Biden’s supreme court nominee will need the support of every Democratic member to get confirmed (assuming all Republicans oppose confirmation), so Manchin’s vote is crucial. Joe Biden’s confirmation that he is still studying the résumés of supreme court candidates and has yet to make his pick will do little to settle nerves among progressives still smarting from Donald Trump’s three supreme court appointments. Many Democrats want the president to emulate the warp speed with which the Trump administration drove through the confirmation of Amy Coney Barrett in less than six weeks following Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s death in September 2020. The Washington Post, citing an anonymous source, said that the majority leader in the Senate, Chuck Schumer, is aiming for a similar timeline. Replacing Breyer with a like-minded justice is seen by many Democrats as critical in preserving the already beleaguered rump of liberals on the bench. The retiring justice is one of only three such individuals on the nine-justice court, and they are so outnumbered that the country now faces drastic changes in several key areas from abortion to guns and affirmative action. Despite the pressure for haste among his party’s members, Biden insisted that he would be “rigorous” in choosing the nominee. He would listen to advice from senators and meet candidates, indicating a selection process that is likely to take weeks not days. Jen Psaki also criticized some Republicans who are already attacking Joe Biden’s supreme court nominee as “radical”, even though they do not yet know who the nominee will be. “As you heard the president say directly, he’s going to work in good faith with senators of both parties,” the White House press secretary said at her daily briefing. But Psaki added that it was important to be clear about some of the “games” Republicans are already playing as Biden begins the search for a nominee to replace Stephen Breyer on the supreme court. “We have not mentioned a single name. We have not put out a list. The president made it very clear he has not made a selection,” Psaki said. “If anyone is saying they plan to characterize whoever he nominates, after thorough consideration with both parties, as radical before they know literally anything about who she is, they just obliterated their own credibility.” Psaki reiterated that Biden is committed to consulting with members of both parties to ensure his nominee is “worthy of the excellence and decency of Breyer’s legacy”. Vice-President Kamala Harris is expected to play a “central role” as Joe Biden selects his nominee to replace Stephen Breyer on the supreme court, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. A reporter at the daily White House briefing asked Psaki which members of the Biden administration will be closely involved in the search for a supreme court nominee. “The vice-president will play a central role in this process, and the President intends to consult with her very closely,” Psaki replied. “Obviously, she has a long history as a former attorney general, as a member of the judiciary committee, and he respects her opinion greatly.” The press secretary noted that White House chief of staff Ron Klain and some of Biden’s senior advisers, including Cedric Richmond, will also be involved in the process. Harris had been mentioned as a potential choice for Biden’s nominee, but the White House has downplayed that possibility, saying the president and the vice-president look forward to running for reelection together in 2024. Russia remains open but ‘not optimistic’ over Ukraine talks The White House has said it will have a read out later this afternoon after US President Joe Biden is expected to speak to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. The call is being described by the White House as a ‘check in’ rather than about a specific announcement. Meanwhile, Jennifer Rankin in Brussels and Julian Borger in Washington DC have the latest news wrap on the diplomacy. They report: ‘Russia has said it is willing to continue talks with the US over European security, but is not optimistic about their prospects after Washington and Nato allies again rejected a key part of Russia’s proposed new order for post-cold war security. Tensions have soared in recent weeks as Russia massed more than 100,000 soldiers and heavy weapons at its border with Ukraine, raising fears of an invasion. On Thursday, Vladimir Putin’s chief spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said “there isn’t much reason to be optimistic” after the US and Nato rejected Moscow’s demands for a veto on Ukraine’s potential membership of Nato in a co-ordinated response the day before.’ Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow’s main concern – the potential for Ukraine to join Nato – had not been addressed, but there was hope “for the start of a serious conversation on secondary issues”.’ Republican party will ‘expose Biden’s nominee’ – RNC chair says Ronna McDaniel, chairwoman of the Republican National Committee (RNC), has been giving her reaction on Twitter to the Breyer and Biden press conference. She says the RNC will do “everything in our power to expose Biden’s nominee” and suggests the president will “nominate an activist judge” who will “rubber-stamp the far left’s political agenda” on the court. The court has a 6-3 conservative majority. Earlier this month McDaniel warned how the Republican party could withdraw from traditional presidential televised debates, claiming they are biased against its candidates. Here’s where the day stands so far: Supreme court Justice Stephen Breyer confirmed he will retire after more than 27 years on the bench. In a letter to Joe Biden, Breyer said he will officially step down when the court adjourns for its summer recess in late June or early July. Breyer’s departure will give Biden his first supreme court seat to fill. Biden reiterated his commitment to nominating a Black woman to the court, which will mark a historic first for the US. Appearing at the White House alongside Breyer, Biden said, “I‘ve made no decision except one. The person I will nominate will be someone with extraordinary qualifications, character, experience and integrity, and that person will be the first Black woman ever nominated to the United States supreme court.” Meanwhile, Biden is expected to speak to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy this afternoon. The conversation comes one day after the US delivered its written response to Russia’s demands on Ukraine, as Vladimir Putin eyes a potential invasion of the neighboring country. In its response, the White House made clear that it still supports Ukraine’s right to pursue Nato membership. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Officially announcing his retirement from the supreme court, Stephen Breyer emphasized the importance of following the principles of the US Constitution to ensure the health of American democracy. Holding up his pocket Constitution, Breyer said he often gives lectures to students about the court, and he expressed optimism about America’s future, despite the current divisions in the country. “Of course people don’t agree. But we have a country that is based on human rights, democracy and so forth,” Breyer said. “I’ll tell you what Lincoln thought and Washington thought and what people today still think: it’s an experiment.” Breyer noted that his wife, Joanna, paid each of their grandchildren to memorize Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address to help them understand the value of this “experiment”. “We are now engaged in a great civil war to determine whether that nation or any nation so conceived and so dedicated can long endure,” Breyer said. “My grandchildren and their children, they’ll determine whether the experiment still works. And of course, I am an optimist, and I’m pretty sure it will.” Joe Biden said this was a “bittersweet” day for him, as Justice Stephen Breyer announces his retirement from the supreme court after more than 27 years of service. The president noted that he oversaw Breyer’s confirmation process in 1994, as Biden was chairman of the Senate judiciary committee when President Bill Clinton nominated Breyer for his post. “I think he’s a model public servant, in a time of great division in this country,” Biden said. “Justice Breyer has been everything his country could have asked him.” Joe Biden applauded Justice Stephen Breyer’s work on the supreme court over the past 27 years, and he pledged to nominate someone who would follow in his footsteps. The president also reiterated his commitment to nominating a Black woman to the supreme court, which will mark a historic first for the US. “I‘ve made no decision except one,” Biden said of his chosen nominee. “The person I will nominate will be someone with extraordinary qualifications, character, experience and integrity, and that person will be the first Black woman ever nominated to the United States supreme court.” Biden said it was “long overdue” to have a Black woman on the high court, adding, “I made that commitment during the campaign for president, and I will keep that commitment.” While he has not yet chosen his nominee, Biden said he will review candidates’ qualifications and make a decision “before the end of February”. Joe Biden and Stephen Breyer have now appeared in the White House’s Roosevelt Room to address the supreme court justice’s retirement. The president kicked off the president by recounting Breyer’s decades of service with the court, thanking him for his devotion to upholding the Constitution. “I’m here today to express the nation’s gratitude to Justice Stephen Breyer for his remarkable career of public service and his clear-eyed commitment to making our country’s laws work for its people,” Biden said. The letter from Stephen Breyer to Joe Biden was dated today, although news of the supreme court justice’s retirement leaked out yesterday. “I enormously appreciate the privilege of serving as part of the federal judicial system - nearly 14 years as a Court of Appeals Judge and nearly 28 years as a Member of the Supreme Court,” Breyer wrote in the letter. “I have found the work challenging and meaningful. My relations with each of my colleagues have been warm and friendly. Throughout, I’ve been aware of the great honor of participating as a judge in the effort to maintain our Constitution and the rule of law.” Justice Stephen Breyer has confirmed that he will retire from the supreme court, after serving on the bench for more than 27 years. Breyer made the news official in a letter to Joe Biden, in which the liberal justice said he will step down once the court adjourns for its summer recess in late June or early July. News of Breyer’s retirement broke yesterday, but neither he nor the White House would confirm his plans until today. Breyer’s retirement gives Biden his first supreme court vacancy, and the president has promised to nominate a Black woman for the seat, which would mark a historic first for the US. Biden has not yet announced his nominee. With Democrats in control of the Senate, which oversees supreme court nominations, Biden’s nominee is expected to be confirmed relatively easily. Biden and Breyer are scheduled to appear together at the White House at any moment, so stay tuned. Dick Durbin, the chairman of the Senate judiciary committee, said he spoke to White House chief of staff Ron Klain yesterday morning about Stephen Breyer’s retirement. According to Durbin, Klain said the White House does not yet have a nominee for Breyer’s replacement, although the administration is “in the process” of selecting the person. “It’s little early to predict a timetable for this hearing,” Durbin said, per CNN. House majority whip Jim Clyburn suggested that South Carolina judge Michelle Childs could potentially attract some Republican support if she were nominated to replace Stephen Breyer on the supreme court. “We have two Republican senators from South Carolina. Both of them know Michelle Childs very well, and both of them have spoken highly of her. And the Republicans all over this state think that she is an outstanding jurist,” Clyburn said during a Washington Post live event. Clyburn added that Childs’ professional experience and background are unrivaled, saying, “I think that Republicans appreciate that as much as Democrats.” Clyburn, whose endorsement was crucial for Biden in the South Carolina primary during the 2020 election, has been saying for at least a year that Childs would make an excellent addition to the court. Joe Biden promised during the 2020 presidential campaign that he would nominate a Black woman to the supreme court, which would mark a historic first for the US. Here are some of the women considered leading contenders for the seat: Ketanji Brown Jackson: Born in Washington DC and raised in Miami, Florida, Jackson has been a judge of the US court of appeals for the DC circuit since June 2021 after the 51-year-old Harvard graduate replaced the attorney general, Merrick Garland. The DC circuit has historically been seen as a stepping stone to the supreme court. Leondra Kruger: A native of Los Angeles, Kruger is an associate justice of the supreme court of California. The 45-year-old was previously the acting principal deputy solicitor general under the Barack Obama administration. Supreme court justice Elena Kagan once called Kruger “one of the best advocates in the Department of Justice”. J Michelle Childs: Childs is currently serving as a district judge of the US district court for the district of South Carolina. Appointed by Obama in 2009, the 55-year-old Detroit native has also been nominated by Biden for a seat on the DC circuit court of appeals. Childs was also the first Black woman to become a partner at Nexsen Pruet, LLC, one of South Carolina’s major law firms. Read the full list of likely contenders here: Once Stephen Breyer confirms his plans to retire from the supreme court, Senate Democrats are expected to move quickly to confirm his replacement. Despite the 50-50 split in the Senate, Democrats will likely be able to confirm Breyer’s successor to the court with relative ease. Joe Biden’s nominee will need the support of all 50 Democratic senators. Although Senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema have helped to block key components of Biden’s legislative agenda, they have generally deferred to the president when it comes to judicial nominations and are expected to support confirmation. Joe Biden will deliver remarks this afternoon on the retirement of supreme court Justice Stephen Breyer, the White House has just announced. Breyer will be in attendance for the 12.30pm ET event, and the liberal justice is expected to confirm his planned retirement. News of Breyer’s retirement broke yesterday, but neither he nor the White House would officially confirm his plans until now. The Guardian’s Martin Farrer and Kate Connolly report: The Nord Stream 2 pipeline between Russia and Germany will not move forward if Russia invades Ukraine, the US state department has said, in a significant strengthening of the west’s previous position on the strategically vital gas supply. As tension ratcheted up over Russia’s military buildup on its neighbour’s eastern border, state department spokesperson Ned Price said on Wednesday night that the Biden administration was “working with Germany” to ensure it could withstand the loss of the pipeline. “I want to be very clear: if Russia invades Ukraine one way or another, Nord Stream 2 will not move forward,” Price told National Public Radio. “I’m not going to get into the specifics. We will work with Germany to ensure it does not move forward.” Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, who has previously argued in favour of imposing energy sanctions in response to aggression from Moscow, said the future of Nord Stream 2 could be up for discussion as part of a “broad range” of possible responses to Russian aggression. Joe Biden will speak to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy at 2pm ET today, Zelenskiy’s office told CNN. The call comes as the US and its allies continue diplomatic efforts to deescalate tensions at Ukraine’s border and avoid a Russian invasion of the country. The US delivered its written response to Russian demands on Ukraine yesterday, and the White House made clear in its response that it still supports Ukraine’s right to pursue Nato membership. Officials from Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany met in Paris yesterday to continue diplomatic negotiations, and they agreed to meet again in two weeks in Berlin. German Chancellor Olaf Scholz will visit the White House next month to meet with Joe Biden and discuss Russian aggression toward Ukraine. In a new statement, press secretary Jen Psaki said Scholz, who became chancellor last month, will visit the White House on Monday 7 February. “Chancellor Scholz’s visit provides an opportunity to affirm the deep and enduring ties between the United States and Germany,” Psaki said. “The leaders will discuss their shared commitment to both ongoing diplomacy and joint efforts to deter further Russian aggression against Ukraine.” Psaki announced earlier this week that Scholz would soon visit the White House, but it had been unclear exactly when his trip would take place. After a year in the White House, Joe Biden was limping with a stalled legislative agenda, a tenacious pandemic and Vladimir Putin threatening Ukraine. He was a tired brand in desperate need of a relaunch, a tough ask at the age of 79. Stephen Breyer has provided it, instantly changing the conversation. A vacancy on the highest court enables Biden to rally the Democratic base and begin to cement a legacy that, despite early ambitions, had recently looked to be in jeopardy. Although the ideological balance of the court will not change, Biden could choose a young liberal who will serve for decades. And Biden has raised expectations. At a debate in the 2020 Democratic primary, he declared: “I’m looking forward to making sure there’s a Black woman on the supreme court, to make sure we, in fact, get every representation.” His judicial appointments so far have been historically diverse, and Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, told reporters after the news of Breyer’s imminent retirement broke that Biden “certainly stands by” his promise. Once Stephen Breyer confirms his retirement, Joe Biden is expected to move quickly to name his replacement to the supreme court, although Breyer is likely to stay on the bench through the end of the term. The Washington Post reports: Biden, whose White House has been long prepared for a potential Supreme Court vacancy, plans to name a replacement in a shorter time frame than the month it took then-President Barack Obama to name Merrick Garland in 2016, according to the person, who requested anonymity to discuss strategy. That would allow for a confirmation fight to play out in the Senate well before the final Supreme Court decisions come down in June and Breyer formally retires. [Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer] has pledged to move as fast as Republicans did to confirm Amy Coney Barrett in late 2020, a process that took just about a month, although the GOP has more power in a 50-50 Senate to slow down committee consideration, such as by denying a quorum. Joe Biden has no events on his public schedule today, but he will likely be quite busy at the White House as he addresses a potential crisis in Ukraine and a likely supreme court nomination. White House officials have been in constant contact with European allies as they attempt to find a diplomatic path to avoid a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Officials from France, Germany, Ukraine and Russia held talks in Paris yesterday, and they agreed to reconvene in two weeks, although the Kremlin has said it is not optimistic about the likelihood of success in the negotiations. Meanwhile, news broke yesterday that Justice Stephen Breyer intends to retire, giving Biden his first supreme court seat to fill. However, Breyer has not yet confirmed that he plans to retire, and he may do so today. Stay tuned for news on that front. And for more updates on the situation in Ukraine, follow the Guardian’s live blog: Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden will travel to New York next week to meet with the city’s new mayor, Democrat Eric Adams, and discuss how his administration is working to tackle gun violence. According to the White House’s travel advisory, Biden will highlight his administration’s “comprehensive strategy to combat gun crime, which includes historic levels of funding for cities and states to put more cops on the beat and invest in community violence prevention and intervention programs, as well as stepped up federal law enforcement efforts against illegal gun traffickers”. The trip comes after last Friday’s shooting in Harlem that resulted in the death of two New York police officers, Wilbert Mora and Jason Rivera. Biden called Adams on Monday night to express his condolences about the fatal shooting and emphasize his administration’s commitment to helping cities address gun violence. “President Biden reiterated his admiration for the brave men and women of law enforcement who risk their lives on a daily basis to protect our communities,” press secretary Jen Psaki said Tuesday. “And he expressed his firm support for Mayor Adams’s efforts to combat gun violence and violent crime.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Thanks for joining us. That’s all from me, Samantha Lock, for today. We will be launching another live Covid blog a little later today but in the meantime you can catch up with all the latest developments here. Thanks for following along and, as always, I appreciate your tips and reader insights. You can email me at samantha.lock@theguardian.com or via Twitter @Samantha__Lock Here’s a quick recap of all the international Covid developments: Europe: England is going back to its “Plan A” Covid strategy by lifting virus restrictions, with commuters back to the office, masks no longer required in enclosed places and vaccine passports shelved. The EU’s drug regulator gave the green light to Pfizer Inc’s antiviral Covid-19 pill for treating adults at risk of severe illness. Booster shots could reduce future hospitalisations in Europe by at least half a million, the EU’s public health agency said. Finland will begin gradually easing restrictions from 1 February instead of mid-February as initially planned. The head of the Paris hospitals system has set off a fierce debate by questioning whether people who refuse to be vaccinated should continue to have their treatment covered by public health insurance. Spain’s north-eastern Catalonia region drops the need for a Covid passport to enter restaurants, bars and gyms. Sweden’s health authority says it will not recommend Covid-19 jabs for all five to 11 year olds, the country again choosing a different Covid policy to much of Europe. Many more Covid restrictions are being lifted on Friday in Wales, allowing nightclubs to reopen and some rules on social distancing to be scrapped. Asia: Hong Kong will shorten its 21-day quarantine requirement to 14 days for incoming travellers starting from 5 February. New Delhi ends a weekend curfew, reopens restaurants and allows markets to operate at full capacity, as the Omicron variant outbreak slows. Americas: Canadian truck drivers are meeting in Ottawa to protest a federal government vaccine mandate. Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau says he has been exposed to Covid-19 and will isolate for five days, in accordance with health rules for vaccinated people. The US government’s main health agency is failing to meet its responsibilities for leading the national response to public health emergencies, including the coronavirus pandemic, a federal watchdog said Thursday. Middle East: A United Arab Emirates medical convoy of one million Covid-19 vaccines reached the Gaza Strip via the Rafah border crossing, state news agency WAM said. Morocco will reopen its airspace for international flights starting Feb. 7, the state news agency (MAP) reported on Thursday. Covid-19 boosters increase protection against death from the Omicron variant to 95% in people aged 50 or over, the UK Health Security Agency said. China’s Walvax Biotechnology has recruited most of the 28,000 participants needed for a large clinical trial of its mRNA Covid-19 vaccine candidate, a senior company official said. British prime minister Boris Johnson has been accused of taking a reckless approach to public health by lifting all plan B Covid restrictions in England while failing to take enough action to get jabs to 3 billion unvaccinated people in poorer countries. The PM has robustly defended his record on the pandemic this week while awaiting the findings of the Sue Gray report on the “partygate” scandal, insisting he “got the big calls right” on the biggest global health crisis in a century. But now more than 300 leading scientists, health experts and academics have said his failure to take sufficient action to boost vaccination levels worldwide means it is more likely new variants will put thousands of lives at risk across the UK. “We write to you as scientists, academics, and public health experts concerned about the emergence of the Omicron variant and the threat that future variants may pose to public health, the NHS, and the UK’s vaccination programme,” they said in a two-page letter delivered to 10 Downing Street. Read the full story here. The US government’s main health agency is failing to meet its responsibilities for leading the national response to public health emergencies – including the coronavirus pandemic – extreme weather disasters and even potential bioterrorist attacks, a federal watchdog said Thursday. The nonpartisan Government Accountability Office said it is designating the Health and Human Services Department’s (HHS) leadership and coordination of public health emergencies as a “high risk” area for the government. While that designation carries no immediate penalties, it signals to Congress that lawmakers need to pay special attention to the agency’s operations. Long-standing “persistent deficiencies” at HHS “have hindered the nation’s response to the current Covid-19 pandemic and a variety of past threats,” the GAO said in its report. “If left unaddressed, these deficiencies will continue to hamper the nation’s ability to be prepared for, and effectively respond to, future threats.” Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog for today as my colleague Tom Ambrose calls it a night in London. The week has culminated in quite a few changes across Europe as England reverts back to Plan A and other countries throughout the region loosen Covid restrictions. On the other side of the world it’s a different story as China continues to pursue a zero Covid strategy and local lockdowns could be on the horizon in Beijing. Over in Australia, at least 74 Covid deaths have been recorded across NSW and Victoria. Pfizer booster shots have also been approved for teenagers aged 16-17 as states urge more people to come forward and get their booster shots amid the Omicron Covid variant outbreak. Brazil reported 228,954 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours and 672 Covid deaths, the health ministry said on Thursday. The South American country has now registered 24,764,838 confirmed cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 625,085, according to ministry data. Many more Covid restrictions are being lifted on Friday in Wales, allowing nightclubs to reopen and some rules on social distancing to be scrapped. But people will still be obliged to wear masks in most indoor places and on public transport while Covid passes will be needed for larger indoor events and gatherings. The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, said Wales was moving fully into alert level zero because the country had passed the peak of the Omicron wave. He said: There are encouraging signs that cases of coronavirus may be starting to stabilise. But we all need to continue taking steps to stay safe – unfortunately the pandemic is not over yet. We are moving to alert level zero and we will retain some important protections, such as face coverings in most indoor public places. Morocco will reopen its airspace for international flights starting 7 February, the state news agency (MAP) reported on Thursday. Morocco banned all inbound international passenger flights in November due to concerns over the Omicron Covid variant. The European Medicines Agency has recommended that Pfizer’s coronavirus antiviral drug be authorised for use in the European Union, the first time the agency has recommended a pill for treating Covid. In a statement on Thursday, the EU drug regulator said giving the green light to Pfizer’s Paxlovoid could help people infected with Covid avoid more serious disease and being hospitalised. The EMA’s expert committee recommended the pill be given to adults who don’t require oxygen and who are at higher risk of severe disease. The drug was cleared by regulators in the US and Britain in late December, although authorities noted that supplies would be extremely limited. An antiviral pill from Merck also is expected to soon be authorised. But Pfizer’s drug is all but certain to be the preferred option because of its mild side effects and superior effectiveness as suggested by studies, including a nearly 90% reduction in hospitalisations and deaths among patients most likely to get severely ill. Finland will begin gradually easing Covid restrictions from 1 February instead of mid-February as initially planned as the burden on its hospitals eases, the government said late on Thursday. Prime Minister Sanna Marin had said Finland would begin scaling back restrictions from mid-February, but signs of stabilisation in the infection rate caused by the Omicron variant of the virus led the government to alter its plan. “The burden on intensive care units has taken a turn in a better direction,” Finland’s minister for health and social affairs Hanna Sarkkinen told reporters. The government decided to start the cautious easing by loosening restrictions on the hours restaurants can remain open to 9 p.m. from a mandatory 6pm closure currently in place, Sarkkinen said. It also recommended local authorities allow reopening of cultural and sports venues such as gyms, swimming pools and theatres from the beginning of February. A United Arab Emirates medical convoy of one million Covid vaccines reached the Gaza Strip via the Rafah border crossing on Wednesday, state news agency WAM said on Thursday. The report said the Sputnik shots were the biggest medical support convoy from the UAE to the Palestinian strip since the start of the pandemic. Hello. Tom Ambrose here, I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news over the next couple of hours. Let’s begin with news from France that the head of the Paris hospitals system has set off a fierce debate by questioning whether people who refuse to be vaccinated against Covid should continue to have their treatment covered by public health insurance. Under France’s universal healthcare system, all Covid patients who end up in intensive care are fully covered for their treatment, which costs about 3,000 euros per day and typically lasts a week to 10 days. “When free and efficient drugs are available, should people be able to renounce it without consequences ... while we struggle to take care of other patients?” Paris AP-HP hospitals system chief Martin Hirsch said on French television on Wednesday. Hirsch said he raised the issue because health costs are exploding and that the irresponsible behaviour of some should not jeopardise the availability of the system for everyone else. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Covid boosters increase protection against death from the Omicron variant to 95% in people aged 50 or over, the UK Health Security Agency said. The UKHSA said that around six months after a second dose of any of the Covid vaccines, protection against death with Omicron was around 60% in those aged 50 and over. However, this increased to around 95% two weeks after receiving a booster vaccine dose. UKHSA added that data continued to show high levels of protection against hospitalisation from the booster. Effectiveness against hospitalisation was around 90% for the Pfizer/BioNTech shot , dropping to 75% 10-14 weeks after the booster.For Moderna, effectiveness against hospitalisation was 90-95% up to 9 weeks after the booster. “The evidence is clear - the vaccine helps to protect us all against the effects of Covid-19 and the booster is offering high levels of protection from hospitalisation and death in the most vulnerable members of our society,” said Dr Mary Ramsay, head of immunisation at UKHSA. [see 5.17pm.]. The UK recorded another 96,871 new cases of Covid and a further 338 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Greece will allow music in restaurants and bars again and extend their operating hours as it lifts some of the restrictions imposed last month now that Covid infections and the pressure on hospitals are easing. “We have decided to scale back the restrictions, taking into consideration the course of the pandemic in terms of cases which have been declining in recent weeks,” the health minister Thanos Plevris said in a televised statement. He said that despite ongoing pressure on the health system, the rate of hospital admissions and discharges and a shorter duration and less severe illness for the Omicron variant compared to Delta allowed authorities to ease the curbs. Capacity restrictions will remain in place for sport events, while a double mask is mandatory in supermarkets and transport. India’s capital announced the end of a weekend curfew and eased other stringent Covid restrictions on Thursday, with government data suggesting the country’s recent Omicron variant outbreak had slowed. Local officials in Delhi decided to reopen restaurants, allow markets to operate at full capacity and lift an all-weekend curfew imposed at the start of January that kept nearly all residents confined to their homes. “In view of the decline in positive cases, it was decided to gradually ease restrictions while ensuring adherence to Covid appropriate behaviour,” Delhi lieutenant governor, Anil Baijal, said. “In the last five to seven days there is an early indication of Covid cases plateauing … but we need to observe and take precautions,” the health ministry official Lav Agarwal told a Thursday press conference. An overnight curfew will remain in effect for all the capital’s residents except essential workers. The Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has gone into isolation for five days after being exposed to someone with Covid. “I feel fine and will be working from home. Stay safe, everyone – and please get vaccinated,” Trudeau tweeted, adding that a rapid test result had come back negative. More than half of all patients with Covid-19 in hospital trusts in England are being treated primarily for something else. New figures show that of the 13,023 patients reported as having the virus on 25 January, 6,767 (52%) were not being treated principally for Covid. This is the highest proportion since these figures were first published in June 2021, and is up from 26% at the start of December. All hospital patients who have tested positive for Covid need to be treated separately from those who do not have the virus, regardless of whether they are in hospital primarily for Covid or not. But the growing proportion of patients who are in hospital “with” Covid rather than “for” Covid is another sign that the current wave of the virus has not led to the same sort of pressure on critical care as in previous waves. [see 1.27pm.]. Booster shots could reduce future hospitalisations in Europe by at least half a million, the European Union’s public health agency said, even as the Omicron variant spreads at an unprecedented pace. “The current uptake of a booster dose achieved by early January may reduce future Omicron hospital admissions by 500,000-800,000 [in Europe],” the European Centre for Disease prevention and Control (ECDC) said. The figures cover the 27-nation EU plus Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. Currently about 70% of the EU’s population of 450 million has had two doses of a Covid vaccine and half of them have received a booster.“ Extending the booster programme to all previously vaccinated individuals could reduce admissions by another 300,000-500,000,” the ECDC said. [see 12.53pm.]. Although wearing a face mask was no longer a legal requirement in England, many travellers and shoppers in London and Birmingham chose to continue covering up as they went about their morning business on Thursday. Commuters at Birmingham New Street committed to widespread mask-wearing, with almost half still wearing them around the station and many saying they would put one on when they got on a train. Of 100 people passing through the station entrance on Thursday morning, 48 were wearing masks, with a variety of different reasons for doing so – on the day not wearing one stopped being an offence in England. “I think I’ll keep wearing one for the foreseeable. The number of colds and coughs I’ve had over the past couple of years has gone right down, and wearing a mask is not that bad,” said salesman Stuart Whitman, 50. Jessica Murray and Georgina Quach report: ‘I’ll wear one for the forseeable’: masks abound despite England rule change Covid boosters increase protection against death from the Omicron variant to 95% in people aged 50 or over, the UK Health Security Agency said on Thursday. The UKHSA said that about six months after a second dose of any of the Covid vaccines, protection against death with Omicron was about 60% in those aged 50 and over. However, this increased to around 95% two weeks after receiving a booster vaccine dose. UKHSA added that data continued to show high levels of protection against hospitalisation from the booster. Effectiveness against hospitalisation was 90% for the Pfizer/BioNTech shot , dropping to 75% 10-14 weeks after the booster. For Moderna, effectiveness against hospitalisation was 90-95% up to 9 weeks after the booster. “The evidence is clear – the vaccine helps to protect us all against the effects of Covid-19 and the booster is offering high levels of protection from hospitalisation and death in the most vulnerable members of our society,” said Dr Mary Ramsay, head of immunisation at UKHSA. The UKHSA also issued an initial analysis of vaccine effectiveness against the Omicron sub-lineage called BA.2, which is growing in the UK and Denmark, finding a similar level of protection against symptomatic disease. “After two doses effectiveness was 9% and 13% respectively for BA.1 and BA.2, after 25+ weeks,” the UKHSA said. “This increased to 63% for BA.1 and 70% for BA.2 from two weeks following a booster vaccine.” A vaccine expert has said the UK’s Covid focus should shift away from the booster programme and move towards urging the unvaccinated to get first doses, Nicola Davis reports. Efforts to increase uptake of Covid jabs in the UK should be concentrated on reducing the number of unvaccinated people rather than booster jabs, a leading expert has said. As Omicron spread rapidly around the country towards the end of 2021, health advisers and government ministers stressed that two doses “are not enough” to protect against the new variant, urging those eligible to take up a booster dose as soon as possible. The message hit home: in an attempt to avert another dismal Christmas and protect their loved ones people dashed to get jabbed, with 968,665 booster or third vaccinations reported on 21 December alone. But uptake subsequently fell dramatically, with booster doses now bobbing about 50,000 a day. Now a leading vaccine expert has said the focus should be placed on reducing the numbers of those who have yet to have even their first jab. “I think the booster programme might have reached saturation and [it is] best to concentrate on those who had no vaccine at all – as their chance of dying is 11 times higher than vaccinated folks,” said Prof Beate Kampmann, director of the vaccine centre at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine. More on this story here: UK Covid efforts should target unvaccinated, says expert A very quick snap from Reuters. Kuwait’s deputy prime minister and defence minister, Sheikh Hamad Jaber al-Ali al-Sabah, has contracted Covid, the Gulf state’s army said on Thursday. He was self-isolating at home and working remotely, it added. The UK has recorded another 96,871 new cases of Covid and a further 338 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares with 102,292 infections and 346 fatalities reported in the 24 hours prior. Greece will allow music in restaurants and bars again and extend their operating hours as it lifts some of the restrictions imposed last month now that Covid infections and the pressure on hospitals are easing, Reuters reports. The country last month forced bars, nightclubs and restaurants to close at midnight, with no standing customers and no music, following a surge of cases over the Christmas holidays due to the fast-spreading Omicron variant. “We have decided to scale back the restrictions, taking into consideration the course of the pandemic in terms of cases which have been declining in recent weeks,” the health minister Thanos Plevris said in a televised statement. He said that despite ongoing pressure on the health system, the rate of hospital admissions and discharges and a shorter duration and less severe illness for the Omicron variant compared to Delta allowed authorities to ease the curbs. Capacity restrictions will remain in place for sport events, while a double mask is mandatory in supermarkets and transport. Greece reported 19,712 new cases on Thursday. Infections have been easing since a record high of around 50,000 in early January. A total of 23,083 deaths linked to Covid have been reported since February 2020 and 1,867,935 cases out of a population of 11 million people. A group of vaccine-sceptic writers are generating revenues of at least $2.5m (£1.85m) a year from publishing newsletters for tens of thousands of followers on the online publishing platform Substack, according to research. My colleague Dan Milmo has the story: Anti-vaxxers making ‘at least $2.5m’ a year from publishing on Substack India’s capital announced the end of a weekend curfew and eased other stringent Covid restrictions on Thursday, with government data suggesting the country’s recent Omicron variant outbreak had slowed, AFP reports. Health authorities are still recording more than a quarter million cases across the country each day, but daily deaths have stayed a fraction of those seen last year. Local officials in Delhi decided to reopen restaurants, allow markets to operate at full capacity and lift an all-weekend curfew imposed at the start of January that kept nearly all residents confined to their homes. “In view of the decline in positive cases, it was decided to gradually ease restrictions while ensuring adherence to Covid appropriate behaviour,” Delhi lieutenant governor, Anil Baijal, said. India recorded more than 285,000 new cases overnight – down substantially from the figures seen a week earlier – and 573 deaths. “In the last five to seven days there is an early indication of Covid cases plateauing … but we need to observe and take precautions,” the health ministry official Lav Agarwal told a Thursday press conference. An overnight curfew will remain in effect for all the capital’s residents except essential workers. The country was battered by a devastating Covid outbreak last year in which 200,000 people died in a matter of weeks, overwhelming hospitals and crematoriums. Since then India has administered more than 1.6bn vaccine doses and expanded its inoculation drive to teenagers, while giving booster shots to vulnerable people and frontline workers. Its current Covid wave comes just weeks before various sub-national elections including for Uttar Pradesh, India’s most populous state and home to 220 million people. Election authorities have restricted public campaign rallies, normally teeming with huge crowds, over fears they could spread the virus. The Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has gone into isolation for five days after being exposed to someone with Covid. “I feel fine and will be working from home. Stay safe, everyone – and please get vaccinated,” Trudeau tweeted, adding that a rapid test result had come back negative. The news means Trudeau, 50, will miss the reopening of parliament next Monday. Trudeau, who has been prime minister since November 2015, was reelected for a second time last September. Trudeau went into isolation for two weeks in March 2020 at the start of the pandemic after his wife, Sophie, tested positive for Covid. Several Canadian cabinet ministers, including the foreign minister Mélanie Joly, have tested positive in the last few months. The UK government may not have the power to ban mask-wearing from schools in England, according to legal advice commissioned by the Good Law Project. Many secondary schools in England have persisted with the use of face masks by students, despite last week’s decision by the government to drop advice that masks be worn in classrooms. Ministers and a few MPs have said that masks should not now be worn, with the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, saying he would “vet” local public health requests to keep them. However, the Good Law Project said the advice it received suggested the government would find it difficult to ban masks nationally: While the education secretary can sometimes issue directions to a school if he believes they are acting unreasonably, it will be difficult for him to override a school’s decision to ask their students to wear masks, provided they have good reasons for departing from the guidance. The charity said schools should record and justify their decision-making process when asking pupils and staff to continue wearing masks. Schools may want to take into account local rates of infection and vaccination, vulnerabilities in the school population and community, and advice from local authorities, among other things. A very quick snap from PA. Jonathan Chew, 24, has pleaded guilty at Westminster magistrates court to a charge of intent to cause harassment, alarm or distress to England’s chief medical officer, Prof Sir Chris Whitty. The incident took place in St James’s Park, London, in June last year. More than half of all patients with Covid-19 in hospital trusts in England are being treated primarily for something else, PA reports. New figures show that of the 13,023 patients reported as having the virus on 25 January, 6,767 (52%) were not being treated principally for Covid. This is the highest proportion since these figures were first published in June 2021, and is up from 26% at the start of December. In London the figure was as high as 64% of patients, while in eastern England it was 62%. Both the Midlands (54%) and south-west England (51%) were also above 50%. But other regions in England had slightly lower levels, with north-east England and Yorkshire at 46%, south-east England 45% and north-west England 43%. All hospital patients who have tested positive for Covid need to be treated separately from those who do not have the virus, regardless of whether they are in hospital primarily for Covid or not. But the growing proportion of patients who are in hospital “with” Covid rather than “for” Covid is another sign that the current wave of the virus has not led to the same sort of pressure on critical care as in previous waves. A total of 501 patients in all hospitals in England were in mechanical ventilation beds on 25 January, compared with 773 at the start of December – and well below the 3,736 recorded at the peak of the second wave on 24 January last year. Separate figures published on Thursday show that nearly one in five patients (18%) arriving at hospitals in England by ambulance last week waited at least 30 minutes to be handed over to A&amp;E departments. This is unchanged from the previous week, but is down from 23% of arrivals delayed for half an hour or more in the week to 9 January. About 7% of arrivals took more than 60 minutes to be handed over to A&amp;E teams – also unchanged on the previous week. A handover delay does not always mean a patient has waited in the ambulance. They may have been moved into an A&amp;E department, but staff were not available to complete the handover. Analysis of the NHS England data by the PA news agency shows that both University Hospitals Bristol &amp; Weston and University Hospitals Plymouth reported the highest proportion of ambulance handovers that were delayed by at least 30 minutes last week (54%), followed by North West Anglia and Shrewsbury &amp; Telford (both 53%) and Gloucestershire (51%). Bristol &amp; Weston and Plymouth also topped the list for the proportion of arrivals that were delayed by more than an hour (37%), followed by University Hospitals of Leicester (33%), Gloucestershire (31%) and North Bristol (29%). There were 85,467 arrivals at A&amp;E by ambulance in the week to 23 January, up almost 2,000 on the previous week and the busiest seven days since the start of December, NHS England said. Ambulance handover delays are likely to have been influenced by the volume of patients who were medically fit but who were not able to be discharged. On average more than half of inpatients (59%) fit to be discharged each day last week did not leave hospital, for reasons such as a lack of space in care homes or pending an agreement with local social services over levels of support. On 23 January, the most recent date for which figures are available, out of 18,075 patients in England who were medically fit to leave, 12,984 (72%) were still in hospital. Saffron Cordery, deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, the body that represents health trusts in England, said the figures showed hospitals were “operating under sustained pressure”, despite the recent fall in the Covid cases. She said: We continue to be concerned about the strain in urgent and emergency care, with the number of ambulances arrivals hospitals the highest so far this winter. We know that success in reducing delayed discharges is dependent on having enough staff to facilitate discharges and support patients once they are ready to return home or to other community settings. That’s why we are pleased to see that the number of staff absences due to Covid-19 is now decreasing after the Omicron peak, although it’s important to recognise that the total number of staff absences remains high. An average of 30,375 NHS staff at hospital trusts in England were ill with coronavirus or having to self-isolate each day in the week to 23 January – down 15% on the previous week, but still nearly double the level just before Christmas. Booster shots could reduce future hospitalisations in Europe by at least half a million, the European Union’s public health agency said on Thursday, even as the Omicron variant spreads at an unprecedented pace. “The current uptake of a booster dose achieved by early January may reduce future Omicron hospital admissions by 500,000-800,000 [in Europe],” the European Centre for Disease prevention and Control (ECDC) said. The figures cover the 27-nation EU plus Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. Currently about 70% of the EU’s population of 450 million has had two doses of a Covid vaccine and half of them have received a booster. “Extending the booster programme to all previously vaccinated individuals could reduce admissions by another 300,000-500,000,” the ECDC said. Although Omicron cases are increasing at an unprecedented speed across the continent, with infection rates three times as high as the highest peak so far, many countries may already be at a turning point, the EU said. “Whilst in some member states, the peak of infection appears to have been reached recently, the pandemic is not over,” the EU health commissioner, Stella Kyriakides, said. A group of German, Austrian and Swiss immigrants has implanted an ideologically driven settlement in one of Paraguay’s poorest regions, William Costa reports. A 1,600-hectare (4,000-acre) gated community, dubbed El Paraíso Verde, or The Green Paradise, is being carved out of the fertile red earth of Caazapá, one of Paraguay’s poorest regions. The community’s population – consisting mainly of German, Austrian and Swiss immigrants – will eventually swell from 150 to 3,000, according to the owners. The project’s website bills it as “by far the largest urbanisation and settlement project in South America”, describing the colony as a refuge from “socialist trends of current economic and political situations worldwide” – as well as “5G, chemtrails, fluoridated water, mandatory vaccinations and healthcare mandates”. Immigration to the colony has stepped up since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, with residents interviewed on its YouTube channel attributing their move to scepticism about the virus and vaccines. Caazapá, a rural region dominated by cattle ranching in the heart of lush eastern Paraguay, saw a jump from four new German residents in 2019 to 101 in 2021, according to official figures. “Anti-vaxxer” immigrants have also been reported settling in other parts of Paraguay. One German citizen who lives nearby and who does business with Paraíso Verde, cited discredited conspiracy theories about coronavirus vaccines to explain the surge. They claimed that Paraguay’s accommodating immigration laws have proved attractive to Germans who want to “escape the matrix” and flee the “deep state and one world order”. “Many older people are coming. They understand that many people are dying in care homes [after vaccination],” said the German, who asked not to be named. “And the others, in their 40s, are trying to bring their children over here to escape.” But the appearance of an insular colony of Europeans has been watched with concern by some in the nearby the regional capital, also named Caazapá. “Why are they here? We don’t know, but we want to find out,” said Rodney Mereles, a former municipal councillor. On its YouTube channel, Paraíso Verde shares videos describing the pandemic which has killed some 5.5 million people as “non-existent”, promoting false, dangerous Covid “miracle cures”, and advertising Paraguay as a country without pandemic restrictions – despite the government’s clear health protocols. Even as Paraguay recorded the world’s highest Covid death rate per capita in June 2021, the colony shared videos of large parties in violation of restrictions. Here is the full story: German-speaking Covid denialists seek to build paradise in Paraguay The UK government’s announcement that care home residents in England will be allowed unlimited visitors from next week has been met with joyous reactions from loved ones, Rob Booth reports. Families have reacted with elation to the government’s announcement that English care homes will allow unlimited visitors for residents from next week. “It’s absolutely fantastic news,” said Penny Hutchinson, whose mother, Yvonne Williamson, 81, lives in Summerfield House care home in Halifax. “Everyone is delighted. It means we are being listened to.” The rule change, placing no limits on the number of visitors, means Williamson will be able to see her grandchildren, Lucy, 23, and Kristian, 18, for the first time in two years. While there was a limit of three named visitors, those roles went to her three children. However, the reunion will have to be delayed because, in common with hundreds of other care homes, Summerfield House is tackling an outbreak of Omicron, which means visitors are limited to a single pre-nominated essential caregiver. Care homes will still have to follow outbreak management rules after next week’s rule changes, albeit for 14 rather than 28 days, as has been the case. “We are still pushing for a law so we can’t lock care home residents away without at least one visitor,” Williamson said. Campaign groups such as Rights for Residents have been calling for the government to enshrine the status of “essential caregiver” in law so care homes can never again go into full lockdown. They argue that what would be known as “Gloria’s law” – named after the mother of the care visits campaigner and actor Ruthie Henshall – is a basic human right and say isolation has caused misery as care homes locked their doors to prevent infection spread. It has left families only able to talk to loved ones through plastic screens or bedroom windows. Birgit Clark, whose daughter Franziska, 26, has severe learning difficulties and lives in a care home in Cheshire, said there would be “fireworks going off” if she was allowed back into her daughter’s home. She has not been inside the home for close to two years, although she has seen her daughter outdoors and taken her on trips. But while the guidelines say there is no limit to the number of visitors from Monday, the reality is the home must consult with the local authority health protection team, she says. “They want to open up,” said Clark. “They understand how important it is to have family life. The mental health of the residents has suffered badly. It is loneliness. So I am hoping we are going to get there.” The full story is here: ‘Absolutely fantastic’: families’ joy at opening up of English care homes There has been a sharp drop in one-off sexual encounters during the Covid pandemic, researchers say, but more people are enjoying friends with benefits and getting experimental in bed. My colleague Zoe Williams has the story: How Covid killed the one-night stand – and made us all kinkier NHS absences due to Covid-19 are falling much faster in London and the north-west than in other parts of the country, particularly the Midlands, my colleagues Niamh McIntyre and Pamela Duncan report. New figures show the number of NHS London staff off sick with Covid was close to 3,000 on an average day in the week to 23 January or 47% of its Omicron peak. However, in the Midlands, there are close to 7,500 staff off sick with Covid, or 69% of the region’s lowest staffing levels in the Omicron wave. Absences in NHS East of England and the South East region are both running at 65% of their Omicron peaks respectively. Across NHS England Covid absences have fallen again, the latest figures show, down 15% on the previous week. There were just over 30,000 NHS staff absent due to Covid in the week to 23 January, compared to 35,000 last week. This is the second week in a row where absences have fallen, down from a winter peak of 46,000 on average at the start of January. In the past week the North West region saw a 25% drop-off in staff absences while NHS London reported a 22% drop. This compares with a 13% fall in the Midlands and an 11% drop in the North East and Yorkshire, 8% in the South West and 6% in the South East region. Staff absences due to all causes remains high across NHS England with more than 72,000 staff absent due to sickness each day last week on average, down from a peak of 88,000 in early January but significantly higher than in early December when they were running at 60,000. Separate figures published today show that the number of ambulance callouts grew substantially in the latest week with 2,000 more callouts than the previous week, to 85,467, the highest in the winter to date. The proportion of occupied beds in the NHS remained stable in the week to 23 January at 91.6%. Pressure in hospitals remains high, with 93% of adult general and acute beds occupied over last week, and paediatric general and acute beds seeing an almost 3 percentage point increase in occupancy the previous week to this past week. NHS England’s national medical director, Prof Stephen Powis, said that it was positive to see more NHS staff back at work but that pressure on the NHS remained intense. He said: Our staff have already had what feels like a long winter, but despite everything they have had to contend with, they continue to step up as they always do; answering thousands more 111 calls last week than the seven days before, continuing to care for thousands of Covid patients and maintaining non-Covid procedures, and working closely with colleagues in social care to get people out of hospital safely. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ England has dropped all plan B restrictions from today. The decision means compulsory mask wearing in shops and on public transport, guidance to work from home and vaccine certificates will be scrapped in England. Last week the government changed guidance to remove mask wearing in classrooms in secondary schools. Care home residents in England can receive unlimited visitors from Monday as restrictions to tackle the Omicron variant of coronavirus are eased, the Department of Health has said. Care homes in England will have to follow outbreak management rules for 14 rather than 28 days, and self-isolation periods will be cut from 15 days to 10 days for those who test positive – with further reductions if they test negative on days five and six. We are still waiting for the publication of Sue Gray’s report into allegations of partying during lockdown at Downing Street and in Whitehall. Andrew Sparrow’s live blog has the latest on that saga. Travel companies are reporting a bounce back in bookings in the UK, with easyJet and Saga predicting a summer surge as the impact of Omicron on consumer confidence wanes, and the government’s move to lift testing and travel restrictions pushes capacity back to near pre-pandemic levels. Moderna says it has started a mid-stage study, testing a booster dose of its Covid-19 vaccine specifically designed to target the Omicron variant, a day after rival Pfizer launched a similar trial. Germany’s Omicron wave continues apace, as the country again set another record number of daily new infections, crossing the 200,000 threshold for the first time. Russia’s daily Covid-19 cases rose to 88,816 on Thursday, a new record high for the seventh consecutive day as the Omicron variant was identified in new regions, officials said. Poland has set another new daily Covid caseload record, at 57,659. The country’s defence minister Mariusz Blaszczak has tweeted that he has tested positive. Hong Kong will shorten its 21-day quarantine requirement to 14 days for incoming travellers starting from 5 February. Current and former staffers have accused the top director of the World Health Organization (WHO) in the Western Pacific of racist, unethical and abusive behaviour that has undermined the UN health agency’s efforts to curb the coronavirus pandemic. Dr Takeshi Kasai denies the allegations, which are said to have been raised by more than 30 staffers. Australia’s expert immunisation advisers are still considering whether to expand the definition of “fully vaccinated” to mean three Covid jabs, while some state and territory leaders have indicated they may be approaching the peak of their Omicron waves. Israel’s government has said in a report marking International Holocaust Remembrance Day that protesters against Covid-19 measures who liken themselves to Jews under Nazi persecution are stoking global antisemitism. A group of vaccine-sceptic writers are generating revenues of at least $2.5m (£1.85m) a year from publishing newsletters for tens of thousands of followers on the online publishing platform Substack, according to new research. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to take you through the rest of the day’s Covid news from the UK and around the world. Andrew Sparrow has got all the latest UK politics. And I’m off to host a special 40th anniversary edition of our rather silly Thursday quiz. Martin Quin Pollard reports from Beijing for Reuters that with just over a week until the Winter Olympic Games begin, teams are frantically trying to ensure that athletes stay virus-free to get past Beijing’s strict checks and make it to the start line. Several teams have reported positive cases of Covid-19 among their athletes and coaching staff this week just days before their scheduled departures for China, throwing careful preparations into disarray. Norway’s ski federation said it was delaying the team’s departure to Beijing, scheduled for Thursday, by at least four days, after a coach and two competitors tested positive. The US bobsleigh competitor Josh Williamson missed his flight with his teammates this week after a positive test, he said on social media Wednesday, though he will still compete if he can both get enough negative tests and catch a flight in time. On Monday, Beijing 2022 slightly eased its Covid-19 measures by adjusting the cycle threshold (CT) of PCR tests so that only those with a CT of less than 35 will be deemed positive, making it easier to test negative, although that applies only once athletes arrive in Beijing. To minimise risks, Beijing 2022 has introduced a “closed loop” system which restricts all Games participants to certain zones in and around venues and accommodation, creating a bubble that separates them from the local population. The organisers have reported 129 positive cases among Games-related personnel between 4 January, when the loop began operations, and 26 January. Athletes must provide proof of two negative tests within 96 hours of their departure for China to get permission to fly and then test every day while there, and close contacts of those infected can be forced to isolate. Close contacts can still compete but are subject to extra restrictions and tests. “The main concern in the pandemic situation for us is a matter of getting there safely rather than the bubble itself,” the German Olympic Sports Confederation told Reuters. Australia’s expert immunisation advisers are still considering whether to expand the definition of “fully vaccinated” to mean three Covid jabs, while some state and territory leaders have indicated they may be approaching the peak of their Omicron waves. National cabinet met for the 65th time on Thursday, with the capacity of the health system, the vaccine rollout and supply chains topping the agenda. As he did prior to last week’s meeting, Daniel Andrews raised his support for mandating a third or booster dose in order for an Australian to be considered fully vaccinated. “This is not a two-dose thing, or two doses and a bonus,” he told reporters on Thursday as Victoria recorded 15 deaths and 13,755 new infections. “International evidence, our own experience, the views of experts and hopefully the confirmation of both Atagi and national cabinet later today will mean that everyone knows and understands that this is a three-dose project.” Andrews said he believed it “will be very soon be three doses to get the green tick” to enter restaurants, bars, cafes, hairdressers and beauty services. But the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) is still considering its stance, with federal government sources indicating that advice will be finalised soon. Read more of Josh Butler and Daniel Hurst’s report here: Booster jab not yet required to be ‘fully vaxxed’ in Australia as national cabinet anticipates Omicron peak Reuters reports that the rising number of infections in Germany – where cases exceeded 200,000 in a day for the first time today – has led to staffing shortages in sectors including logistics, healthcare and child care. The airline group Lufthansa’s cargo arm said a staffing crunch at its hub in Frankfurt meant it was currently unable to handle sorting of loose freight from the United States, Canada and Europe. “Despite comprehensive preventative measures, we are now clearly feeling the rising infection numbers,” Lufthansa Cargo said, adding that up to 15% of cargo at Frankfurt was affected by delays. It said its flight schedule was unaffected, as was transportation of time-sensitive goods such as organs for transplants or temperature-controlled cargo. Rival DHL said its operations in Frankfurt and Leipzig were still running smoothly. The German Hospitals Federation had warned earlier this week that three-quarters of hospitals were reporting higher than usual numbers of staff out on sick leave. Hong Kong will shorten its 21-day quarantine requirement to 14 days for incoming travellers starting from 5 February, its leader, Carrie Lam, has said. Reuters reports that it is a move that comes after months of pressure from financial executives and foreign diplomats who said the rule was eroding the city’s competitiveness. Currently Hong Kong residents returning from more than 160 countries have to quarantine for 21 days at their own cost in designated hotels. A group of vaccine-sceptic writers are generating revenues of at least $2.5m (£1.85m) a year from publishing newsletters for tens of thousands of followers on the online publishing platform Substack, according to new research. Prominent figures in the anti-vaccine movement including Dr Joseph Mercola and Alex Berenson have large followings on Substack, which has more than 1 million paying subscribers who sign up for individual newsletters from an array of authors who include novelist Salman Rushdie, the writer-musician Patti Smith and former Downing Street adviser Dominic Cummings. Mercola, a US alternative medicine doctor and prolific producer of anti-vaccine content, and Alex Berenson, a journalist banned from Twitter last year after questioning the efficacy of Covid-19 vaccines, are among five vaccine sceptics on the platform who earn themselves and Substack a minimum of $2.5m a year from their newsletters. Under Substack’s business model, writers keep about 90% of the subscription income, with the platform taking 10% and the payment company Stripe charging the writers 3% of their take. Research by the Center for Countering Digital Hate, a campaign group, showed that Mercola’s newsletters made a minimum of $1m a year from charging subscribers an annual fee of $50, with Berenson making at least $1.2m from charging people $60. Three other vaccine sceptic newsletters, from the tech entrepreneur Steven Kirsch, virologist Robert Malone and anonymous writer Eugyppius, generate about $300,000 between them. Read more of Dan Milmo’s report here: Anti-vaxxers making ‘at least $2.5m’ a year from publishing on Substack Travel companies are reporting a bounce back in bookings, with easyJet and Saga predicting a summer surge as the impact of Omicron on consumer confidence wanes, and the government’s move to lift testing and travel restrictions pushes capacity back to near pre-pandemic levels. easyJet said it expected Omicron to continue to have an impact over its short-term performance. However, the airline said that customers looked to rebook, rather than cancel, which would help boost its performance. “We see a strong summer ahead, with pent-up demand that will see easyJet returning to near 2019 levels of capacity, with UK beach and leisure routes performing particularly well,” said Johan Lundgren, the chief executive of easyJet. Saga, the travel and insurance group specialising in products and holidays for over-50s, said it had seen strong bookings for its cruises in the period from 1 August to 26 January. The company said that for this 2022-2023 financial year, which runs from 27 January, cruises had a booking load factor of 86% in its first half and 73% for the full year. “While Omicron has impacted travel bookings through December and January, our outlook for cruises in 2022-2023 and beyond is positive,” said Euan Sutherland, the chief executive of Saga. Read more of Mark Sweney’s report here: UK travel industry forecasts summer boom amid surge in holiday bookings My colleague Kalyeena Makortoff has a rundown here of six UK firms that have handed bonuses to executives or payouts to shareholders despite refusing to refund taxpayers for support, including business rates relief and the furlough job retention scheme. A very quick snap from Reuters confirming that Poland has set another new daily Covid caseload record, at 57,659. The deputy health minister there yesterday warned that the country could soon see case numbers over 60,000 each day. The Israeli government has said in a report marking International Holocaust Remembrance Day that protesters against Covid-19 measures who liken themselves to Jews under Nazi persecution are stoking global antisemitism. Such displays showed factual knowledge of the genocide was eroding, the report said, adding that some Covid-19 agitators had been “consuming and disseminating antisemitic conspiracy theories that Jews are responsible for the crisis and are using it for oppression, global domination, economic gain, etc”. Expanding on the findings, the diaspora affairs minister Nachman Shai said Holocaust distortion or trivialisation was itself antisemitic and could sometimes lead to actual endangerment of Jews. “There are people so fraught with hate who can, when faced with such imagery, be tipped over into action,” he told Reuters. Yad Vashem, Israel’s main Holocaust memorial, has urged world leaders to come out against such discourse – a call apparently heeded by the UN secretary general, António Guterres, who on Monday said the yellow star protests were “reprehensible”. “Covid brought Holocaust trivialisation to a summit,” said the Yad Vashem chairman, Dani Dayan. “Things like that, sometimes done by politicians, by public figures, are despicable and Yad Vashem is very clear in demanding those persons retract.” Andrew Sparrow is live with our UK politics blog for today, which is of course heavily intertwined with the Covid story as we await the publication of Sue Gray’s report. You can find that here. I’ll be continuing here with major UK Covid developments and the coronavirus news from around the globe. Poland’s defence minister Mariusz Blaszczak has tweeted that he has tested positive for coronavirus. “I feel well, I will carry out my duties under isolation,” Blaszczak said. Reuters remind us that Poland reported a record 53,420 new daily Covid infections yesterday. Russia’s daily Covid-19 cases rose to 88,816 on Thursday, a new record high for the seventh consecutive day as the Omicron variant was identified in new regions, officials said. The number of new infections was a significant jump from the 74,692 reported on Wednesday. Reuters report that officials also said that 665 people had died in the last 24 hours. Prime Minister Boris Johnson has take some time out of waiting for the Sue Gray report to arrive to tweet about England dropping Plan B measures today, and to urge people to continue to get vaccinated. Care home staff in England have said they are facing Covid “testing fatigue” with up to 50% of services experiencing outbreaks, the chairwoman of the National Care Association has warned on the BBC Radio 4 Today programme today. Responding to the Government announcement that visitor restrictions in care homes will be scrapped next week, Nadra Ahmed said the situation would need to be “considered carefully” by independent providers. PA Media quote her saying: We also know that up to 50% of services are in outbreak at this moment of time, which is why we’ve got the NHS in the position it’s in because we can’t take people in, so I think all of this will need to be considered very carefully. Somebody mentioned to me... that we’ve got testing fatigue going on at the moment because you know, we have introduced so much testing, but these (we) have to do because we have to keep people safe. Asked whether independent providers would place their own restrictions on visitor numbers despite the Government announcement, Ahmed said care homes would be “aiming towards” allowing people to visit freely. She added: “There may be some challenges for some providers if they are short-staffed or there’s an outbreak, and if there are additional challenges those are the things that we’ll need to take into consideration”. EasyJet has said the Omicron variant hit passenger demand last month, but revealed it had seen a recent boost in bookings from the move to scrap Covid travel tests. The low-cost airline said Omicron saw its load factor, a measure of how well it fills its planes, slump to 67% in December after recovering past 80% in October and November. PA Media report that the carrier said it has seen a “step change” in bookings since the 5 January announcement that pre-departure Covid testing would be scrapped for fully vaccinated arrivals entering England, with demand buoyed further by last week’s news of restriction-free travel from 11 February. There is a developing story from Associated Press that current and former staffers have accused the top director of the World Health Organization (WHO) in the Western Pacific of racist, unethical and abusive behaviour that has undermined the UN health agency’s efforts to curb the coronavirus pandemic. The allegations were laid out in an internal complaint filed in October and again in an email last week, sent by unidentified “concerned WHO staff” to senior leadership and the executive board and obtained by the Associated Press. Two of the authors said more than 30 staffers were involved in writing it, and that it reflected the experiences of more than 50 people. Maria Cheng reports that the internal complaint and the email describe a “toxic atmosphere” with “a culture of systemic bullying and public ridiculing” at WHO’s Western Pacific headquarters in Manila, led by Dr Takeshi Kasai, director of the region that includes China and his home country of Japan. Kasai denies the allegations. The AP says it has also obtained recorded snippets of meetings where Kasai is heard making derogatory remarks about his staff based on nationality. Eleven former or current WHO staffers who worked for Kasai told the AP he frequently used racist language. In an email to the AP, Kasai denied allegations of racism and unethical behavior. He said that after receiving the email last week, he immediately took steps to communicate with all his staff. “I ask a lot of myself, and our staff,” he said. “This has particularly been the case during the Covid-19 response. But it should not result in people feeling disrespected.” Isobel Frodsham at PA Media has a little bit more on those changes to care home rules in England. Limits on the number of visitors to care homes are being scrapped from Monday. She writes that care homes will only have to follow outbreak management rules for 14 rather than 28 days, and self-isolation periods will be cut from 15 days to 10 days for those who test positive - with further reductions if they test negative on days five and six. Isolation periods for those in care following an emergency hospital visit are also being reduced from 14 to 10 days. The move comes as 86.5% of care home residents have now had a booster vaccination. Care minister Gillian Keegan said: “Thanks to the continued success of the vaccine rollout, I am delighted we can ease restrictions in care settings and allow unlimited visits to ensure people living in care homes see all their family and friends. “The changes announced today are backed by scientists, ensuring we all have more freedoms from coronavirus, including care home residents and their families.” The withdrawal of the requirement for Covid passes in England from today has been welcomed by those within the hospitality industry. PA Media quote Michael Kill, chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association, described the requirement as having been a “debilitating and divisive mitigation” and said businesses across the night-time economy will celebrate the change. Kill said the impact of the measure has left “many businesses now concerned that they will struggle to survive beyond February” and called for more government support. Shaun Hinds, chief executive at Manchester Central, which describes itself as one of the UK’s leading events venues, described the end of plan B as “a very positive move”. He said “a number of significant inquiries for events in 2022” and new bookings for 2023 indicate a “real appetite and eagerness in the live events sector as it continues in its recovery”. A couple of snippets from Politico’s London Playbook email this morning suggest we might all be here again on Monday waiting for Sue Gray to publish her report into a lockdown party culture at Downing Street and in Whitehall. They write: The latest information is that Boris Johnson has still not received the document from Gray. It is possible it will arrive this morning and then be published this afternoon — however it is now just as likely that the whole publication process slips to next week, after a remarkable internal row broke out over what exactly can be made public following the police decision to launch a formal probe. … Government lawyers, police officers and human resources officials are poring over the document line by line because there are legal concerns that publishing some of her findings on the eight alleged events being looked at by the police could prejudice their investigation. … It may now be Monday before the report can be released, because MPs start to head back to their constituencies this afternoon and there may not be sufficient time to allow Johnson to make an immediate statement to the Commons. Germany’s Omicron wave continues apace, as the country again set another record number of daily new infections, crossing the 200,000 threshold for the first time. The Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases reported 203,136 positive tests in the last 24 hours, 69,600 cases more than the same day a week ago. The seven-day incidence per 100,000 people rose to 1,017 from 941 the previous day, while another 188 people died, bringing the death toll since the start of the pandemic to 117,314. Reuters remind us that German lawmakers debated yesterday whether to impose compulsory Covid vaccine shots, while protesters gathered outside the parliament building. Around 75% of the German population have received at least one dose of a vaccine - less than in western European peers such as France, Italy or Spain. Chancellor Olaf Scholz backs compulsory vaccines for over-18s but his coalition government is divided on the issue and he has told lawmakers to vote according to their conscience. Care home residents can receive unlimited visitors from Monday as restrictions to tackle the Omicron variant of coronavirus are eased, the Department of Health has said. Self-isolation periods will also be reduced from 14 days to 10 for those who test positive, with further reductions if they test negative on days five and six. And there will be changes to the testing regime for care workers from 16 February, with pre-shift lateral flow tests replacing the current system involving weekly asymptomatic PCR tests. PA Media report that Health and Social Care Secretary Sajid Javid said: “I know how vital companionship is to those living in care homes and the positive difference visits make, which is why we continued to allow three named visitors and an essential care giver under Plan B measures. “Thanks to the progress we have made, I am delighted that care home restrictions can now be eased further allowing residents to see more of their loved ones.” Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, has done her interview on Sky News, and has naturally been immediately quizzed about the publication timing of the Sue Gray report into Downing Street parties. She said: I’m conscious that Sue Gray is finalising her report … it’s important that be allowed to continue, as indeed the prime minister said about the police investigation. I know that the government is committed to publishing the full findings of the report, but the timing I actually have no idea about. There then followed a somewhat awkward exchange where she was asked if she had attended any parties at Downing Street. Here’s how it went: Kay Burley: Did you ever go to any of the parties in Downing Street? Thérèse Coffey: I’m not aware of any parties at Downing Street, but it is important that Sue Gray’s report is allowed to be published and the PM … sorry … the police be allowed to investigate. Burley: But did you ever go? Coffey: I’m not aware of any parties, I’m here to talk about jobs [then pushes government line on new Universal Credit policy] Burley: Did you ever go to any parties at Downing Street? Coffey: Have I ever been to any parties in Downing Street? The last party I recall going to Downing Street was the celebration of when the UK left the European Union following the referendum. And that was because Boris got Brexit done. Today is the day that England drops all the Plan B restrictions which were put in place ahead of the expected wave of Omicron infections. The move means compulsory mask wearing in shops and on public transport, guidance to work from home and vaccine certificates will be scrapped in England. Last week the government changed guidance to remove face mask wearing in classrooms in secondary schools. Health Secretary Sajid Javid said the success of the vaccine programme, coupled with a better understanding of treatment for the virus, is “allowing us to cautiously return to plan A, restoring more freedoms to this country”. The move comes as the UK as a whole recorded 102,292 new daily Covid cases, with the week-on-week average being slightly down. There were 346 deaths recorded yesterday. Public health guidance urging people to wear a face covering in crowded and enclosed spaces if coming into contact strangers will remain in place, the Government said. It also said organisations will be able to choose if they will require Covid passes from those visiting their venues. While the scrapping of measures have been welcomed by some, others have urged people to “be considerate to those around them” when it comes to choosing to wear a face covering, and to “be respectful” of policies in certain settings. Both Sainsbury’s and John Lewis said their customers will be asked to wear masks, though the latter acknowledged it will ultimately come down to “personal choice”. PA Media quote the British Retail Consortium saying the changes “will enable shopping to return to a more normal experience for customers, employees and businesses”. But their chief executive Helen Dickinson added: “Retailers ask customers to be considerate to those around them when choosing whether to wear a face covering and to respect the decision of other customers.” Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London, taking over from Samantha Lock. You could be forgiven a slight sense of deja vu as the UK news cycle seems entirely gripped with when Sue Gray is going to publish her report into Downing Street’s lockdown party culture, what Prime Minister Boris Johnson is going to say in parliament in response to that, and then whether he can cling on to his leadership of the Conservative party. So just like yesterday, to be honest. I’ll bring you the key lines from the morning’s UK media round. Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, is on the airwaves for the government. And I’ll also be bringing you continuing coronavirus coverage from around the world. A convoy of truckers is set to descend on Ottawa in Canada to protest a vaccine mandate for cross-border drivers. Thousands of truckers are protesting a new requirement that they be fully immunised to enter Canada as of 15 January. Ottawa police Chief Peter Sloly said officers have been in been in contact with protest leaders whom he said have been cooperative and shared their plans, the Associated Press reports. The US has imposed the same requirement on truckers entering the country. The Canadian Trucking Alliance has estimated that about 15% truckers in Canada — as many as 16,000 — are not fully vaccinated against Covid-19. Donald Trump Jr. took to social media Tuesday to endorse the Canadian truck convoy’s fight against “tyranny” and to urge Americans to follow suit. At the meeting in Ottawa, police disclosed they are preparing for a range of scenarios including the potential for violent outbreaks. Police say they are planning for the arrival of between 1,000 and 2,000 demonstrators, but say the situation is “fluid” and changing by the hour. Some supporters of the convoy have taken to social media to warn the vaccine mandate for truckers will leave store shelves empty. Transport minister Omar Alghabra has assured Canadians there’s no reason to fear food shortages will result from a small minority of truck drivers refusing to comply with the vaccine mandate. Moreover, he said there’s been no “measurable impact” on the number of trucks crossing the border since the vaccine mandate went into effect on 15 January. Last week, he said almost 100,000 trucks crossed the border — about the same as usual for this time of year. England today lifts Covid restrictions imposed to tackle the Omicron variant, with masks no longer required in enclosed places and vaccine passports shelved. People will no longer be legally required to wear face masks, although they will still be recommended in some settings. Covid passports are also to be scrapped to enter places such as nightclubs, football grounds and large-scale events, although venues may continue to ask customers to provide evidence of their vaccination status or a recent negative test if they wish. The changes are part of the government’s decision to lift Plan B coronavirus measures and come as the number of positive Covid-19 cases has fallen sharply over the past two weeks. Although still at high levels, cases have plateaued in recent days. The UK government introduced the so-called Plan B restrictions on 8 December, after prime minister Boris Johnson warned of a looming “tidal wave” of Omicron. Moderna Inc says it has started a mid-stage study, testing a booster dose of its Covid-19 vaccine specifically designed to target the Omicron variant, a day after rival Pfizer Inc launched a similar trial. The pharmaceutical company said while a third shot of its original coronavirus vaccine increased neutralising antibodies against the variant at the lower dose, their levels declined six months after the booster dose was administered. However, neutralising antibodies remained detectable in all participants, Moderna added. On Tuesday, Pfizer and its partner BioNTech started a clinical trial to test a new version of their vaccine specifically tailored to the Omicron variant. Moderna said it would study its Omicron-specific booster in adults aged 18 years and older, Reuters reports. It would test the booster in individuals who received only the two-dose primary series of Moderna’s original vaccine, mRNA-1273, and also in those who received the primary series and a booster dose of the same vaccine, the company said. Moderna plans to enrol about 300 participants in each of the two groups in the study. Three studies, led by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have shown that a third dose of an mRNA vaccine, such as those from Pfizer and Moderna, is key to fighting the Omicron variant. Hello and thanks for joining us for all the latest Covid developments this Thursday. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be here for the next hour or so before my colleague Martin Belam takes the reins from London. It’s another day of humiliation for Boris Johnson as the embattled British PM fields fresh calls to quit over a slew of alleged lockdown breaches in Downing Street. Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer pressed Johnson on his behaviour during a session of prime minister’s questions where he said the PM had previously told MPs that “all guidance was followed” in Downing Street over gatherings during Covid lockdowns. “So since he acknowledges the ministerial code applies to him, will he now resign?” the Labour leader asked. Johnson replied: “No.” An official report by senior civil servant Sue Gray due to be published in the coming days may prompt a new raft of Conservative MPs to send letters of no confidence in the PM. Amid all the political chaos it may be easy to forget we are still in the midst of a global pandemic. People in England today will no longer be legally required to wear face masks, although they will still be recommended in some settings. The change is part of the government’s decision to lift Plan B coronavirus measures. Covid passports are also to be scrapped although venues may continue to ask customers to provide evidence of their vaccination status or a recent negative test if they wish. Pharmaceutical company Moderna Inc also announced it has started a mid-stage study, testing a booster dose of its Covid-19 vaccine specifically designed to target the Omicron variant, a day after rival Pfizer Inc launched a similar trial. Here’s everything else you might have missed: Europe: Italy will ease Covid restrictions for all visitors from European Union countries starting from 1 February, its health ministry said on Wednesday. Moderna has started testing an Omicron-specific Covid booster in healthy adults. In Denmark, the government announced it will scrap most pandemic restrictions next week, even as neighbouring Sweden extended its own measures for another fortnight. Police in Berlin have been authorised to crack down on protesters wearing badges resembling yellow star badges and other symbols associated with the Nazi era at demonstrations against vaccine mandates or other pandemic restrictions. Story here. The UK has reported a further 102,292 Covid infections and 346 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares with 94,326 cases and 439 fatalities in the 24 hours prior. Sweden will extend its current pandemic measures by another two weeks, the minister for health said on Wednesday, as Omicron is spreading at record speed. The curbs mean bars and restaurants have to close at 11pm and there is a cap of 500 people inside larger indoor venues. As pressure on hospitals eases, Austria will end its lockdown for people not fully vaccinated against the coronavirus on Monday, though some restrictions on public life will remain. Middle East: Israel has broadened its eligibility for a fourth dose of the Covid vaccine to include adults under 60 with underlying medical conditions, their carers and others over 18 at significant risk of exposure to coronavirus. United States: The United States has donated more than 400m vaccine doses to 112 countries, marking a major milestone in the White House’s goal of donating 1.2bn vaccine doses under president Joe Biden’s direction. The Americas have seen their highest daily Covid caseloads since the pandemic began, and Omicron has clearly become the predominant variant, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said.The chief executive of a major aged care provider has slammed the prime minister for suggesting Australians “push through” the Omicron crisis, warning his “exhausted” staff are at breaking point and some residents have been isolated in their rooms for 21 days straight. Baptistcare chief executive, Charles Moore, penned a damning open letter on Thursday saying his organisation “cannot stay silent” over Morrison’s comments. Earlier this month Scott Morrison explained his government’s strategy for dealing with the latest wave of the pandemic, saying: “You have two choices here: you can push through or you can lock down. We’re for pushing through.” Moore, who runs 18 aged care facilities across New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory, said the Omicron variant had only served to exacerbate existing systemic flaws in the “critically underfunded” sector, which were identified in the royal commission but remain unaddressed. He said his staff were “significantly underpaid” for the work they do and were exhausted, working huge shifts and grappling with shortages that were being compounded by the Omicron variant. “The simple truth is that we cannot maintain the standard of care our community expects if the situation continues and all we do is ‘push through’,” he said. Moore warned current infection control measures required that vaccinated residents were “endlessly” isolated, prevented from having essential visitors. “In one situation, residents have been forced to keep to their rooms for over 21 days.” He called on the federal government to work with states and territories to develop new guidance to help vaccinated aged care residents live with the virus, and ensure that workers receive “fair and competitive compensation for the critical work they do”. “I write to you today because we cannot keep ‘pushing through’,” he said. “We need change from the top and we need support from our communities to ensure Australia’s vulnerable and elderly receive the standard of care and services they deserve and expect.” “We ask that, through your leadership of our nation, you ensure the aged care sector has the appropriate resources to push through this wave, and beyond.” His comments came on the same day that aged care staff unions renewed their plea for the Australian Defence Force to be used as a surge workforce for the sector. Moore later told the Guardian that staffing shortages had been experienced across all 18 of the organisation’s facilities. He said the plea for help showed the sector was “on our knees” and needed long-term, sustainable and appropriate resourcing. “Requests for the highly respected ADF to provide assistance are indicative of the poor resourcing the aged care sector has faced for a long time,” he said. “BaptistCare is saying that needs to start with better pay and conditions for existing staff, as well as to attract more staff into the sector, to care for our future generations of ageing Australians.” Data suggested Omicron had spread to more than 700 aged care homes across Australia last week. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Patchy supply of rapid tests and personal protective equipment has compounded the problem, and the industry says proactive distribution of testing devices to facilities not yet experiencing an outbreak has yet to begin. Some providers who were in the grips of an outbreak were left waiting weeks for their shipments of rapid tests to arrive. Moore said Baptistcare had been proactive in ordering rapid tests, which had prevented any shortages, but said the Commonwealth should be funding stock for all aged care providers, regardless of whether they are the site of an outbreak. He said the impact of separation on residents and families was significant. “We understand how frustrating this is for families, who on one hand want their vulnerable and ageing loved one to be safe, but also want to visit with them,” Moore told the Guardian. “We’ve worked hard to try and set up visitation via phone, video or windows, but with increasing strain on staffing, and a priority to provide direct care to residents, this is sometimes difficult to achieve.” The aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, meanwhile, has faced criticism for attending the Ashes cricket on the same day he declined to front an inquiry about the federal government’s Covid response. He has previously said there is no shortage of PPE, that more than 6m rapid tests have been distributed to aged care facilities, and that no one could have predicted the nature of Omicron. “None of us know what the next variant will look like or how it will play out. And we’re adapting to the pandemic appropriately, in my view, as we have done all the way through,” he told the ABC earlier this month. Morrison’s office was approached for comment.Antonee Robinson broke through a freeze in the air and the US offense, scoring a big goal in the 52nd minute that lifted the Americans over El Salvador 1-0 on Thursday night and kept them on track for a return to the World Cup. The narrow victory on a 29F night that tied the record low temperature for a home American qualifier boosted the US to 18 points with five games left. The US have two more chilly matchups in the next week and can move to the verge of a berth with victories on Sunday against Canada in Hamilton, Ontario, and Wednesday against Honduras at St Paul, Minnesota. The final three qualifiers are in March. Canada remained top with 19 points after their 2-0 win over Honduras on Thursday night, Mexico have 17 points after beating Jamaica 2-1, and Panama have 14 followed by Costa Rica with nine. El Salvador are left with six and have virtually no chance to reach this year’s tournament in Qatar. The top three nations qualify, and the fourth-place team advances to a playoff against the Oceania champion, likely New Zealand. Winning home games is a key, and the Americans have won four of five matches on US soil, stumbling only in a draw against Canada in September. Robinson scored after Weston McKennie played a long ball down the right flank to Tim Weah, who let it bounce three times as he ran past Roberto Domínguez and Eduardo Vigil. Goalkeeper Mario González made a sliding block, and the ball rebounded to Jesús Ferreira. He headed it across the goalmouth and Christian Pulisic let the ball bounce past him to Robinson, who kicked it in with his left foot from eight yards for his second international goal. Robinson did a forward flip and a backflip to celebrate, adding to the backflip he performed after scoring the tying goal in the 4-1 win at Honduras in September. Matt Turner took over in goal from Zack Steffen, who remained in England because of a bad back, and didn’t have to make a save. Turner played following reports he will move next summer from New England to Arsenal. The US Soccer Federation scheduled the match in a cold climate to minimize travel and put the chill on El Salvador, which went to a sporting goods store to purchase additional winter gear. The Americans’ 15th straight home win over El Salvador since 1989 didn’t come easily. They outshot El Salvador 8-3 in the first half but put none on target. But the offense followed its pattern: The US have scored 11 of its 13 goals in the second half. González leaped to parry Yunus Musah’s goal-bound shot three minutes after Robinson’s goal. He also stopped a 12-yard shot by Robinson in the 65th. El Gráfico, a Salvadoran sports newspaper, headlined the match “En una hielera”. Translation: “In a freezer”. Snow flurries fell during warmups and the temperature was the same as for the “Guerra Fria” win over Mexico at old Columbus Crew Stadium in February 2001 and the Snow Clasico victory over Costa Rica at Commerce City, Colorado, in March 2013. US players had electric heated cushions on the bench and refreshments of chicken broth and cider. The locker room temperature was set unusually low to acclimatize the team. Defenders Walker Zimmerman and Chris Richards were the only starters for either team to wear short sleeves. About 12 minutes in, El Salvador’s Enrico Hernández went to the bench and took off his thermal underwear. Pulisic, McKennie and Tyler Adams started together for just the second time, the first time since a March 2019 exhibition against Ecuador. Ferreira was a surprise pick at forward over Ricardo Pepi, scoreless in 12 matches for club and country since 7 October. Ferreira was high with an angled 10-yard shot with his left foot in the 16th minute. The best US chance of the first half came three minutes later, when Adams, Musah, Sergiño Dest and Weah combined on a quick attack that left Ferreira open in front of González only to misfire over the crossbar with his right-foot flick.Sarah Palin, the former Republican vice-presidential candidate, has continued to dine out at New York City restaurants despite testing positive for Covid-19. The ex-Alaska governor, who is not vaccinated, was spotted on Wednesday eating outdoors at the upper east side restaurant Elio’s after testing positive for the illness, according to photos published by Mediaite. Palin had dined at the same restaurant on Saturday night, where she was seen eating indoors in violation of city rules requiring proof of vaccination for indoor dining. Palin was also seen eating outdoors Tuesday night at Campagnola, Gothamist reported. Under CDC guidance, people with Covid-19 should isolate for at least five days to avoid further spread. The manager of Elio’s restaurant told the New York Times it was investigating Palin’s Saturday visit and that the restaurant had made a “mistake”. The manager told the Times that Palin had “probably just walked in and strolled over” to a table where she joined a regular customer. Palin returned to the restaurant Wednesday evening. “Tonight Sarah Palin returned to the restaurant to apologize for the fracas around her previous visit,” Luca Guaitolini, Elio’s manager, said in a statement to Mediaite. “In accordance with the vaccine mandate and to protect our staff, we seated her outdoors. We are a restaurant open to the public and we treat all civilians the same.” Palin confirmed her positive Covid test on Monday, which has delayed the start of her defamation trial against the New York Times in relation to a 2017 editorial on comments she made about gun violence. City officials have encouraged New Yorkers who come into contact with Palin to test for Covid-19, and warned that she needs to “follow the rules just like everyone else”. “By repeatedly flouting CDC guidelines, Ms Palin has shown a complete disregard for the health and safety of small business workers and her fellow patrons,” Jonah Allon, a New York city hall spokesperson, said in a statement to the Washington Post. “We encourage Ms Palin to join the 98% of New Yorkers who report they have followed guidance on isolation and have helped New York City stop the spread.” Palin had previously tested positive for the illness in March 2021, but has been adamant about her opposition to receiving the vaccine. “It’ll be over my dead body that I’ll have to get a shot. I will not do that. I won’t do it, and they better not touch my kids either,” she said at a conservative event in December 2021. Vaccines offer crucial protection against serious illness and death from Covid-19, and are considered an important tool to prevent the development of new variants such as Omicron, which led to a rise in cases across the country. US cases, including in New York, have begun to fall after a surge around the holidays. More than 877,000 people have died of Covid-19 in the US since the start of the pandemic.At the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age, it seems, revenge is a dish best served cold. Three years after the former feminist columnist Clementine Ford walked away from her column and accused the Herald of losing its independence, an interview with the author was spiked after it had been written by an Age journalist, published online and printed in Saturday’s Spectrum. On Thursday the interview Kerrie O’Brien conducted over lunch with Ford about her new book How We Love appeared online, complete with a photo of the $300 lunch tab. The hard copy of the article was ready to go too, as it is printed ahead of the news section. But soon the online story had disappeared and that particular page in Spectrum was torn up and re-printed. Tory Maguire, the executive editor of the Herald and the Age, confirmed the story had been pulled at the 11th hour. “Clementine Ford spent years making vile and personal attacks on the journalists and editors of the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age after the mastheads stopped publishing her column,” Maguire told Weekly Beast. “I had knocked back a pitch for an interview with her but there was a breakdown in communication and it was commissioned and published in error. I have pulled it from Spectrum and taken it down out of respect for my team.” The animosity was sparked by Ford’s harsh criticism of the Herald on Twitter, and in an article for Schwarz Media’s the Saturday Paper. Ford was angered by getting an official warning from her editor for calling Scott Morrison a “fucking disgrace” on social media and said she quit because of the “cultural shift” at the newspapers, which are now owned by Nine Entertainment. But she denies Maguire’s claim that she “spent years making vile and personal attacks on the journalists and editors of the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age”. Ford says she has had a thing or two to say about the direction of the SMH - but that has been aimed not at the journalists but senior management and Chessell. After she quit she wrote that “the change in political culture at Fairfax began long before the television network set its sights on establishing a newspaper presence”. “To my mind, the trajectory traces back to the appointment in March 2018 of James Chessell as Fairfax’s group executive editor of Australian Metro Publishing … he has also been an adviser to former Liberal treasurer Joe Hockey, as well as a known associate of many in business and finance,” she wrote. Chessell, since promoted to Nine’s managing director of publishing – with responsibility for the Australian Financial Review, the Sydney Morning Herald, the Age, Brisbane Times and WAToday – as you can imagine is no fan of Ford’s. Ford, who had no idea what had happened to the piece when we contacted her, was disappointed readers wouldn’t get to read about the “lovely chat” she had with O’Brien. She told Weekly Beast that “if something as gentle and inoffensive as a piece about love can be spiked as retaliation against valid journalistic critique” then “I do think readers should think carefully about what that means”. Back from the ‘dark side’ We are used to journalists quitting reporting to join the so-called dark side as advisers and lobbyists but when they go the other way it can ruffle feathers. Long-term Santos spinner Tom Baddeley has represented the oil and gas producer as the manager, government and community relations in Western Australia and the Northern Territory for 12 years. Before that he was WA’s director for the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association, the peak national body representing the oil and gas industry. A former journalist who left the ABC in 2005, Baddeley starts on 7 February as ABC Radio Perth’s new Breakfast presenter, replacing Russell Woolf, who died suddenly last October. Some environmental campaigners are concerned about the appointment given Santos is a powerful player – it was the fossil fuel company which the government hosted at its pavilion at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow last year. Baddeley, who has appeared before the NT’s fracking inquiry, will now have to present an objective journalistic voice on all the issues he used to prosecute for Santos. We think the ABC may have sensed a problem as the press release announcing the appointment reached back 14 years on Baddeley’s CV to find a job that wasn’t related to fossil fuel lobbying. “He began his journalism career with The West Australian and after leaving the ABC in 2005, went on to work in media relations, government relations, policy advocacy and public affairs including as Communications Manager for WA’s then new Super Rugby team, the Western Force,” the ABC said. An ABC spokesperson said ABC Radio broadcasters have a diverse range of experiences and come to the organisation from many different backgrounds. “Tom Baddeley is an experienced journalist and former ABC reporter,” the spokesperson said. “When he takes to the Perth airwaves, next month he will be subject to the same editorial standards and ABC Editorial Policies that all of our employees must meet. He will be required to present independent and balanced content at all times, regardless of the topic or interview subject.” A bit rich With Covid-19 in Australia deaths passing 3,000 we were quite startled by a headline in the Australian Financial Review that the pandemic had an upside. It was, according to Michael Stutchbury’s AFR, good for rich people. “COVID was a great wealth-creation event,” declared senior correspondent Aaron Patrick in an article that argued that for some homeowners “the pandemic was the greatest wealth-creation event of their lives”. Patrick is well known to Beast readers for his hit job on Samantha Maiden last year which backfired spectacularly. Apparently all this wealth was good news for the prime minister, who would be rewarded at the next election by happy, cashed-up voters. Watch out Albo. “The consequences of a more prosperous-feeling society will be seen in the election campaign,” Patrick wrote. “Labor leader Anthony Albanese will have to be more cautious; more wary of frightening a nation asking itself: what’s the compelling reason to replace the government under which we have become so much richer?” Patrick’s award under a cloud Still on Patrick, the National Press Club board will discuss a request to rescind an award he won for an article that the WA supreme court subsequently found “contained incorrect statements of fact”. Last month justice Rene Le Miere awarded $400,000 to Dr Jemma Green, who sued for defamation over two articles published in the Fin in December 2018 about her technology company Powerledger. Le Miere said the imputation in the articles by Patrick was defamatory and the defendants had been unable to establish that it was substantially true or that it was their honest opinion, adding that nominating himself for the award during legal proceedings was an “aggravating factor” in the defamation. The judge was also scathing about Patrick’s decision to criticise defamation law on the eve of the trial in September 2020 in an article that claimed Green’s action was “sucking up financial resources that could be used to fund investigative journalism”. Le Miere found that the September article constituted a publication by Patrick and the AFR of an act of intimidation or reprisal or ill will towards Green for suing them. The judgment found the articles had several inaccuracies, and conveyed serious defamatory imputations against Green. NPC’s chief executive Maurice Reilly told Weekly Beast he had referred the matter to legal counsel for an opinion. “The judgment it should be noted is against the AFR and Aaron and not the National Press Club,” he said. “We don’t have that opinion as yet and the board will consider when it meets in February.” The judgment said while the award judges would not have known about the legal action, the newspaper did. “In those circumstances it was improper for Mr Patrick to nominate himself for the award and state that the article was an objective look at blockchain technology,” Le Miere said. The AFR did not respond to a request for comment. 60 Minutes lands Cleo Smith special 60 Minutes will launch its 2022 season on 6 February with an exclusive interview with the family of Cleo Smith, an interview which is reportedly part of a $2m multimedia deal Nine Entertainment made with Ellie Smith and stepfather Jake Glidden. The program released a promo to tease the upcoming show which they claim contains “startling revelations to reporter Tara Brown about what really happened to their precious daughter”. The Australian reported the deal includes plans for a drama, likely to be a six-part special for Nine’s streaming service Stan. And all this before the man accused of abducting her is sentenced. Terence Darrell Kelly, 36, on Monday admitted taking the four-year-old from a tent at the remote Blowholes campsite last year.The federal government will not review its business case for the inland rail project, rejecting any reassessment as “not an appropriate use of taxpayer dollars”, despite cost blowouts identified by a Senate inquiry into the major infrastructure project. The Senate report, released in August 2021, called on the government to update the 2015 business case undertaken by the former Nationals leader John Anderson, which originally estimated the cost at $4.7bn. The inland railway is now budgeted at $14.5bn, although the Senate inquiry heard expert opinion that costs could exceed $20bn. GUARDIAN INVESTIGATION: Trouble on the tracks: is Australia’s $14bn inland rail project going off the rails? A new business case was one of 26 recommendations from the Senate report. But the government supported only 11 recommendations in its response, released quietly in the week before Christmas. However, the government response said it would not support the recommendation to update the 2015 business case, as it “does not accept that further review of the route or business case for Inland Rail is needed or would be an appropriate use of taxpayer dollars”. The government response said its project was driven by increasing freight needs over the next three decades. “By 2050, it is estimated that almost 70% of the freight to be carried on Inland Rail will be for domestic use,” it said. “This includes household goods and groceries produced in Australia and consumed in our major cities, with over 50% of this freight forecast to be carried between Melbourne and Brisbane to meet demand in southeast Queensland from its rapidly growing population.” The final Senate report highlighted the potential for a cost blowout closer to $20bn following predictions from John Abbott from the Central Queensland Regional Organisation of Councils and the private sector initiative National Trunk Rail. A National Trunk Rail spokesman told the committee in January last year that the estimate of $20bn “might be on the low side,” warning that it was likely additional funding announcements would be made because “[t]here is a huge amount still unaccounted for – a huge amount.” The report also found “one of the key critiques directed at the Inland Rail has been whether the project remains viable if demand for coal declines or whether restrictions are imposed on the movement of coal along the Inland Rail alignment”. The NSW Farmers Association and Country Women’s Association were successful in getting the government to support a recommendation that the Australian Rail Track Corporation (ARTC) engage an independent mediator to facilitate an improved working relationship with the two groups. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter However, the government did not support the recommendation from NSW Farmers and the CWA that the federal and state governments establish an independent international flood and hydrologist panel to conduct a review of the flood modelling and design features of the inland rail project in NSW. The federal government is instead relying on the NSW government’s environmental approval process for inland rail which includes an independent review by a hydrologist of the ARTC’s flood modelling as a mandatory requirement of an environmental impact statement. However, as Peter Holt, the lawyer engaged by the NSW Farmers Association and CWA, told Guardian Australia in its major investigation into the infrastructure project, the environmental impact statement currently being exhibited “operated at a very high level of generality” and landholders’ serious concerns about flooding remain unresolved. The government also rejected a recommendation to establish an independent comparative review of the current Narromine to Narrabri alignment with the proposed Dubbo-Coonamble line and alternative routes around Narrabri, taking into account both the impacts and potential broader economic benefits for regional economies and communities. The government cited “even a small increase in distance and transit time translates into an increase in operational costs for Inland Rail users”. Adrian Lyons, the chair of the NSW Farmers inland rail taskforce, said he was hopeful that the deputy prime minister and infrastructure minister, Barnaby Joyce, would demonstrate that he was willing to fix the issues clearly outlined. “That didn’t happen. Yet again, communities were ignored in favour of future ribbon-cutting opportunities for politicians,” Lyons said. A spokesperson for the deputy prime minister told Guardian Australia the government had agreed to the majority of the review’s recommendations, which responded to a range of stakeholder concerns. The government supported 11 recommendations, supported four in principle, noted five and rejected six, including the most substantive first three recommendations regarding the costs and the business case. The spokesperson said there were “compelling reasons” for not supporting certain recommendations. “There are always competing demands when it comes to the development of national infrastructure projects and these are considered in the context of the significant benefits they deliver,” the spokesperson said. “Inland rail will create thousands of jobs in regional Australia and generate new economic opportunities for our exporting businesses, helping them grow and drive our economy forward.” Danica Leys, the CEO of the CWA of NSW, said they supported the project, but desperately needed a recalibration of how it was implemented. “The Senate inquiry report provided a great template for that to happen. The federal government, however, have really missed the opportunity to rectify wrongs and get this project back on an even keel,” Leys said. “It was disappointing for us, and for the communities and individuals impacted, to see such a dismissive response to the Senate report.” The government also rejected a recommendation for an ongoing inquiry for oversight of the inland rail project on the grounds that the ARTC, as a commonwealth company, was already subject to a range of oversight mechanisms, including regularly appearing before the Senate Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport Legislation Committee. Senator Glenn Sterle, the chair of the inquiry, described the government’s response as “very poor” and called on the Coalition to support all the Senate inquiry’s recommendations. “They’re not Glenn Sterle’s recommendations. It was evidence taken from witnesses throughout the couple of years we did the inquiry. Listening to all sides of the argument, listening to experts, listening to local people, listening to people that were expected to use the inland rail project that had had no say,” Sterle said. “I’m so thankful we were able to have the inquiry because then we found out just how bad things really were.” Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityAn eight-year-old boy has inspired a developer to relaunch a popular mobile game after it became defunct, leaving his father desperate to find a solution. Jack, who was diagnosed with autism, became enamoured with the game Joe Danger – a motorbike-riding daredevil who takes players on a race across the desert – as a source of joy and a way to cope with stress. However, updates to Apple’s iOS operating system rendered it defunct and prompted his father to write to the developer for help. “Jack is 8 years old, about the sweetest kid on the planet, and has been diagnosed with autism,” the father wrote in a plea to Hello Games, more widely known as the makers of No Man’s Sky. “Jack LOVES Joe. He loves everything about him. He has a collection of toy motorcycles that are his ‘Joe Dangers’; every motorcycle we see on the street is ‘Joe Danger’,” the letter continued. “One of the things that has enabled Jack and I to bond is our shared love of video games, specifically Joe Danger,” the father says before recounting how one of the first things he hears every day when walking in the door after a day at work is: “Come on, Daddy, let’s go play Joe Danger!” “Just being able to say that sentence is a MASSIVE deal for a child with autism,” the letter adds. As well as a source of “endless hours of entertainment and joy”, the game has enabled his son to interact with friends and family, provided a coping mechanism and reward for getting through stressful situations and allowed Jack to “experience normal kid stuff”, his dad says. His letter asks the developers if they can bring the game back online. “It would mean the world to at least one little boy.” Company founder Sean Murray said the letter “broke our hearts and made us want to set things right”. “As game devs [developers] it’s so easy to underestimate the impact even your smallest games can have,” he said in a Twitter thread where he shared the father’s letter online. Murray said the team had undertaken a “hobby project” to bring the game back to life online, “slowly rebuilding it piece by piece through eight years of technology changes”. “It blows my mind that something you make can be someone’s first game they played, hit at an important time or even be their favourite thing for a while.” The game, relaunched on iOS on Thursday, has been remastered with improved visuals, high frame rate, ProMotion and Gamepad support, according to the developers. It was also the first game the team developed when “we were still four guys in a shed, trying to get noticed”, Murray said. “Joe helped us get a break and it’s also where we learned to make games … It’s sad that games slowly rot and many disappear.” News of the relaunch has been welcomed by the gaming community, eager to download what some described as their “favourite mobile games of all time”. Signing off his letter to the game’s founders, the father said: “As a parent, it’s hard to put into words the feeling I get seeing the pure joy on Jack’s face Joe Danger brings, knowing the other struggles he experiences everyday. But I can assure you, the feeling is a good one.”Covid is “out of control” in central Australia, representing a “catastrophic failure” by the Northern Territory government to carry out its own emergency plans, according to the three biggest Aboriginal organisations in the NT. The groups have accused the NT government of failing to adequately carry out emergency plans that had been made “well in advance” of the current outbreak. “Many of the issues we are facing were foreseen, and plans made to address them. But there has been a catastrophic failure by government to discharge its responsibility to all Northern Territory residents by implementing these plans in Central Australia,” they wrote in a scathing letter to the NT chief minister, Michael Gunner. The Central Land Council, Congress Aboriginal Health Service and the Aboriginal Medical Services Alliance Northern Territory (AMSANT) – representing thousands of traditional owners, as well as the territory’s frontline medical services – demanded Gunner “act urgently” to lock down central Australia. “This is our last chance,” they said. “We have been advocating continuously for firm action to slow the outbreak since it began in the early days of 2022. However, our requests have been ignored, or action taken too late or on too small a scale to make a real difference. “There has been a significant failure by government agencies in Central Australia to put into practice the plans agreed with your government before the outbreak. This has directly led to Covid spreading out of control in the Aboriginal communities of Central Australia and beyond,” the letter said. “This is our last chance to flatten the curve of new infections and hospitalisations and save lives that will otherwise be lost.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The groups outlined a series of public health failures they say have occurred including slow contact tracing, the belated introduction of a mask mandate, and the failure to remove positive cases from crowded households. “When positive cases were located in crowded households, they were left at home for more than 48 hours, by which time the virus had spread within and between households, and then to other town camps and houses,” they said. “This was in contravention of all agreed plans to remove positive cases immediately from households where they were unable to safely self isolate.” On Friday, Guardian Australia reported the case of a resident of the remote community of Yuendumu, who was pleading with the Northern Territory government to provide a local quarantine facility after her Covid-positive elderly relative was forced to sleep outside on the veranda and spend three days under a tree in order to safely isolate from the rest of the family. Community groups in Yuendumu also expressed frustration that a group of people taken into quarantine were “unexpectedly” sent home last week and subsequently tested positive for Covid-19. The community members – who had been evacuated to the Alice Springs quarantine facility as close contacts – were flown home on 16 January and sent back to their homes. Local authorities said they had not been informed of their return. A number of the group were Covid-positive when tested by health workers in the following two days. Leaked minutes of the Yuendumu local emergency health response group – made up of NT police, health workers and key community organisations – expressed concern that the “urban model” of managing Covid at home was not working in the community. “It appears that the outbreak cannot be contained by using the tools (targeted testing) and practices (quarantine/lockout/living with Covid) in place. An approach that is not working for the community and more fit for an urban mainstream environment,” the minutes of the 17 January meeting said. The letter to Gunner called for an “immediate lockdown” in central Australia, “to stop the movement of people and flatten the curve of new infections and hospitalisations”, which they said would give them time to set up a rapid response team for Alice Springs and the remote communities in Central Australia. They have also asked for rapid antigen tests and N95 masks to be distributed. “We urge you to ignore those who say it is too difficult, too late, or too expensive, or that the Omicron variant of Covid is a mild disease and that we need not worry about it,” they said. NT chief minister Michael Gunner said he understood the calls for a lockdown but did not think it would be workable. Gunner said the territory’s response “remains the best in the world”. “We need to concentrate our resources into those communities that have Covid and need actual care, and make sure those people get the care that they need – that’s where those resources are,” Gunner told the daily press briefing in Darwin on Friday. “A lot of thought has gone into what our current measures are and why those are the measures,” he said. “If you look at the Territory response, for two years we have been the best. Right now if you look at our caseload, the prevalence of Covid, how we are managing it. We have three people in ICU. Look at other jurisdictions and how they are handling it and compare it to the NT and take into account all our vulnerabilities, the Territory response remains the best in the world.”The US navy is racing to salvage an F-35C fighter jet from the bottom of the South China Sea after it crashed on an aircraft carrier and plunged overboard – taking with it highly classified technology that would be a coup if China retrieved it first. The F-35C crashed-landed on the deck of the USS Carl Vinson during routine operations on Monday, the navy said, injuring six sailors and the pilot, who ejected from the plane before it fell into the sea. The most advanced US fighter, a stealth plane costing over $100m, is packed with highly classified technology and if found would represent an intelligence boon for China, which claims almost all of the South China Sea as its own territory. The Vinson was on a patrol intended to challenge that territorial claim and defend international freedom of navigation. The F-35C is a version of the plane specially designed to operate from aircraft carriers. Maritime experts have said it could take a US salvage ship more than 10 days to reach the site of the crash, potentially giving Chinese submarines the opportunity to find it first. “We’re certainly mindful of the value of an F-35 in every respect of what value means,” said John Kirby, the Pentagon spokesman. “And as we continue to attempt recovery of the aircraft we’re going to do it obviously with safety foremost in mind, but clearly our own national security interests. And I think I will just leave it at that.” In Beijing the foreign ministry spokesman, Zhao Lijian, said the Chinese government had no ambitions to find the crashed plane. “I noted relevant reports. This is not the first time that the US has an accident in the South China Sea,” he said. “We have no interest in their aircraft. We urge the country concerned to do things that are conducive to regional peace and stability, rather than flex muscles in the region.” In 2001, a heavily damaged American EP-3 surveillance plane made a daredevil emergency landing on China’s Hainan island after a collision with a pursuing Chinese fighter plane. The fighter crashed and its pilot was killed. The 24 crew of the EP-3, who had been lucky to survive the collision, were detained and interrogated by Chinese authorities before their release 10 days later. Meanwhile, the Chinese military stripped and examined the EP-3’s highly classified equipment and intelligence materials over several months – eventually giving back the plane in pieces. It is the third time an F-35 has crashed into the sea and had to be salvaged. In November a British F-35B, the short takeoff and vertical landing version, crashed as it lost power taking off from the aircraft carrier HMS Queen Elizabeth in the Mediterranean. The pilot ejected and the plane was recovered from the seabed a few weeks later. In April 2019 a Japanese F-35A, the conventional takeoff and landing version, crashed at over 1,000km/h into the Pacific, leaving the pilot dead and only debris to be recovered.This week we asked Guardian New Zealand readers about the arrival of Omicron and how they are feeling and preparing. Hundreds of New Zealanders wrote in, about their hopes and anxieties, preparations and frustrations, confidence and worries. The country has spent almost two years relatively sheltered from the pandemic’s worst effects, and many said they felt some trepidation at the prospect of widespread Covid, and the threat it could pose to the country’s small health system, as well as its immunocompromised or under-vaccinated communities. Some were concerned about divisions the pandemic had produced: between the vaccinated and unvaccinated, those inside the border and those locked out. But many also expressed a sense of relief and inevitability – and a sense that the timing was as good as it may ever be for Aotearoa to fall back into step with the rest of the world. Some have been long separated from their families, and found consolation in the prospect of reopening borders. And many felt quietly confident, bolstered by the country’s results so far. New Zealand had weathered each stage of the pandemic before, they said, and they trusted both the government and fellow New Zealanders to meet the next challenge. This is a small sampling of the comments. ‘Not knowing how it will play out is almost as bad’ NZ just hasn’t suffered the kind of personalised trauma happening overseas, and summer makes a lot of people shrug at the prospect of doom. The not knowing how it will play out is almost as bad as the anticipation of personal and societal harm; how vulnerable ARE we as a population? How will our mental health _ not great at the best of times – weather the compound stressors? … Crossing all the fingers at the moment. Kelly, writer and photographer, Dunedin ‘We haven’t had to deal with huge case numbers and deaths’ I think we are all feeling a sense of trepidation and worry. Throughout the pandemic we have watched what has happened overseas whilst keeping the virus at bay for two years. Now we face the inevitable that Omicron is here and we can no longer keep Covid at bay. There is the worry for the health system, our communities, particularly those who are vulnerable or immunocompromised. You can’t help but think: I am going to get Covid now, will it be OK? Will my family be OK? Here in NZ, we just haven’t had to deal with huge case numbers and deaths, nor are we in the mindset of just accepting those numbers. And currently it feels like we are just waiting for it all to begin. Saffron Dunlop, 46, Auckland, marketing ‘Bring it on’ I want to stop being frightened and put the whole ghastly business behind me whilst, at the same time, observing reasonable restrictions to keep the vulnerable safe. Recently the reality of Omicron in the community has given me the impression that we will all get the virus at some stage, but vaccinations provide protection against severe infection. I am respecting the science, I have had my booster, now bring it on! Mari Bennett, 73, north of Auckland Kia kaha, Aotearoa – Stand strong, New Zealand I am worried about Omicron, but accepting that the outbreak is coming. All my whānau have been vaccinated, and are – where eligible – boosted. I mask up with an N95, track my movements on the Covid app, cut out attending or holding larger events, and have gone or go virtual where I can … Just trying not to be a dick! Kia kaha, Aotearoa: he eke waka noa – we are all in the same canoe. Sam Young, 59, Nelson lecturer ‘Suck it and see’ I think resignation mostly. We all knew Omicron would break through eventually. As an asthmatic, yes I feel a degree of trepidation, but I got the vaccination, and I’ve had the booster, and I’m pretty consistent with mask-wearing. So really, from now on it’s a case of suck it and see. I am profoundly grateful to not be sent back into lockdown though … At least with vaccination I can live a pretty normal life now. Elizabeth Revel, 71, cardiac nurse ‘New Zealanders, I think, will rise to the challenge’ The government has done a fine job in keeping deaths to a mere 50 or so. They have generated great confidence. Omicron may be different in its transmissibility but New Zealanders will, I think, rise to the challenge … Our vaccine situation is amazingly good and that will help too. No sweat. Dave Smith, 75, lawyer, Wellington ‘The silver lining is the border settings’ “I think that the silver lining of reaching this stage is the change it will bring to border settings. There are so many families affected by the border restrictions. I have a friend whose dad [overseas] … died last year – I sat with her while she watched his live-streamed funeral and had to grieve without her family. It probably doesn’t seem much in the scale of things, but I have a cousin’s wedding to go to in the UK in June and it’s really important to me that my parents, siblings, nieces and nephews can see us and our kids. That time when they’re little goes so fast.” Fiona Macdonald, civil servant, Wellington ‘New Zealand is about to experience what the rest of the world had in 2020’ I can’t help feeling that New Zealand is about to be surprised in a very unpleasant way by the reality of Covid’s exponential spread … I’m very concerned. I feel New Zealand is about to experience – albeit maybe without the large numbers of deaths due to Omicron’s milder nature – what the rest of the world had in 2020. That is, huge disruption to supply chains, working life, and massive social anxiety. Tom Hawkins, 32, maths and statistics teacher ‘Hoping for the best’ This feels inevitable. We couldn’t keep Covid-19 out for ever. We know the drill. Masks, hand washing, physical distancing, using the Covid-19 app, and keeping up with the vaccine and booster. I feel prepared. I am hoping for the best. Hoping Omicron is mild. Hoping it increases our immunity. Hoping we all stay safe and healthy. Nicki Frances, 53, science technical writer, Lower Hutt ‘We are ready to face Omicron without a lockdown’ I feel safe in the hands of such capable leadership, and a community that by and large understands the need for individual action to serve the greater societal good. Kiwis are, despite a tiny but vocal proportion … extremely proud of how we defeated Covid with lockdown, then defeated Delta with lockdown, and now with 94% of adults double vaxxed feel we are ready to face Omicron without a lockdown. As for how I am coping with the red traffic light? Well, for the majority it’s really little different to how we’ve lived in non lockdown times … Doing my part to help the country basically involves missing a beer festival and not going to the cricket. We are so very fortunate here and send our aroha (love) to all people whose countries who have been less fortunate, and arguably less well led. Dan Hanid, 46, Palmerston NorthGina Rinehart, a global warming denier and the wealthiest person in Australia, cannot protect the sports she sponsors from the impact of the climate crisis. But should they be protecting Rinehart’s reputation from the condemnation that is increasingly directed at those who stand in the way of climate action? That is the question on the lips of many Australian athletes following the announcement on Friday that Rinehart’s Hancock Prospecting was becoming a major partner of the Australian Olympic Committee (AOC) in a four-year deal. Just days after being appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia for, among other things, her distinguished service “to sport as a patron”, Rinehart has increased her already considerable involvement with Australian Olympic sport. But at a time of growing athlete activism around climate action, the appropriateness of the AOC lending its social licence to Rinehart and Hancock Prospecting is in doubt. In 2020, the AOC became a signatory to the United Nations Sports for Climate Action Framework. “We will certainly be advocating with our stakeholders the importance of conserving vital resources, reducing and recycling waste, promoting environmental stewardship and tackling global warming,” an AOC spokesperson said last month, prior to the deal being announced. Have they told Rinehart, who has called climate science “propaganda”? In recent years, the 67-year-old has poured money into Australian Olympic sports. Her annual contribution across swimming, rowing, volleyball and artistic (synchronised) swimming is estimated to exceed $10m, even before Friday’s announcement (an AOC spokesperson refused to put a dollar figure on the new deal). Hancock Prospecting billboards dominate Australian swim meets, while Rowing Australia’s high performance centre in Penrith is named after the iron ore miner. The sports often describe Rinehart as their “patron” in official communications and have awards and events in her honour. The billionaire’s choice of sports is noteworthy. Although swimming and rowing are both major contributors to the Australia’s Olympic medal tally, neither – nor volleyball or artistic swimming – is a commercial heavyweight. Despite all four receiving federal government support to varying extents (swimming is the best-funded, at over $9m this year), athletes do not typically enjoy the professional salaries commonplace in other elite sports. Rinehart, whose wealth is estimated at $31bn, has sought to fill this gap. She provides at least $1.4m annually to rowing, which goes to a weekly wage of $525 for the top 50 Australian rowers. Rinehart has a similar arrangement with swimming, providing salary-style funding for athletes across three tiers, with the highest-tier receiving about $32,000 per year. “I don’t say this lightly, but Gina Rinehart saved swimming,” veteran Cate Campbell told the Australian Financial Review during last year’s Tokyo Olympics, where she won two gold medals. “Gina Rinehart stepped in [after sponsors had withdrawn funding in 2012]. She made funds available that went directly to athletes. This allowed many athletes – myself included – to see that there was a future career in swimming for us.” Following the successful Tokyo 2020 campaign, Rinehart gifted earrings, designed by the magnate herself and made by Australian jeweller Paspaley, to female athletes in each of the sports she supports. Male athletes received Apple laptops. “The ongoing generosity of Mrs Rinehart in support of these Olympic and Paralympic teams is incredible,” Liberal senator Hollie Hughes told parliament in November, updating the Senate on Rinehart’s post-Tokyo gifting spree. “So many athletes are able to reach their dreams because of her support.” Rinehart’s annual funding is equivalent to about one-tenth of the Australian Institute of Sport’s total high performance investment allocation this financial year. Underscoring the significance of her involvement, Rinehart-funded sports accounted for 11 of the nation’s 17 Olympic golds in Tokyo and 26 of Australia’s total haul of 46 medals. In a video published on Rinehart’s website, Swimming Australia’s stars sung the praises of their benefactor following the Games. “You have been our number one cheerleader every step of the way,” Campbell said. Two-time bronze medallist in Tokyo, Alex Graham, added: “Without your support, of course, none of it would have been possible – and we are extremely grateful.” Other swimmers to feature in the video included Bronte Campbell, Jess Hansen and Ellie Cole. Clear climate views So what? What does it matter if Australia’s richest citizen chooses to splash her largesse on otherwise underfunded sports? If Australia’s swimmers, rowers and volleyballers can train full time thanks to Rinehart’s funding, and wear pearl earrings on nice occasions, all the better? And surely a major funding boost for the AOC can only be a good thing? Alongside her sporting passions, Rinehart has been outspoken in her views on climate change and continues to support climate change denial. In 2018, it emerged in legal proceedings that Hancock Prospecting had donated almost $5m to the Institute of Public Affairs, a conservative thinktank that has consistently promoted global warming scepticism. She also admitted to bringing prominent climate change sceptics Lord Christopher Monckton and Prof Ian Plimer to address students at a high school after learning that they had been shown Al Gore’s climate film An Inconvenient Truth. In a speech in November, Rinehart described Australia’s official attendance at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow as a “waste [of] taxpayers’ money” and mocked the job-creating potential of renewable energy. “I know the miles of solar panels will need wiping to be effective, and the millions of dead bats and birds – lives claimed by wind power infrastructure – will need collecting and burying,” she said. (While wind turbines do impact wildlife, fossil fuel production – and domestic cats – kill far more birds.) Rinehart is also an influential backer of the National party. She hosted deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce’s first fundraiser following his return to the leadership, and has previously flown Joyce to a wedding in India on a private jet. In 2017, Rinehart gave Joyce a personal cheque for $40,000 at a gala dinner, although he returned the money following criticism. The Nationals, as is well known, are the major blockers of climate action in the governing Liberal-National coalition. Joyce is believed to have opposed the Morrison government’s net zero by 2050 target. All of which sits uneasily with the growing climate activism of Australian athletes and sports. The Campbell sisters are among the hundreds of athletes to have joined the Cool Down initiative, championed by David and Emma Pocock, which seeks to use sporting profile to promote climate action. “If climate action was the Olympics, Australia isn’t winning gold, we’re not making the finals, in fact, we don’t even qualify,” its website says. In 2021, the Climate Council, a leading Australian climate NGO, published a report on sport and climate change, titled Game, Set, Match: Calling Time on Climate Inaction. Among the high-profile athletes to speak out following the report’s release were Bronte Campbell, Australian cricket captain Pat Cummins, surfer Adrian Buchan and AFLW star Sharni Layton. “Australia’s summer of sport is under threat from climate change,” Dr Martin Rice, the Climate Council’s head of research, told Guardian Australia. “Climate change, driven by the burning of coal, oil and gas, is worsening extreme weather events and disrupting Australian sport. By 2040, heatwaves in Sydney and Melbourne could reach highs of 50C, threatening the viability of summer sport as it is currently played. “Sport is a powerful force for climate solutions,” Rice continued. “When it comes to sponsorship, professional and community sports should switch from fossil fuel-backed companies to ones that invest in climate solutions.” Ongoing relationships Rinehart is not alone in both sponsoring sport and resisting climate action. Oil and gas company Santos is a major sponsor of the Tour Down Under cycling and the Wallabies, while Adani – which is currently developing the Carmichael coalmine, expected to cause 200m tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions – has its logo on the sleeve of the North Queensland Cowboys. Woodside, which in December signalled its intent to proceed with a gas development that will release 1.37bn tonnes of CO2, has been the Fremantle Dockers’ major sponsor for over a decade. Former Wallabies captain Pocock recently described fossil fuel sponsorship as “the new cigarette sponsorship.” But Rinehart’s involvement is closer, more personal and now, following the AOC deal, even more high-profile. She and her company are not just engaging in a transactional commercial sponsorship, but buying an intimate relationship with these sports and athletes. Her personal gifts to Olympians is indicative of that atypical involvement. By directly paying athlete wages, often bypassing the national sporting organisation entirely, Rinehart has also secured an ongoing relationship less easily replaced by traditional sponsorships. Cate Campbell, in her video message to Rinehart, noted that the billionaire had personally travelled to Cairns to farewell the team before they departed for Tokyo. “Seeing you waving us off as we took off to go and take on the world in Tokyo gave us that little bit of extra motivation that we needed to take on the best in the world,” said the four-time Olympian. Rinehart has also reportedly become close with silver medal-winning beach volleyballer Taliqua Clancy, who told The Australian newspaper “Mrs Rinehart has been amazing ... and with her support our journey to this point has been possible. We have missed her in Tokyo.” Guardian Australia sought comment from Swimming Australia, Rowing Australia, Artistic Swimming Australia, Volleyball Australia and the Australian Olympic Committee. The sports were asked whether their acceptance of Rinehart’s support might inhibit athletes from pursuing climate activism, whether the organisations had a position on climate action and net zero, and why they had not signed up to the Cool Down (organisational signatories include the AFL Players Association and Professional Footballers Association, but no major sporting peak bodies). A spokesperson for Swimming Australia said that it does not currently receive any direct financial support from Hancock Prospecting or Rinehart. Hancock Prospecting was previously a significant sponsor of Swimming Australia, including as a headline sponsor for major events (the company’s signage was prominently poolside at the Olympic trials earlier this year). Guardian Australia understands that the underlying commercial agreement was not renewed. “Our athletes often voice their opinions on issues they feel passionately about, including climate action,” the spokesperson said. The AOC confirmed that, prior to Friday’s deal, neither it nor its foundation had received any financial support from Rinehart or Hancock Prospecting. However, in 2014, Rinehart was awarded the AOC’s Order of Merit. An AOC spokesperson said: “We have no concerns [about athletes being silenced]. Athletes with strongly held convictions on important issues are entitled to express their views with the same freedom as any individual.” None of the other sporting organisations replied to requests for comment. Guardian Australia also unsuccessfully sought comment from Cate and Bronte Campbell via their agent. In a statement published by the AOC following Friday’s announcement, Rinehart said “our company has been a long-term supporter of the summer Olympic sports of artistic swimming, rowing and volleyball for many years, and specifically over 30 years for swimming. We are so proud to help our great Olympians who are such inspirations, through their hard work, most do not really know how hard they work, dedication, focus and self-discipline, as they endeavour to represent our country to the best of their ability. The traits these role models show in my view, are important for us all, if we wish to succeed in life and business.” Steadfast support With the new AOC deal and the 2032 Olympics confirmed for Brisbane, Rinehart’s involvement in Australian sport is only likely to grow. The billionaire has been a conspicuous presence at a number of events in Queensland celebrating the successful bid. Rinehart made headlines at an Olympic lunch in late November, where she appeared alongside the likes of Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, for her presentation complaining about the lack of facilities to moor her superyacht along the Queensland coast. “I am booked into Paris [2024 Olympics] for all four sports that I am involved in,” she told The Australian newspaper following an Olympic-themed Property Council event last year. “I have been asked to continue to Los Angeles [2028]. You never know I am an elderly vintage but I rather hope I am around for 2032 as well.” She confirmed that intent on Friday, expressing her desire to “continue this all the way until and including Brisbane 2032”. Rinehart may be steadfast in her support for Australian Olympic sport. But unless her position on climate action evolves, the sports and athletes that accept her funding will face an increasingly acute dilemma. What is the cost, to athletes and sports, of accepting money from an influential denier of global warming? And what is the cost to our planet? Last winter, the iconic Manly beach had been left battered following a major storm – the kind that now hits with greater frequency and eroding force. On the disturbed sand stood askew sponsorship banners for Hancock Prospecting, the mining company owned by Rinehart, surrounding a beach volleyball court. The juxtaposition was stark. Friday’s deal only underscores the dissonance. When increasing heat impacts Summer Olympics and a lack of snow sours Winter Games, the AOC will not be blameless.For the first time in two years we’re out planting trees again, part of a volunteer crew working for the Eastern Moors Partnership, currently transforming the moors on the western fringes of Sheffield. When all is done, around 280 hectares of trees will have been planted. Our leader, John Mead, explains that today’s area has been planted once already, an experiment that has gone awry. In an attempt to avoid more unsightly plastic tubes, this patch was fenced to keep off sheep and planted with unguarded whips. Unhappily, they haven’t prospered. The fence kept sheep out, but not the small herd of red deer that roams these moors. The whips have been munched and we must start again, this time with tubes. My partner and I look at each other. Weren’t we part of the crew that planted this patch last time? Yes we were. What has happened to our work? Moving through the bracken, it’s clear at least some of the young trees are still alive, bravely persevering. We ask John if we can go to their rescue. If they’ve made it this far, then surely with help they can make it through. He gives his blessing and we start combing the moor for saplings worth saving. Some have been chewed, others flattened by bracken going over in the autumn. Operating a system of arboreal triage, we tube some, mostly rowan, alder and birch, and leave those that seem beyond hope. Then we find our first oak. Less than a foot high, it’s standing proud of some heather, still wearing all its leaves, now dried and coppery. Not shedding leaves in autumn – common practice among oaks and beeches, especially young ones – is called marcescence. Why they do this is still not properly understood. It may be to protect young buds from frost and wind. Or else deter browsers, since the dried leaves are bitter, although red deer will still browse oaks with their leaves on. Or the delay may mean the leaves mulch later, when the young tree really needs the nutrients. Between us all we plant 500 trees; my partner and I rescue another 40. This little one seems humming with life, so we carefully protect it and move on. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryAustralia has recorded its deadliest day ever of the Covid pandemic, with 98 deaths recorded, as the first cases of the BA.2 descendant of the Omicron variant were recorded in NSW. There are now 35 cases of BA.2 in Australia overall including in Tasmania, ACT, Queensland, WA and Victoria. Of the new deaths, 39 were recorded in Victoria, 35 in NSW, 18 in Queensland, and one in the ACT. The previous one-day high was on 21 January, when 88 deaths were recorded. While overall cases are plateauing, the country’s chief nursing and midwifery officer, Prof Alison McMillan, said death rates were set to remain high for some time. “As we have seen during the two years of the pandemic, the number of deaths associated with those cases stay higher for a longer period,” she said on Friday. “There is a delay in the number of deaths, sadly, we have seen quite a number of deaths.” The director of NSW Health Pathology at Westmead Hospital and immunologist, Prof Dominic Dwyer, told Guardian Australia that three cases of the BA.2 strain had been reported in NSW on Friday, and that pathologists were monitoring all Australian cases closely. “It is mostly being seen in returning travellers,” Dwyer said. “It is unknown if it is more transmissible at this stage but that is under investigation, with the likely spread in Australia still uncertain.” Denmark, India, UK and northern Europe have recorded the most BA.2 cases. While it looks to be outcompeting the original Omicron strain, particularly in Denmark, there is no evidence of increased severity. It comes as the eligibility for Covid-19 booster shots were expanded to include 16 and 17-year-olds, after the medical regulator gave provisional approval for the age group to receive a third dose. Federal health minister Greg Hunt said final approval still needs to be handed down by the country’s leading vaccine advisory group, Atagi. “We are hoping to receive the Atagi advice within the next week, if not earlier, and if that’s a positive, we can make this available immediately,” he said. The waiting time between second and third doses will also shorten from four months to three months from Monday, allowing more people to get the booster. However, some states and territories have already shortened the waiting time to a three-month gap. There have been more than 7.3m boosters administered across the country, with two-thirds of those eligible having received theirs. While NSW health minister Brad Hazzard said people who had recently acquired Covid-19 should wait for four-to-six weeks after their infection to get the booster, Prof. McMillan urged people to get the third dose immediately after symptoms stopped. “We know that an initial infection does potentially provide you with a small amount of protection from Covid, but we really don’t yet know how much,” she said. “But we do know that the booster will provide you with high levels of protection against severe disease and death.” A recent survey from the NSW customer service department found half of people eligible for the Covid-19 booster didn’t know they were eligible for their third dose. Meanwhile, prime minister Scott Morrison defended aged care minister Richard Colbeck, after it was revealed he chose to attend the cricket over a Covid-19 committee hearing when 40 per cent of the system was in lockdown. Colbeck said he couldn’t attend the hearing due to diverting resources away from “urgent and critical work,” but his register of interests showed he accepted tickets to the Ashes test in Hobart for three days. “Ministers have many responsibilities, I can understand the criticism ... I think Richard has taken that on board,” Morrison told radio station 4BC. “I know what he does each and every day for the welfare of people living in our residential aged care facilities, and he’ll take the criticism on the chin and he’ll get back to work.” Morrison said 86 per cent of aged care facilities had received a visit for residents to get the booster shot, with the remainder to have theirs in the next week. There were 13,333 cases in NSW, while there were 12,755 infections recorded on Friday in Victoria. Queensland reported 9,974, the NT 940, while there were 734 and 584 new cases in the ACT and Tasmania respectively. South Australia has announced QR code check-ins won’t be required in retail settings going forward, however they will still be required in hospitality and high-risk settings. That state recorded 1846 new cases on Friday.Theodore Agnew was the model of a modern Tory oligarch. A successful businessman, he made enough to dabble in the new politics. He did all the right things. He backed a chain of academy schools and joined a Conservative thinktank, Policy Exchange. He donated a dutiful £134,000 to the Tory party between 2007 and 2009. Part-owner of an AI consultancy called Faculty, Agnew set it to work for Johnson’s Vote Leave campaign. He received a knighthood, then a peerage, and was then offered a ministerial post in Boris Johnson’s government, at the time being advised by the former Vote Leave director, Dominic Cummings. Faculty won a fistful of government contracts worth almost £1m. All in all, Agnew could feature in an Armando Iannucci satire on Boris’s Britain. Then this week, Agnew went bang. Even he had had enough. In February 2020, he was given the Yes Minister title of “efficiency and transformation”, and in a speech on Monday in the House of Lords he was supposed to congratulate himself on his work. He had been one of the custodians of the £47bn of public money that had been dished out to private companies and banks in bounce-back loans between 2020 and 2021. However, of this sum, Agnew reckoned £17bn had been lost and at least £5bn of those losses were to fraud, or 1p on income tax. He clearly choked on the task asked of him. And then something unprecedented took place. A Johnson minister proceeded to tell the truth and resign on the spot. The scheme had been chaos, he said. “Schoolboy errors” had been made by the Covid loans scheme, such as bounce-back loans being given to more than 1,000 companies that had not even been trading when Covid struck. As for the government’s 100% guarantee to banks that it would underwrite any losses, this had led to gross indiscipline by lenders. By the time checks came in to weed out fraudulent duplicate applications, 60% of the £47bn had already been paid out. Agnew estimated that a quarter of the money lost through the scheme would be down to fraudulent claims rather than credit failure. Many fraudsters had simply claimed the loans, then dissolved their businesses months later. Agnew’s speech was scathing. He declared that the government’s record as guardian of the country’s resources was “desperately inadequate”. The business department and its cash-gushing British Business Bank (BBB) had been “woeful” in their oversight and auditing of the scheme. The Treasury had shown “no knowledge of, or little interest in” the level of fraud. Using his words with care, Agnew accused them of refusing to “lift their game”, even when warned of the scale of the scandal. As for the resistance of the system to policing itself, the BBB, a government agency, would not even share fraud data with Agnew, the counter-fraud minister. A presumably desperate letter from Agnew to the bank released this week was sent on 16 December but went unanswered. The BBB fobbed off enquirers by saying it had been “held up in the House of Lords IT system”. Agnew estimated that total fraud across the public sector now ran at £29bn a year, or about 5p on income tax. The bounce-back loan fraud is estimated to have cost a third of the annual revenue of the new national insurance levy of 1.25 per cent due in April. Some picture of this scandal is already emerging from the mundane world of the courts, from crimes and insolvency records. A Manchester judge last week was reportedly aghast at bounce-back loans having been granted under Treasury guarantee to two serial fraudsters to the tune of £145,000. Loans went to known gangsters involved in expensive car theft. Other loans went into paying off gambling debts or into buying a £2,400 watch, according to the Times. Clearly much of this money will have gone to deserving businesses caught out by lockdown and genuinely faced with bankruptcy. Most world governments caught up in the pandemic felt entitled to print money to relieve what was assumed to be temporary – and unprecedented – financial hardship. This mostly took the form of “helicopter money”, disbursed to those in the furlough scheme and totalling £70bn. The bounce-back loan scheme was more like B-52 money. It carpet-bombed the ever murkier financial no man’s land that separates productive business and the City. The £47bn must explain why banks and other financial services survived the lockdown in remarkably healthy shape. It would seem that Cummings’ “madhouse” extended far more widely across Whitehall than just Downing Street. It embraced the Treasury and the business department, in what appears to have been a conspiracy of high-spending anarchy. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has already responded by promising to do “everything we can to get that money back”. So far though, HMRC investigators have recovered a mere £536m of stolen money. While Agnew in his resignation speech was kind to the prime minister, he conspicuously did not mention Sunak. It is hard to escape the suspicion that his wrath was directly largely at the Treasury. While Sunak has been desperate to distance himself from Johnson’s spendthrift tendencies, his leadership pitch, of seeking a responsible and fiscally stable Toryism, must be damaged by these revelations. When Covid is over, there is to be an awesome day of reckoning on many fronts. Ministers can reasonably protest that they faced a wholly exceptional crisis in 2020. From this, Britain emerged hesitantly at first but with some panache later on. Surely it should not suffer comparison with banana republics or kleptocracies? Last November, the website Politico published a leaked list of 47 companies that were awarded PPE contracts early in the pandemic through the so-called VIP lane. These went mostly with no competition or serious checking of their often dubious qualifications. The list of those who referred companies to the scheme dripped with the names of Conservative ministers, MPs, peers and party donors (including Lord Agnew himself). According to the National Audit Office, clearly now a broken reed in Whitehall, this afforded them a 10-times better chance of a contract. All British politics relies on clubs. To Alexis de Tocqueville it was this that saved democracy from the tyranny of the majority. The ties of friendship and mutual support that hold communities together also cohere political parties in their shared ideas and interests. Debts are generated, and it is probably as well they are honoured. But such debts require absolute transparency and audit. Public trust depends on those put in charge of the nation’s wealth being seen to distribute it competently, openly and fairly. Coronavirus has been to many Britons a traumatic experience. The fury of the reaction to “partygate” shows the delicacy of the public mood. That the club of those in power should not just party while the nation suffers but should casually line its pockets and those of its friends is intolerable. To this there can be only one answer: ruthless inquiry and, insofar as is possible, restitution. At very least, if Sunak knows what is good for him, his penance is to say goodbye to April’s stinging rise in national insurance. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistThe Last Leg 10pm, Channel 4 It’s a welcome return to Friday-night telly for the Last Leg gang, who are back for season 24 after just a few weeks’ break from our screens. Adam Hills, Josh Widdicombe and Alex Brooker will be joined by celebrity guests to unpick the week that’s been – and, considering everything that’s happened in their short absence, they have a lot to catch up on. Hollie Richardson George Clarke’s Amazing Spaces 8pm, Channel 4 Clarke inspects another assortment of nooks to see how imaginative Brits transform them into architectural Narnias: a 1920s railway carriage is converted into a luxury gym and sauna by a 21-year-old fitness fanatic, while a Victorian ladies’ loo becomes a romantic getaway. Ali Catterall Death in Paradise 9pm, BBC One In tonight’s episode of the Caribbean detective drama, Florence’s (Joséphine Jobert) undercover role takes a dangerous turn during a murder investigation. Facing a race against time, Neville (Ralf Little) sets out to solve the crime. HR A Discovery of Witches 9pm, Sky Max Diana’s literary treasure hunt continues, prompting a neat one-off story as the mysterious TJ Weston, owner of a magic book page, is found. While his problems gild the season’s overall theme, a soppy treat for fans looms when our heroine (Teresa Palmer) goes into labour with the twins. Jack Seale New York: Homicide – Murder at the Met 9pm, Sky Crime With its high culture setting (Manhattan’s Metropolitan Opera House) and a show-stopping premise (a violinist goes missing mid-performance), this true crime documentary has the makings of a Dan Brown novel as it untangles the mysteries of the night in 1980 when Helen Mintiks was murdered. Henry Wong The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Director Pedro Almodóvar and Oscar-winning actor Penélope Cruz – who have joined up again for upcoming drama Parallel Mothers – join Norton for a chat, along with James McAvoy. HR Film choice The Abominable Dr Phibes (Robert Fuest, 1971), 9.05pm, Talking Pictures TV Vincent Price’s 100th film is a fine example of the grand guignol tendency in 70s British horror. Director Robert Fuest had made episodes of The Avengers, and this 1920s-set chiller has elements of the spy series’ line in stagey murders. Price’s mute, scarred widower takes revenge on the doctors he blames for his wife’s death by recreating the curses visited on Egypt in the Old Testament. It’s inventive stuff – kudos to the set and costume designers – even with a sadly diminished Joseph Cotten as one of the surgeons under threat. Simon WardellA “green corridor” inspired by the 18th-century fashion of perambulating for both pleasure and therapy is to be created, linking the city of Bath with the rolling hills that surround it. The corridor is the first of 20 projects that the National Trust is planning to design to connect urban areas in England, Wales and Northern Ireland to green spaces on their fringes. In Bath, the conservation charity has acquired water meadows close to the River Avon which were threatened with development to help piece together a three-mile green corridor, which will also use existing footpaths. Hilary McGrady, the director-general of the National Trust, said the route – and the 19 others that are planned to follow by 2030 – would help reconnect people with the countryside. “These routes will improve access to nature for those living in urban areas who may feel disconnected from the countryside or cannot access rural areas easily,” she said. “Research has shown that engaging with nature is good for our wellbeing and that those connected to nature are likely to do more to help protect it. “Many of us have felt the benefit of spending time in the outdoors and close to nature, especially over the past couple of years. We want to make it easier for more people to spend time in nature.” The spa city of Bath, famed for its Georgian squares and streets, is seen as an appropriate and symbolic starting point for the project due to its history as a place of therapy. People were drawn to the city because of its thermal waters, but doctors from the 18th century onwards – such as the celebrated George Cheyne – also ordered patients to take therapeutic walks or rides out into the surrounding fields and hills. Tom Boden, the general manager for the National Trust’s Bath properties, said it was pleasing that modern residents and visitors would find it easier to get into the countryside. “It will make it possible for the 100,000 residents of Bath and thousands of visitors each year to head out of the city to enjoy the countryside,” he said. “With the city’s unique position, sat in a hollow in the hills, we want to help more people to get out to this amazing countryside.” The final route has yet to be established, but it is expected to start near Bath Abbey and will head east out of the city along current paths. It may run next to the river or the Kennet and Avon canal, knitting together patches of green space. A public consultation on it will begin in the spring. The project has been made possible by the acquisition of 40 hectares (99 acres) of land at Bathampton Meadows, which were threatened with destruction to make way for a park-and-ride site. Protesters argued that it would wreck a beloved landscape and jeopardise the city’s world heritage status. Campaigners also claimed it would ruin views of the city, including those from Little Solsbury hill, which was celebrated in the Peter Gabriel song. Bath and North East Somerset council (Banes) has transferred 25 hectares (62 acres) it owned to the trust, and the charity bought 15 hectares (37 acres) of farmland to protect the spot from any future development. The plan is to improve the water meadows to benefit wildlife such as the greater horseshoe bat and wading birds including snipe, and to increase the number of wildflowers to encourage more butterflies, such as the small blue. Walkers will be able to extend their explorations to Little Solsbury hill and link up to established long-distance footpaths such as the Cotswold Way and the Limestone Link. Cllr Richard Samuel, the deputy leader of Banes, said he was pleased the meadows had been preserved. “There is a real desire from residents and visitors alike to enjoy the unique green status of this historic city, and we want to open up more areas for them to enjoy,” he said. “Crucially, the proposed route is also relatively flat which will enable more people to not only enjoy the city’s architecture, but to also enjoy nature in the meadows and spend time outdoors.”The crumbling medieval fortress at Barnard Castle had a record number of visitors last year after gaining notoriety as the destination of Dominic Cummings on a lockdown mission to test his eyesight. Visitors to the 12th-century castle on the north bank of the River Tees were up by almost 20% in 2021 compared with 2019, according to English Heritage, the charity that manages more than 400 historic buildings and monuments. After the Guardian and the Daily Mirror revealed Cummings’ trip to his parents’ farm during the height of the first Covid lockdown, the prime minister’s then chief aide claimed he had driven with his wife and child to Barnard Castle to test his eyesight, which “seemed to have been affected” by his bout of Covid. He wanted to ensure he was able to drive back to London the following day, he said. At the time, Covid restrictions prohibited almost all movement, and the revelation of Cummings’ trip to the north-east caused public outcry. As restrictions eased in the following weeks, Barnard Castle residents and businesses reported a surge in curious visitors. John Blissett, the town’s former mayor, said the controversy had “put us on the map”. “The crowds have been coming in … I think the publicity has done us good.” The initial increase in visitors to the Grade I listed fortress – built by Bernard de Balliol and later in the hands of Richard III – turned into a record year in 2021, English Heritage said. Barnard Castle is among a number of smaller historic attractions that saw a boom in visitors last year, with several reporting record numbers, English Heritage said. The trend was a clear indication that the public “took advantage of the ‘stay at home’ mandate to rediscover the heritage on their doorstep”, the charity said. Boscobel House in Shropshire, where in 1651 Charles II hid from Cromwell’s soldiers in an oak tree after the civil war, saw an 82% increase in visitors compared with 2019. Kirkham Priory in North Yorkshire, which was home to Augustinian canons until its dissolution in 1539 and where secret military research was conducted during the second world war, had a visitor increase of 75%. There was a 30% rise in visitors to Pickering Castle, also in North Yorkshire. The 13th-century castle was used as a royal hunting lodge, holiday home and stud farm by a succession of medieval kings. Kate Mavor, chief executive of English Heritage, said: “In the past, lesser known, more intimate local sites in our care have often been overlooked in favour of our more iconic ones, despite having just as rich and important a history. “This has been a long and hard pandemic but one silver lining appears to be that with people staying closer to home, they have discovered historic places nearby.” • This article was amended on 28 January 2022 because an earlier version referred to John Blissett as the mayor of Barnard Castle. He is the town’s former mayor.Picks of the week The Big Hit Show “Twilight is stupid; if you like it, you’re also stupid.” Why is there so much vitriol towards female Twihards? (Spoiler: misogyny.) In the first run of a series unpicking pop culture’s biggest moments – from the Obamas’ media company – Alex Pappademas starts by dissecting the wildly popular tale of teenage vampire love – and what the reactions to it say about us. Even if you’re not a fan, he raises some great questions. Hollie Richardson Fake Psychic Journalist Vicky Baker captivated listeners with Fake Heiress and now she investigates the fascinating story of Lamar Keene, the go-to spiritualist of 1960s America. When he hung up his questionable crystal ball he decided to reveal the tricks of supposed psychics, and Baker asks if that too was a con while pondering the authenticity of the psychics who followed. Hannah Verdier Deep Cover: Mob Land Animal lover, lawyer and switcher of identities Bob Cooley is the subject of Jake Halpern’s new season of the reliably mysterious podcast. Cooley was a top Chicago mob lawyer in the 70s and 80s, but what was the price when he offered to switch to the FBI’s side? This dive into corruption quizzes the key figures around him. HV Chutzpod This lively, engaging podcast attempts to “apply a Jewish lens to life’s toughest questions”. Hosts Rabbi Shira Stutman and one-time West Wing actor Joshua Malina cover topics ranging from reality TV shows to the Jewish “New Year of the Trees”, via the recent hostage stand-off at a synagogue in the Dallas suburb of Colleyville. Alexi Duggins Backstage Pass with Eric Vetro Eric Vetro is a vocal coach who’s worked with the likes of John Legend, Shawn Mendes, Camila Cabello and Ariana Grande. Here, he entertainingly lifts the curtain on their craft, talking to them about their journey in a manner that feels genuinely intimate given their pre-existing relationships. Expect some enjoyably daft voice exercises too. AD Producer pick: Royally Flush - Human Resources Chosen by Danielle Stephens It’s fair to say that in the last couple of years the British monarchy has been put under a microscope for the way they handle their own family members, whether that be an heir to the throne and his American wife, or a prince embroiled in a civil sex abuse case. In a two parter titled Royally Flush, however, the Broccoli Productions’ Human Resources podcast goes back in time to investigate the royal family’s role in the slave trade in Britain, questioning how influential they were in trying to prevent abolition. This is clearly a pandemic production as audio quality can sometimes be shaky, but the content is an important listen. As the country gears up to celebrate the Queen’s platinum jubilee, writer and host, Moya Lothian-McLean takes us on an unexplored trip down memory lane, presenting fascinating insights into why – despite ample evidence that the monarchy was historically instrumental in propping up the slave trade in Britain – we haven’t heard so much as a sorry coming from Buckingham Palace, according to the program maker. Talking points Never underestimate the skill that goes into making a good podcast. Over a year since Meghan and Harry’s audio production company Archewell signed a podcast deal with Spotify, they’ve only managed to release a single podcast. Hence, presumably the job ads Spotify posted this week, looking for full-time staff to help Archewell. Why not try: Smartless | Screenshot Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureLet’s get the title out of the way first because it’s a silly one. Intentionally silly, though, which makes it OK. The Woman in the House Across the Street From the Girl in the Window (Netflix) – and don’t expect me to type that out in full again if you want any actual review in this review – is a mashup of psychological thrillers such as The Woman in the Window and The Girl on the Train. This is not a genre often parodied, and for good reason it turns out. Anyway, you don’t need to be a 2010s thriller fan to guess the softly lampooned cliches that lie within. The woman on the edge who looks like she has never been within 10ft of any actual edge, the sexy suspenseful vibes, and the hot guy who may or may not be a murderer. What’s really creepy about this “darkly comedic”, “built to be binged” limited series is that its title is the only spoofy thing about it. Otherwise, TWITHATSFTGITW, starring and executive-produced by the usually funny Kristen Bell playing it bewilderingly straight, is not funny at all. Nor is it serious. It doesn’t seem to know what it is. A meta-spoof spoofing a stab at a spoof, perhaps? Ultimately – and I’ve watched all eight episodes – this tonal confusion makes it ludicrous at best and at worst disturbing. And not in the way creators Rachel Ramras, Hugh Davidson and Larry Dorf intended. The first minute and 20 seconds are satirically quite promising. Anna (Bell), A Woman in a Dressing Gown (signpost: depressed but still sexy), is thwacking raw chicken breasts with a tenderiser to an eerie refrain of Rain, Rain, Go Away. Opening a can of Campbell’s cream of mushroom soup. Making the most unappetising dinner seen in a psychological thriller since the bunny got boiled in Fatal Attraction. Which took decades of simmering before it was collectively digested as a misogynistic trope. Now that is disturbing. “My husband used to tell me that I have an overactive imagination,” Anna says in a hammy English accent, crowbarring the unreliable narrator trope in nice and early. She drinks too much. Never wears a jacket then complains of the cold. Speaks in a British accent even though she’s not British. Then she switches to her actual American accent. I’m afraid this is as funny as it gets. There are more jokes in Rear Window. The rest of the opener is a scene-by-scene precis of all that it aims to send up. Anna is falling apart. She drinks bottle after bottle of red wine, without ever appearing to be anything other than sober, bright-eyed and white-toothed. She’s addicted to pills. She hears bumps in the attic and spends most of her time obsessing over the handsome stranger and his nine-year-old daughter who have moved into the house across the street. It’s all so tonally flat that intentionally awful lines such as “There’s so many layers to casseroles. Just like there are so many layers to a person”, end up just being awful. The reason for Anna’s breakdown? Her daughter died three years ago in what we discover were the most horrific circumstances imaginable. Oh, and the neighbour is grieving his dead wife, too. This, to me, is not solid spoof subject matter unless you really, really know what you’re doing (and even then …). Since her daughter’s death, Anna’s marriage has broken down and her career as a promising artist is over. Although, having seen her work, which covers the walls of her fifty-shades-of-turquoise home, this is no tragedy. (Even this confused me: is Anna’s awful art part of the satire? Or is it actually supposed to be good?) What we’re not meant to do is wholly trust her. Anna pitches up at the school gate in her dressing gown and slippers, despite no longer having a child to drop off. And she has visions. She sees her dead daughter playing in her bedroom, even asks her for a kiss, which her daughter declines: “Because I’m dead.” “How do I keep forgetting that?” Anna sighs. It’s supposed to be darkly comedic, but it doesn’t land because it’s true. We do keep forgetting people we love are dead after they die. It’s part of the distressing but also magical landscape of grief. Is there a way of making a genuinely suspenseful “darkly comedic” psychological thriller based on characters propelled by bereavement? This is the niche and slightly ridiculous question I found myself asking after watching TWITHATSFTGITW. Maybe Simon Pegg and Nick Frost could have pulled it off in the 00s, but it hasn’t happened here.“My kids LOVE it!” “It’s MASSIVE in our house!” The WhatsApp group for my daughter’s reception-year class – usually home to messages about lost school jumpers and tips for half-term clubs – explodes into emojis and capital letters at the mention of Disney’s Encanto. One obsessed eight-year-old has learned the words to all the songs – and so have most of their classmates. A’s five-year-old is demanding to know how to say the words in Spanish. Encanto-mania is taking over kids’ lives. For the uninitiated, Encanto (which is Spanish for “charm”) is Disney’s 60th animated feature film, featuring ridiculously catchy songs by Lin-Manuel Miranda, the composer of Hamilton. It tells the tale of the magical Madrigal family who live in an enchanted house hidden in the mountains of Colombia. Every member of the clan is blessed with an extraordinary gift – except 15-year-old Mirabel (voiced by Brooklyn Nine-Nine’s Stephanie Beatriz) who is struggling to find her place in the family. Encanto is not so much a fairytale as a family saga with a sprinkling of magical realism. It’s about unconditional love, understanding your worth and the burden of living up to family expectations. It’s possible that Covid lockdowns have put us in the mood for a film about complex family dynamics – with added Miranda hip-shakers. In the US, Encanto opened in cinemas over Thanksgiving weekend in November a few weeks after children aged from five to 11 became eligible for coronavirus vaccinations. But its arrival coincided with news of the Omicron variant, which dented ticket sales. The movie made $40.3m (£30m) in the US during the holiday break, plus $29.3m in the rest of the world. Nothing to write home about. “A fair opening by pandemic standards, and a weak opening by Disney standards,” said an expert in the New York Times. It launched on Disney+ on Christmas Eve. Two months after its theatrical release, Encanto is an unexpected Disney hit – a cultural moment and craze. Plenty of families I speak to spent Christmas watching it on repeat, playing the songs from breakfast to bedtime. The cumulative global total of streams from the soundtrack is 1.5bn. “I think we’re probably responsible for 50% of plays in the UK” jokes one of the WhatsApp mums. The industry magazine Toy Insider reported that an $80 Encanto Magical Casa Madrigal was one of the top-selling toys over Christmas. And we need to talk about Bruno. Last week, the Encanto song We Don’t Talk About Bruno reached No 1 in the UK chart, the first original Disney song to do so. It’s an ensemble number sung by the Madrigals and tells the story of their long-lost uncle, Bruno, the outcast of the family (he prophesied they would all lose their magical powers). The song is classic Miranda musical fusion – Cuban folk with Broadway and hip-hop. It’s been viewed 137m times on YouTube. One critic joked that it was the second most addictive thing to come out of Colombia. Not even Jared Bush, one of the film’s two directors, expected Bruno to be the breakout song. Speaking over Zoom from Los Angeles he shakes his head with disbelief, grinning: “What’s happening now, the Bruno song, the fact that it’s taken off and everyone wants to sing those parts …” He pauses to take it all in. “There’s no way I’d have thought that’s the song that would go kerchunk. I love it so much, but it’s a complicated song that requires context.” Bush first got an inkling of Encanto-mania when people started telling him to check out TikTok. “People were like: ‘Have you seen these TikToks? You’ve got to get an account, man.’” The #Encanto hashtag has been viewed more than 13.6bn times on the app, where users are sharing videos of themselves lip-synching and acting along to scenes. TikTok has even created Encanto social media stars. In December, 23-year-old Maribel Martinez posted a video of herself lip-syncing to Surface Pressure – for my money the catchiest song of the movie. It’s sung by middle sister Luisa Madrigal, who has superhuman strength but feels the stress of always having to be the strong one. “Give it to your sister, it doesn’t hurt, and see if she can handle every family burden,” Luisa sings. Martinez filmed herself after friends pointed out her resemblance to Luisa. Her video has been viewed more than 35m times. Martinez added a heartfelt caption to the video: “This is more than me just looking like her. It tells my story.” In an interview with NBC News she explained how the film held up a mirror to her experiences growing up: “[It] relates to a Hispanic community where the family dynamic is brought up like that and we’re put under so much pressure.” I ask Yvett Merino, one of the producers of the film who is Latina, about the connection Latinx audiences have with Encanto. Merino’s path to the Disney boardroom was not a traditional one; after studying sociology, she became a social worker for a year, then joined Disney as a temp and worked her way up. She tells me that Latinx Disney staff formed a group called Familia, which became a kind of advisory board to the film: they met once a month to talk about their lives and experiences, read draft scripts and watched early cuts. Their feedback was blunt, says Merino, laughing: “I joked that they were a real family, because they would be honest. When they didn’t like it, they let us know.” Disney worked hard to capture an authentic sense of culture and place in Encanto. The film-makers worked with Colombian documentary-makers and writers on recce trips. They cast actors with Colombian heritage: Stephanie Beatriz’s father is Colombian; John Leguizamo, who voices Bruno, was born in the capital, Bogotá. Colombian television star María Cecilia Botero voices Alma, Mirabel’s grandmother. It’s striking how many of the film-makers are Latinx. Merino is of Mexican heritage while Miranda is of Puerto Rican descent. Latina composer Germaine Franco, who orchestrated and arranged Miranda’s songs, grew up 10 minutes from the Mexican border in Texas, immersed in Latin music. Her stunning score features traditional folk instruments that are indigenous to Colombia, she tells me, including the arpa llanera, a harp (different from both a Mexican and Paraguayan harp, she says); and a flute played in Colombia called the gaita, which sounds like a bird. “When people hear the music and they say yeah, that sounds like Colombian music or that sounds like Latin music, then they can feel proud about it. They are seeing themselves, hearing themselves.” Franco is the first woman to score a Disney animated feature, and was the first Latina composer invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences’ music branch. She says of Disney Animation hiring more diverse voices: “I notice the difference in the meetings. Having Yvett Merino sitting in and Charise [Castro Smith, co-writer of Encanto] sitting in, I’m not the only person of colour in the room, which has been my experience on many projects. I feel like Disney is making the effort and they are showing their support by hiring people of colour.” The studio has, however, come under fire this week after actor Peter Dinklage criticised its “backwards” live action remake of Snow White and the Seven Dwarves. The writer she mentions, Charise Castro Smith, is a playwright hired as a co-writer on the screenplay who went on to co-direct the film. (“The best decision of the movie” jokes Bush). A first-generation Cuban American, one of the first scenes Castro Smith worked on was the prologue that explains the Madrigal “miracle”. In flashback, we see Abuela Alma, Mirabel’s grandmother, as a young woman fleeing her home with her husband, Pedro. When Pedro sacrifices himself to save his family, Alma’s grief sparks the miracle that gives her family its gift. But over the years Alma puts tremendous pressure on her family to live up to their gift. Merino believes that this storyline of intergenerational trauma and expectation goes some way to explain the emotional responses from Latinx audiences – such as Maribel Martinez’s TikTok followers. These are first- and second-generation immigrants who grew up listening to stories of their parents and grandparents’ sacrifices: “These stories stay with you,” Merino says. “I heard how hard my parents worked to give us a better life. You hold that in you. You grow up with that pressure of saying: I have to do this because of how much they sacrificed. I think that’s really part of what hits, what is connecting with people.” And it’s not just the Latinx community. I speak to a London mother of south Asian heritage who feels a connection to the family dynamics in Encanto. “The whole film speaks to a different family unit. People from non-white backgrounds can really identify with the complexity of a multi-generational family.” Her kids are not regular Disney watchers, “My older daughter doesn’t like princesses and she’s a bit of a film snob.” But they are on their fifth viewing of Encanto. “There’s something about a really good Disney that hits,” she says. “Something that you can put into practice straight away. With Encanto, it’s the message: Let’s be gentler to each other. We’ve all been through shit. It’s an understanding that our parents, our grandparents, had a tough time of it; things were different 50 years ago.” One last question for Merino – it might be a bit cheesy, I warn. As a child, how would she have felt watching Encanto? “It’s not cheesy at all! I always say this is the film I wished I would have had as a little girl. Growing up, I didn’t see stories that looked like my family, that looked like me. “I have a son who is 12 and a seven-year-old daughter. I get to see Encanto through their eyes. I know that my children are growing up seeing themselves. My daughter came home yesterday saying that everyone is singing the Bruno song at school. When the dolls first came, she opened it up and was like: She’s got brown eyes like me! She immediately saw herself in the dolls.” Over on the school WhatsApp, a mum shares a video of her daughter doing an expressive dance in front of the telly, Encanto playing. She is in her own universe, dancing with the kind of over-dramatic intensity you might remember from virals of kids belting out Let it Go from Frozen a few years ago. I check the Disney online store: Mirabel dresses are sold out. Encanto is in cinemas and on Disney+ • This article was amended on 28 January 2022. In the film, Abuela Alma’s husband is Pedro, not Pepa as an earlier version said.Earlier in January the London mayor and other organisations issued the first pollution warning of the year. These warnings follow the UK government index. They are designed to protect vulnerable people, but they do this by asking those people who experience most harm to avoid doing things outdoors. They do not ask the polluters to reduce their emissions. So, what can cities do when air pollution soars and what works? Many European cities restrict car parking, reduce speed limits, pull the most polluting vehicles off the roads or ban half of vehicles according to odd/even number plates. These are usually balanced by cheaper, or free, public transport and cycle hire. Most cities justify these schemes on the basis that traffic is a major source of air pollution, and any action must help. Independent scientific evaluations are mainly restricted to the biggest cities. For example, data from Madrid and Paris shows that banning the most polluting vehicles can reduce traffic pollution by about 15-20%. Many cities across the western half of the US ban home wood-burning when pollution is predicted to linger in the cold winter air. The scheme in Puget Sound, Washington issues bans each winter that typically last a few days but can be a week or more. In California’s San Joaquin Valley, wood-burning bans on around 100 days a year reduced hospital admissions for heart problems in elderly people by 7-17%. A pilot system has just begun operating in Sheffield in Yorkshire. Some smogs cannot be controlled from within the city. Western Europe’s spring smogs and northern India’s pollution problems will require actions from surrounding farmers too. The biggest smog reduction schemes are those around Beijing. These began with the 2008 Olympics and Paralympics, followed by the 2014 Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (Apec) summit and the 2015 parade to mark the 70th anniversary of the end of the second world war. At times, controls took place over an area of about 500,000 km2, covering a population of nearly 300 million people. Cuts to industry and traffic over the city and surroundings reduced pollutants by between 40% and 60%. Suddenly, the people of Beijing could see the true colour of the sky without the customary haze. It was nicknamed “Apec blue”, a term that later came to mean something delightful but fleeting. Beijing’s fleeting blue skies highlight a major problem with emergency actions. The air pollution that we breathe each day does more long-term harm than short smogs. Sufficient actions to control air pollution all the time would also help to control smogs.The reputation of British farming is at risk after its failure to follow the EU in curbing the overuse of antibiotics in healthy animals, say campaigners. Antibiotic use is the main driver of antimicrobial resistance, one of the biggest threats to human and animal health. Reducing its use in farming is seen as critical, with about two-thirds of antibiotics globally given to animals. From today [28 January], a ban on the administration of antibiotics to groups of healthy animals comes into force across the EU. As a result, European farmers will be able to use antibiotics as a preventive measure only in exceptional cases when there is a high risk of infectious disease, and then only with individual animals. UK ministers have previously refused to commit to an outright ban on preventive use – also referred to as “prophylactic use”. The nearest the UK came was in 2018, when farming minister George Eustice told MPs that the UK intended to “implement restrictions on the preventive use”. In response to a request for comment, a spokesperson for the government’s Veterinary Medicines Directorate said it would set out proposed regulatory changes as part of a public consultation during 2022. It did not respond to queries about whether it would propose a ban. “We are committed to reducing unnecessary use of antibiotics in animals and it remains our intention to strengthen our national law in this area.” The vast majority of farm antibiotics in the UK are used in the pig and poultry sectors, both of which have reported significant reductions, with total antibiotic use across all farm animals falling by 52% between 2014 and 2020. But campaigners say greater reductions could be achieved if preventive group treatments were banned. “British farmers have made good progress in cutting their antibiotic use,” said Cóilín Nunan, from the Alliance to Save Our Antibiotics, “but antibiotic use in British pigs remains two-and-a-half times higher per animal than in Denmark and the Netherlands. “The government can’t claim to be a world leader when the UK is one of the only countries in western Europe where it will be legal to use antibiotics routinely for preventive mass medication of farm animals.” Richard Griffiths, the chief executive of the British Poultry Council, said the current voluntary approach had put the UK ahead of most EU countries. “We are recognised as a leading proponent of responsible use of antibiotics, so no I do not think there is a danger of us falling behind anyone. “A large part of our success is based on trusting veterinary colleagues to make expert judgments on a case-by-case basis and then pooling what has been learned. Compulsory controls are unnecessary at this point and would be too blunt an instrument for what is an incredibly complex subject,” said Griffiths. Cat McLaughlin, the chair of the Responsible Use of Medicines in Agriculture (Ruma) Alliance, said there would “always be some instances and conditions that unavoidably require the treatment of groups of animals to help protect their health and welfare. “Ruma believes it is important for vets to have medicines available to tackle disease and ensure animal health and welfare, following the principles of responsible use: as little as possible, but as much as is necessary, at the right time and in the right situations.” Sign up for the Animals farmed monthly update to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at animalsfarmed@theguardian.comGina Rinehart’s Hancock Prospecting has been announced as a sponsor for the Australian Olympic Team through to 2026. Reaction to news of the partnership has been swift, with the Queensland Conservation Council calling for John Coates to step down as president of the Australian Olympic Committee (AOC). The council had previously written to the International Olympic Committee outlining its concerns about the games being associated with companies which contribute “to avoidable carbon emissions such as fossil fuel extraction”. The AOC announced the partnership on Friday morning, saying it will encompass the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympic Games, Paris 2024 Summer Olympics, and the Milan-Cortina Winter Olympics in February 2026. The mining giant will also “support” Australian Teams to Youth Olympic Games in Gangwon 2024 and in Dakar 2026, the Pacific Games in 2023. Rinehart is quoted in the statement as saying her company was “proud” to support the Australian teams, adding that she believed athlete’s “work, dedication, focus and self-discipline” were important to “succeed in life and business”. “We are delighted to take the next step in our long-term support of Australia’s best athletes and become an official Australian Olympic Committee partner, an organisation admirably independent of Government funding and aligned to our values at the Hancock Group,” she said. “We are so proud to help our great Olympians who are such inspirations, through their hard work, most do not really know how hard they work, dedication, focus and self-discipline, as they endeavour to represent our country to the best of their ability. “The traits these role models show in my view, are important for us all, if we wish to succeed in life and business.” Rinehart said she believed there was a need for greater scrutiny of how taxpayer money was allocated. “We believe government or sponsor funds should be used to ensure sport is at the service of the community and the athletes, and much tighter scrutiny of taxpayers and sponsors funds would assist,” she said Dual Olympian Rhydian Cowley accused the deal of undermining “the AOC’s sustainability action plan”. Queensland Conservation Council’s director Dave Copeman said he was “furious” at the decision and questioned how the future Olympics could be for all Australians when the interests of a “small group of donors were being promoted”. “This is a disaster,” Copeman said. “It’s such an own goal. It shows nothing is free from being up for sale. “There’s a real question of how much does a couple of big cheques to Swimming Australia and the AOC buy you out of a history of environmental devastation. “How the hell did they do this? What are they thinking?” Copeman called on Coates to step down, saying the body “either did not do their due diligence or they did it but decided it was worth the cost”. He also questioned the “overtly political” nature of the joint statement announcing the decision, which included comments from Rinehart: “As Australia looks to hosting an Olympic Games in 10 years, it will be important for our country to be open to investment and reduce the regulatory burden that impacts development needed to help make Queensland shine and the Games a success,”. Copeman described the comments as “outrageous”. A spokesperson for AOC said “Mr Coates has no intention of stepping down before the end of his term” and that the organisation was a signatory to the UN Sports for Climate Action Framework and the Sports Environment Alliance. “We see no conflict between this sponsorship and the AOC’s commitment,” the AOC said. “We have set targets for ourselves as an organisation to achieve climate neutrality. “We are committed to embracing sustainability in our day-to-day operations, measuring progress, advocating and educating with member sports.” Rinehart has declared herself one of Australia’s biggest Olympics fan, and has contributed $10m annually. Coates, “greatly welcomed” the partnership, saying it would deliver “significant benefits” to the Australian teams. “This is a major commitment to Australian sport. We welcome and thank Mrs Gina Rinehart and Hancock Prospecting for this investment. On the eve of farewelling our Team to the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympic Games, the timing is perfect. “There is no coincidence that the strong support of Mrs Gina Rinehart for many of our athletes in Tokyo yielded excellent results. There were so many golden moments and success in the pool, our rowers had a wonderful Games, as did our beach volleyballers.” Coates added: “The AOC is proudly independent of government. We neither receive nor seek federal funding for our day-to-day operations. We are grateful to have the support of Mrs Gina Rinehart, Hancock Prospecting and all our partners to ensure we retain that independence.” It comes only days after Rinehart, Australia’s richest person, was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia “for distinguished service to the mining sector, to the community through philanthropic initiatives, and to sport as a patron”. Hancock Prospecting has applied to build the equal-largest coalmine in Queensland next door the Adani coalmine in the Galilee basin. The company was founded by Lang Hancock, who in a 1982 televised interview called for the forced sterilisation of Aboriginal people. Rinehart has previously been criticised for warning against climate change “propaganda” in education. In a speech last year she said she had once helped to convince students climate change was not human-induced, by organising a talk at a school by climate sceptic Lord Christopher Monckton and told students to “do their own independent research” on “which comes first – global warming, or an increase in carbon”. She has also been an active financial supporter to climate sceptic groups and individuals. In 2018 court documents revealed the mining billionaire had paid $4.5m to the Institute of Public Affairs in 2016 and 2017. The organisation published a climate change review paper in 2017 that claimed most global heating was natural, a claim which experts rejected as “flawed” and “junk science”. Hancock Prospecting has been contacted for comment.Top story: Critics worry PM will ‘wriggle out of scrutiny’ Hello. Yes, it’s Friday, and this is Warren Murray bringing you news upon which to muse. Boris Johnson has been told it is “time for the truth to be released” as he faced more calls to publish a long-awaited report into “partygate” in full and not “suppress crucial details”. Anticipation reached fever pitch early this week of its arrival but some Tories believe the report will not be released until early next week. Sue Gray, the senior civil servant compiling the report, is said to want to send it in a state that can be published by Downing Street in full, without further redactions. “We are in no way seeking to block the report,” the prime minister’s spokesperson said. “It remains our intention to publish the report as it is received from the investigation.” Allies of the prime minister believe the longer-than-expected wait for the official civil service investigation is proving helpful for him, because it is letting anger in the party ebb. One Tory critic feared Johnson would “wriggle out of the scrutiny he deserves once again”. * * * Fears of NICs U-turn – The Treasury is becoming increasingly alarmed that Boris Johnson may be preparing to scrap the national insurance rise as he fights to save his job. The Guardian understands the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has stressed to MPs that it must go ahead. Speaking in Wales on Thursday, when asked to confirm explicitly that the increase would go ahead as planned, Johnson declined to do so. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, told the BBC on Thursday that there would be “no U-turn” on the rise. The 1.25 percentage point rise in national insurance contributions (NICs) is badged a “health and social care levy” and is meant to bolster funding for the NHS and social care. * * * UK falls behind on protecting antibiotics – The reputation of British farming is at risk after its failure to follow the EU in curbing the overuse of antibiotics in healthy animals, say campaigners. From today, a ban on giving antibiotics to groups of healthy animals comes into force across the EU. UK ministers have previously refused to commit to an outright ban on preventive use. Antibiotic overuse is the main driver of antimicrobial resistance, one of the biggest threats to human and animal health. About two-thirds of antibiotics globally are given to animals. The government’s Veterinary Medicines Directorate said it would set out proposed regulatory changes as part of a public consultation during 2022. * * * Hate crime accused in court – A teenager is to appear in court today charged with racially aggravated actual bodily harm after two Jewish men were attacked in north London on Wednesday, the night before Holocaust Memorial Day. Police were called at 9.50pm on Wednesday to a road in Haringey after receiving reports that two men had been assaulted. Both were taken to a north London hospital to be treated. A spokesperson for the Metropolitan police said the incident was being treated as a hate crime. * * * ‘Honoured to be a part of change’ – Inflo, the genre-straddling producer known for work with Adele, Little Simz and Michael Kiwanuka, has been announced as producer of the year in 2022’s Brit awards. It is the first time a non-white artist has won the award since the inception of the Brits in 1977. “I feel honoured to be a part of change,” said Inflo, whose real name is Dean Josiah Cover. “All the Black producers before me, I’m in awe and have studied you. I am you. Thank you for both paving the way and for your integral contribution to British music.” Inflo will receive his award at the Brits ceremony on 8 February at the O2 Arena, London. Adele, Ed Sheeran, Little Simz and Dave are top of the nominations, with four each. * * * Sight for more eyes – The crumbling medieval fortress at Barnard Castle had a record number of visitors last year after gaining notoriety as the destination of Dominic Cummings on a lockdown mission to test his eyesight, according to English Heritage. Separately, a “green corridor” is to be created linking the city of Bath with the rolling hills that surround it. Twenty similar projects are planned in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The Bath route it is expected to start near Bath Abbey and will head east out of the city along current paths. A public consultation will begin in the spring. Today in Focus podcast: China’s Covid-zero syndrome From the beginning, China’s response to coronavirus has been to quash outbreaks with ultra-strict lockdowns. But has the Omicron variant left its leaders trapped in the wrong strategy? Lunchtime read: How Encanto strikes a major chord The runaway success of the Colombia-set animation, with its infectious Lin-Manuel Miranda songs, is in no small part thanks to its Latinx characters, cast and key film-makers. Sport At the Australian Open, the men’s semi-finals are under way with Rafael Nadal on court against Matteo Berrettini, and Stefanos Tsitsipas due to face Daniil Medvedev. Catch all the action at our live blog. After Australia declared on 337-9, the England women’s captain Heather Knight is sitting on 126 at time of writing in the second day of the Ashes Test. England are currently 223-8. Newcastle have agreed terms with Lyon to sign the Brazil star Bruno Guimarães in a £40m deal. In Women’s Super League football, a revitalised Vivianne Miedema and Beth Mead have breathed life back into Arsenal’s title challenge in a tough 2-1 defeat of Brighton. The sprinter Harry Edward, who won two bronze medals at the 1920 Antwerp Games, has long been lauded as Britain’s first black Olympian. But researchers have discovered he was preceded by 12 years by a long forgotten black heavyweight wrestler named Louis Bruce, who reached the second round of the 1908 Olympics in London. Business Apple reported record sales in the holiday quarter, beating estimates as it benefited from high iPhone demand in China and withstood constraints caused by supply chain disruptions and the Omicron variant. The company made an all-time record revenue of $123.9bn, 11% up from last year and higher than analysts’ average estimate of $118.7bn. Stock markets in Asia followed stronger leads from the US and Europe to bounce back today after Thursday’s heavy losses. The FTSE100 is set to nudge up around 0.2% this morning while the pound is on $1.339 and €1.201. The papers Our Guardian front-page lead today is “Treasury alarm as PM refuses to confirm national insurance rise”. The i has “PM’s plan for cost-of-living crisis delayed by Downing Street turmoil” while the Metro has “Plan A OK” as “millions return to public transport” after the lifting of restrictions. The Telegraph likes the sound of “Work from home tax loophole to be closed” – the £125 in relief was costing the Treasury £500m, the paper reports. The Times has “US sounds alarm over Russian cash in London”. There is plenty to keep the PM’s partygate woes off the front pages or at least suppressed today, but the Express fails to cotton on: “Boris allies: don’t repeat Thatcher betrayal”. The Mail attempts to divert the asteroid of public fury from No 10 with “600 Whitehall fat cats paid over £150,000”. The Mirror has “Palace’s sex trial fear”, about the US court action against Prince Andrew. The Financial Times leads with “New Russian gas projects face sanctions if Ukraine is invaded”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.Right, time for a cup of tea and a recalibration. Thanks so much to all those who messaged in through the night, I really appreciate the company. Do join us for a crucial day three later today/tomorrow - can England capitalise on Knight’s brilliance, or can Australia grab the initiative back? Sleep well/have a lovely day. Bye! I’m not sure we’re going get any interviews at the close - so I’ll have to guess for you. Australia: frustrated, having had England on the rack, even though they still lead by more than a hundred. England: relieved. Looked as if they weren’t going to capitalise on the hard-work of Katherine Brunt (5-60) and at 169-8 the Ashes were swirling down the plug-hole. Enter Ecclestone, a fine foil to the brilliant Knight. An amazing stat from Geoff Lemon - Knight has been on the field for all but 13 balls of the Test. She’s the queen of cool, technically very together, not afraid to sit tight for a while, but full of strokes when the ball deserves it. 87th over: England 225-8 (Knight 127, Ecclestone 27) An expensive last over from Sutherland, and last over it is, despite the Aussie fielders doing their best to sprint into position for another. A boundary to long-leg and three from a stylish straight drive by Ecclestone, then a flick off the pads for four more by Knight. The umpires pull out the stumps, and Knight removes her helmet and raises her bat as she strides off, as well she should, accepting Aussie handshakes from Healy, Mooney and Haynes en route. 86th over: England 223-8 (Knight 122, Ecclestone 20) As a rogue feather pricks into my back from the cushion, Knight drives Perry through the covers but can’t pick the boundary. And confirmation that dogs are to cats like a toastie is to a dry bit of bread and cheese spread. 85th over: England 221-8 (Knight 121, Ecclestone 19) A full-toss from Sutherland (who has replaced Brown) is pinged back down the ground by Ecclestone and that’s the fifty partnership for the ninth wicket, as England’s deficit floats down towards two figures. 84th over: England 216-8 (Knight 120, Ecclestone 15) Sophie Ecclestone! Her first boundary of the innings comes with a shovel into the leg side off Perry. I’m almost as impressed with the behaviour of Ecclestone’s long pony-tail which always seems frizz-free and here it is again swishing along in neat perfection. 83rd over: England 210-8 (Knight 119, Ecclestone 11) No runs but a no ball from Brown’s over. And this partnership is now worth 41 in 100 deliveries and has taken England towards respectability. Some frustration I imagine for Australia at the moment. “Dug-out, Tanya?” writes Bob Mills. “Are we talking canoe here or are we underground. Either way, a great innovation for cricket, I’d reckon. Can we have a pic please?” Ok, so it isn’t exactly a dug-out. A shaded area for relaxation and preparation. You’re a pedantic lot you OBOers. 82nd over: England 209-8 (Knight 119, Ecclestone 11) Perry at the other end, uncharacteristically brunette. Perhaps this is a new image for a new era when the queen of Australian cricket can actually be dropped (though not from the Test team). She’s more accurate than Brown and beats Knight between inside edge and pad. Knight gives a nod of admiration and Perry smiles back. And again! This time one that keeps low. 81st over: England 208-8 (Knight 119, Ecclestone 10) Ten overs left in the day, as Australia take the new ball straight away in an attempt to finish off this plucky bit of sticking-around by England’s ninth-wicket partnership. Brown it is, and she’s expensive, as Knight digs away a yorker for four, then cuts a short one for another boundary. “I never disagree with Ravi Nair who is always annoying but never actually wrong (annoyingly),” types Robert Wilson. “Yes you can stroke cats’ bellies. Some like it fairly quickly, some after years of bribery and Cultural Revolution era brainwashing, and others will never, EVER accept it. Not as confusing as it seems, since if you make a mistake, it’s corrected with admirable promptness (and those interested in the structures of tendons and bones in their hands can gain fascinating insights. “The only advantage that cats have over dogs is that you can wear them as an actual scarf.” 80th over: England 198-8 (Knight 111, Ecclestone 10) Australia ignore my advice and continue bowling King. And Ecclestone is duly nearly bowled/caught by one that spins like a roulette wheel. 79th over: England 195-8 (Knight 110, Ecclestone 8) Jonassen rattles through a tidy over. 78th over: England 194-8 (Knight 109, Ecclestone 8) The paper clatters through the letter box but no-one stirs. Maybe time for King to have a rest - this has been a long spell. England pick five, Knight sweeping with elan. Oh, and, I think I forgot to mention, but England have avoided the follow-on. 77th over: England 189-8 (Knight 106, Ecclestone 6) A not totally convincing throw of the bat from Knight against Jonassen, but she still picks up two. Ecclestone showing resolve. 76th over: England 186-8 (Knight 103, Ecclestone 6) Oooof, a leading-edge, from Knight, just falls short of King. 75th over: England 183-8 (Knight 101, Ecclestone 5) Gardner has two close enough to examine Eccleston’e split ends, and another to mutter sweet nothings. She still finds two off Gardner with a push, and the follow-on is now in touching distance. This: 74th over: England 181-8 (Knight 101, Ecclestone 3) Australia lose another review, going for the lbw as Ecclestone misses King, but the ball pitches outside leg stump. King turns away, hands to the sky in supplication, grin on her face. Now look at this belly waiting to be rubbed...(do cats like having their bellies rubbed?) 73rd over: England 180-8 (Knight 101, Ecclestone 2) A couple of singles from Gardner, and England’s next target is the eight runs needed to avoid the follow-on. 72nd over: England 178-8 (Knight 100, Ecclestone 1) And there it is! Knight’s second Test hundred comes with a push through the covers off King: she makes her way safely to the non-striker’s end, takes off her helmet, beams a huge smile, raises her bat with a staccato acknowledgement and gets a hug from Ecclestone. You can see how much work she’s put in, her hair heavy with sweat. What a super knock - she’s just always so calm no matter what happens. In the England dug-out they all stand and applaud. 71st over: England 175-8 (Knight 96, Ecclestone 1) A big lbw appeal against a wooden Ecclestone and Australia decide they fancy a review when the on-field ump says no. Hits above the knee and it is drifting away from leg stump. Australia duly lose the review. 69th over: England 174-8 (Knight 96, Ecclestone 1) A handy single off King, and Knight is just a shot away from three figures. Does she have Joe Root on speed dial I wonder? 69th over: England 173-8 (Knight 95, Ecclestone 1) Not sure if that counts as a chance - Knight bats the ball back and Jonassen leaps skyward, tipping the ball with the top of her fingertips but unable to hold on. And they take drinks, with England needing just 15 runs to avoid the follow-on. Not sure what Australia will do if they get a chance to enforce, might be influenced by an inclement forecast tomorrow. 68th over: England 170-8 (Knight 93, Ecclestone 0) Knight inches closer with a single off King’s last ball and just an over to go until drinks. 67th over: England 169-8 (Knight 92, Ecclestone 0) Jonassen, left-arm over, makes the break-through immediately when Shrubsole is tempted by a wide one. Nineteen needed for the follow on, eight for Knight’s century. “Ma chère Tanya,” Bonjour Robert Wilson! “Is your email action exclusively French this morning? C’est dingue! Can’t believe there’s been no pooch-pic. Not even a sketch or cartoon. I’ll send my cats if you do (they don’t care about cricket but they love the ext-mounted camera footage of the Apollo 11 landing - seriously).” What intellectual cats! All I need to tell you is she’s the best dog . She’s shown no interest in space flight as yet, but is very keen on squirrels., her favourite spot either looking through the window or, if weather permits, (she doesn’t like rain), perched on the back step for the swish of a grey tail. Just a dobble shot to extra cover where a diving McGrath picks it up and slots it in her apron pocket. Shrubsole pulls her helmet down over her eyes in disgust with herself/to avoid her captain’s steely glare. 66th over: England 168-7 (Knight 91, Shrubsole 3) England need 20 to avoid the follow-on, as King rattles through another super over, beating Shrubsole’s outside edge. 65th over: England 167-7 (Knight 90, Shrubsole 3) Gardner, neat, three from it. 64th over: England 164-7 (Knight 88, Shrubsole 2) I love Heather Knight’s sang-froid, approaching her century, not much support, but a loose ball from King and down she goes, sweeping away, tending the ball down to the rope “Thank you for the OBO.” A pleasure Duncan Wood and I’m sorry you’re sleepless in Bedford. “Re over 57, I like the idea of ‘maternity leaves’, but not sure how to define them: a particularly mumsy way of removing the bat from the path of the ball? Any better offers?” Very droll. I think the gentleness of a maternity leave would depend very much on how much sleep the little darlings are permitting. 63rd over: England 158-7 (Knight 83, Shrubsole 1) These spinners whip through the overs far more quickly than is polite on a dark January morning. But Shrubsole survives and even gets a run. I’d say she’s more comfortable in have-a-go mode than stay-and- protect but let’s see. 62nd over: England 156-7 (Knight 83, Shrubsole 0) England should be able to make the follow on-target, which sits in the near-distance, just 32 runs away. Shouldn’t they? One is ticked off King’s over. 61st over: England 155-7 (Knight 82, Shrubsole 0) A flustered shot from Dean who had looked fairly composed in the face of fine bowling from Australia. The ball before she had turned the ball to short leg, straight into Haynes’ midrift, who couldn’t quite hold-on on the rebound. Knight reacts to the collapsing house of cards by reverse-sweeping Gardner for four. She is some cool cookie, and lives completely under the radar in the UK. The ball after being dropped, Dean hasn’t re-found her zen, and has a swing, lofting the ball into the hands of McGrath at deep square leg. 60th over: England 150-6 (Knight 77, Dean 9) Coffee - where would we be without it?As the sun bakes down at Canberra, Australia build the pressure on Dean, with two close-in fielders, watching, murmuring. But Dean nonchalantly takes a single leaving Knight, thick wristband on her front arm, to eye up the last two balls from King. 59th over: England 147-6 (Knight 77, Dean 6) It’s time for Gardner, and spin at both ends. She nearly strikes straight away, as Dean turns her off her hip just past the eager paws of Haynes at short leg. 58th over: England 143-6 (Knight 74, Dean 5) King looks like she has a wheelbarrow full of surprises up her sleeve. Knight has to squeeze down on a ball that threatens. One from the over. 57th over: England 142-6 (Knight 73, Dean 5) Rachael Haynes shows that maternity leaves has not dulled her competitive instinct with an energetic dive at point to stop four. A classy straight drive brings Dean a couple more as the score ticks over. 56th over: England 138-6 (Knight 71, Dean 3) Knight looking good for three figures here, if Dean can stay with herm she successfully plays out the last three balls of King’s over, who has bowled more slowly since tea. 55th over: England 136-6 (Knight 70, Dean 3) The fresh-faced Brown canters in but Knight suddenly has ants in her pants. A thick edge is hauled back from the rope by Mooney - a very smart bit of fielding - then a kind of cut-cum-fly through point for four. Also throw a no-ball bouncer into the mix. 54th over: England 130-6 (Knight 64, Dean 3) King, in her trademark shades, bustles in. Dean, in her helmet, blunts back. A maiden. “ Very early morning hello from France, Tanya,” Hello Tone White! “Just wondered if Doh-gi is hiding under a blanket or bravely sharing the all-girl panto from your lap.I guess the rush from dressing room to centre stage and back helps to keep you awake!” Darlin doggy is curled up in a full stop beside me. Ive taken the hot water bottle but she’s stolen the cover. 53rd over: England 130-6 (Knight 64, Dean 3) Darcie Brown replaces Sutherland, another very promising young cricketer coming through the baggy green ranks. She’s like a young rabbit, very high knees, springing to the crease. Dean looks wary. 52nd over: England 128-6 (Knight 63, Dean 2) Nought but a singles off King’s ninth over of the day. Knight lucky to miss a fat leg-break. 51st over: England 127-6 (Knight 63, Dean 2) Healy roars for a caught behind off Dean but she’s much more enthusiastic than anyone else, and it hasn’t come off the bat. A sprinkling of singles from Sutherland’s over. 50th over: England 124-6 (Knight 60, Dean 1) Not too many in this afternoon at Canberra, though we’re not getting many crowd shots so I can’t give you an accurate guess. The sun has crept out from the clouds though and shadows flicker beneath the players. England take three from King’s over: another one full of tasty variation. 49th over: England 121-6 (Knight 58, Dean 0) Knight doesn’t look as drawn as Joe Root did by the end of the Ashes series - “give it time” calls a voice from the wings. Sutherland it is from the end after tea, and just a single to show for it from England. “Well, women in sport have always wanted parity with men, and it seems our England cricket team are making great strides towards equalling the men’s team against Australia,” types Christopher Moss. “Thanks for the OBO commentary - as a night owl I’m just sitting down to dinner. It must be terribly dispiriting for you, although at least none of these test matches last very long ...”” Yes, its been a funny way to play the winter - but we’re always so grateful for messages to keep us going through the night. 48th over: England 120-6 (Knight 57, 0) King whisks through her last two balls as Australia stretch into the final session of the day. Aint this the best: Time to just make a quick cup of coffee and digest that last session, back in five. 47.4 overs: England 120-6 (Knight 57) They take tea with the fall of Brunt’s wicket and the tea-leaves will not make pretty reading for England, who have slipped since Dunkley and Knight were looking in pretty good nick an hour or so ago. A first Test wicket for Alana King on debut! Brunt sends for the DRS more in hope more than anything and the replay shows a ball that pitches in line, hits in line... and that’s umpires call. Super bowling! 47th over: England 120-5 (Knight 57, Brunt 1) Just a couple of singles off Sutherland, and the runs have rather dried up since that wicket. 46th over: England 118-5 (Knight 56, Brunt 0) Brunt plays out a maiden from King, who zips through six balls in less time than it takes to take two slurps of disappointingly tepid tea. 45th over: England 118-5 (Knight 56, Brunt 0) Just as England were starting to breathe a little more easily, Jones hastens her own end with an awkward stab. Jones, pokey in the crease, pulls awkwardly which is brilliantly caught at mid-on by Brown who runs, dives and swallows! 44th over: England 118-4 (Knight 56, Jones 13) It’s King’s turn with a scurried run-up to the crease, arm whizzing over her ear. 43rd over: England 117-4 (Knight 56, Jones 12) Super innings from the captain, who strides to her fourth century in her last five Test innings. She goes to her fifty with a(nother) gorgeous cover drive, off Sutherland, raising her bat and bumping gloves with Jones. The very next ball is pulled for four more. Runs-aplenty for England in these last few overs. 42nd over: England 109-4 (Knight 48, Jones 12) An over of plenty for Jones off Perry, if not altogether convincing. An airy drive, followed by a top-edged hook to another Perry bouncer, finished by a much more statuesque cover drive. 41st over: England 99-4 (Knight 48, Jones 2) Sutherland gets the nod, zipping in, a very fluid run-up. But through the covers goes Knight with another stylish drive. 40th over: England 95-4 (Knight 44, Jones 2) That was an eventful over for the middle of the night, Jones picks up her first runs, then a near run-out as an over-eager Jones is sent back by Knight, then a Perry bouncer. 39th over: England 93-4 (Knight 44, Jones 0) Knight seems a bit twitchy: having a farmer-esque mow at McGrath’s first ball, and squeaking home for a second run from a flick, but finally finding her straps with a smart drive for four. 38th over: England 86-4 (Knight 38, Jones 0) Perry, pony-tailed, comes off her long-run and Jones is tentative to her first ball, playing and missing. Thought this was an fascinating stat, thought it says as much about the lack of red-ball cricket than anything else. 37th over: England 85-4 (Knight 37, Jones 0) Thanks Geoff, what a huge wicket on the stroke of drinks! Dunkley had been looking in sweet touch and England need to make sure their later-middle order can stick with Knight. McGrath sends down a half-volley and Knight tucks in, wheeling it through the covers for four. 36th over: England 79-4 (Knight 32) All on Heather Knight now. England might have to start thinking about the follow-on mark of 188 rather than thinking about a lead. I will leave that part of our travels to Tanya Aldred, and see you tomorrow. The last ball before the drinks break! Knight gets off strike with the pull shot. Dunkley just wants to see out the over. She hangs a dead bat out at Perry’s delivery, trying to drop it into the pitch, but instead offers an inside edge that goes straight back down onto her stumps. The twists of fortune. 35th over: England 78-3 (Knight 31, Dunkley 15) A quieter over from Gardner, just one run this time. Eight off her previous. “I do think that this Ashes is already far more engaging than the recent men’s installment, and England women don’t tend to collapse with the bat as professionally and prolifically as the men, so I feel there is hope yet,” writes Andrew Benton. “Is the format under consideration for any men’s series - Ashes or other? It would seem to reduce the number of different format games that teams need to play, concentrating them in a single block, and thus reducing the time and game commitments on the players and staff. Or, maybe not?” They did try this in England a few years ago, I think it was against Sri Lanka. But the different formats are sufficiently established that it didn’t feel cohesive, I don’t think there was much buy-in to the overall points idea. And really they use this format for the women so that boards don’t have to commit the time or money to a proper Test series. 34th over: England 77-3 (Knight 30, Dunkley 15) Perry returns for a second spell after her seven overs straight to start the innings. She beats Dunkley immediately, past the outside edge with bounce. Two slips, gully, point, and basically a ring field. Dunkley misses a glance down leg. Catches up with the next one for a single. Knight drives nicely but straight back to Perry. And again there’s a sixth delivery overstep, for an extra. Knight gets a single from the seventh. 33rd over: England 74-3 (Knight 29, Dunkley 14) Ash Gardner comes on with her off-breaks, and Heather Knight belts her for six! Second ball of the over, slog-sweep over a vacant deep midwicket, and it goes the journey. Knight lines up another powerful sweep but hits it flat into Haynes at short leg and takes a run on the deflection. This is spicy. Then it’s Dunkley’s turn, playing that half-squat pull shot off the spinner this time, out to the leg-side sweeper. 32nd over: England 66-3 (Knight 22, Dunkley 13) Good ball from Brown, draws the edge from Dunkley into the cordon but on the bounce. There’s a fumble but they don’t take the run. And just as well, because when Brown drops short Dunkley pulls again for four! This strange technique she has of dropping her back knee and keeping both feet planted as she swivels her upper body rather than pivoting to play the shot. It works on this occasion. 31st over: England 62-3 (Knight 22, Dunkley 9) Another leg flick for Knight for a single, then Dunkley glances Sutherland finer and picks up another four. She’s such a busy player in white-ball cricket that it feels against her interests to be too circumspect against the red ball. Sutherland tries the yorker but it’s over to the leg side and Dunkley almost sweeps it away to deep backward square for a run to the sweeper. 30th over: England 56-3 (Knight 21, Dunkley 4) Knight has been the most composed for England by far, and she knocks Brown off her hip for a single. Brown bounces Dunkley, and Dunkley is away! Plays a pull shot for four. Then we have another of those very belated no-ball calls from the sixth delivery, but there’s no score from the seventh. 29th over: England 50-3 (Knight 20, Dunkley 0) That is officially a Good Leave™ from Dunkley, who watches Sutherland’s delivery pass within about a centimetre of off stump. The players all wince. Then Dunkley throws a sloppy cut shot at Sutherland and misses completely. Hasn’t scored from a dozen balls. 28th over: England 50-3 (Knight 20, Dunkley 0) Darcie Brown is back for pace, and she’s on line to begin with. No runs for Knight. Every bowler poses a challenge, but England’s run rate has progressed at a crawl in this innings, and it isn’t helping them. Just being out there doesn’t get them anywhere if a good ball comes along eventually to take a wicket, as with Sciver. Keeping some pressure on the Australians by scoring would also be a helpful form of defence. 27th over: England 50-3 (Knight 20, Dunkley 0) Sutherland with her first Test wicket under her belt will carry on with enthusiasm. Dunkley, still pretty young in her international career, is happy to let go everything she can. 26th over: England 50-3 (Knight 20, Dunkley 0) Lovely shot from Knight to put the dismissal out of mind, driving King’s fuller ball off her toes out through midwicket. Perfect timing for four. Sophia Dunkley is her new partner. 25th over: England 46-3 (Knight 16) The sun comes out, and the contest catches fire! First it’s Sciver striking Sutherland away through midwicket for four. Then Sciver lays into a cut shot and only some good fielding at point saves another boundary. But Sutherland keeps striding in with purpose, putting energy into her run-up, and from the last ball of the over she hits the pitch at a fuller length hard enough to make the ball jag in off the seam. Sciver jams the bat across trying to protect her stumps, and instead gets a little inside edge through to Healy. 24th over: England 42-2 (Knight 16, Sciver 11) Lots of loop from King, and she’s bowling just outside off stump to Knight now. I wonder if she’s setting her up for the googly to spin back in? If so she’s playing the long game, sticks with leg-breaks and maybe a top-spinner from the last ball. 23rd over: England 42-2 (Knight 16, Sciver 11) Sutherland cuts a ball into Knight and hits the pad, but too high. Knight gets off strike with a pull shot, then Sciver is similarly hit on the thigh pad. Tricky stuff from the bowler. 22nd over: England 41-2 (Knight 15, Sciver 11) And no sooner said than here comes King, replacing Jonassen, so perhaps Jonassen only bowled to help King switch ends. The leg-spinner gives it flight, finds some turn again, and only gives away a run from the last ball as Knight flicks to midwicket. 21st over: England 40-2 (Knight 14, Sciver 11) Sutherland to pair with Jonassen, which is curious given how good King looked in her over before lunch. A leg bye and a no-ball, and I think that was called because of her back foot cutting the return crease. You rarely see those called in top level cricket. Ian Chappell will be happy. 20th over: England 38-2 (Knight 14, Sciver 11) Jess Jonassen will bowl her first over to start us off in the second session. Left-arm orthodox, accuracy being her watchword, and she bowls exactly as you’d expect, right on the dot and Sciver doesn’t score. We’re back after lunch... An interesting first session with the ball dominating. Lots of swing and movement. The Australians came out wanting to add another 70 or 80 runs, but only added 10 before losing two of their remaining three wickets, and opted to declare rather than send out the No11. Brunt took five wickets. That brought England to the middle, and good work from Australia’s opening bowlers has sent back both openers for not many. Plenty to do for England after the break. 19th over: England 38-2 (Knight 14, Sciver 11) The traditional over of spin before lunch will fall to Alana King, for her first over in Test cricket. She lands them nicely. It looks like she has white frames on her shades today to match her outfit, after the colourful green frames on her T20 debut. Sciver waits for a fuller one and drives three runs down the ground, then King follows up by turning one past the edge. Good ball! Proper turn. That’s lunch. 18th over: England 35-2 (Knight 14, Sciver 8) McGrath is bowling tempters outside the off stump, and Sciver is resisting them. McGrath’s patience wanes first, trying to angle one in at the pads but it’s too far across and Sciver can glance a run. Knight does the same before Sciver clips one to midwicket. 17th over: England 32-2 (Knight 13, Sciver 6) Sutherland bowling as the lunch break approaches, and it looks like the English pair just want to get there. No attempts to score. 16th over: England 32-2 (Knight 13, Sciver 6) McGrath has a change of ends to replace Perry after that long opening spell. Sends a wild one down the leg side, but otherwise is very tidy, just a single to fine leg - but then comes her traditional sixth-ball overstep. Sciver drives the replacement ball through cover for two. 15th over: England 28-2 (Knight 12, Sciver 4) Sutherland bowls straight and Sciver clips hard into Haynes at short leg on the bounce. No joy there, but plenty when Sutherland overpitches and Sciver plays a lovely on-drive for four. Stands up tall and hits it under her eyes. 14th over: England 24-2 (Knight 12, Sciver 0) Perry is into her seventh over on the reel, and still getting the ball to nip away from the right-hander. Has Knight fishing and missing. Healy goes up in appeal for a ball down the leg side, and Perry joins in belatedly, but no agreement from the umpire this time. Clipped the pocket of her trousers, I fancy. No run from the over. 13th over: England 24-2 (Knight 12, Sciver 0) Annabel Sutherland to have her first go with the ball, landing on a perfect line and length from ball one. Knight doesn’t score until the last ball, dropping and running to cover. She has a very good understanding between the wickets with Sciver from white-ball cricket, and they will need to bring that into their work today. Find a way of adding runs when it’s difficult. 12th over: England 23-2 (Knight 11, Sciver 0) Nat Sciver to the middle, captain and deputy together with a big job to do. Australia’s leadership pair did it for Australia yesterday when Lanning and Haynes added 169. Something similar required. Through the forward defence, hit on the back thigh, and Perry pleads with the umpire while backpedalling all the way down the pitch. After a very long deliberation the round-arm dismissal finger of Michael Graham-Smith goes up. Beaumont is very short so her back thigh is not high off the ground. Beaumont reviews but ball-tracking shows that crashing into the top of middle. She was going nowhere for a long time, her high backlift made it hard to get the bat down in time to stop a ball seaming into her, and Perry gets wicket #301 across formats for Australia. 11th over: England 23-1 (Beaumont 5, Knight 11) A real wrestle going on between bat and ball. McGrath beats the edge, then Knight flicks her away for two runs. England having to work hard for each run. McGrath gives them one extra with another overstep. Jess Jonassen said just now that they batted on this morning hoping that she and Sutherland and King could take them past 350 and towards 400, but decided to declare based on the bowling conditions when those two wickets fell. So she ended up 98 runs short of a hundred today, but my colleague James Wallace had an interesting interview with her a while back about making 99 on her debut. 10th over: England 20-1 (Beaumont 5, Knight 9) Width from Perry, Knight gets a square drive nicely out of the middle, fumbled at point for a single. Beaumont has been becalmed on five runs for a long while now as Knight has come in and gone past her. That continues as she blocks out the rest of Perry’s over, ducks a bouncer, and it’s time for drinks. 9th over: England 19-1 (Beaumont 5, Knight 8) First change in the bowling, with Tahlia McGrath coming in. Growing in stature with each match for Australia over the last few months, having had a slower start to her career before that. She’s finding swing too, but starts too straight to Knight and can be clipped for two. Then a single to cover. The last ball is very belatedly called as an overstep by the third umpire and has to be rebowled. 8th over: England 15-1 (Beaumont 5, Knight 5) Perry has her outswinger going beautifully now, drawing Knight forward and beating the edge again. Movement on offer consistently. Only when Perry pitches a bit short can Knight deflect a run towards midwicket. 7th over: England 14-1 (Beaumont 5, Knight 4) A peach from Darcie Brown that lifts from a length and zips past the edge of Beaumont’s bat. Then another very wide ball. It’s fun stuff, this spell, you don’t know what’s coming next. Bowls short and rapid, and Beaumont flings a cut shot at it but is beaten by the pace. 6th over: England 14-1 (Beaumont 5, Knight 4) Perry holds Knight scoreless up until her 11th ball, but when that ball slips fuller Knight throws her hands through a square drive and slices it behind point for four. Not fully controlled. Knight resists a similar temptation a couple of balls later. 5th over: England 10-1 (Beaumont 5, Knight 0) Brown has lost her line a few times and strayed wide outside off, dragging the ball down as she looks for full pace, but when she gets the ball on line she’s tough to face. Angles one in at the body of Beaumont which is uncomfortable. The closing ball is fuller and Beaumont can check drive through cover for two. 4th over: England 7-1 (Beaumont 3, Knight 0) Beaumont pushes a run off her pads, after which Perry works at Knight beautifully, beating her on an off-stump line a couple of times. 3rd over: England 6-1 (Beaumont 2, Knight 0) The TV commentary is talking about how England didn’t take their catches early yesterday. Except... they did, they had Australia two down with four runs on the board. The drops came in the middle of the day. Anyway. Heather Knight comes to the middle and sees off Brown’s next five balls. Early wicket for Brown! Poor shot from Winfield-Hill, just throws the bat at a wide ball without getting into position for a cover drive, and slashes a low thick edge to third slip. Some away movement, and that’s a gift for Australia. 2nd over: England 6-0 (Winfield-Hill 4, Beaumont 2) Ellyse Perry will share the new ball. Bowled really well in the Test against India late last year. Takes a couple of balls to get her radar here, wide either side of the wicket, but zeroes in eventually. Beaumont with her super-high aggressive backlift looks vulnerable against a moving ball, she has to bring the bat down with speed even while defending, which is more likely to produce catchable edges. Interested to see how she goes this morning. 1st over: England 4-0 (Winfield-Hill 4, Beaumont 0) Darcie Brown has the ball in hand, the teenage quick who has been so exciting since emerging in the Big Bash a bit over a year ago. Brisk pace from the outset. Winfield-Hill chops her first ball into the ground, and it races past gully for four. She tries to leave the rest of the over alone, though one ball leaps and clips her back elbow on the bounce through to Healy. Here we go, for the start of the second innings. Daniel Aguirre Evans emails in. “Evening Geoff (or morning in your hemisphere!) Interesting to see they managed 97 overs (out of a maximum 100) in Canberra yesterday. This despite the fall of 7 wickets, there being 4 reviews (2 each), and it being the second highest total on Day 1 of a Women’s Ashes test on record (so plenty of boundaries and ball fetching by the fielding side). These being amongst the many piss poor excuses often given for why the men are so slow... And all of that was only using 30 mins additional time beyond the 6 hours scheduled play for 3 sessions. Any thoughts about what the women’s sides can teach their male counterparts about maintaining good over rates? Is the women’s game consistently better than the men or is this a blip?” The short answer, Daniel, is that the women’s game is consistently far better. One factor is the shorter run-ups for seamers, which saves some time. But mostly it’s that the women get on with the game more. They don’t stop for a five-player conference every three balls to discuss fields that they could have worked out before the game. Because they have worked out their fields before the game. They’re used to need to keep moving to get the overs in, so they get it done. There is a very clear difference in attitude to the men’s game, where players don’t care because they don’t have to care. Interesting moves all round, then. This is good positive stuff from Lanning. Anything over 300 is a great score, there was no need to push on to something massive. But a very good morning for England, they keep Australia to only 10 more runs added and pick up the final wickets. Brunt finishes with 5 for 60. Sciver took 3 for 41. Shrubsole 1 for 38 from 18 overs, very economical as well. As far as the keeping record goes, England’s early 90s keeper Lisa Nye was the only other player with six catches in an innings in a women’s Test. Jones joins her, and could have had a chance at a seventh had Australia batted on. No desire for Darcie Brown to come out at 11 and bat. Both King and Jonassen turn and run for the sheds at the fall of the wicket, so the plan must have been for them to bat for as long as they could while knowing they were the last partnership. The Aussies want to get bowling. Five wickets for Brunt, and a record-equalling six catches in a women’s Test innings for Jones! Angled across Jonassen, a bit of away movement, and Jonassen reaches for it in an effort to score but only nicks it behind. 104th over: Australia 337-8 (Jonassen 2, King 7) Shrubsole doesn’t give King anything to swing at in this over, very tight line and no run. 103rd over: Australia 337-8 (Jonassen 2, King 7) Anyone who has watched any Big Bash cricket knows that Alana King can hit. Brunt bowls too wide, and King clobbers a toe-ended cut shot away for four. Three slips and a gully in place. King reaches for a fuller wide ball and stabs it into the gap at cover for a run. 102nd over: Australia 332-8 (Jonassen 2, King 2) Shrubsole to the right-handed King now, and gets the ball to straighten off the seam and beat the edge of a poke. King didn’t know too much about that one, and smiles broadly afterwards. Inswing to follow from Shrubsole, and King drives back to the bowler. When the length is a tad shorter, King is able to clip a single. 101st over: Australia 331-8 (Jonassen 2, King 1) Alana King on Test debut comes to the middle, and immediately gets an immaculate outswinger that she nearly nicks. But she hangs in there, and chops a ball off her pads for her first run. Jonassen then gets her score going with a clip off the hip for two. Gorgeous delivery from Katherine Brunt! Looks like it’s on the line of middle and off stumps, but swings away just enough to beat the defensive prod and hit the top of off. Bails off from a perfect piece of bowling. Brunt has a chance at a Test five-for. 100th over: Australia 328-7 (Sutherland 8, Jonassen 0) Clever from Shrubsole to the left-handed Jonassen, sometimes using the angle to go across, sometimes coming back in. Not a run to be had. 99th over: Australia 328-7 (Sutherland 8, Jonassen 0) Katherine Brunt to partner Shrubsole, as in so many England matches before. She’s getting swing too. Angles in a variation delivery to smash Sutherland’s pad but it’s going down the leg side and Brunt doesn’t want a review. 98th over: Australia 328-7 (Sutherland 8, Jonassen 0) Anya Shrubsole takes the first over of the day, tucked away for a single by Sutherland before Jonassen faces out the rest. Swing already for Shrubsole, and the last ball beats the outside edge. We’re underway. If you’ve been listening to the Final Word daily podcast through the men’s series, we’re doing it for this Test match too with me and Isabelle Westbury, who was good fun yesterday. I mentioned how much action we had yesterday. Also notable for England’s missed chances. Here’s the report. What’s the weather doing? There’s a full layer of cloud over Canberra today but so far it is not the sort that is full of rain. The light is quite bright. Rain might come later, with possible thunderstorms projected towards the end of the afternoon. It’s not too hot right now but it’s supposed to get warmer and more sweltering, increasingly humid, and that may mean it builds towards some sort of cathartic precipitatory release. Hello from Canberra. Day two awaits, after a highly entertaining day one: 327 runs, seven wickets, and 97 overs bowled. Catches dropped, screamers held, swing and seam, centuries denied, counterattacks launched. The upshot is that Australia have a very strong position, with a good score racked up already. Annabel Sutherland and Jess Jonassen will resume with the bat, both of whom are capable of making plenty themselves. They are only down the order because of the team’s batting depth, but Sutherland has batted at No3 for Australia before and Jonassen nearly made a Test hundred on debut in 2015. So England’s first order of business must be to get their heads back in the game and have the patience to dismiss some good players, instead of thinking that the job is nearly done by virtue of the wickets column.Microsoft’s second attempt at its interesting dual-screen Android smartphone corrects some mistakes of the original, but falls short of a revolution due to a series of oddities created by its physical laptop-like form. Looking more like a tiny convertible computer than a phone, the Surface Duo 2 starts at £1,349 ($1,499/A$2,319), a lot for a regular smartphone but slightly cheaper than folding-screen rivals. It opens like a book, with each half just 5.5mm thick, and a hinge that allows it to fold all the way over. Inside are a pair of 90Hz OLED screens each measuring 5.8in on the diagonal. They can be used on their own or combined as one display measuring 8.3in – a similar size to an iPad mini. Both screens are covered in traditional scratch-resistant smartphone glass and have large, old-fashioned bezels top and bottom. Having two separate displays rather than one that folds in half creates a major drawback: a gap in the middle of the screen big enough that you can see through it, which is much harder to ignore than the crease in the middle of a flexible display as found on the Samsung Galaxy Z Fold 3. You can use two different apps at the same time on the two screens. The theory is sound, but I found few pairings were useful beyond simple messaging apps and a browser. More useful was using one screen for a note-taking app and the other for a full keyboard like a mini laptop. Some apps spanned across both displays, like Outlook, can put different information on each screen, such as your inbox on one side and an open message on the other. Some games, including Asphalt 9 and Microsoft’s Xbox Game Pass streaming service, put controls on one screen and the action on the other. But there are very few apps and games optimised for this setup. Specifications Screens: two 5.8in AMOLED 90Hz displays Processor: Qualcomm Snapdragon 888 RAM: 8GB of RAM Storage: 128, 256 or 512GB Operating system: Android 11 Cameras: 12MP wide, 16MP ultra-wide, 12MP 2x telephoto; 12MP selfie Connectivity: 5G, USB-C, wifi 6, NFC, Bluetooth 5.1 and location Water resistance: IPX1 (dripping water) Dimensions closed: 145.2 x 92.1 x 11.0mm Dimensions open: 145.2 x 184.5 x 5.5mm Weight: 284g 2021’s top Android chip The Duo 2 has last year’s top Qualcomm Snapdragon 888 chip with 8GB of RAM, matching the performance of top-flight Android smartphones from 2021 and capable of running two apps running side-by-side without slowdown. Battery life is more variable than a traditional phone. It lasts about 32 hours between charges, with both screens used for about four hours with a variety of messaging, browsing and work apps. It lasts about a third longer if you mostly use only one screen. That’s a considerably shorter battery life than a regular smartphone and behind the Z Fold 3. Sustainability Microsoft does not provide an expected lifespan for the Duo 2’s battery; those in similar devices typically maintain at least 80% of their original capacity for in excess of 500 full charge cycles. Microsoft charges an out-of-warranty service fee of £593.94 to repair devices and £568.44 to replace the battery. The previous generation Surface Duo scored only two out of 10 on iFixit’s repairability scale. The phone contains no recycled materials, but Microsoft operates recycling schemes for old devices, publishes a company-wide sustainability report and a breakdown of each product’s environmental impact. Android 11 The Duo 2 runs Android 11 – not the latest Android 12 – and generally behaves like a standard Android smartphone or tablet with a few small additions that make it easier to use each screen separately. One of the best is the ability to drag the gesture bar at the bottom of an app to move it between screens or to drop it on to the gap between the screens to span it across both displays. The software can be a bit unpredictable at times, such as opening the keyboard or text box of an app on another screen or hiding a second app from the screen when you try to type. But it is generally a fast and responsive experience given how unusual the device is. The Duo 2 will receive three years of software updates from release, including monthly security patches, which is disappointingly at least a year short of what rivals, including Samsung and Apple, offer. Microsoft’s last planned update for the Duo 2 will be 21 October 2024. Camera The Duo 2 has a triple camera on the back and a 12-megapixel selfie camera above the right-hand screen. The rear main 12MP camera and 2x telephoto cameras are good, capable of producing detailed shots in a range of lighting conditions. The 16MP ultra-wide camera is reasonable, but a bit soft on detail and struggles with challenging scenes. The camera app has most of the features you’d expect, such as portrait mode, night mode and slow-mo video, and can shoot regular video at up to 4K at 60 frames a second. The 12MP selfie camera is capable of shooting detailed photos even in middling light, and has access to the dedicated night mode when it gets dark. Overall, the camera system on the Duo 2 is solid, but it can’t hold a candle to the best in the business. Observations The Duo 2 supports Microsoft’s Slim Pen stylus, which can be magnetically stored and charged on the back of the device when not in use. The stereo speakers are decently loud but a bit tinny, fine for watching YouTube videos. The width of the device makes it a challenge to fit into smaller pockets. Price The Surface Duo 2 costs £1,349 ($1,499/A$2,319) with 128GB, £1,429 ($1,599/A$2,469) with 256GB or £1,589 ($1,799/A$2,769) with 512GB of storage. For comparison, the Samsung Galaxy Z Fold 3 costs £1,599 and the Galaxy Z Flip 3 costs £949. Verdict The Surface Duo 2 is an improvement on its predecessor, but is still a very odd proposition that’s neither a good phone nor a good tablet. The individual screens are short and stout, forcing lots of scrolling in apps when using it like a phone and making one-handed use very difficult. The gap at the hinge makes combining them into one big tablet screen awkward too. Using two apps side-by-side works well, but few combinations proved useful or faster than just quick switching between two apps on one screen on a normal phone. There is more potential in apps like Outlook that provide a multi-pane view, but few apps or games are optimised for the dual-screen system. Microsoft is only offering a disappointing three years of software and security updates from release for the Duo 2, too, losing it a star. It is good to see Microsoft trying something different. But ultimately the Duo 2’s two screens are just not yet as good or useful as either a single phone screen or a bigger folding screen, making it an expensive halfway house. Pros: two screens, two apps side-by-side, multiple modes, top performance, hardened glass screens, decent camera, head-turning design. Cons: gap between screens, few optimised apps, average battery life, bulky camera lump, chunky in pocket, hard to use one-handed, no real water resistance, only three years of software updates from release. Other reviews Galaxy Z Fold 3 review: Samsung’s cutting-edge water resistant phone-tablet hybrid Galaxy Z Flip 3 review: Samsung’s cheaper, better hi-tech flip phone Apple iPad mini 2021 review: the best small tablet gets stunning revamp Surface Pro 8 review: Microsoft’s best Windows tablet gets big upgrade Microsoft Surface Go 3 review: small Windows 11 tablet can’t keep upStart The Ram Inn, Firle, East Sussex Distance 5 miles Time 2½ hours Total ascent 200 metres Difficulty Moderate Google map of the route No artist has captured the curves and chalky pastel colours of the Sussex landscape like Eric Ravilious (1903-1942). In his book The Old Ways, Robert MacFarlane writes glowingly of Ravilious’s “dreamy watercolours” and calls him “an artist of the path”. Ravilious grew up in East Sussex but spent much of his adult life away from the area, returning throughout the 1930s to paint the landscape of his childhood. From his timeless depictions of the Long Man of Wilmington to his paintings of Cuckmere Haven and the serpentine Ouse, the brooding skies, furrowed land and undulations of the Downs are ever-present in his work. This circular walk from the glorious Ram Inn at Firle journeys through countryside that has changed little since Ravilious first painted it over 70 years ago. It climbs high on to the Downs and offers spectacular views of East Sussex and the coast – should you choose to do it during the day. But for a more unusual experience, this walk, with its clearly marked pathways, can also be enjoyed by night. Leave at twilight in the daylight-saving months and you can enjoy a nocturnal ramble and still be back at the Ram in time for dinner. Or you might prefer to eat first, then take a moonlit hike to walk off a hearty roast and a pint of Harvey’s. Needless to say, this is best done when the moon is plump and bright. From the front of the Ram Inn, head south towards the Downs through the village, passing the old store, village hall and Little Talland House, which Virginia Woolf rented for a year from January 1911. She described the house as “an ‘inconceivably ugly and hideous suburban villa”, but was charmed by the village itself. Firle remains a handsome sleepy hamlet, a time capsule of brick and flint houses, many covered with ivy. It is the imagined village of every classic children’s adventure story. The route towards the Downs passes Firle’s 12th-century church and the Burning Sky brewery. When the road bends to the right, carry straight on, keeping a long flint farm building on your left. The path soon curves to the left with a long high wall and the Downs to your right. Whether lit by moon or sun, the combination of rolling farmland and hills can be enchanting. Stay on this path until reaching a fingerpost and a triangle of paths with a tree in the middle. Go through the gate on your right and you’ll soon be ascending a steepish path to the top of the Downs. The chalk path may glow in moonlight but can be slippy and sticky if wet, so watch your footing and use a torch if necessary. A post halfway up is perfect for taking in the view and enjoying a breather. Look for the round turret-like folly on the Firle Estate to your left and the ripple effects – terracettes – on the closest slope, caused by centuries of grazing animals. Continue climbing; when the chalk path gives way to grass, you’re almost there. On reaching the top of the Downs head towards the fence to be rewarded with glorious views of the sea. The town straight ahead of you is Newhaven. Day or night, there is an otherworldliness to being up on the Downs. These hills were once believed to be the playground of fairies, goblins and that most mischievous and ancient of spirits, Puck. A “Puckhill” was listed in local parish records close to here as early as 1350. Many a strange encounter has been reported on the Downs. An hour’s drive to the west, Chanctonbury Ring has long held a reputation as a meeting place for witches, and unearthly sightings of demons and the like. A few miles away, on a walk around the lost village of Balsdean, Sussex folk singer Shirley Collins saw a ghostly apparition of a group of Roman soldiers, which she writes about in her book All In the Downs. And it was here above Firle, 81 years ago, that shepherd Fred Fowler had a life-changing experience. “Mine’s a simple life,” he told the Daily Mirror on 8 November 1940. “I just have me two dogs, me sheep and me missus way back at the cottage and I come to church on a Sunday. That’s all I sees or knows of life; that’s all I really want to see or know.” Yet, in broad daylight, Fowler had a vision of Christ on the cross, surrounded by six angels, in the sky above Firle Beacon. “It be like what they tells me cinema is like, but I think it be more real,” Fowler concluded. Despite three other residents recounting that they too had seen the vision above the Downs, Firle’s vicar, the paper noted, dismissed it all as “nonsense”. Keeping your feet on the ground but your eyes on the heavens, continue east across the top of the Downs for nearly a mile, passing a few copses and ignoring paths leading to the left or right until the trail drops sharply to a couple of gates, a tarmac road and the Bo-peep car park. Follow the road – you won’t encounter much traffic – to the bottom. In daylight, you may be treated to spectacular views of red kites, buzzards and ravens. At night it could be a barn or tawny owl quartering the fields. On reaching Bo-peep Farmhouse, follow a clear sign west to Charleston and Firle. The track cuts across open farmland, with the South Downs on your left and another Raviliousesque landscape of muted colours, undulating lines, wide-open spaces and rolling hills. After a mile, you’ll see a pretty house with cathedral-shaped windows. Skirt round it, keeping the house on your right and take a sheltered, tree-lined path. Reaching a gate, the path ascends slightly to the triangle of tracks and tree from the beginning of the walk. Retrace your steps, with that long flint wall on your right now, as the path curves back towards the village and the Ram Inn. The Ram Inn This lovely 500-year-old pub has dark walls, stone floors, open fires and fine local brew Harvey’s on tap. There are three dining areas, a large grassy back garden and a front “beach” – though it’s so popular it’s worth booking. Despite operating principally as a gastropub (on the inside at least), the Ram retains plenty of character and charm. The fare, made with locally sourced ingredients, might include grilled sea trout, braised shoulder of lamb, mussels, mixed nut roast and roast haunch of Heathfield venison (£14-£18). But who’s the guy at the bar dressed like Crocodile Dundee? That’s local clergyman, pilgrim and TV presenter Peter Owen Jones. If you do happen to have a Blakean vision on the Downs, slip this vicar a pint of Harvey’s and he, at least, will be all ears. The rooms The Ram has five individually designed rooms styled with contemporary furniture and local antiques. Three have freestanding baths; four are dog-friendly. The most luxurious ones – which also offer the best views of the Downs, should you be inspired to bring your easel – are Beacon View and Bloomsbury. Doubles from £130 B&amp;B Thanks to author Martine McDonagh for invaluable help with the route David Bramwell is co-author of Cheeky Walks in Brighton and SussexLeaked chats of the US white supremacist group Patriot Front have revealed the day-to-day organizing of a far-right gang desperate for new members as it seeks a higher profile in the US with provocative public marches. More than 400 gigabytes of private communications from chat logs on RocketChat, an alt-tech platform favored by far-right groups, were obtained and published by Unicorn Riot, a left-wing nonprofit media organization that reports on social movements. The chat logs reveal a group of men struggling to expand membership and being harangued by their leadership to maintain physical fitness, show up to events and contribute financially to the cause of white supremacy – all with limited success. It also shows how the group uses social media to make itself seem larger than it is. Chats indicate the white supremacist group has about 200 members. The messages show a coordinated effort to commit vandalism and intimidate people of color nationwide. The group requires members to deface racial justice murals and monuments to Black Lives Matter in their communities, much like a street gang that requires initiates to “tag” buildings as a form of vandalism and intimidation. Chats show that the group’s leaders regularly reprimand members for failing to meet exercise or participation requirements. It also shows a group fixated on getting more members, a task it has found difficult. “We are absolutely desperate for new people. We’ve been in the 220’s to 230’s membership rut for nearly a full year,” wrote Thomas Rousseau, the founder of Patriot Front. Patriot Front garnered headlines and trended on social media this month after marching in uniform with shields alongside anti-abortion activists in Chicago and Washington DC. The leaked chats reveal that the demonstrations were part of a strategy to recruit new members to the group. The chats outlined a plan to create fake social media accounts that would pose as bystanders to their marches. The fake accounts would then post deceptive material on platforms like Twitter, Reddit and 4chan. One pre-written tweet about Patriot Front’s 4 December march down the National Mall referred to “about 500 men with riot shields marching in #washingtondc” – but there were far fewer than that counted at the actual event. The chats also instructed members to direct message a mix of traditional media outlets and rightwing media figures, such as Andy Ngo. “We’ve been trending all day since last night,” one member wrote. “Another news piece that mentions us,” said another. Patriot Front members rejoiced after being thrust into the national conversation. “We’re the news cycle, now. Everyone lean into your promotions,” wrote Rousseau. The Guardian has previously reported on how far-right groups face exposure from an army of hacktivists, which has crippled their ability to operate in secret and made membership in such groups a risky proposition for anyone wishing to keep a low profile. Patriot Front formed out of Vanguard America, a white supremacist group, after it splintered following the deadly violence at the Charlottesville’s Unite the Right rally in 2017. While Vanguard America has largely gone quiet in the years since, Patriot Front has gone on to aggressively promote white nationalism. The group was responsible for 80% of the white supremacist propaganda incidents tracked by the Anti-Defamation League in 2020. Rousseau requires Patriot Front members to distribute the group’s stickers weekly, and upload photos to an internal channel as proof they’ve done an assignment. It also requires members to buy the stickers from him directly at a markup. “If any of the prices seem above market rate it’s because it also goes toward paying for our servers, our digital accounts and subscriptions, and the food I can afford to eat,” wrote Rousseau. One member complained that their region was “single-handedly paying Thomas’ rent” with the stickers they were buying. Rousseau and other regional directors frequently scold members for not participating in events. “You are obligated by membership in this organization to attend the demos, unless a valid excuse is given. Simply wishing not to attend is not a valid excuse. If you have any issues, get them resolved or you can talk to Thomas,” one regional director wrote to a member who failed to attend a meetup. The group has one member designated as a “fitness coordinator” who polices the exercise regimen of members. “[I]t’s important to be fit and healthy, he will call out men who are not following the routine in front of everybody,” one chat log reads. Recruits have to answer a list of questions that interrogate everything from their ideological commitment to white supremacy to their physical and mental health. The chats reveal a group obsessed with their public image, enforcing strict uniform standards for its members during demonstrations. Members are also required to wear masks to “encourage uniformity and unanimity” and “protect the individuals against state repression, but also purify the message so people have to focus on the deeds/words of men not their identities,” according to one chat log.New Yorkers love a big trial. From Joan Collins, who resisted a claim from her publisher over an “unpublishable” manuscript, to Leona Helmsley’s “only little people pay taxes” prosecution, to a long line of swindlers, cheats, celebrity divorces and mafia take-downs, each scandal-strewn case becomes part of the metropolis’s dirty jungle lore. Short of an intervening settlement, it appears that the Duke of York is to join a long list of high-profile defendants. And, with the prospect of a senior British royal on trial, it is a case that would go down in city history. Prince Andrew’s civil case does not carry the risk of jail time. But in a city obsessed with money, power and prestige, a famous prince in the dock, facing further losses of each after being forced to withdraw from royal duties, could be a late summer feast of contentious jurisprudence for a city desperate for pandemic distraction. The prospect of a jury trial follows the prince’s attorney’s decision on Wednesday to file legal papers strongly resisting sexual abuse claims brought against him by his accuser, Virginia Giuffre. In the papers, Andrew’s legal team denied the allegations and then sought to blame Giuffre for being partly responsible for her abuse. That move has been criticized as “cruel” and “inappropriate” by legal experts. Giuffre claims she had sex with the prince when she was 17 and a minor under US law. She says they were introduced by the disgraced late US financier Jeffrey Epstein, who killed himself in prison while awaiting trial for sex crimes, and the convicted sex trafficker Ghislaine Maxwell. The response to Giuffre’s complaint denied all allegations and questioned her lawsuit’s validity on jurisdictional grounds. It also demanded a jury trial, notwithstanding that as Giuffre had already requested that, it’s a fairly meaningless demand. To many experts, it seemed largely unremarkable save for two of the 11 entries marked Affirmative Defense. In one, titled Damages Contributed to by Others, his attorneys wrote: “Assuming, without admitting, that Giuffre has suffered any injury or damage, Giuffre and/or others, who are not Prince Andrew, contributed in whole or in part to the alleged damage.” In the other, titled Consent, they wrote: “Assuming, without admitting, that Giuffre has suffered any injury or damage alleged in the Complaint, Giuffre’s claims are barred by the doctrine of consent.” Sexual abuse attorneys and former sex crimes prosecutorssay both statements are astonishingly tone-deaf, both in public relations terms and if those defense claims come before a New York jury. The prince is effectively making the argument that Giuffre, a victim of the Epstein-Maxwell conspiracy to traffic minors, consented to having sex while being trafficked, and while being under the age of majority. The first statement – Damages Contributed to by Others – is the response of a “cruel person and an outrage because Andrew did not have to assert that as a claim”, said the former sex crimes prosecutor Wendy Murphy, a professor of sexual violence law at New England Law | Boston. “To say that she was acting of her own volitions and causing herself to be raped by a man with so much more power is … a dangerous thing to do. It’s going to cause enormous negative publicity for the prince, as it should, and if you ask a jury to blame a kid, they’re going to come back at you with a vengeance,” Murphy added. Victims’ lawyers agreed that the prince was attempting to blame the victim. “Prince Andrew denied ever meeting Ms Giuffre and denied that they ever had sexual contact. Now in his answer to the court, he is still denying it, but unbelievably says if the acts occurred, they were consensual,” said Eric Baum of Eisenberg &amp; Baum. The question of how a 17-year-old could consent to systematic sex trafficking is baffling to Murphy, who points out that under sex trafficking laws, consent is illegal as a matter of public policy. “A human being cannot consent to trafficking any more than they can consent to slavery,” she said. Murphy argued that the Duke’s affirmative “Consent” defense – while technically legal under an assault and battery statutes – is “inappropriate … when you know, and the allegations are, this was a systematic trafficking industry, an illegal enterprise that was extraordinarily well-established and just grotesque in terms of how they were soliciting and choosing vulnerable girls.” In a statement to NBC News on Wednesday, Giuffre’s attorney, David Boies, responded to the filing: “Prince Andrew continues his playbook denying any knowledge or information about the claims despite photographic evidence and third-party testimony to the contrary. He also continues his pattern trying to blame the victim for her abuse.” Legal experts have also voiced opinions that the prince’s legal strategy does not preclude a settlement with a statement of responsibility, as Boies has hinted would be a part of his client’s terms. But Giuffre’s legal team still have to prove that the alleged touching was offensive and non-consensual. “She has to prove that it was non-consensual touching, and Andrew could win by saying it was consensual – and he can do that at trial,” says Murphy. “What he does not have to do is assert it as an affirmative defense. Politically, it’s a tin-eared thing for a lawyer to do in a case like this, where the public is well aware that this is about trafficking, not an 18-year-old boy having sex with his 15-year-old girlfriend.” All in all, if a trial does go ahead in New York, it appears all but certain to join the storied list of the city’s most shocking scandals: an elite list of bold-faced names that no one wants to be on. • This article was amended on 3 February 2022. An earlier version referred to Andrew “demanding a jury trial notwithstanding that, as the defendant, it’s not Andrew’s to demand”. To clarify: a defendant can ask for a jury trial but as Giuffre had already requested that, it’s a fairly meaningless demand.Denise Coates, head of gambling empire Bet365, was Britain’s biggest taxpayer last year, according to the Sunday Times Tax List. The Coates family paid an estimated £481.7m, topping the annual ranking of billionaires’ tax payments for the third consecutive year. While the family’s tax payment was down from £573m in 2020, it was still almost £200m more that paid by hedge fund manager Chris Rokos in second-place with a £300m payment to the exchequer. The total tax paid by the top 50 taxpayers rose by £510m to £3.7bn up from £3.2bn the previous year. The minimum amount of tax paid needed to make the top 50 rose to £15.2m, up 16% on the previous year. “This is a stronger Tax List than last year’s – which will be good news for the chancellor,” Robert Watts, compiler of the list, said. “The total take is up by more than £500m” However, the IPPR thinktank, which is campaigning for a wealth tax, said the list provides “an insight into the UK’s broken tax system” which allows “the richest people in the country to pay little to no tax at all”. “Only one name from the top 10 of last year’s [Sunday Times] Rich List appear among those thought to be the top 10 taxpayers,” George Dibb, head of the IPPR’s centre for economic justice, said. “Our tax system, which supports the NHS and welfare safety net, should ensure that those with the broadest shoulders bear the biggest burden. But today it’s just too easy for some of the richest people in the country to pay little to no tax at all. ” Dibb pointed out that of the top 10 richest people in the UK, only the Weston family (the 10th richest with £11bn) appear on the tax list. The richest person in the UK according to the Sunday Times’ rich list is Sir Len Blavatnik, a Ukrainian-born businessman who made his money from energy and aluminium groups in the former Soviet Union, with an estimated £23bn fortune. He is not included in the tax list. Coates, 54, who paid herself £421m last year, has built up an estimated £8.4bn fortune from Bet365 making her the 17th richest person in the country. Her pay since 2016 totals almost £1.3bn. Rokos, 51, who runs $13bn hedge fund Rokos Capital Management, paid £300m in tax after he collected £509m in pay from the hedge fund that made almost £1bn in profit from bets placed during the pandemic. The fund made £914m in profit in the year to 31 March 2021 according to filings at Companies House. Stephen Rubin, 84, whose family is behind the JD Sports high street chain and sportswear brands Speedo, Berghaus and Kickers, paid £256m. Behind him, the Weston family, which owns Fortnum &amp; Masons and recently sold Selfridges for £4bn, paid £175.4m. Rounding out the top five are Fred and Peter Done, who paid about £170m in tax from their gambling business Betfred. More than £100m of that tax take is made up of specific gambling taxes including betting duty (£55.1m), machine gaming duty (£38.1m) and the statutory betting levy (£8.4m). The most notable of the 10 new entries in this year’s list is Lord Sugar. The Apprentice host ranks sixth this year off the back of his £163.4m tax bill, largely made up of a £148.6m dividend tax exposure that followed his £390m dividend payment from his Amshold Ltd property business. JK Rowling paid £36m in tax, bringing to £119.4m the amount she has paid in tax over the past three years. Rowling has said she makes a conscious decision to pay full taxes in the UK, refusing to live in “the limbo of some tax haven” and criticising “greedy tax exiles”. Rowling, who received single mother benefits when she was writing the first Harry Potter book, has previously spoken of the debt she felt she owed to the welfare state. “When my life hit rock bottom, that safety net, threadbare though it had become, was there to break the fall,” she said. “It would have been contemptible to scarper to the West Indies at the first sniff of a seven-figure royalty cheque.”Britain’s children are being failed by schools when it comes to learning about the climate crisis, with the subject often wholly missing from the curriculum, sidelined, or mistaught, students and education experts have said. A private member’s bill that would require basic knowledge of climate issues to be taught in the national curriculum receives its second reading in parliament on Friday with cross-party support. But it is unlikely to make it to the statute books, despite promises at Cop26 last November that ministers would prioritise climate education in schools. Nadia Whittome, the Labour MP who brought forward the bill, said: “The education system should be helping young people to get informed on the impacts of climate change – it’s their lives that will be affected. It’s also part of how we will reach net zero – give young people the tools to be part of the solution.” Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, pledged at Cop26 to “put climate change at the heart of education”. A draft strategy is due to be published in April. The Guardian has reported that an early version told teachers not to advise pupils to get involved in climate protests. However, students and experts said the UK was failing to equip young people with the skills they will need to understand and cope with the climate emergency. A survey of 4,680 teachers in England found that two-thirds of secondary school teachers felt climate change was not taught in a meaningful way within their subject, even though nine out of 10 said the climate was relevant to their subject area. Four in 10 teachers said they would like more time and capacity to devote to climate issues, as well as more cross-subject collaboration. Students have described their frustration at the lack of opportunities and resources to discuss the climate crisis in class. Scarlett Westbrook, 17, from Birmingham, who helped to write the climate education bill, faced a question on her geography GCSE paper in 2020 requiring her to list benefits from climate change. She complied, to get the marks, but also wrote that any benefits were vastly outweighed by the damage – a note that was criticised by the exam marker. “I was shocked to be asked that. To have to write that to get marks was a really weird dilemma – should I spite the education system or spike my exams?” she said. “I think there has been influence from lobby groups, and that’s why the education on this subject is so bad.” Phoebe Hanson, a second-year politics student at Lancaster University, said young people had a right to expect the education system to inform them about and equip them to understand the crisis. “We are growing up in this world where the climate is changing. The immensity of that is terrifying. But in our education system, this subject is just tacked on the side. We are letting people down,” she said. Matt Carmichael, an English teacher in Leeds, said teachers felt under pressure to be cautious about discussing the climate crisis. “I educated myself on the issue, but I know colleagues who lack the confidence and know this as a controversial subject that they don’t feel equipped to teach,” he said. “It’s vital that we do teach it as there is lots of misinformation out there, especially on social media, and lots of anxiety among young people.” Education is a devolved issue, and the survey, by the Teach the Future campaign, applied only to England. However, Teach the Future covers all four UK nations, and it said schoolchildren were poorly served on climate education across the UK. A spokesperson for the Department for Education said: “Topics related to climate change already feature across the curriculum at primary and secondary school. By 2023, all teachers in all phases and subjects will have access to high-quality curriculum resources, so they can confidently choose those that will support the teaching of sustainability and climate change. “Our new sustainability and climate change strategy will help empower all teachers to deliver education on climate change. From aiding the development of climate interests in early childhood right through to the skills needed for green careers. It also goes beyond the classroom – children and young people will get hands-on experience of understanding, nurturing and protecting the biodiversity around them through our new national education nature park and climate leaders awards.”When he suffered a stroke, Frank Luntz blamed it on the anger and tension coursing through him after decades of inhaling America’s toxic political culture. The country’s best-known pollster found himself hospitalised for nearly a week with dangerously high blood pressure. Two years later, Luntz regards the experience as a turning point. “That completely changed my outlook,” he says. “The loudness of my voice has changed. The speed in which I speak is changed. I’m slower and I’m quieter and I think about what I say. It’s not that I’m trying to be careful, it’s that I really analyse stuff that comes out.” The 59-year-old, well known from countless media appearances and for running focus groups that provide an insight into America’s political psyche, has also now chosen a less partisan path. Having once worked for rightwing Republicans such as Pat Buchanan, Newt Gingrich and Rudy Giuliani, he no longer hesitates to condemn Donald Trump’s pernicious influence or fears the conservative media backlash. “If I didn’t die, I’m not afraid any more, so you will hear me criticise people I never would have criticised two years ago. What are they going to do to me? It can’t be any worse than what I’ve been through and, when you become more fearless, it makes life easier to navigate.” Often seen on TV as ebullient and garrulous, Luntz has felt tired all the time following the stroke. He is visibly so as he holds court with half a dozen British newspaper journalists in his downtown Washington luxury condo, a kitsch affair with faux classical columns, built-in saloon bar (“Frank’s sports bar”) and busts of presidents George Washington (wearing a mask) and Abraham Lincoln. Luntz’s motivation for this unusual gathering, it seems, is to express gratitude to Britain. He is one of those old school American conservatives who says, “I believe in the special relationship very much,” and is tickled by how the nations rhyme and how they don’t. Last year he went to the UK for a month and ended up staying nearly eight, finding an antidote to American’s poison. “I was in real trouble when I got to Britain, in real emotional trouble,” he admits. “I still haven’t fully recovered from my stroke, and what goes on in this country, I couldn’t talk about it. I got in the middle of it. Tucker Carlson [a host on Fox News] was killing me every fucking night.” Luntz, who studied British voters for a conservative thinktank, the Centre for Policy Studies, also invited UK journalists to disseminate a warning: don’t let British politics become as polarised and debased as the American system. “You still like each other, you still respect each other, you still value public debate: your democracy is still functioning,” he insists. “Ours has seized up and I don’t know how to get ours flowing again. Be thankful that you don’t have our poison … I’m very afraid of the American system being hopelessly damaged.” Doesn’t the acrimony of the post-Brexit era suggest that the UK is already heading in that direction? Not so, Luntz insists. “You all have proven that there’s still a desire for substance in politics, not just slogans and soundbites, and thank God you haven’t completely embraced American politics because your elections are of substance rather than style. “I know that you guys are critical of the UK in recent times for being too American in your elections. You’re not. We are becoming more and more superficial. You are still substantial.” Later he plays a video clip of one of his US focus groups descending into angry shouting and recriminations, a glimpse of a society that seems to be falling apart. He comments: “The worst of the worst. This is my warning to you. This is shit. This is a disaster and it will come to you if you let it happen.” During his time in Britain, Luntz met several prime ministers in quick succession: John Major (“he’s the most sensible person in the UK”), Tony Blair (“brilliant – he gets it more than anyone”), David Cameron (“still the best communicator that I’ve ever worked with”) and Boris Johnson (“the most fun: when I saw him, he spent 10 minutes just ripping me before I even got to the stuff I wanted to show him because we knew each other at Oxford”), who had not yet become embroiled in “partygate”. Ever the anglophile, Luntz does not share a view expressed by Joe Biden in 2019 that Johnson is a “physical and emotional clone” of Trump. “Boris Johnson has written more books than Donald Trump has read. Boris is the real Trump. He understands the hopes and dreams of the public. He gets the historic context. He can wax poetically about 2,000 years ago, 200 years ago and two years ago. Trump could not do that. “Trump captured the anger and the desire for revenge; that is not Boris at all. Think about it: Boris is amusing whereas Trump was vitriolic and mean; Boris is compelling whereas Trump was insulting. There’s a big difference. Boris is more likable, more approachable, more human than Trump was. Trump is more the middle finger; Boris was the kind of guy that you wanted to hang out with at the pub.” Last week Luntz was hired by the New York Times to take the temperature of 14 independent voters after Biden’s first year in the White House. They weren’t happy. “Biden does not understand the hopes and dreams of the average American,” says the messaging expert, who remains on the centre-right. “He does not empathise with them. His team is ideological rather than emotional and so he’s missing all this. It’s how people feel even more than how they think; feeling is a deeper emotion and Biden is not connecting to them at all. “Inflation is ‘transitory’? The line that I would use would be we should transitory Joe Biden right out of office, and the public would do that. Secondly, you got Kamala Harris, who comes across as inauthentic with that laugh. He picked her up and put her there, so they’re regarded as a team, and as a team they’re failing.” Biden’s approval rating is hovering in the dismal low 40s as the coronavirus pandemic drags on interminably. Luntz argues that he overpromised. “He created unrealistic expectations. He’s a very arrogant human being and very flawed and the combination of flaws and arrogance is a really unhealthy cocktail.” Wasn’t Biden supposed to be Mr Empathy? “There’s nothing about him that screams empathy. There’s everything about him that screams someone who’s already made up their mind.” A referendum on Biden looms in the midterm elections in November. Luntz agrees with the conventional wisdom that Republicans will win the House of Representatives but thinks Democrats will cling on to the Senate. He identifies six issues that will determine voters’ choices: crime, immigration, shortages, prices, education and the January 6 insurrection. “Democrats have a huge problem on five out of the six.” Prices, the cost of living, are the biggest problem. “This is the issue that’s going to kill the Democrats because it affects every single voter in every possible way every day of the year, whether it’s food or fuel, whether they’re trying to buy a house or car or something small. They know that it’s impacting them and it’s going to continue for a little while longer. Every day that it continues, you can assume that another member of Congress loses their job. It’s that big a deal.” An Atlantic magazine interview with Luntz in 2014, a year before Trump began his run for president, was prophetic about his health as a metaphor for America. He complained about a six-day headache and sleeping two or three hours at a time. Voters were “contentious and argumentative” and “didn’t listen to each other as they once had”. The article’s author, Molly Ball, wrote: “Frank Luntz is having some kind of crisis. I just can’t quite get my head around it.” Today, after the catharsis of his stroke, Luntz finds plenty of blame to go around. He casts a harsh light on the media, social media and his own younger self. In an infamous 2003 memo, for example, he advised George W Bush’s Republican party to abandon the phrase “global warming” in favour of “climate change” because it is “less frightening”. He is now an advocate of climate legislation. “I’ll take my blame for the stuff that I did 20 years ago. But I figured it out.” He touches a button and a giant painting of man walking on the moon slides up to reveal a TV screen and slideshow presentation of polling data entitled The Great Rethink. It is a study of America voters’ attitudes and disillusionment with their leaders. “The only thing we agree on is that politicians suck,” Luntz says. “If you’re American, this is a very depressing time right now.” One slide is about what people want most in life: fewer hassles, more money, no worries, better work, more choices, more time, better lifestyle, better work-life balance. Another offers some words to use (I am your voice, accountability, fact-based) and words to lose (agenda, I’m listening, transparency). Luntz argues that even in a polarised society such as America, every parent asks the same question: will my child/grandchild be happy? Perhaps rather optimistically, he urges politicians to focus on children as “the great unifier”. “If you want to bring people together, you do it over their children. You guys are divided on just about everything; this crushes that divide. This brings people together and it’s not been done before. I’m waiting for a political party or movement to capture the next generation as their focus.” Luntz, who does not think he will be in the polling business much longer, hopes politicians will consider the lessons of his “Great Rethink” presentation and rethink their own ways before democracy seizes up for good. “I want to hit them over the head with this,” he says. “I want to be able to say to them: cut it out. Just stop. Nothing is worth destroying the country – and you are this close to destroying the country.”Pick of the week Station Eleven Ready for a drama about the aftermath of a devastating flu outbreak yet? Based on Emily St John Mandel’s novel, it tells the story of Jeevan (Himesh Patel), an anxiety-ridden dropout who receives a warning about the seriousness of the virus and, in the company of a randomly acquired child, Kirsten (Matilda Lawler), tries to prepare for disaster. Given recent history, there’s a grim fascination in the familiarity of initial responses – denial, evasion, panic. But, crucially, the story hops between timelines, veering off into the distant future. What it finds there is surprisingly uplifting, with initial claustrophobia and terror giving way to renewal and even hope. StarzPlay, from Sunday 30 January *** Pam &amp; Tommy It’s 1995. Mullets are still being worn just about unironically. The internet is the wild west. And voyeurism hasn’t quite yet become a global hobby. Into this innocent world arrives a video tape featuring Baywatch pin-up Pamela Anderson and her rock star beau Tommy Lee engaging in vigorous adult recreational activity on their honeymoon. This hugely entertaining romp stars Seth Rogen as the building contractor who, justifiably furious after professional dealings with Lee (a gloriously infuriating Sebastian Stan), steals the tape and bootlegs it. Lily James plays Anderson with real heart, sweetness and empathy. Star on Disney+, from Wednesday 2 February *** The Tinder Swindler “You can find a bit of everything on Tinder.” This documentary (from the team behind Don’t F**k With Cats) suggests you can certainly find trouble. The grubby story of Shimon Hayut, a catfishing conman who used the dating app to extract money from a series of women, is a cautionary tale – his web of lies included stories about everything from diamonds to the Russian secret services. The women’s life-savings funded Hayut’s lavish, globetrotting lifestyle, until several of his victims found each other and plotted revenge. Netflix, from Wednesday 2 February *** Murderville Law &amp; Order meets Whose Line Is It Anyway? Based on BBC Three’s patchy but intriguing Murder in Successville, this peculiar new Will Arnett vehicle is a comic crime procedural with a twist. Each week, Arnett’s Detective Terry Seattle will be accompanied by a new celebrity guest star and, clue by clue, they’ll attempt to improvise their way through a murder investigation before the guest is asked to identify the killer. Joining Arnett on this strange journey will be heavy hitters including Kumail Nanjiani, Annie Murphy and Sharon Stone. Netflix, from Thursday 3 February *** Cry Wolf From Borgen writer Maja Jul Larsen, here’s an award-winning tense family drama under the Walter Presents umbrella. Lars (Bjarne Henriksen) is a heavy metal-loving social worker assigned the case of 14-year-old Holly (Flora Ofelia Hofmann Lindahl), who writes a school essay revealing that her stepfather abuses her and her younger brother. Cue a complicated unravelling of a fractured family, with Holly’s mother claiming it’s nothing more than a teenage rebellion as her children are taken into care. HR All 4, available now *** Suspicion A gritty adaptation of Israeli thriller False Flag, this drama series stars Uma Thurman as icy American media mogul Katherine Newman, whose son is kidnapped. The suspicion falls upon five seemingly oblivious Londoners whose only connection is that they all happened to be in New York at the time of the disappearance. There’s a distinct sense that Newman is a woman with many dark secrets and very few scruples – but can the hapless suspects prove their innocence? Kunal Nayyar, from Suspicion’s tonal antithesis The Big Bang Theory, also stars. Apple TV+, from Friday 4 February *** Reacher A hilarious (possibly even deliberately so) adaptation of Lee Child’s action thriller novels about a former cop returning to small-town civilian life who can’t help drawing the attention of the local constabulary after the town is hit by its first murder in decades. Reacher is played by Alan Ritchson, who has the killer combination of boy-next-door charm and muscles in places most people didn’t know existed. As a criminal conspiracy begins to swirl around, he’s forced to flex them. Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 4 FebruaryHungarian journalists targeted with Pegasus spyware plan to take legal action against the Hungarian state and the Israeli company NSO, which manufactures the tool. The Pegasus Project, a consortium of news outlets including the Guardian, revealed last summer that forensic analysis of mobile devices showed that a number of journalists in the country had been targeted with Pegasus. The invasive spyware allows its operator to take control of a target’s mobile device, access all data, even from encrypted messaging apps, and turn on audio or video recording. It is only meant for use against terrorists and serious criminals, but the Pegasus Project revealed that Hungary appeared to be one of many countries where the tool was being abused. At the time, the Hungarian government deflected questions about whether it had used Pegasus to spy on the named individuals, and refused to confirm whether it had acquired the spyware. However, in November a senior government official acknowledged for the first time that Hungary had indeed acquired Pegasus. Now the Hungarian Civil Liberties Union (HCLU) has announced it will launch legal action on behalf of six clients: Brigitta Csikász, Dávid Dercsényi, Dániel Németh and Szabolcs Panyi, all journalists; Adrien Beauduin, a Belgian-Canadian PhD student and activist; and a sixth person who requested anonymity. “It is unacceptable that the operations of the national security services, which are necessarily carried out in secret, should become a tool of oppression rather than a means of protecting citizens,” said Ádám Remport, of the HCLU. The HCLU will pursue various legal avenues, including complaints to the ministers overseeing the secret services in Hungary, requests to the security services to divulge information, and legal action in the courts. “What we would like is for our clients to have direct evidence of their being surveilled and the disclosure of the data gathered on them,” said Remport. “If we can get good rulings it would mean that a new avenue for redress would open for anyone who has been secretly surveilled.” Remport admitted that previous case law suggested that the courts usually sided with the security services, and that the cases were likely to take months if not years to proceed through the courts. However, the Hungarian legal action could become a template for victims of unlawful surveillance in other countries. The HCLU and Eitay Mack, an Israeli lawyer, will also file a demand to the Israeli attorney general asking for a criminal case to be opened against NSO in Israel and the Israeli officials who approved the sale to Viktor Orbán’s government. “They should have known from the beginning the deteriorating situation in Hungary, and that targeting the press is a main activity of the Orbán regime,” said Mack, who said he wanted them charged with violating Israeli wiretapping and privacy laws, among others. He pointed to a 2016 ruling of the European court of human rights that criticised the use of surveillance in Hungary. NSO Group did not respond to a request for comment, but in previous answers to the Guardian it said it could not confirm or deny whether particular countries were clients. It also insisted its tools were only meant for use against criminals and terrorists and should not be used on dissidents, activists or journalists. “The international community should have zero-tolerance policy towards such acts, therefore a global regulation is needed. NSO has proven in the past it has zero tolerance for these types of misuse by terminating multiple contracts,” the company said. Panyi, an investigative journalist with the Hungarian outlet Direkt36, which was a partner on the Pegasus Project, was targeted with Pegasus on numerous occasions, according to forensic analysis of his phone. He said the case was a symbolic one that was more about trying to force reform of the system of authorising surveillance in Hungary than getting any personal justice. “Infringing my right to protect my sources is the most troubling thing for me,” Panyi said. “It’s very hard to understand the true aim, whether they were after my sources, if they wanted to get a heads up on what I’m working on, or try to gather dirt on me.” He said he hoped that as a result of the case he might find out more about why he was targeted. “I would at least like to receive some information about which agency was surveilling me, when and why,” he said.Road pricing may promise a fairer, sustainable way to make polluting drivers pay, ease congestion and fund better transport, but few politicians in power have ever wanted to take the flak that would come with introducing it. The Treasury has stressed the move from petrol and diesel to electric cars as part of Britain’s net zero strategy will require new sources of revenue to replace billions in lost fuel and vehicle excise duty. However, despite a year of speculation that the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, was warming to the idea, there has been no mention of road pricing as a possible solution in his budgets. Sadiq Khan has been bolder, announcing last week that London will bring in more charges for motorists, in some form, by 2024. While Khan has backed road pricing in principle, last week’s announcement still contained the familiar caveat that the technology to make a London-wide scheme work wouldn’t be ready until some time later in the decade. The city is potentially the canary in the coalmine for the rest of the UK. Congestion has grown, and London needs to tackle widespread air pollution and meet challenging environmental targets, with an ambition to drive down car use by more than a quarter. But there is also an imminent funding crisis after Covid, with billions in lost revenue from transport and the government unwilling to fully help the mayor. Why is road pricing likely to happen, how might it work and what are the potential obstacles? The finances Roads, unlike most utilities, are essentially unmetered, with the way they are paid for failing to reflect when and where they are used. Instead the Treasury collects money from motorists via fuel duty and vehicle excise duty. Fuel duty is a blunt tool that charges motorists for how much they drive, and the efficiency of their vehicle. Raising it has become politically toxic – Conservative chancellors have frozen the 57.9p-a-litre levy for a decade – but the bigger longer-term problem is the move to electric cars. That puts fuel duty revenues, about £28bn a year pre-pandemic, on their own path to net zero. Vehicle excise duty, worth roughly £6bn a year, is also currently not paid by electric car owners, who are likewise exempt from London’s congestion or clean air charges. That is seen as an acceptable trade-off for the high purchase price of electric cars for early adopters, but car owners driving “for free” could soon feel politically tricky, and in the long term new funding, such as road pricing, feels inevitable. The logistics Worldwide, basic road-charging schemes currently range from tolls for bridges, tunnels, or stretches of motorway, to the kind of congestion zone London already has, often relying on number plate recognition cameras, transponders or other sensors. Singapore has arguably come closest to a comprehensive road-pricing scheme, with motorists billed automatically for journeys calculated via in-car units triggered when they pass a series of gantries. The system was first put in place before the millennium. But the grid road system in the small city state makes it relatively easy to calculate where someone has driven from a series of fixed points. London’s eventual scheme – particularly if it does, as the mayor suggested, take account of factors such as the relative availability of public transport, congestion, or time of day as well as distance travelled – would require some form of GPS tracking. The technology Khan said the tech could be ready in two and half years, just beyond his remaining term in office. The Green party and others argue it has been ready for years, in various forms. For example, car owners have grown used to insurers installing black boxes that can track speed and performance. A smart road-pricing scheme could require in an in-car device, as used in Singapore – but that could be replaced by a smartphone and app. As any user of satnav or exercise apps knows, an individual’s movements can already be tracked effectively. However, Steve Gooding, the director of the RAC Foundation, is less convinced: “Is [the technology] ready at the scale it needs to be, for everything it needs to do, for all the vehicles moving in Greater London 365 days a year?” Civil liberties London’s congestion zone was originally set up in 2003 by the then mayor, Ken Livingstone, with clear separation from the other arms of the state. But in 2015 his successor, Boris Johnson, instructed Transport for London to give full access to the data to the Metropolitan police, and records of who drives into central London are now stored for two years. The Green party’s Siân Berry, a London Assembly member who has long backed the idea of road pricing, says stricter safeguards should be in place around the data – and more would certainly be needed should journeys be logged by GPS. That could be via an app that is under the driver’s own control in terms of details, or an in-car unit that tots up charges but does not keep a journey history, she suggests. “But you need to put privacy into the conversation early on, not later, or you risk it becoming an issue that cancels the scheme.” Fairness As a report in 2021 from Tony Blair’s Institute for Global Change noted, this cuts both ways: do nothing to reform the system and the wealthiest electric car owners will forever get a free ride while still using roads and creating congestion – and particulate pollution. While it is argued that overall, road pricing should be fairer and beneficial, there may be winners and losers, particularly at the borders of schemes, and key workers with fixed shift times may not be able to avoid peak charges. But the status quo is not fair for non car-owners, argues Berry. She adds: “It’s 20p for petrol or £1.50 for the bus for a short journey – the price signals are completely wrong.” Public opposition The London congestion charge proved less of a vote-loser for Livingstone than many anticipated. However, attempts by Labour in 2007 to implement a nationwide road-pricing scheme attracted what was then one of the biggest protest petitions from the public. The tide may be turning, slowly. Concerns over car use and urban air quality are firmly on the agenda. Motoring organisations have also joined the call for charging in some form: the RAC Foundation backs it, while the AA’s Edmund King has proposed tradeable “road miles”, measured through telematics. A recent report from the Social Market Foundation thinktank claimed that the formerly hostile UK public could now be won over.Nadal is safely through to the final. All that remains to be seen is who will join him there. Tsitsipas and Medvedev aren’t due on court until 7:30pm local, 8:30am GMT, so we’ll close this blog down for now. There will be another later on though, so keep your eyes peeled. But from me for now, cheerio. And with that, Nadal disappears down the tunnel to a cacophony of cheers. What a champion. Nadal will play the winner of tonight’s match between Stefanos Tsitsipas and Daniil Medvedev, when he gets the chance to win a 21st grand slam title. “For me it’s all about the Australian Open more than anything else. It just an amazing event that as I said a couple of days ago now, I have been a little bit lucky in my career with some injuries. At times I play good finals against Novak in 2012and Roger in 2017. I was lucky to win once in 2009 but I never thought about another chance dm in2022. Just enjoy the victory today and after that try my best.” On the conditions on Rod Laver Arena: “Well, as everybody knows I am more an outdoor than indoor player. But, yeah, I think the stadium looks amazing like this closed with the amazing crowd like this is even more noises, I enjoy the atmosphere a lot. I can’t complain at all.I knew before the match that the roof is going to be closed. You know what, a month-and-a-half I didn’t know if I was going to play tennis. It doesn’t matter if it is outdoors or indoors today. I just wanted to play and do my best.” Nadal elicits more cheers from the crowd when he says: “That is the only way to be where I am today. Honestly, it means a lot to me to be in the final here again.” Rafa speaks to Jim Courier. “I started the match playing great. The first two sets were one of the best so far since a long time. Then I know how good Matteo is, he is a very solid player, very dangerous. In the third I know at some point he is going to go for the shots. And thenI think I didn’t play a good game with myself in the fourth and third. He played some great shots, passing shot down the line, unbelievable. Then, yeah, then I had to suffer and wanted to fight in the fourth again.” Nadal beats Berrettini 6-3, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3 He’s done it! With the pressure on his shoulders, Nadal’s experience of these situations shines through. He maintains his cool and on the first of two match points he rides his luck, running around a net cord to put the pressure back on Berrettini, who hits into the net and Nadal is into the Australian Open final! Fourth set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 3-5 Nadal* (* denotes next server) What a game! And it could be a pivotal one in this semi-final! Nadal finally wins a point on Berrettini’s serve, when the Italian is long. A classic Rafa forehand levels at 30-30 soon after and the pressure builds on Berrettini for the first time in a long time. He can’t handle it and slashes a forehand into the net to give Nadal a break chance! A lengthy rally ensues as tension spikes but on the 23rd shot, Nadal is out and Berrettini survives! The Spaniard gets another chance soon enough, following another loose Berrettini shot and this time he is able to take it! Berrettini is into the net and Nadal will now serve for a place in the Australian Open final! Fourth set: *Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 3-4 Nadal (* denotes next server) Nadal loses the crucial first point on his own serve and he’s forced to fight from thereon in. An ace at 30-30 helps him get through this one though, and we’re still on serve, even if Nadal is having to work harder than Berrettini to hold. Fourth set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 3-3 Nadal* (* denotes next server) The transformation of Berrettini continues. He is yet to lose a point this set - in stark contrast to the many points he lost during the opening two. He aces to win another love game and level at three games apiece. Fourth set: *Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 2-3 Nadal (* denotes next server) A couple of unforced errors from Berrettini at the end of this game prove decisive and the Italian is right to look annoyed with himself. Nadal noses in front again. That was a really courageous third set from Matteo Berrettini. Nadal has been very impressive, pinning Berrettini into his backhand corner, the worst stroke on the court, exposing Berrettini’s poor return with really solid serving and playing such efficient tennis. After two disappointing sets, Berrettini showed his spirit in the third. He gained confidence in his service games early on and then played a brilliant return game at 4-3, complete with one of the shots of the tournament. He is absolutely destroying the ball now and it looks like a different match. Still, two good holds from Nadal at the beginning of set four. Aside from a couple of messy points in his 4-3 service game, he hasn’t done much wrong. He will now try to weather the storm. Fourth set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 2-2 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Service games are coming to the fore. Berrettini again holds without losing a point. And onwards we go. Fourth set: *Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 1-2 Nadal (* denotes next server) Nadal follows suit, with a love-game, the highlight of which is a wonderfully deft backhand volley at the net to bring up game point. Fourth set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 1-1 Nadal* (* denotes next server) No problems for the resurgent Berrettini. He holds serve to love. Tomorrow’s order of play is out: Fourth set: *Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 0-1 Nadal (* denotes next server) Now it’s Berrettini, for the first time really today, who’s bouncing around. He’s invigorated at the start of this fourth set and why wouldn’t he be? He’s found a way back in, when he seemed dead and buried. He unleashes a forehand winner, and follows it with a jumping backhand winner. Where have these shots been today? Rafa counters with some big shots of his own, and he’s not going away without a fight. The Spaniard digs deep to hold. Third set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 6-3 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Three big serves from Berrettini bring up three set points. He launches a fourth towards Nadal, who can’t return it and the Italian has found a way back into this match! Third set: *Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 5-3 Nadal (* denotes next server) The pendulum swings. It’s been coming. Berrettini slides across the blue surface and wallops a forehand winner back past Nadal to go 30-0 up and the complexion of this set has changed. Nadal puts a regulation ball into the net on the next point for the first time Berrettini has a break point against Nadal! Not just one, but three. Nadal saves the first but the writing is on the wall and there are big celebrations in the Berrettini camp when he finally secures a break! Third set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 4-3 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Wowsers, what is this? Berrettini races through a service game, to love for the first time today. That’s by far his easiest hold of the match. Third set: *Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 3-3 Nadal (* denotes next server) Berrettini threatens to get a break point chance, but he can’t quite get there. Nadal holds. In other news, the capacity at Melbourne Park for the weekend’s finals has been increased to 80%, in line with the latest Victorian state government advice. A previous limit of 65%, up from an initial 50%, had been set in response to the state’s Covid case load. It means around 3,000 home fans will be able to watch Ash Barty in the women’s singles final, before the Kyrgios-Kokkinakis show gets under way on Saturday night. “Following consideration of a request from Tennis Australia for a higher cap, the ticketed capacity of the AO has been increased to 80% for the finals on Saturday and Sunday,” Martin Pakula, the sports minister, said. Third set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 3-2 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Nadal has a golden chance at 30-30 - he plays the point perfectly, but his final volley at the net is off target. And he’s left to rue that as Berrettini holds again. Third set: *Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 2-2 Nadal (* denotes next server) You get the sense that Berrettini may have turned a corner now, finally. Still, Nadal holds his serve and we’re all square. Third set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 2-1 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Berrettini catches the line with a forehand - a fist pump follows, an indication of growing confidence? It’s not easy for the Italian this game, but he roars with delight as he manages to hold again. Still on serve this third set. Third set: *Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 1-1 Nadal (* denotes next server) Nadal blots his copybook with a rare double fault - his first of the day - at 40-0 up but otherwise it’s plain sailing. Meanwhile, here’s an offer he’d be mad not to accept. Third set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-6, 1-0 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Berrettini has been broken in his first service game in the previous two sets; what can he do here in the third? He has no answer to Nadal’s forehand on the opening point, but a couple of big serves inject some energy into his outlook. Nadal forces a deuce, but that’s all for the Spaniard as Berrettini does indeed manage to hold! Second set: *Berrettini 3-6, 2-6 Nadal (* denotes next server) Berrettini, at 30-30, perhaps senses a chance. But he puts a ball long and his face cannot hide his disappointment. Another long ball later and Nadal is in a very strong position, two sets up and with a spring in his step. Second set: Berrettini 3-6, 2-5 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Berrettini holds with the minimum of fuss! He seals it with an ace and lives to fight another day this set. But Nadal will now serve for a two-set lead. Second set: *Berrettini 3-6, 1-5 Nadal (* denotes next server) Oof, what a backhand from Nadal to kick off this next game. The commentators on the telly are looking for excuses for Berrettini - they’re coming up with fatigue, both physical and mental, given the extra court time the Italian has had, including that epic five-setter in the quarter-finals against Gael Monfils. Second set: Berrettini 3-6, 1-4 Nadal* (* denotes next server) This is nice from Berrettini, finishing off at the net to go 40-15 ahead. An encouraging sign for the Italian, who could be forgiven for feeling disconsolate at the moment. He holds though, and he’s on the board. Second set: *Berrettini 3-6, 0-4 Nadal (* denotes next server) Shankar Mony emails in to say, “It’s getting late early for Berretini!” But what do we have here? Berrettini goes 30-0 up... Nadal on second serve... but the Italian lands a backhand into the net and you feel the chance to apply some pressure to Nadal has passed him by. So it proves, as Nadal produces some brilliant shotmaking, ending with a sliced backhand on game point, to escape unscathed and move further towards a two-set lead. Second set: Berrettini 3-6, 0-3 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Nadal is in total control at this point. Berrettini is far too passive and he’s paying the price. He faces two break points, which he relies on his big first serve to save, and he soon has to save a third. But when Nadal gets a fourth chance, this time he takes it, and this second set is mirroring the first so far. Nadal with an ominous three-game lead. Second set: *Berrettini 3-6, 0-2 Nadal (* denotes next server) Nadal is running around a number of forehands and at the moment Berrettini has few answers. Two up early in the second. Nadal’s energy levels are high, as usual - he jinks off to take his return position at the end of this game, contrasting with Berrettini, who appears a bit deflated. Second set: Berrettini 3-6, 0-1 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Berrettini finds himself in trouble again in the opening game of the second set. His serve threatens to get him out of a potential pickle at 0-30 down but an unforced error follows to gift Nadal a couple of break chances. And the Spaniard rips a forehand winner to get another early advantage. First set: *Berrettini 3-6 Nadal (* denotes next server) No worries for Nadal as he sends down three impeccable first serves to bring up three set points. It looks like the first set is in the bag, but an off-target forehand followed by a backhand into the net and then another Berrettini powerful forehand winner down the line forces deuce. The glimmer of hope afforded to the Italian is soon extinguished though, and at the fourth time of asking, Nadal secures the opening set, in 43 minutes. First set: Berrettini 3-5 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Nadal forces a deuce but a couple of loose shots ensure Berrettini survives for another game at least this set. First set: *Berrettini 2-5 Nadal (* denotes next server) Nadal elicits a big cheer from the stands as he advances to the net to finish off with a volley and move 30-0 ahead. The noise is similar a point later when it’s Berrettini’s turn to have his opponent running all over the baseline before the Italian gets to the net and volleys confidently. But Nadal is all class and a trademark forehand whip sees him safely through another service game. Berrettini has to hold now to stay in the first set. First set: Berrettini 2-4 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Brilliant from Berrettini! He runs into a sliced backhand that Nadal has no answer to, before he holds his service game off the back of a big serve followed up with a monster forehand. Much better from the Italian as he grows into this match. First set: *Berrettini 1-4 Nadal (* denotes next server) Again Berrettini shows a glimpse of brilliance - a glorious whipped forehand back across Nadal gets him to 15-40. But a forehand on the run from Nadal on the next point sees the No 6 seed pocket another game without too much further fuss. First set: Berrettini 1-3 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Berrettini’s first serve sporadically flickers into life in a game he really needs to hold - not just for the scoreboard but in terms of confidence going forward this set and beyond. A couple of aces help the Italian and he does indeed get on the board. First set: *Berrettini 0-3 Nadal (* denotes next server) Here we go then. Nadal is off and running. Berrettini shows what he’s capable of at one point though, a blistering forehand down the line at 15-40 leaving Nadal flailing. Nevertheless, Spaniard consolidates that early break and he opens up a three-game lead. The weather in Melbourne could not be more horrendous right now. The rain is heavy, the sky is dark and there was even thunder earlier. Although Nadal struggled badly in the heat against Denis Shapovalov, these indoor conditions certainly benefit Berrettini. His serve should be bolstered without having to fight the elements while Nadal’s heavy topspin will not bounce as high as in sunny conditions. We’ll see how this goes. First set: Berrettini 0-2 Nadal* (* denotes next server) Nadal draws first blood! That’s not the start a booming server like Berrettini would be hoping for as Nadal puts the pressure on, brings up two break point opportunities and takes the break at the first chance, as Berrettini fires a ball wide. I’ve got more on the weather for you, from my second colleague on the ground at Melbourne Park, Tumaini Carayol. First set: *Berrettini 0-1 Nadal (* denotes next server) Nadal unleashes his trusty left forehand on the opening point, but for once it’s a bit wayward. Good to get those ones out of the system early on. Berrettini does well to force deuce having been 15-40 down, as he capitalises on a Nadal net cord. No matter, Nadal holds his opening service game. The deluge at Melbourne Park in the last half-hour or so is something to behold. It is difficult to tell inside Rod Laver Arena, where the roof has been rolled out, but it has been absolutely pelting down. This morning was hot and humid, as it has been in Melbourne for most of this tournament. One giant crack of thunder later and that all changed. Nadal and Berrettini would have had enough time to be aware pre-match they would have to play under covers but the rest of us are a bit soggy. Journalists and broadcasters are umbrella-pooling, if that is a thing, to get between the media centre and centre court. My colleague Emma Kemp has just been caught out in the rain. We’ll hear from her shortly. Meanwhile, we’re pretty much ready to go! Nadal won the toss and chose to serve first. Here we go! A quick word on the weather, as always: it’s cooled right down to around 22C outside. Apparently it’s raining outside and the roof above Rod Laver Arena has been closed. That result I mentioned earlier - things didn’t go to plan for the Australian mixed double duo of Jaimee Fourlis and Jason Kubler in the final against Kristina Mladenovic of France and Croatia’s Ivan Dodig. The home side fell to a 6-3, 6-4 defeat to the Europeans, who were playing for the first time together at Melbourne Park. Finally we have pictures of Nadal in the bowels of Rod Laver Arena! There he is, bouncing around, full of energy, and raring to go. He’s 35 years old, this man. The tennis is big, but it’s not the only sport on at the moment. The Women’s Ashes Test match is well into day two at Canberra’s Manuka Oval, where I believe young Australian quick Darcie Brown has just taken an absolute screamer. Join Tanya Aldred for more over on our dedicated liveblog: And if you want a good read on the Kyrgios-Kokkinakis juggernaut, look no further than my colleague Emma Kemp’s take on the Australian pairing who are taking the doubles game to new, louder and brasher heights. While we wait the players on Rod Laver Arena, the host broadcaster is showing a re-run of last night’s women’s semi featuring Ash Barty and Madison Keys. In case you’ve been in a cave for the past 12 hours or so, have a read of Tumaini Carayol’s take on the local talent who will look to become the first Australian to win their home Open in 44 years, since Chris O’Neil in 1978. A quick look at the head-to-head stats for this pair: Nadal is 100% against Berrettini and has never lost to him. Impressive. Granted, they’ve played just once before, but the stats never lie. That match came in the semi-finals of the 2019 US Open, when Nadal won in straight sets on his way to lifting the title at Flushing Meadows. Day 12 of the Australian Open and that can only mean one thing: it’s men’s semi-finals. Greek fourth seed Stefanos Tsitsipas goes toe-to-toe with Daniil Medvedev, Russia’s second seed, later on but first up there’s the small matter of Matteo Berrettini, the Italian seventh seed, against Rafa Nadal, the man standing on the cusp of etching his name further into the annals of tennis history. Nadal is now just two wins away from a 21st grand slam title, one which will put him out on his own above the absent Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic. It will be quite some feat should he manage it, but first things first, he faces the tough prospect of finding a way past Berrettini if he is to return to Rod Laver Arena for Sunday’s showpiece and retain the chance of making history. The pair are due on court “not before 2:30pm” local time so, with the day’s only preceding match already done and dusted, that’s in about 20 minutes. Don’t go anywhere, entertainment is assured. In the meantime, feel free to get in touch on email or tweet @mike_hytner.When Australia resumed batting at 327 for seven on the second morning of the Canberra Test match, Plan A was to push on towards 400. With Jess Jonassen and Annabel Sutherland batting in positions far below their ability, this was realistic. But as England swung the ball and took wickets under heavy cloud, things changed with a hasty declaration. Plan B was to make the most of those same bowling conditions. With England 38 for two at lunch and 120 for six at tea, only Heather Knight’s outstanding innings of 127 not out stopped it working like a charm. Australia added only 10 runs in 7.1 overs to the overnight score, declaring at 337 for nine rather than sending 18-year-old fast bowler Darcie Brown out to join debutant leg-spinner Alana King with the bat. Sutherland was bowled for eight by a Katherine Brunt special that swung past a defensive shot to hit the top of off-stump, before Jonassen edged behind on two. That gave Brunt figures of five for 60 and Amy Jones a sixth catch, equalling the record in a women’s Test innings set by England keeper Lisa Nye in 1992. As much as Australia’s bowlers produced a concerted performance, sloppy batting from England played its part. Lauren Winfield-Hill scored one boundary through the cordon before throwing a bottom-handed slice at width from Brown, edging to Beth Mooney at second slip. Tammy Beaumont’s high backlift, honed for attack in white-ball formats, left her looking vulnerable in defence, and so it proved as Ellyse Perry decked a ball in to hit her on the back thigh before the bat could intercede. With Beaumont gone for five, a score of 23 for two was still better than Australia’s first-innings start of four for two. But where the Australians had combined restraint with counterattack from that point to keep the score moving, England ground to a halt. Perry bowled seven overs straight off the top of the innings, giving little away, but fellow seamers Brown, Sutherland and Tahlia McGrath all offered short wide balls on occasion that were rarely put away. Nat Sciver made 15 from 42 before one of Sutherland’s mediums jagged back off the seam, taking the inside edge to the wicketkeeper as Sciver tried to protect her stumps. Sophia Dunkley started slowly before hitting three boundaries but was also out for 15, hanging out her bat to Perry and chopping on to her stumps from the last ball before drinks in the middle session. Amy Jones made a slow 13, eventually trying to pull a Sutherland delivery that was not short enough, top-edging wide of mid-on where Brown made up ground to take an excellent diving catch. In the meantime, England’s captain was left to do the job on her own. After a couple of early sliced drives, Knight looked impeccable. She worked singles from the pace of Brown, drove stylishly to the on side when King overpitched, and played the pull shot and cover drive well against seam. By the time the fifth wicket fell, Knight had 56 of England’s 118 runs. The follow-on mark of 188 now looked distant, and more so when Brunt, batting too high at No 7, was lbw playing back to the leg-spinner. That meant that King, Sutherland and Brown had each taken their first Test wicket in the innings. But Knight was not giving up, even as Charlie Dean and Anya Shrubsole popped up cheap catches from spin. The captain was on 92 when Sophie Ecclestone joined her at 169 for eight, and the left-arm spinner kept her company until Knight was viciously swishing her bat through the air in celebration of her second Test century. With that done, the pair sailed past the follow-on, then past 200, in an unbroken partnership of 66. It made for an extraordinary scorecard: when Ecclestone drove a boundary down the ground with 10 minutes to go in the day, Knight was on 121 and Ecclestone had become the first of her teammates in the innings to go past 15. There will be much more work for the pair to do on the third day, with Ecclestone on 27, and England 102 runs behind at 235 for eight. But given how the day had gone until that stand, things could have been much worse. There are still two days to see who can plot a road to victory from here.Russia’s ambassador has hit back at the Australian defence minister, Peter Dutton, for branding Vladimir Putin an ageing and irrational dictator, amid growing tensions over the buildup of more than 100,000 Russian troops near Ukraine’s border. The ambassador to Australia, Alexey Pavlovsky, said if that was “the level of analysis informing Australian policy then it is definitely a worrying sign” and argued that some western politicians had been “convinced by their own propaganda”. As concerns grow in the west about the Russian president’s intentions, Pavlovsky also suggested that new sanctions against the country’s officials – which Australia has not ruled out – would have no effect on Moscow’s position but would come at a “high price” to Australia. Addressing the media for more than an hour in a hotel conference room in Canberra on Friday, Pavlovsky mounted a defence of Russia’s position, denied the troop presence was a sign of aggression and at times bemoaned the quality of Australian journalism and policy-making. “Australians definitely are entitled to more meaningful understanding of the situation than comic book-style propaganda like Batman versus Joker – I mean, liberal democracies versus autocracies,” he said. Pavlovsky sought to counter the idea that Russia was irrational for being concerned about the expansion of Nato and for its push to prevent Ukraine from ever joining the military alliance. “There is a campaign trying to portray our concerns as irrational,” he said. “I understand that the propaganda machine in the west is very powerful … We see now that the politicians have come to be convinced and hypnotised by their own propaganda.” Dutton had on Thursday branded Putin an ageing dictator who is becoming “more and more irrational”. The defence minister argued the international community must “put as much pressure on Russia as possible” to prevent a “devastating” invasion of Ukraine. Western countries have voiced increasing concern about Russia’s buildup of troops near the Ukraine border but opinions differ on if, or when, Putin plans a full-scale military invasion. Russia has demanded security guarantees and a promise that Ukraine never be admitted to Nato, which the US has rejected. Pavlovsky denied the troops were a threat, instead characterising the buildup as a “a warning to Ukraine not to try any reckless military adventures, not to interpret the support they have from the west as carte blanche to do such crazy things”. But Pavlovsky said he would “not go further” when pressed on what action Russia would take if that “warning” was not heeded. “There’s no aggression because our troops are on our territory.” Pavlovsky dismissed the positions of western countries, including Australia, suggesting their credibility was tarnished because of their invasion of Iraq in 2003 under the “fake pretext” that Saddam Hussein’s regime had weapons of mass destruction. A senior Ukrainian representative in Australia rejected the Russian ambassador’s claims. Volodymyr Shalkivskyi, the chargé d’affaires at Ukraine’s embassy in Canberra, said he believed any country would feel threatened if more than 100,000 troops were stationed at the border. “It’s quite a game of words from his side in terms of how to consider it, whether it’s a threat or warning, or something else. For us, it’s a clear threat,” Shalkivskyi told Guardian Australia. “It was really amusing to hear from the Russian side about western propaganda. That is kind of a really unexpected turn, given the mass-scale propaganda inside and brainwashing inside Russia.” Shalkivskyi said he believed the Kremlin was in a “state of heavy illness” in believing it had a right to influence the territories of the former Soviet Union. “It’s the 21st century, but it looks like they still live in the Cold War era of last century when there were spheres of influence,” Shalkivskyi said. Ukraine was grateful to its international partners including Australia for strong support for its sovereignty and territorial integrity, and for flagging further sanctions in case of any further intervention, Shalkivskyi said. Earlier, Pavlovsky denied Moscow would be influenced by any further sanctions by Australia and its allies. “By now I think it should be crystal clear to everybody that those sanctions, they just don’t work,” said Pavlovsky, who has been Russia’s ambassador to Australia since 2019. “More than that, they damage the economies, companies, individuals, in the countries that impose such sanctions.” Pavlovsky said it may be a “high price” for western countries to pay “just to make a gesture”. He said Russia did care about sanctions “but we do adapt”. The Australian government says it is not planning to send troops or military assets to the region in the event of a conflict, but it has offered assistance to help Ukraine fend off cyber attacks. On Monday the Australian government urged any Australian citizens to leave Ukraine immediately due to the deteriorating security situation. Australia is considering supplying extra liquefied natural gas to Europe, after the US and the UK raised fears the continent’s reliance on Russian gas makes it vulnerable in the standoff with Putin. The US upped the ante with a declaration that an invasion would endanger the Nord Stream 2 pipeline project, which is to carry gas from Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea. “If Russia invades Ukraine one way or another, Nord Stream 2 will not move forward,” the US state department spokesperson Ned Price told National Public Radio. Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, said she would prefer to “continue the dialogue” with Russia but not at any price.With that, I will send the blog on its merry way. To all those battling floods/heat/hailstones, stay safe and dry. Here were today’s major developments: Australia has recorded a record number of Covid deaths, with 98 fatalities nationwide and 39 in Victoria alone. To say it mildly, there are a lot of storms about. There has been flash flooding in Victoria, SA and New South Wales; winds as strong as category two cyclones in Victoria; and power outages in SA as Melbourne was hit with the brunt of rain and hail this afternoon. A number of warnings remain in place on the Bureau of Meteorology’s website. Pfizer booster shots have been approved for Australians aged 16 and 17. Teenagers will not be able to book in right away, that will come with Atagi advice. Human rights advocates and union leaders have urged the Australian government to impose targeted sanctions against Myanmar’s military leaders as the first anniversary of the coup looms. The Australian Olympic Committee has partnered with Gina Rinehart’s mining company, Hancock Prospecting. Russia’s ambassador to Australia Alexey Pavlovsky held a rare press conference in Canberra in which he hit out at media “propaganda” and said a buildup of more than 100,000 troops near the border of Ukraine was not a sign of aggression. WA has announced changes to close contact requirements that will come into effect when Covid-19 cases rise in the state. They are similar to those in place in SA. Speaking of which, SA has loosened some Covid restrictions including QR mandates for retail and increasing indoor hospitality caps to 50%. More changes may be made in the coming weeks if cases continue to fall. And prime minister Scott Morrison rebuffed Grace Tame’s smile snub at the Lodge by retorting he and Jenny “always greet guests with a smile” at their home. Note: Grace Tame was not visiting the PMs personal residence, and she was there for a formal event. Back in Victoria: Canberrans – be careful this mushrooming season: McGowan has repeatedly emphasised the record numbers of Covid deaths in Australia in the past week as justification for keeping definitions for close contact and isolation rules in WA tighter than the rest of the nation when it does open up to the virus. He says the rules are closely modelled off SA. Interesting stat: Before McGowan announced the reopening of the border (and then backflipped), this has probably been the most significant acknowledgment that it is not a matter of if Covid arrives in greater numbers in WA, but when. The changes will only be introduced when (and the terminology in this presser has been “when”) WA records high daily case numbers, but – though stricter than the national definition of close contacts – it will be a huge game changer for how the state has been managing Covid cases thus far. The last thing to change in WA “in the event of a very high caseload environment” is a re-definition of close contacts for critical workers – similar to what we’ve seen in the rest of Australia. Critical workers, if asymptomatic, will be able to continue to work if they are designated as a close contact. McGowan: This is a measure of last resort to ensure we keep our state running. The worker must be asymptomatic and cannot undertake their role from home and either performs a role that is critical to the Covid-19 response, a continuation of critical services that prevent significant harm ... or performs a role that is necessary for the safe continuation of services or has a role in transport, food beverages, pharmaceutical supplies, agriculture, critical resources, power utilities and waste management services, corrective and judicial services, police and emergency services, schools and childcare, healthcare services, social assistance at residential care, veterinary services, funeral, crematorium and cemetery services and defence and defence-related industries. So a fair string of industries. The third condition to change in WA is new testing and isolation protocols for positive cases and close contacts. Confirmed positive cases will need to self-isolate for a minimum of seven days instead of 14. McGowan says if symptoms are still present, they must keep isolating until they recover. Otherwise, they’re free to leave isolation after a week. If you are a symptomatic close contact, you’re required to isolate for seven days from date of contact with a positive case, and to take a PCR or rapid antigen test as soon as possible. If positive, you must stay in isolation and take another RAT in 24 hours. If the test is negative or you are asymptomatic, you’re required to take a final RAT on day seven before leaving isolation. McGowan: If you are designated a close contact but you do not have any cold or flu-like symptoms, self-isolate for seven days from date of contact with the positive case. If symptoms develop prior to day seven, take a PCR or RAT test. If still asymptomatic, you can have a RAT test and if not positive you can leave isolation. For any close contact it is important to remember: even after leaving isolation after seven days, it is important you monitor for symptoms for the next seven days as an extra precaution. McGowan says the Omicron variant is “impossible to eliminate and spreads fast”. In light of this fact, new settings will be brought in regarding the definition of a close contact when/if case numbers rise. For the moment, though, current isolation and close contact requirements still apply. At some point in the future, we will inevitably be in a higher caseload environment ... To strike the right balance between suppressing the virus and allowing society to function as smoothly as possible, there are two things tonight. WA is not currently in the environment that requires these new settings. Right now the virus is still at manageable levels ... Today, we can detail the future settings to give the community, businesses and industries the opportunity to plan and prepare for our transition to managing higher levels of data cases. When settings change, casual contacts will no longer be considered, so being at an exposure site at the same time as a positive case won’t be a reason for testing and isolation. Check-ins will continue despite this so people can monitor for symptoms. The definition of a close contact will change to a household member or intimate partner, or someone who has had “close personal interaction” with a confirmed case during their infectious period - which means 15 minutes of face-to-face contact where no masks were present, or more than two hours in a small room where masks had at least partially been removed. Close contacts must get tested and isolate for 14 days. McGowan: I think most would agree that the WA definition is better for limiting the spread of the virus in the community and ensuring people are incentivised to do the right thing while also ensuring that things can continue safely to operate. The WA premier, Mark McGowan, is speaking now in Perth. He says there have been nine local Covid-19 cases detected overnight – all linked to the current Omicron outbreak. McGowan: Several of today’s cases have been infectious while in the community. Contact tracers are working with these cases to determine potential public exposure sites and these will be uploaded to the Health WA website when confirmed. WA Health is also reporting one case who is an interstate traveller. There are currently 114 confirmed active cases in WA. McGowan says yesterday was the deadliest day of the pandemic in Australia so far – a “hard, unavoidable and very uncomfortable fact”. Given the ongoing outbreak in WA, McGowan convened a state of disaster meeting to finalise “several issues” following how the outbreak has played out in eastern states. This all relates to WA’s future high caseload settings for those contacts, testing and isolation protocols and critical worker guidelines. Everyone has seen what has happened on the east coast for the past two months ... Omicron is a game changer. It is so infectious and it has overwhelmed systems that were set up for Delta. Australia has recorded its deadliest day ever of the Covid pandemic, with 98 deaths recorded, as the first cases of the BA.2 descendant of the Omicron variant have been recorded in NSW. There are now 35 cases of BA.2 in Australia overall including in Tasmania, ACT, Queensland, WA and Victoria. Of the new deaths, 39 were recorded in Victoria, 35 in NSW, 18 in Queensland, and one in the ACT. The previous one-day high was on 21 January, when 88 deaths were recorded. While overall cases are plateauing, the country’s chief nursing and midwifery officer, Prof Alison McMillan, said death rates were set to remain high for some time: As we have seen during the two years of the pandemic, the number of deaths associated with those cases stay higher for a longer period. There is a delay in the number of deaths. Sadly, we have seen quite a number of deaths. A reminder – motorists and passengers are “urged to be vigilant” amid the storms. As in, stay off the road if it’s flooding. In Queensland, ordinary commissioner of the Queensland Crime and Corruption Commission, Bruce Barbour, has been appointed acting chair. The state’s attorney general, Shannon Fentiman, lauded Barbour’s track record in law and risk assessment. Barbour has extensive experience in administrative law and conducting investigations, and held the highly-respected position of NSW Ombudsman for 15 years. He has the capability and skills to lead the CCC in the interim and has a thorough understanding of its operations since being appointed as an Ordinary Commissioner in 2021 with the bi-partisan support of the Parliamentary Crime and Corruption Committee (PCCC). Barbour has been a senior member of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, a member of the NSW Casino Control Authority, chair of the NSW Public Interest Disclosures Steering Committee, a member of the NSW Institute of Criminology Advisory Committee, regional vice-president of the International Ombudsman Institute and Convenor of the NSW Child Death Review team. The position for a permanent chair will be advertised nationally in accordance with the Crime and Corruption Act 2001. Barbour will begin his role as acting chair today. Hail, heavy rain and thunderstorms have lashed Greater Melbourne as the cool change sweeps across Victoria. The Bureau of Meteorology issued a severe thunderstorm warning for Gisborne and Melton in Victoria’s east and Belgrave in the state’s west. Pakenham, Sunbury, Williamstown, Craigieburn, Footscray and St Alban are also forecast to be hit by heavy rainfall and hail this afternoon that could lead to flash flooding. The BoM reported that Bullengarook in Victoria’s west recorded 21.8mm of rain in 30 minutes while Springvale in the state’s south-east was drenched with 35mm of rain in half an hour. Meanwhile motorists and passengers are “urged to be vigilant” with the severe thunderstorm warning and heavy rain moving across Melbourne. Victoria’s State Emergency Service has issued a watch and act thunderstorm alert for Greater Melbourne including Paekenham, Sunbury and Williamstown. The emergency agency also issued a flash food watch and act alert for Elwood Creek and Castlemaine, with residents urged to stay indoors. Some of the greatest impacted areas include: Bell Street, Preston is closed eastbound between Albert Street and Chifley Drive, due to fallen power lines. Use Murray and Southern roads instead. Outbound traffic is reduced to one lane on the Princes Highway, Berwick between Clyde Road and Wheeler Street, due to a fallen tree. There are heavy delays in the area. There are areas of flooding on the Monash Freeway, particularly around Kooyong and Glen Iris. The inbound entry from High Street is closed. Buses will replace trains on the Mernda and Hurstbridge lines between Parliament and Clifton Hill, due to equipment damage caused by the weather. Coaches are replacing V/Line trains between Geelong and Waurn Ponds, due to an equipment fault near South Geelong. There are areas of flooding on Springvale Road, Glen Waverley as well at the Princes Highway through Mulgrave. There are delays of 30 minutes for the Cranbourne and Pakenham lines, and of 40 minutes for the Frankston Line, due to flooding on the tracks. There are several tram services diverting or operating in sections due to flooding or debris on the tracks. The Bureau of Meteorology says severe thunderstorms continue to hit large parts of greater Melbourne. There is an ongoing forecast for heavy rainfall, damaging winds and large hailstones for northern greater Melbourne and parts of the inner east, inner and outer east areas: At 3.50pm, severe thunderstorms were detected on the weather radar near Craigieburn, Woodend, the area west of Woodend, Mt Macedon and Warburton. These thunderstorms are moving towards the east to southeast. They are forecast to affect Broadmeadows, Greensborough and Whittlesea by 4.20pm and Croydon, Lilydale and Yarra Glen by 4.50pm. Heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding, damaging winds and large hailstones are likely. Some 3cm hail was observed in Melbourne’s inner east. Bullengarook recorded 21.8mm of rain in 30 minutes. Springvale recorded 35mm of rain in 30 minutes. Heavy rain, thunder and flash flooding in Victoria continues: In case you missed it, here is a summary of Russian ambassador to Australia Alexey Pavlovksy’s media appearance from AAP. Pavlovsky used the rare media conference in Canberra to warn Australian support for Ukraine risked leading to war: When the western countries now, including Australia, are expressing their support, either verbally or in material terms, or by sending arms to Ukraine, they embolden Kyiv to continue their line of sabotage. We think that such expressions of support are very dangerous because they lead to provocations, they lead to war. Pavlovsky also claimed Russia was not being aggressive by massing troops on the border with Ukraine: Our troops are not a threat. They are a warning to Ukraine not to try any reckless military adventures, not to interpret the support they have from the West as carte blanche to do such crazy things. The ambassador attacked defence minister Peter Dutton’s earlier description of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, as an increasingly irrational and ageing dictator: If such is the level of analysis informing Australian policy, then it is definitely a worrying sign. Australians definitely are entitled to more meaningful understanding of the situation than comic book-style propaganda like Batman versus Joker. Australia earlier this week evacuated some diplomatic staff and their families from Ukraine and upgraded its advice to “do not travel”. Pavlovsky accused the Morrison government of “fanning hysteria” from thousands of miles away. Federal authorities also suggested Australia could look to help supply gas to Europe should Russia decide to cut supplies. Pavlovsky wished Australia “good luck” in entering the European gas market. The last time a Russian ambassador to Australia held a press conference was in 2018. Talk about a man on a mission: Former media personality Andrew O’Keefe has been refused bail. Catch up on the story here: This is insane: St Kilda Junction right now: So, to recap the SA press conference: Indoor dining will increase to 50% capacity for the hospitality sector from midnight. Seated consumption will still be required, and there is no change to outdoor settings. QR codes will no longer be required for the retail sector. They will remain mandatory in hospitality and in “high risk” settings. Also from midnight, paediatric elective surgery for children will be able to resume. Marshall said further changes may be made in the coming weeks, as active cases (hopefully) continue to fall: Hopefully, as we continue to deal with this Omicron outbreak, we can make further restrictions that will improve outcomes in hospitality and other sectors as well. We will be looking very carefully to add some other sectors in the next round, certainly the fitness sector is one that we are looking at very closely, we will look at those limits again and how many people are coming back into the CBD. The Melbourne storm is looking as wild as was predicted: Broken Hill: From midnight, 50% density limits will be reinstated for the hospitality sector in South Australia as part of a string of eased restrictions for the state. On 26 December we were facing a very uncertain future with the rise and rise of Omicron, not just here in South Australia but right around the country, right around the world. True to form, South Australians responded exactly and precisely to the requests that were made by the government, by SA health, by the state coordinator, to reduce movement ... We now find ourselves in a much, much improved situation, certainly within our hospitals’ capacity to respond to the numbers that we have at the moment. That has given us confidence to be able to gradually reduce restrictions in South Australia. What I can announce effective at one minute past midnight tonight is that we will restore 50% density for hospitality in South Australia ... Effective at 12.01am tonight, we will go back to 50% density ... still seated consumption indoors, no change to outdoor densities. I can also let you know that elective surgery, paediatric elective surgery for children in South Australia will also be permitted as a 12.01am tonight. We appreciate that elective surgery will not be able to be scheduled until next week – we are giving you advance notice that as of 12.01am tonight that will be available. QR codes will no longer be mandatory in retail settings across South Australia. They will still be required for hospitality and “high risk” locations. Marshall says 1,846 new cases has been the lowest number reported in SA all year. Some 1,336 cases were detected from PCR tests, and 510 from RATs. What I can let you know is there were 2,969 recoveries in the past 24 hours. That is a very positive number against the number of new cases at 1,846. We have a total number of active cases in South Australia continuing to fall, now at 24,612. That takes our seven day average down to 2,047 – certainly the lowest number we have had for a very, very long period of time. We have also had a fall in the number of people in hospital, down to 285, the lowest we have had for several days. South Australia’s premier, Steven Marshall, is providing detail of the state’s 1,846 new Covid cases and flags a further easing of restrictions. Before he does though, Marshall announces that as of this morning, a further emergency declaration was made in response to the “continued issues” associated with extreme weather in recent days. This will provide a state coordinator – who is of course the police commissioner in South Australia – with the additional responsibilities and, if you like, the powers to do with issues associated with heavy vehicle movements, to do with food security, and also to deal with supporting very remote and isolated communities. It is fair to say that we are now understanding the full magnitude of the issues associated with extreme weather in South Australia. A major emergency declaration has been declared. That will be in place for 14 days. South Australia has recorded five more Covid-19 deaths – all over the age of 80. There are 285 people being treated with Covid in hospital, including 24 people requiring intensive care and four on ventilators. Downward drinking trends pre-Covid are continuing to reverse according to a new survey from the Alcohol and Drug Foundation. The latest data showed 25% of Australians are drinking more now than they were before the pandemic. Chief executive of the ADF, Dr Erin Lalor, warned alcohol use as a “coping mechanism” was threatening to become culturally entrenched even as states emerged from lockdown restrictions: Australians have been using drugs and alcohol as coping strategies to deal with ongoing restrictions and Covid-induced unemployment, anxiety, mental health problems and loss of social connectedness. Although restrictions have eased, the repercussions of another tough year are still being felt so we urge people to leave behind unhealthy drinking habits as we move towards a ‘new normal’. If this spike in alcohol and other drug use isn’t addressed quickly, we’re likely to see corresponding adverse effects on these social issues that are of most concern to everyday Australians. Here is a quirky little media release from MP Bob Katter to keep you going this Friday afternoon. Katter says the federal government is throwing money at the Great Barrier Reef instead of addressing “immediate and real problems” such as “feral pigs causing erosion in river systems or raw sewage seeping out at Cardwell”. Katter says he’s been lobbying Cardwell’s (a town south of Cairns) case for the past two years: There is no sewage system for the town and nearly the entire population lives 150 metres from the ocean. I can’t imagine a worse situation. What we need is a further $23m to the money that’s already been allocated to properly fix it up. They’ve already spent $1b on the reef without addressing the sewage at Cardwell. Ayr has a magnificent answer to suburban runoff going onto the reef with their macro-algal bioremediation facility and they need serious funding too. Katter goes on: How much of a scam and a con on the public purse were the previous crown-of-thorns starfish eradication programs? $120m was allocated and it would appear from the information sent to me that it went into the hands of three people. There was never any information published on just how many crown-of-thorns starfish were removed. Relief for Melburnians, followed nearly immediately by thunderstorms: Morrison is absolutely shamelessly milking the votes of reptiles here who – let’s be real – are already committed to the Animal Justice Party. Back in the NT, and a third vaccination will become mandatory for workers in public facing roles. High risk workers must receive their first dose by 11 March, and the remainder of public facing workers will need to receive their booster by 22 April. Chief minister Michael Gunner says it was known Omicron would spread “quickly and aggressively: We also knew that fully vaccinated Territorians would be the best protected – and they are. That is why we worked so hard to achieve such a high vaccination rate across the Territory. Two doses of the vaccine has given tens of thousands of Territorians excellent protection against severe illness – the booster shot makes sure that protection is stronger, and lasts longer. If you are eligible now, please don’t wait. Book in, boost up and give yourself and your loved ones the best shot at protection from serious illness. Pavlovsky says the buildup of more than 100,000 troops near the border with Ukraine is not a sign of aggression: I’m not saying there are no troops in our territory – I’m not. Reporter: But why are they there? Pavlovsky: A sign not of aggression ... there is no aggression because our troops are on our territory. He turns to telling reporters how to write: “You can not say there is Russian aggression.” He then pivots to criticising Australia for its “lies” to invade Iraq in 2003. Other lyrics of John Lennon’s Imagine include: Imagine there’s no countries It isn’t hard to do Nothing to kill or die for And no religion, too... Imagine all the people Sharing all the world Russia’s ambassador to Australia, Alexey Pavlovsky, is holding a press conference in Canberra amid growing concerns about Russia’s troops building-up near the border with Ukraine. Pavlovsky begins by saying many media have requested comment on the situation in eastern Europe: I appreciate that when you requested our comments, you cited the desire to ensure balanced reporting. Indeed I think the Australian public does need balanced reporting and it needs it badly. The ambassador tees off at “propaganda”. He cites Peter Dutton’s comment yesterday that Vladimir Putin is an ageing dictator who is becoming more irrational: If such is the level of analysis informing Australian policy then it is definitely a worrying sign. The Australian government has voiced support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity and has left the door open to sanctions coordinated with allies, if Russia invades. The first question goes to a Russian reporter. We’ll have more updates later. Russia’s ambassador to Australia, Alexey Pavlovsky, has begun a rare press conference. Heading to Darwin now, and Northern Territory chief minister, Michael Gunner, is providing a Covid update. There have been 940 new cases detected overnight. Yesterday’s case numbers have also been revised from 626 to 747, Gunner says. I am unsure why this has jumped so dramatically overnight. There are 4,200 active cases in the NT, with “well over half” of the cases in Darwin and Palmerston. A 48-hour lockdown will be imposed in parts of central Australia with very low vaccination rates to allow for greater testing and containment of the virus, Gunner says. There’s additional community in central Australia we’re concerned about. We’re getting detail of new cases there but we understand ... there’s a community with a very low vaccination rate. From 2pm today, they will enter a 48-hour lockdown to allow us to test the community and trying to contain it as much as possible. Active cases in the Northern Territory now stand at 4,200. Around two-thirds of our cases are occurring in the Top End, well over half are in Darwin and Palmerston. We have seen a sharp spike in cases, mainly in Darwin, as more and more families rush home from interstate holidays. It’s not surprising and we can expect that to continue for a few days to a week. This doesn’t change our overall settings, but it’s more important than ever we stick to the measures that are in place to keep us safe. Big bag of Cairns (coffee cups) with the lads! Here we go again. The Bureau of Meteorology says a severe thunderstorm is approaching western parts of greater Melbourne including Geelong and the Bellarine Peninsula: [As of 1pm] severe thunderstorms were detected on the weather radar near the area south of Ballarat, the area southwest of Ballarat and the area northwest of Meredith. These thunderstorms are moving towards the southeast. They are forecast to affect Brisbane Ranges, the area south of the Brisbane Ranges and the area west of Lara by 2pm. Damaging winds and heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding are likely. A more general severe thunderstorm warning is also current for parts of the central and south west districts. The Australian Energy Market Operator has released its latest quarterly report which shows a renewables “surge” in rooftop solar and large-scale wind and solar farms. The founder &amp; chief scientist of Rewiring Australia, Dr Saul Griffith, said households could better share in the economic benefits of energy technology trends if homes were rewired with electric heating, electric water heating, electric cooking, and electric cars: Australia’s global lead in generating clean, renewable energy from our home rooftops is admirable but to really drive home this advantage we need to fully exploit our lead ... If we press this advantage now, Australian households can smash household energy costs by $5,000 a year and drive a one-third reduction in domestic carbon emissions. We are spending $1bn to save the Great Barrier Reef while spending many more billions destroying it by supporting fossil fuels. While I can’t complain about more money for reef research and support, this is blatant hypocrisy. We should be investing in more renewable energy and storage, demand side electrification, and prioritising green manufacturing for future export industries. Today’s report from AEMO found almost 35% of Australian energy was generated from renewable sources for the three months to 31 December. Griffith: With just a little foresight, Australia can lead the world in fully electrifying our homes and then export that technology and expertise to the world. But this won’t happen by itself. We need to make it really straightforward for households to swap a fossil fuelled appliance or vehicle with one powered by clean energy. We should change our planning and permitting laws to prioritise all electric households and businesses, and start training the installation and maintenance workforce for this electrified future now. After wild weather and flooding in the past 24 hours, 6,700 homes are without power in Victoria. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 734 new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24 hours and sadly, one further death. A man in his 80s has died overnight, bringing the number of fatalities with Covid-19 in the ACT to 26. There are 66 people being treated in hospital with Covid including five people in intensive care and one person requiring ventilation. It’s down from 73 hospitalisations yesterday, and it’s the ninth day running case numbers have remained below 1000. Butler is asked whether Labor will up its funding commitment to the reef in the wake of the Morrison government’s announcement. Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, committed $163m to the Great Barrier Reef during a trip to Cairns earlier this month Butler says Labor’s commitment is for “immediate support” to protect the reef: The government’s announcement is for funding over ten years or so. We don’t even know how much of this money is supposed to be spent immediately and how much of it will be in years, eight or nine. It is up to the government to say that they will be taking action immediately to stand up for the reef. And as I said, Australians will judge this government on what they have done over the past decade – not what they say they’re going to do in a decade’s time. In Brisbane, shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, and Labor MP Terri Butler, are reacting to the federal government’s $1bn pledge for the Great Barrier Reef announced today. Butler says the $1bn investment – to be provided over a nine year period – comes after the threat of the reef being added to the world heritage listing: What the international community knows and what Australians know is that the greatest threat to the Great Barrier Reef is climate change. And until we have a government willing to take real action on climate change, it’s just not good enough. Chalmers says today’s announcement is an “admission of failure and also a con job”: They’ve left businesses in far north Queensland in the lurch. And now at five minutes to an election campaign, they want to all of a sudden pretend that they care. If this government really cared about the reef, they’d care about climate change. And you can’t do anything meaningful about the reef unless you do something meaningful about climate change as well. And in this government, climate change policy is run by Barnaby Joyce and Matt Canavan and all the rest of them, and the reef is not getting a look in. Many thanks to Calla Wahlquist and, by extension, her enviable ponies for guiding us through this morning’s news. I’ll be with you for the rest of the day. Thank you for your company this morning. I’ll leave you in the capable hands of Caitlin Cassidy, who will take you through the afternoon. In unsurprising news, parents who home-schooled children experienced significantly higher levels of distress than people without children during lockdown. More from AAP: An Australian National University study asked more than 1,200 Australian adults to rank their psychological wellbeing during the first wave of Covid-19 restrictions in March and April of 2020. The results validate the feelings of those who struggled through home-schooling hell. It found that those who were home-schooling experienced greater disruption to their work and social lives. Lead researcher Prof Alison Calear, from ANU’s Centre for Mental Health Research, said parents who supervised their children’s school work were “so stretched”. “They were often trying to do their full-time job, as well as keeping their kids on track, as well as still doing everything else they have to do around the house,” Calear said. “In addition, most caregivers couldn’t rely on their usual social networks for support. “You couldn’t have grandparents helping out for example, or take your kids to a friend’s house.” The analysis was carried out during the first wave of the pandemic. “My suspicion is the distress levels would be even higher now,” Calear said “It’s important for employers to be aware of this toll. I think there’s a lot we could do to better support parents”. Producer prices were rising at the fastest annual pace in almost 13 years at the end of 2021, the ABS tells us this morning. The 3.7% rise in the December quarter tracked closely the 3.5% “headline” increase in the consumer price index reported earlier this week. Similar factors were at play in nudging the pace of rising costs to its fastest since the March quarter in 2009, namely fuel prices and construction materials. Cheaper power and water costs helped – thanks La Niña – although the ABS also sought to highlight a 4.4% drop in sugar and confectionery manufacturing due to falling chocolate prices “resulting from promotional Christmas discounting”. Think of it as a sweetener, I guess, amid all the bad news. Anyway, with the Omicron disruptions rattling supply chains at the end of 2021 and 2022, we might expect to see further increases in producer and consumer prices well into this year. The RBA has its first meeting next Tuesday and the bank governor, Philip Lowe, will give a National Press Club speech the following day in Sydney. Investors have already dismissed RBA pronouncements about being patient and leaving the official cash rate unchanged at its record low 0.1% and today’s producer prices will probably bolster their case. They’re betting the bank will lift the rate to 0.25% by May, and by a full percentage point by the year’s end. Commercial bank economists don’t expect a rate move so soon but more are coming around to a rate move by August or so. Labor frontbencher Mark Butler said much the same: You can’t be serious about protecting the Great Barrier Reef if you’re not serious about climate change. And I think that Australians understand that this government simply is not serious about climate change. The Greens have criticised the $1bn Great Barrier Reef funding announcement made by prime minister Scott Morrison today, saying that the biggest threat to the reef was climate change and the government has no meaningful policy in that area. Queensland senator Larissa Waters said the “belated cash splash” was a “joke from a government that has turbo charged the climate crisis imperilling the Reef by giving billions to fossil fuels and backing new coal and gas”. Climate policy is the most important factor in saving the Reef and the government’s policy is crap. Under Scott Morrison’s leadership, Australia played a spoiler role at the climate summit in Glasgow, holding the entire world back from achieving the emissions reduction we need to slow global heating. This is a pathetic attempt to shore up Queensland regional seats but if this is to save tourism it’s too late. Cairns tourism operators needed JobKeeper for much longer. Sarah Hanson-Young, the Greens spokesperson on environment and water, said Morrison “can’t save the Reef while making climate change worse”. Our environment is in crisis and the Great Barrier Reef is at top of the list of casualties. We need genuine action not just lip service. Spending $1 billion of the reef over the next decade, while handing out over $220 million to open new gas wells in the Beetaloo Basin makes no sense!” The Australian Olympic Committee has partnered with Gina Rinehart’s mining company, Hancock Prospecting. In a media release today the AOC said the “innovative and important partnership” would run until 2026, through the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympic Games, Paris 2024 summer games, and the 2026 Milan-Cortina Winter Olympics, as well as the youth olympic games at Gangwon in 2024 and Dakar in 2026, and the Pacific games in 2023. Rinehart made a pitch for reduced government regulation on new developments ahead of the Brisbane games in 2032. AOC president, John Coates, says he “greatly welcomes” the partnership. This is a major commitment to Australian sport. We welcome and thank Mrs Gina Rinehart and Hancock Prospecting for this investment. On the eve of farewelling our Team to the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympic Games, the timing is perfect. There is no coincidence that the strong support of Mrs Gina Rinehart for many of our athletes in Tokyo yielded excellent results. There were so many golden moments and success in the pool, our rowers had a wonderful Games, as did our beach volleyballers. While delighted that this partnership will assist with our teams at future Games, I am also extremely grateful for the ongoing support for so many athletes at the grassroots. While that support is separate to this arrangement, it is a remarkable illustration of Mrs Gina Rinehart’s commitment to Australian sport at all levels. Along with our artistic swimmers, our swimmers, rowers and beach volleyballers will continue to benefit from this investment. She’s a great Australian who shares our Olympic values and philosophies. The AOC is proudly independent of government. We neither receive nor seek federal funding for our day-to-day operations. We are grateful to have the support of Mrs Gina Rinehart, Hancock Prospecting and all our partners to ensure we retain that independence. Rinehart said: Our company has been a long-term supporter of the summer Olympic sports of artistic swimming, rowing and volleyball for many years, and specifically over 30 years for swimming. We are so proud to help our great Olympians who are such inspirations, through their hard work, most do not really know how hard they work, dedication, focus and self-discipline, as they endeavour to represent our country to the best of their ability. The traits these role models show in my view, are important for us all, if we wish to succeed in life and business. We are delighted to take the next step in our long-term support of Australia’s best athletes and become an official Australian Olympic Committee partner, an organisation admirably independent of government funding and aligned to our values at the Hancock Group. At Hancock we believe it is important that if there is government funding to other sporting bodies, that it be strictly applied to support the Olympians and future Olympians, their coaches and training requirements and participation in sport. We believe government or sponsor funds should be used to ensure sport is at the service of the community and the athletes, and much tighter scrutiny of taxpayers and sponsors funds would assist. And the kicker, of course: As Australia looks to hosting an Olympic Games in ten years, it will be important for our country to be open to investment and reduce the regulatory burden that impacts development needed to help make Queensland shine and the Games a success. Australia has recorded its deadliest day of the pandemic with 92 deaths so far. There have been 18 deaths reported in Queensland, 35 in New South Wales, and 39 in Victoria. The previous highest toll was 88 deaths, reported last Friday. Queensland chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, said he did not expect the hospitalisation numbers would be so low. There are currently 818 people in hospital, 54 in intensive care. Gerrard says that the peak of cases has passed on the Gold Coast and while there is no clear fall anywhere else in the state, “the situation in most of Queensland outside of the Gold Coast is very stable and we are expecting to see falls sometime in the next seven days.” Today is two years since I saw Queensland’s first Covid-19 case on the Gold Coast and never at that time did we expect to see such low numbers of patients in our hospitals or intensive care units as we approach this peak. This is quite extraordinary and it is of course all due to the vaccination and vaccinations across Queensland, and the work of Queenslanders in healthcare workers delivering the vaccines. Palaszczuk says it appears Queensland is coming to the peak of Covid-19 cases. She says the peak has passed on the Gold Coast, and it appears to be cresting in Brisbane and the southeast. She is releasing modelling that was presented cabinet on Monday, which showed how bad authorities in Queensland were expecting things to get. You can understand why we have had so many sleepless nights but we were initially expecting, in the worst case scenario, 5,000 [hospital] beds across Queensland would be needed. Our most likely scenario was around 3,000, over 3,000. And as you know what we are reporting at the moment is under 1,000. This is encouraging news but, honestly, I have to tell you that we were planning for the worst case scenario. And it was quite frightening at the time. In ICU, our worst case scenario, we were looking at around 500 beds that were needed for ICU and at the moment that is tracking just above 50 and it is actually lower than the low scenarios in both situations so I think Queenslanders can appreciate that a lot of planning went into this. The modelling will be updated as well but these are very encouraging signs today. Palaszczuk said the number of health staff furloughed was also down. It doesn’t mean by any means that we are out of the pandemic but it does mean that hopefully we will see the return of our supply chains, and of course it means more police are out there to do their general duties and health staff are back into our hospitals. So we’re not out of it yet. It has taken a toll on our workforce. To all of our men and women out there and families who have been affected during this time, I know it has been hard for many people. For the majority of people, it is mild. In some cases, people have been quite sick at home and in other cases people have ended up in hospital. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says that Queensland has reported 18 deaths in people with Covid-19, 12 of which were in aged care. One of the deaths was also a person in their 30s who was not vaccinated. It’s one of the worst days of the pandemic so far for the sunshine state. Palaszczuk also noted it is two years to the day since the first Covid-19 case was reported in Queensland. Victorian health minister Martin Foley is speaking now. He says 38% of children aged five to 11 in Victoria have now received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, before school goes back next week. A further 12,991 kids in that age group are booked in to receive their first dose at state run clinics next week, and there are more than 82,000 appointments for kids in that age group available over the next 30 days. The Victorian government is also holding pop-up vaccine blitzes targeting school communities with reduced access to general practitioners and pharmacies. There are also walk-up appointments available for children at the Sandown Racecourse, Dandenong Plaza vaccination Centre, Caroline Springs Leisure Centre, the Campbellfield Ford Factory Complex, the St Albans hospital and the Melton vaccination hub. Former Liberal government staffer, Rachelle Miller, has responded to prime minister Scott Morrison’s comment that he greets everyone who comes to the Lodge with a smile. Morrison was responding to a question about whether he felt “disrespected” by outgoing Australian of the Year, Grace Tame, who had a neutral expression during a photo op earlier this week. The Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, will give a press conference shortly. At the risk of tempting fate, it’s worth pointing out that despite the concern about rising petrol prices, the pain at the bowser has actually been easing lately. As I note in this piece, most capital cities have had a drop in fuel prices in the past week or longer even with global oil prices at seven-year highs, and ongoing concerns about whether Russia will invade Ukraine. Still, petrol prices rose about one-third in 2021 and were a significant contributor to nudging underlying inflation to the highest level – perhaps not coincidentally – since 2014. Meanwhile, it’s worth keeping an eye on where Australia’s electricity prices are headed because the RBA has cited their relative stability as one reason why we weren’t facing the same inflationary pressures as in the US, EU, UK and so on. Well, that was short of true. New data out today from Aemo, the electricity market operator, showed wholesale power prices were heading higher as 2021 came to an end, and future markets were pointing to further rises. It’s a nuanced tale because renewables – which offer near zero-cost fuel once set up – are rapidly advancing. In the December quarter they made up a record of almost 35% of the National Electricity Market (which serves about 80% of Australians). But rising coal and gas prices – which are linked to overseas trends – meant that when they set the wholesale market price it was higher for buyers. Still, there were a bunch of interest records set in the quarter, as you can read here: Chant said another 35 people, in addition to those previously reported, had died in aged care facilities in south-western Sydney between 2 and 20 January. There was a delay in reporting those deaths to the health department, she said. We have reached out to all our other local health districts to ensure that the processes are streamlined for the reporting to the state-wide reporting purposes and we have been – no additional issues have been identified to date. So can I also pass on my condolences for those who have lost their loved ones. NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, is now running through the list of people who died with Covid-19 overnight. Twenty of those who died were men, 15 were women. One person was in their 40s, two were in their 60s, six in their 70s, 11 in their 80s, four in their 90s and one person was more than 100 years old. Eight of the 35 had received three doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, 15 had received two doses, and 12 were not vaccinated. He said that additional public transport services would be provided to ensure students could travel to school in a Covid-safe way. There will be an additional 3,400 buses and an extra 200 train services in both mornings and afternoons for students. Anyone over the age of 12 is required to wear a face mask on public transport. Perrottet said every school that starts back in NSW next week has now received their rapid antigen tests, to allow for two tests per student and teacher for surveillance testing for the first four weeks. This has been a phenomenal effort, it has been as we have said a military operation and we set out to achieve this a few weeks ago. We always thought it would be a substantive challenge not just in the procurement of these tests, the distribution right across NSW to schools, public schools, independent and Catholic schools. It is over 3,000 schools right across NSW we have been able to distribute these tests to. As well as 5,000 childcare and early childhood centres across the state. So it has been a mammoth effort. I want to thank and congratulate everyone involved, whether that has been at department of education teams, who volunteered their time on weekends, to help package, to help organise this distribution in a way that would ensure that every child in every school and every teacher has access to these tests. We have worked alongside the Victorian government to achieve this outcome, we are the only states in the country that have been able to achieve this program due to the fact we went out and procured a substantial amount of these tests. But it should give confidence, a lot of confidence to parents and to teachers that when we open up schools day one, term one, we are doing so in a safe way for you and your family. Perrottet said ideally parents would pick up their child’s rapid antigen tests before school starts back but he said not to worry if you can’t organise it – the school will hold them until you can pick them up. He also said there are no set days that the tests have to be completed provided you do two a week. Perrottet says the health system is still under strain, but compared to modelling put out a few weeks ago it is tracking well. You might recall a few weeks ago we had around 6,000 furloughed health workers across our state that was putting a strain on the system. Today that figure is around 3,700. So we are having many frontline health workers being able to return to our health system, to continue to provide that care and support for people who need it across our state. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, is giving an update on the Covid situation now. He says they are “tracking within capacity and in a positive trend as well”. We’re standing by for a press conference from NSW premier Dominic Perrottet, transport minister David Elliott, metropolitan roads minister Natalie Ward, and chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant. They will give a Covid update and make an announcement about transport arrangements for the return to school next week. There have been 98 deaths of people with Covid-19 reported so far today. NSW has reported 35 deaths in people with Covid-19 overnight, 2,737 people in hospital and 13,333 new cases. Victoria has reported 39 deaths in people with Covid-19 overnight, 988 people in hospital and 12,755 new cases. Queensland has reported 18 deaths, 12 of those in aged care. There were 9,974 new cases reported and 818 people in hospital, with 54 in ICU. South Australia has reported five deaths in people with Covid-19 overnight, 285 people in hospital with 24 in ICU and 1,846 new cases. ACT has reported one death in people with Covid-19 overnight, 66 people in hospital with five in ICU and 734 new cases. Tasmania has reported 584 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, with 19 people in hospital. The NT has reported 940 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, with yesterday’s case numbers revised from 626 to 747. We will update this post as the numbers come in from other states and territories. Tasmania has reported 584 new cases of Covid-19 overnight, a significant drop from the 700 reported yesterday. There are currently 19 people in hospital, down from 24 yesterday. According to the ABC, nine of the 19 people in hospital are being treated “specifically for coronavirus symptoms” and one person is in ICU. Hunt said no decision had been made at this stage about changing the definition of fully vaccinated in Australia from two doses to three. It is currently before the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation. That is an item that is being considered, so I won’t pre-empt. Either way we want to encourage everybody to come forward for their booster. Hunt was also asked to comment on the open letter from Northern Territory Aboriginal organisations, who say there has been a “catastrophic failure” in management of the Covid outbreak in central Australia. Hunt said the federal government was working with NT land councils on the Covid response, including applying biosecurity orders to restrict movements in and out of communities. It is absolutely critical that there is the consent, endorsement and approval of those communities that may be affected. That’s been a principle that we have upheld throughout and the endorsement of the Northern Territory government. So where we have that joint support, then we have put those biosecurity declarations in place and we’re continuing to do that. He said increasing vaccination rates in Indigenous communities was an important part of the response. The national vaccine rate for Indigenous Australians is now 81.5%. Hunt was asked if Novavax, which is not yet available in Australia, will be approved for use as a booster. He said that as of this week, Novavax has not put in an application for booster status, “but I spoke with the company last week and they are intending on doing that”. We don’t have a time frame from them yet but we’re encouraging them to do that at the earliest possible time. We are now about to begin the process of batch testing the Novavax early arrivals in Australia and as I say we’re planning on ... Novavax being available as a primary course from the 21st, but please do not wait for this as a booster. The company has not applied as of yet. They do intend to apply. We don’t have a time frame on that. The critical thing is ... do not wait. But Novavax has indicated they’ll be applying for booster status, whether it’s for the third or fourth shot were required for immunocompromised people. Australia’s chief nursing and midwifery officer, adjunct professor Alison McMillan, said that people who have had Covid do still need to get a booster. The answer is absolutely you do. We know that an initial infection does potentially provide you with a small amount of protection from Covid, but we really don’t yet know how much. But we do know that the booster will provide you with high levels of protection, particularly against severe disease and death. So if you have had Covid recently or you think you had Covid, what our advice is, what the advice of Atagi is – once your symptoms, once the runny nose, the headache, the sore throat, the aches and pains, all of those things have gone, then you can go and get your booster. And there are appointments available right across the country. So as I say, once those symptoms have gone, now, if you’re eligible at three months as of Monday, you can go and get your booster. Federal health minister Greg Hunt is speaking to reporters this morning about the booster shot rollout. From Monday the interval between second dose and booster shot has been reduced to three months for everywhere in Australia, not just Victoria and New South Wales. And as reported earlier, the Therapeutic Goods Administration has provisionally approved the use of Pfizer booster shots in people aged 16 to 17. It’s now just up to Atagi to determine the recommended use, but Hunt says: “We’re looking forward to their advice within the course of the coming week, if not earlier, then we will make these doses available immediately.” The booster dose for teenagers aged 16 to 17 is the same as for adults, so it’s already widely available. Hunt said there is also now clear advice on people who have recovered from Covid-19 and have yet to get a booster shot. If you have had Omicron, the simple message is – you still need to be boosted. We want all Australians to come forward to be boosted and once you cleared your symptoms, then it’s appropriate for you to come forward so long as you are eligible for your dose. Breen then asked: “Scott Morrison, did yourself and your wife Jenny feel disrespected by Grace Tame this week with the way she looked at you and didn’t greet you at the Lodge?” I am not really sure why we’re bringing Jenny into this, she was not in the photos that were widely spread, and Tame does smile at her in the video. Morrison replied: Oh look, I’ve seen all that. When anyone comes to our home, when Jenny and I, we invite someone to our home we greet them with a smile and they’re always welcome. And that day was actually about all the finalists that we came to celebrate. And the previous Australians of the Year were there. Jenny and I were there, and that day was all about them. Breen suggested Tame “made it about herself though and she made a political statement”. Morrison: Well look, that’s for – I haven’t raised any issues about this. All I’m saying is we were there that day to celebrate those who had done an incredible job for our country. And Jenny and I wanted to welcome them to our home and wish them all the best. Look, Grace is a passionate person who’s raised important issues. She’s had a terrible life ordeal, you know, things happen to her, her ordeals, the abuse. It’s just awful. And I know a lot of Australians, me included, you know, support her efforts to ensure that these issues can be raised and addressed. Our government has done more than any other government on this issue, and that is in part because of the strong focus that has been brought to these issues and the response that we’ve made. So I thank her for her time as Australian of the Year and as I say, when you know, if people come to our house, Jenny and I always greet them with a smile. I’m going to pass the microphone to Amy Remeikis, who has written powerfully on this subject. And also provided this reminder: the Lodge isn’t Morrison’s house, it belongs to the people. Morrison was then asked about aged care minister Richard Colbeck attending the cricket in Tasmania on a day where he did not attend a federal aged care inquiry. Morrison said Colbeck “has appeared ... at that hearing on many, many occasions”. And you know, we set up that hearing. We set up that committee at the start of Covid because we wanted to ensure there was an ongoing oversight and visibility on everything we’ve been doing. And he’s appeared before that on countless occasions. And during the course of that week, I’m aware he was dealing not just issues when it was related to his sports minister, but he was having the regular contacts with the aged care sector with the AHPPC and all of those things. I mean, ministers have many responsibilities. I can understand the criticism and I’m sure ... Breen: Because it doesn’t pass the pub test. Doesn’t look good. Morrison: I think Richard has taken that, you know, on board. I have no doubt but I can tell you, I mean, over the course of this pandemic and I know Richard very well and you know, there’s been a few knockers of him, but I know what he does each and every day for the welfare of people living in our residential aged care facilities. And so, you know, he will take that criticism on the chin and he’ll get back to work, which he does every single day. Breen then asked about aged care. Morrison said 86% of all residential aged care facilities have now received their booster visits and pointed out that death rates in Australia are lower than they are in Canada. Morrison then said: And that’s, you know, and the reason for that is we’ve worked so hard on the vaccination in aged care facilities. I remember the first big wave that we had that went through aged care in Victoria. You’ll remember it, it was just terrible. Breen said he does remember it. You will too – it was only 18 months ago, within Morrison’s current term of government. Morrison continued: There was no vaccine [in 2020]. But even then, only 8% of our aged care facilities were affected by those extreme events. And in the UK, it was 56%. So it is a challenge to manage Covid in aged care facilities. Prime minister Scott Morrison was on Brisbane radio 4BC this morning, talking to Neil Breen about the $1bn Great Barrier Reef announcement. Breen asked if the additional investment will “protect the reef from those [Unesco ‘in danger’] lists”. Morrison: Well, I believe so. But more importantly, I believe it will protect the reef, and that’s what it’s about. And I mean, the reef is, you know, one of the great natural wonders not only of Australia, but the world, but it’s also an important livelihood for everybody up in north Queensland, far-north Queensland. I mean, there are 64,000 jobs that depend on that reef. And so its health is about the economic health of that region, as well as the natural health of that region. And as you said in the introduction, this billion goes on top of the $2bn we’ve already invested. As a government, we’ve taken our stewardship responsibilities for the reef incredibly seriously, and we’ve been able to ensure that the reef not only remains protected despite the many challenges, environmental challenges to the reef, but to ensure that its status has been able to be preserved. Breen then asked if money was “the only thing that can fix it”, saying “if we keep throwing money at everything in Australia, we’ll go broke”. Morrison again: Well, that’s why you have to be careful about where you’re investing. Your programmes have to be targeted, and that’s why we’ve done the work over a long time with this package to ensure it’s been directed where it needs to go. And as you said, water quality is the most important part of this package [Breen did not say this]. So that’s working with land managers, people who actually live off the land in this part of the world. Those who are, you know, doing that commercially. Those who do it to care for our national parks and places like this, land managers to remediate erosion, improve land condition, reduce nutrient and pesticide runoffs. There’s serious investment going into research. This is not quite the deadliest day in Victoria since the pandemic began, but it’s getting close. The record for Covid deaths in Victoria is 41 deaths per day in September 2020. Today’s toll, of 39, is particularly worrying because while we appear to have passed the peak in infections, the peak in hospitalisations and deaths is, if it follows the usual pattern, yet to come. New South Wales has recorded 35 deaths overnight. There are currently 2,737 people in hospital with Covid-19, of whom 189 are in ICU. The state recorded 13,333 new cases. Victoria recorded 39 deaths overnight and 12,755 new cases. There are 988 people in hospital, 114 in ICU and 40 on ventilators. Only one of Australia’s 23 approved at-home rapid antigen tests explicitly states it will detect Omicron, as the Therapeutic Goods Administration carries out a review of all tests to check how they work with different variants of Covid-19. Most of the product disclosures for tests list their ability to detect Delta and other variants, but not Omicron. However, manufacturers are providing evidence to the TGA of their tests’ effectiveness as it comes to hand. The United States Food and Drug Administration has warned that “early data suggests that antigen tests do detect the Omicron variant but may have reduced sensitivity”. The TGA has announced that variants caused by virus mutations could mean “test kits may no longer be able to detect the virus, leading to false negative results”. Read more: Severe thunderstorms have caused flash flooding in parts of Victoria and New South Wales. Bureau of meteorology senior forecaster Jackson Browne told the ABC this morning that parts of western Victoria experienced winds as strong as a category two cyclone, with wind speeds of 139km/h recorded at Horsham and 133km/h recorded at Swan Hill. A flash flooding alert was issued for the Victorian city of Geelong about 9.30pm Thursday night, with homes, buildings and roads flooded. The storms began on Wednesday. The State Emergency Service had responded to more than 350 calls for help by Thursday afternoon, including for one incident where a lightning strike set a house at Bundoora alight. Mildura in northern Victoria recorded its highest ever daily rain total for January, with 80.2mm falling in the 24 hours to 9am. Kyneton, north of Melbourne, recorded 75mm in the same period. Thunderstorm warnings have been lifted for the morning but are expected to be back in place this afternoon, with storms agains sweeping across Victoria and southern NSW from South Australia today. Browne said: [The storms] will make their way in during the course of today, most likely affecting the central parts of the state as some of them will be severe, during the afternoon and into the evening. And unfortunately looks like Geelong is looking like to get more rainfall today, so hopefully people impacted there can make whatever preparations they can for some of the further heavy rainfall. Sticking in NSW for a moment: the premier, Dominic Perrottet, is expected to announce a back-to-school transport plan at a bus interchange at 10.30am today. He’ll give the Covid update at the same time. Public schools in NSW are back on 1 February, and most teachers are back from today. Hazzard said NSW is supporting the Victorian government push to change the definition of fully vaccinated in Australia from two doses to three. But he says there are some issues to be ironed out before that change can be made. He doesn’t know what issues, he says, because he is not a part of national cabinet. He then offered this musing on the benefits of unilateral versus consultative decision making: I understand that most of these things require a range of medical expert input. In fact, they all require a range of medical expert input, and I think when you’ve got a committee of a large number of people, all giving their input, sometimes it takes a while to get there. Sometimes it is easier being a minister, I’ve got to say, than being on a committee. Anyway: get your booster. The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, has just been on ABC24 talking about the slow uptake of booster shots. He says 40% of the eligible population in NSW has had the booster so far. He has urged everyone who is eligible to get their booster, because the booster is what will slow the transmission, but also reduce the likelihood of the severe illness. So for everybody who is eligible, please go and get the booster as quickly as possible. Hazzard says he thinks the slow uptake is in part caused by confusion around when you can get your booster after you have had Covid. In NSW, the advice is you can get your booster four to six weeks after you have had Covid. The booster interval has also been reduced to three months. So three months after you get your second shot, you can get your booster. Hazzard was asked if the rhetoric around Omicron being ‘mild’ – which all Australian governments partook in – may have contributed to the lack of urgency around people getting a booster. He replied: I think a number of issues, not least the period where the federal government and TGA were telling us that we could have the booster five months after we had had our second shot, then it moved to four months, then it moved to three months, I think that has been very confusing for most people. And I think generally the understanding, of course, on one interpretation the virus certainly is less dangerous than Delta, but on sheer numbers, because of its transmissibility, it transmits so easily, then we have vast numbers of people who are obviously getting it, and therefore more people who are ending up – or at least a reasonable number of people who are ending up passing away and also ending up in hospital. In one sense it is less severe and in another, because of the total numbers it is quite severe. Human rights advocates and union leaders have urged the Australian government to impose targeted sanctions against Myanmar’s military leaders as the first anniversary of the coup looms. A letter to the foreign minister, Marise Payne, also calls for sanctions or other economic measures to stop funds from Myanmar’s oil and gas sector, the junta’s single largest source of foreign currency revenue, amid concerns about the deadly campaign against anti-junta protesters. The letter – signed by six groups including Human Rights Watch, the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Australian Council for International Development – says sanctions will be most effective when countries take a coordinated and unified approach: By joining with other countries that have imposed targeted sanctions, the Australian government would send a strong message to abusive leaders in Myanmar and around the world that there are far-reaching consequences for their actions. Many people in Myanmar are risking their lives to challenge military rule. The Australian government should unequivocally stand by them and heed their calls to help deprive the military of its revenue sources, joining other governments to maximise pressure on Myanmar’s junta to end its campaign of terror against the Myanmar people. The letter says the Australian government should move swiftly to sanction individuals including the commander-in-chief, Min Aung Hlaing, and also state enterprises and industries currently under military control and military business conglomerates. It also encourages the Australian government to determine whether there are other junta officials and military personnel “implicated in abuses since the coup who have assets or who travel to Australia, and immediately impose sanctions on them.” The letter – released just days before the anniversary of the 1 February military coup – was also signed by the Australian Centre for International Justice, the Refugee Council of Australia and Publish What You Pay. It comes after Australia’s Woodside Petroleum announced it was following multinational energy groups Chevron and Total in exiting Myanmar. Karvelas then asked why the reef shouldn’t be listed by Unesco as in danger, “when it clearly is”. Ley: Because every reef, in fact every natural world heritage property, is under the same threat, if you like, from climate change as our Great Barrier Reef. So the unreasonableness of the listing is that our reef was singled out. You could line up every single reef in the world, not nearly as well-managed as ours, and not one of them were listed as being in danger or draft listed as being in danger. Now we won that argument in the international forum at the world heritage committee because it was a perfectly sensible argument. But we also said we have taken a position as a country that we want to take a look at the effect of climate change on world heritage properties. Australia has done some of the leading work on that ... so we’re not shying away from that. What we want is a global response to how we manage world heritage properties in the face of climate change that doesn’t single out a single one and doesn’t actually suggest that one country can on its own make a difference. Federal environment minister Sussan Ley has been on Radio National talking about the $1bn in funding for the Great Barrier Reef announced today. She would not provide any further detail how the funding would be spent and when, beyond saying it would be spent over nine years. Those details apparently have to wait until after the formal announcement in Northern Queensland today. In the interview with Patricia Karvelas, Ley also said that it was unreasonable to link damage done to the reef by global heating to carbon emissions in Australia because the emissions causing global heating don’t only come from Australia. Yes, really. Here’s the full exchange. Karvelas: Wouldn’t a more ambitious 2030 emissions reduction target be a good way to demonstrate your commitment to preserving the reef? Ley: Well, we’ve made our response to the emissions challenge clear – Karvelas: Minister, you have, but is it good enough given we know the reef is going to deteriorate further because of climate change. So we need more ambitious targets, don’t we, in the shorter term. Ley: But implicit in that question is the assumption that it is Australia’s emissions that are the only emissions that are responsible for the state of the reef and that’s clearly not the case. So internationally we are playing our part. Obviously we can’t influence the emissions from the big emitters, and we know who they are, but we know that we can help build a healthy resilient reef in the face of climate change while playing our part. Karvelas: But we can take responsibility for our own ambitions, minister. Of course the global community is part of this. Every country must take responsibility. but you’re a minister of the crown in this country. For 2030, as the minister for the reef, don’t we need a more ambitious target to deal with climate change affecting the reef in the shorter term? Ley: I think the action we’re taking by protecting the reef with this package is the best possible response to the pressures on the reef, not withstanding the global challenge of climate change and acknowledging that every country must play its part. Ley then went on to talk about the shift to renewable energy, and said that as she travels to Queensland today, “I want to reassure the farmers, the fishers, the tourism operators that we have got their back. That we’re not setting policy that will act to elevate their costs and raise electricity prices.” The Theraputic Goods Administration has provisionally approved the use of the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine as a booster or third dose in teenagers aged 16 and 17. In a statement, the TGA said: Dosing in this age group is the same as the adult population – a booster dose of COMIRNATY may be administered intramuscularly after the completion of a Covid-19 vaccine primary series (2 doses). This primary series can be of any of the Covid-19 vaccines approved for use in in this age group, although data on the use of COMIRNATY as a booster with other Covid-19 vaccines is more limited. This does not mean teenagers can book in for boosters right away. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI) will provide advice on when that age group will become eligible to receive a booster. The TGA says it continues to monitor ongoing trials associated with booster doses for younger children. Birmingham was also asked to comment on the decision of aged care minister Richard Colbeck to attend the Ashes on the same day he declined to front an inquiry about the federal government’s Covid response. He said: I have had a discussion with Richard. I have been assured as aged care minister he was receiving all of the daily briefings, that he was engaged in the meetings that he should be for all of those considerations. Of course, he is also the minister for sport and the Ashes Test being held in his home state of Tasmania was a significant thing for Tasmania, too, but I’ve been reassured that he certainly wasn’t missing a beat in terms of engaging, as he should be in the aged care issues every single day asI know he does. ABC24 host Michael Rowland: “It wasn’t a good look, was it?” Birmingham: Well, Michael, I think it’s possible for many people to be able to walk and chew gum at the same time. This was a day/night Test. I know that he has reassured me. We’re about to run through a slew of federal ministers on morning radio and TV, so bear with us. Earlier, finance minister Simon Birmingham told ABC24 that the economy is doing fine, actually, despite the Omicron wave. Birmingham said data released on the first half of the financial year — crucially that’s to 21 December, before the cases really took off — showed that unemployment was down and the economy was resilient. He said: Although we know things are tough in terms of labour market and worker shortages right now due to Omicron, we’re confident that the resilience and bounce back we’ve seen before will be repeated again as we come off of the current cases. Birmingham was asked if the federal government would provide additional support to struggling NSW businesses, and said that was a matter for the NSW government. The minister for families and social services, Anne Ruston, has told ABC radio that she believes every person with a disability who wants to work should be supported to do so. Ruston announced $20m in funding for paid internships and industry training to help employers hire more people with disabilities. It comes after the new Australian of the Year, Dylan Alcott, urged non-disabled people to “challenge your unconscious biases, your negative perceptions and lift your expectation of what you think people with disability can do”. Asked how many people with disabilities should be in work, Ruston said: I’d like to see a figure that sees anybody who wants to have a job has a job. So I would like to see an absolute sky’s the limit target ... but we do need to put measures in place to ask what support do people need in the workplace. Good morning, The three biggest Aboriginal organisations in the Northern Territory have written a scathing letter to the Gunner government, saying the coronavirus outbreak is “out of control” in central Australia, due to a “catastrophic failure by government”. They are calling for a lockdown to protect vulnerable communities, saying the current strategies — a “lockout” and living with covid — are not working. Meanwhile, the New South Wales health minister, Brad Hazzard, has criticised people for failing to get their booster shot, saying about 100,000 doses of the vaccine had been available but not taken up in recent weeks. Most adults in NSW are eligible to receive their third shot, but only 36.2% of them have got one. The deputy secretary of the NSW health department, Susan Pearce, told AAP “a perception in the community that Omicron was milder” was to blame. That perception was created, in some part, by the NSW government saying Omicron was milder. In Victoria, 35% of those aged 18 and over have got their booster shot. The Victorian government reduced the third dose interval to three months last week. On Monday, premier Daniel Andrews said that 2.2m Victorians were eligible for their third dose but hadn’t had it yet. He wants national cabinet to agree that Australians must have three doses to be considered fully vaccinated. And in pre-election news, the federal government has announced another $1bn in funding for the Great Barrier Reef just months after successfully lobbying Unesco to delay a decision about listing the World Heritage site as “in danger”. The prime minister Scott Morrison will make the announcement in north Queensland on Friday, a fortnight after Labor pledged $163m to protecting the reef. There is, in case you had not guessed, a fight to be had for the Cairns electorate of Leichhardt. Environmentalists have said the plan for the reef remains wanting, because the Morrison government has not committed to more aggressive emissions reductions targets and global heating remains the biggest threat to the reef. Let’s crack on. You can get in touch on calla.wahlquist@theguardian.com or via twitter at @callapilla.Across the 20 seasons that Rafael Nadal has spent travelling the world as a professional tennis player, he has slowly and with great difficulty compiled one of the greatest sporting CVs the world has seen. He has won at his best, when his body has been close to crumbling and also so many times in the vast grey area in between, but what he has achieved so far this year already stands high on his endless list of achievements. After a six-month lay-off due to a chronic foot injury, a recent bout of Covid-19 and swirling doubts about whether he would ever return to competition, at the age of 35 Nadal has risen to produce one of his most improbable runs to a grand slam final at the Australian Open. Under the Rod Laver Arena roof on Friday afternoon, Nadal picked Matteo Berrettini’s weaknesses apart across two brilliant sets and then survived a late, intense surge to win 6-3, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3 and reach his sixth Australian Open final, where he will meet the No 2 seed, Russia’s Daniil Medvedev, on Sunday. “Overall, it’s a particularly exciting success for me,” said Nadal, speaking in his Spanish press conference. “Perhaps more exciting than a victory, than a grand slam title, because of how unexpected it was, because of everything we’ve been through in recent months.” After hearing for so many years that his playing style would not be conducive to a lengthy career in his sport, Nadal continues to succeed deep into his career. He is now the fourth oldest man in the Open era to reach the Australian Open final and only four other men his age and over have reached any major final. Nadal has additionally compiled a 9-0 record in 2022 after also winning a warm-up tournament in Melbourne. Most notably of all, on Sunday he will compete for his 21st grand slam title and the chance to break his tie of 20 major titles with Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer, becoming the sole owner of the men’s all-time grand slam record. Despite the looming possibility of more history, Nadal said that while his competitive spirit is in his “personal DNA” and his goal is to win, he is also taking things differently after the past few months. He has resolved to enjoy the strides he has made because simply being able to play tennis is a greater priority to him than winning tournaments. He said: “At the end of the day, and being very honest, for me is much more important to have the chance to play tennis than win the 21, no? Because that makes me more happy in terms of general life, to be able to do the thing that I like to do more than achieving another grand slam.” The match-up issues for Berrettini, the seventh seed, were always clear. While he can unleash hell on his opponents with his serve and forehand, his backhand is by far the worst shot on the court in most matches against the best. Unfortunately for Berrettini, he just so happened to be standing before a player who has spent his career tearing the weak backhands of right-handed players apart. From the very beginning, Nadal, the sixth seed in Melbourne, relentlessly pressured Berrettini’s backhand with his heavy top-spin forehand, constantly dragging the Italian off the court and eliciting ample errors from it. He also exposed the younger man’s mediocre return of serve, serving well and breezing through his service games. Despite his technical deficiencies that can be exploited by the best, the passion that Berrettini plays with is undeniable. He fought back in the third set, then he played a quality return game at 4-3 en route to a fourth set. As Berrettini demolished the ball off both wings from on top of the baseline, he had his chances to fight for even more, pushing a tense Nadal to 15-30 at 3-3 in the fourth set before missing a finishing forehand. But even as the rallies lengthened, and the match had shifted, Nadal held on to win. When Berrettini’s final backhand flew out and the crowds roared in support for the returning finalist, Nadal looked to his team with his fists pumped, his face a picture of surprise and joy. As he returned to his seat, he crouched over his racket bag and sobbed into it. Nadal later explained that he was thinking of all of those challenging times over the past six months when his future prospects in the sport were so uncertain. “The reality is that not only a month and a half before, but three weeks ago, we saw it very difficult or almost impossible when we landed in Melbourne to be where we are today,” Nadal said. “But hey, in the end life gives you these kinds of surprises, these kinds of opportunities and I’m enjoying it to the fullest. I can’t be thankful enough for all the support I’m getting here. The stands are supporting me practically unconditionally.” Before the tournament, even when it was not clear that Djokovic would attempt to travel to Melbourne, little thought was given regarding Nadal’s prospects of winning his 21st grand slam title here. Nadal played his own chances down as he said that he was simply looking to see how his body and his game would react after such imperfect preparation. It seemed like a sensible outlook. But throughout his career Nadal has defied logic, and as he returned to compete for another Australian Open title, he has done so once more.In the first two days of January, the average Briton was already responsible for more carbon dioxide emissions than someone from the Democratic Republic of the Congo would produce in an entire year, according to analysis by the Center for Global Development (CGD). The study, which highlights the “vast energy inequality” between rich and poor countries, found that each Briton produces 200 times the climate emissions of the average Congolese person, with people in the US producing 585 times as much. By the end of January, the carbon emitted by someone living in the UK will surpass the annual emissions of citizens of 30 low- and middle-income countries, it found. Euan Ritchie, a policy analyst at CGD Europe, said his work was prompted by the “climate hypocrisy” of western countries, including the UK and the US, that have pledged to stop aid funding to fossil fuel projects in developing states. “At Cop26 there was lots of hand-wringing by rich countries about the extent to which aid and other development finance should finance fossil fuels in poorer countries,” said Ritchie. “The hypocrisy of this caught my attention.” “Our analysis shows that in just a few days, the average person in the UK produces more climate emissions than people in many low-income countries do in an entire year. It would be a cruel irony if the countries that have least contributed to this problem won’t be able to have access to energy infrastructure.” Several countries, including some developing countries, and finance institutions have signed up to a pledge to end public support for international fossil fuel projects. The same countries will be able to continue to develop fossil fuels at home. The US has at least 24 pending fossil fuel projects representing more than 1.6 gigatons of potential greenhouse gas emissions, while the UK is licensing new oil and gas fields in the North Sea. The CGD research used World Bank data of per capita carbon emissions for each country, spread out over a year, to calculate the point at which a British or US citizen’s energy use surpassed that of someone living in a low- or middle-income country. About 940 million people, mainly in sub-Saharan Africa, do not have access to electricity. African leaders, including President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria, who has committed Nigeria to net zero by 2060, and Lazarus Chakwera, the president of Malawi, have spoken out about their countries’ need to transition to net zero via natural gas. The Energy for Growth Hub, an international research network, estimates that if 48 countries in Africa, excluding South Africa and several north African nations, tripled their electricity consumption through use of natural gas, the resulting carbon emissions would be less than 1% of the global total. Vijaya Ramachandran, the director for energy and development at the Breakthrough Institute in Berkeley, California, argues that blanket bans on fossil fuel projects in poor countries are “colonial” and will entrench poverty while doing little to reduce the world’s carbon emissions. “It’s very easy for rich countries to impose fossil fuel financing bans on poor countries, while at the same time increasing their own consumption of fossil fuels,” she said. “It’s rank hypocrisy and it’s devastating for poor countries as they need a wide range of energy to fuel development. “It’s well known renewable energy is intermittent and needs to be backed up by other sources. Telling African countries they just need solar is completely hypocritical and colonial.” Rose M Mutiso, the research director of Energy for Growth Hub, said the CGD research should be used to inform the debate over responsibility for the climate crisis. “Solving the climate crisis in the medium term is the responsibility of high emitting countries, not only because they caused the problem but logically, it’s where high emissions are concentrated,” said Mutiso, who is Kenyan. “The video gaming industry in California is using more energy than entire African countries,” she said. “There’s this idea that in California we can’t live without video games, or air conditioning, but we are worried about Africans moving up and consuming. It’s really important for us as Africans to establish that our development is non-negotiable. All of those decades of exploitation and being left behind – that is owed to us.” Mutiso cited a 2019 study that estimated electricity demand from gaming in California alone would grow from 5 terawatt hours (TWh) in 2011 to as much as 11TWh by 2021, the same as Sri Lanka’s entire consumption.The Australian writer Hannah Kent has found critical and commercial success with fictionalised reworkings of real-life historical crimes. Her bestselling debut, Burial Rites, shortlisted for the 2014 Women’s prize, examined the case of Agnes Magnúsdóttir, condemned to death in Iceland in 1829 for the savage murder of her master. Her second, The Good People, was based on 1820s newspaper reports about the violent attempts by an Irish village to banish a child they believed to be a changeling. Both books cleaved closely to the historical record, working within the constraints of the known facts to invest those bleak and brutal stories with ambiguity and depth, and to give a voice to participants whom the past had long condemned to silence. With Devotion, Kent returns for a third time to the same period, this time to the Prussian village of Kay and a close-knit community of Old Lutherans, compelled by the strict religious reforms of their emperor to worship in secret. Many of Kent’s familiar themes are here: the fierce connections and exclusions that bind small communities; the tension between doctrinal religion and superstition; the power of landscape. This time, however, the history is much closer to home. Kent grew up (and still lives) in the Adelaide Hills in South Australia. Most of the émigrés who settled in this unceded Indigenous land were English, but some were Prussians like the Old Lutherans of Kay, in search of a place where they could practise their faith in peace. Those Prussians were Kent’s forebears – the start of her own story. This novel is different in other ways, too. Kent originally conceived her third book as an exploration of the power of female friendship but, in 2017, as Australia voted in favour of same-sex marriage and her girlfriend proposed, she realised that she wanted to go further, to celebrate the love between two women with “music instead of silence, presence instead of absence”. Devotion is, from its opening pages, a passionate celebration of that love. Fifteen-year-old Hanne has never fitted in with the other girls in the village: they “came together in a dance she did not know the steps to”. A wild soul with a connection to nature so deep that she hears the songs of the trees and the bell-chime of snow falling, Hanne has come to believe that she is “a cuckoo born to a songbird”, someone who cannot properly be loved even by her own mother. Then she meets Thea. Kent describes Devotion as “a return to the light after two books that have very much considered the dark”, but, from the outset, there are shadows. Before Hanne and Thea even meet, long before they embark with the rest of the village on the gruelling journey to Australia, their story is an elegy, freighted with loss and longing, the smallest of shared moments heavy with significance. At their best these moments are piercingly beautiful. When Hanne confesses that “Thea was as a chink of light in a curtain. When I put my eye to her, the world beyond blazed”, her words cut cleanly to the heart. There is poetry, too, in Hanne’s profound engagement with the natural world. She writes of “greasy-fingered light” on the mudflats, the wind wanting “to drag her into a dance”. Like Hanne’s love for God, her love for Thea is bound up in landscape, a part of both its glorious vastness and its tiny, perfect details. It is a pity, then, that too often Kent allows the twin raptures of faith and physical love to get the better of her prose, whipping it into ecstasies that come dangerously close to pastiche. “With the firm grip of [Thea’s] fingers between my own,” Hanne gasps as they set sail for Australia, “I felt time dissolve in the arms of the ocean’s brilliant, salted constancy.” The larger difficulty with Devotion, however, is that, despite the vast distances travelled by the people of Kay, the narrative never quite takes flight. Kent keeps some surprises up her sleeve, upending our expectations of where this story will go, but her large cast of villagers remain fixed in their roles. Their odyssey is gruelling – Kent has done her research and does not spare the detail – but no one really changes. Those who started out good stay good and in the same ways. The bad continue to be bad. Hanne is transported by her love for Thea and their relationship opens her up to become fully herself, but that self is essentially unaltered. Hanne’s passion is absolute, unwavering, untainted by the doubt or fear essential for self-revelation. The reader is left craving more of the darkness of Kent’s previous work, darkness that might have defined Hanne more clearly and ensured that this sweet misfit seized our hearts and imaginations as Agnes, the violent murderer in Burial Rites, so powerfully contrived to do. • Devotion by Hannah Kent is published by Pan Macmillan (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.“You might be very surprised at the answer to this,” says Jess Sigsworth. “It’s not easy to guess what I like doing on days off.” The Leicester forward is talking about the need to unwind from the stresses of a Women’s Super League relegation battle and the all-consuming nature of her new obsession. “It’s Lego,” she reveals. “I’m addicted. I’ve built Wembley and Old Trafford. “When you’re doing Lego your mind’s taken off everything else, it’s the only thing that matters and, by the time you finish, you can’t believe two or three hours have just gone. It stops me thinking about football all the time.” Leicester, too, are building something special, but not unexpectedly their WSL debut season involves considerable mental strain and an outlet is essential. “Football at this level can be quite intense,” Sigsworth says. “Especially if we haven’t got the result we wanted at the weekend the girls can be a bit down. It can be all football, football, football and worrying about what we need to achieve, so it’s quite nice to switch off every now and then. If I just thought about football all the time I’d drive myself mad.” It was at her previous club, Manchester United, that she was introduced to Lego. “I started last year when we went into lockdown and I just got addicted,” she says before joking that resultant construction projects could yet affect this summer’s holiday plans, with Dubai and Florida facing serious competition from an unlikely rival. “I love Dubai and I love Florida and but I’ll obviously have to take a trip to the Legoland resort in Denmark at the end of the season. The only problem will be having enough suitcases to bring it all back in!” By then the 27-year-old trusts last year’s Championship winners will be looking forward to a second season in the top tier after surviving a testing induction. Tempted by Leicester’s ambitious long-term vision and stellar training facilities, Sigsworth was persuaded to leave United by the club’s former manager Jonathan Morgan last summer. It has not proved plain sailing. With the team then still lacking a WSL win, Morgan was sacked in late November and replaced by Lydia Bedford, a highly regarded Football Association coach, who was previously in charge of England Women’s Under-18s. So far at least, it seems an inspired switch. Since the installation of Bedford and her vastly experienced assistant, the former England women’s caretaker manager Brent Hills, Leicester have won two key games. Victories at home to Birmingham and Brighton have moved them off the bottom, two points clear of Birmingham, who occupy the sole relegation place. “We’ve got a bit of momentum now,” says Sigsworth. “We’re starting to look upwards. Lydia’s training sessions are very enjoyable and she’s brought us a bit more together as a team. That’s so important. “In the past we’ve been very defensive and holding out for draws but we’ve become a lot more attacking. As a forward, it’s nice to be able to take risks. It’s so hard to defend for 90 minutes without making that one mistake that can cost you the game. “It’s just about being clinical now; we know we’re too good to get relegated. After the FA Cup tie [at Tottenham on Sunday] we’ve got a massive league game at Birmingham; win that and we’ll be in a much better position.” Not that bidding farewell to Morgan was easy. “I trusted Jonathan a lot – he was a big reason why I came here,” she says. “All the girls got on with Jonathan, he’s got a heart of gold and was great to work with. It’s just that football can be brutal sometimes; if you’re not picking up points the first finger of blame always points at the manager. It’s unfortunate it didn’t work out but I know Jonathan still wants us to do well.” Morgan was in frequent contact with his Leicester men’s counterpart, Brendan Rodgers, and Sigsworth relished a “big, very enjoyable, training workshop” Rodgers recently staged for the women’s side. Phil Neville also takes a keen interest in the team’s progress. The former England manager, now in charge of Inter Miami, keeps in touch with several of his former Lionesses, including Sigsworth’s housemate, the Leicester defender Abbie McManus. “Abbie’s always getting texts and stuff from Phil,” she says. “He’s really encouraging.” The pair live in a village a short drive from Leicester. “There’s lots of lovely country walks,” says Sigsworth. “I’m really enjoying it here – although I still don’t like our league position.” Despite ranking among Leicester’s senior professionals, her years of scoring goals for Doncaster Belles, Notts County and Manchester United could not quite prepare her for the nerve-shredding intensity of a relegation skirmish. “It’s completely different from playing for Manchester United,” she says. “There’s huge pressure being at the bottom of the table where every point is critical but I’m enjoying the responsibility and I feel we’ve got a lot to build on. This year’s been a massive learning curve but, if we can just stay up, I know we can go on to bigger and better things.” Do not bet against a survival celebration at Legoland. Get to know the players in England’s top-flight better with our WSL player in focus series. Read all our interviews here.When I last interviewed Ian Anderson, leader of multimillion-selling prog rockers Jethro Tull, in 1993, he told me that 2000 would be a good time to hang up his flute. “I think I was confusing myself with British Airways pilots who, when they turn 65, are out,” he counters today. “If you’re a professional tennis player and fully vaccinated, you might manage to play on until you’re in your late 30s. But those of us in arts and entertainment get to die with our boots on, like John Wayne in a black-and-white western.” Appraising Anderson’s face on my laptop screen, I could easily knock a decade off his 74 years, but it’s still hard to reconcile this loquacious, informed analyser of politics and history with the wild hippy dervish he was circa 1970, famous for playing his flute on one leg. His troll-like hair vanished long ago, but that passage of time is “both romantic and encouraging, because it means we can keep on paying our grandchildren’s school fees in our old age. There are others older than me who are still doing their stuff. Mick Jagger’s trousers keep going up and down, so all’s well with the world.” And indeed it is for fans of Jethro Tull, who will have wondered if they’d ever get another studio album – the previous one was in 2003, and that was a Christmas album (although done in puckish Anderson style). New LP The Zealot Gene originated in early 2017 with a list Anderson made of primal emotions: “Bad stuff like anger, jealousy, retribution, then good stuff like love, compassion, loyalty,” he says. All the tracks draw on biblical texts Anderson then Googled to support the record’s anti-extremism theme; one song skewers Judas Iscariot, the disciple who kissed Jesus in Gethsemane to expose him to his enemies: “How does it feel to point the stabbing finger / with perfidious kiss from those deceiving lips?” The Zealot Gene explores how these emotions govern life today as they did when the vengeful Old Testament God rained sulphur and fire on Sodom and Gomorrah. Mrs Tibbetts is named after the mother of the US air force captain whose B-29 dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima; Jesus is wistfully evoked in the acoustic songs interspersed among the album’s spiky rockers. The title track talks about Twitter-happy authoritarian leaders; damaging use of social media is an Anderson bugbear. “Donald Trump was relatively shiny and new when I wrote the songs,” he says, speaking from his Wiltshire home two weeks before Jethro Tull head to Europe for their first post-Omicron shows. “Already you could see the way he thrived on division and polarisation, but there’s another five or six almost-dictators who represent populism and the extremes of left and right equally well.” Crucified by rock critics for his ambitious conceptual thinking when Tull were in their 1970s pomp, Anderson is loath for The Zealot Gene to be labelled Tull’s biblical album. “The interest I have in a whole variety of subjects, from hard science to the cruel world of politics, is part of who I am,” he says. “I’m an observer, which comes from my brief art history education – I see a picture in my head and I want to illustrate it musically. “I fully understand if people look at my meanderings over many years and think: ‘Oh, if you’re making lists of words, the ones that come to mind about Ian Anderson would be pompous, vain, arrogant and self-indulgent.’ But, hopefully, you might also think serious, studious, passionate and, above all, engaged.” The 22nd Tull studio album is the first the current lineup has recorded under the band’s name. When Anderson dismantled the previous incarnation in 2011 – ending guitarist Martin Barre’s four-decade tenure – Tull seemed over. But having made two solo albums in the intervening years, Anderson revived the name for The Zealot Gene, since seven of its 12 tracks were recorded live in the studio by the whole band before the epidemic struck. Alongside other classic-era progressive rock bands still extant – including King Crimson, Yes and Genesis – Tull went global. Integral to their success was the fusion of Anderson’s folk-tinged voice, acoustic plucking and rasping flute with Barre’s scorching riffs and John Evans’s rococo keyboards, in intricate songs that often ignored the rules of conventional pop composition. Tull’s 1971 breakthrough album Aqualung presented the layered medieval rock that might have been played in baronial halls and taverns had amplifiers existed in Elizabethan times. “I loved the blues, but for me it was just a pragmatic way of opening the door, because it wasn’t really what I wanted to do musically,” he says of the band’s path to Aqualung. “The signposts were the Beatles’ Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band and then Pink Floyd’s The Piper at the Gates of Dawn. I thought: ‘I want to try to do something like that, something that’s eclectic.’” Tull’s signature sound characterised Thick as a Brick (1972) and A Passion Play (1973), classically influenced concept albums consisting of single pieces each 45-odd minutes long. Deterred by A Passion Play’s complexity and Miltonian afterlife allegory, not to mention the whimsical fable that bridges its halves, music press reviewers tore it to shreds. The band were distinctly un-glam amid the glam rock of the early 70s, but shed their scruffy look to embrace flamboyant mummery. Anderson’s cavorting bug-eyed troubadour was rooted in court-jestering with its mockery of cant and hypocrisy. Anderson still plays on one leg occasionally, but not to the extent it compromises his elder statesman’s dignity. Dressing up “was fun,” he says, “and looking back on it, it was too much fun. Much of it was perfectly silly, but at the time I felt if someone was going to wear tights and a codpiece, it might as well be me.” Tull’s manager-producer Terry Ellis took Anderson to the costumer of the Royal Ballet in 1972. “This very creative man came up with a pretty racy codpiece design. He made a couple of them that were moulded to look like they had a wriggly monster inside,” Anderson recalls, laughing. “In the end, I chose one that had a nice bulgy shape. When I clipped it on, he said: ‘How does it feel?’ I said: ‘It feels great. How did you know my size?’ And he said” – Anderson mimics a flirtatious voice – “‘Well, when I looked at you, I thought we’re about the same size’, which I thought as good a response as any. “Luckily back then, I had slightly muscular legs and a firm, trim bum, and I looked like some demented Nureyev with a flute. The codpiece was a good investment for getting noticed, but it became a real pain in the arse because I had to truss myself up in it every night to go on stage. Plus, it required very careful dry cleaning, beyond that of the local laundry service. It ended up like a Hell’s Angels original – it just didn’t get washed. So if you were within 20 metres of me on stage in 1972 or 1973, I announced my presence with a distinct lack of fragrance, even if I was just standing in the wings.” Tull hit an all-time low in 1979 following the death at 28 from a heart condition of their former bass player John Glascock. In the early 80s, the band that began life as a Blackpool blues combo in 1963 experimented with synthesisers, yet it was a blend of hard rock and proggy grandeur that earned 1987’s Crest of a Knave an unexpected Grammy award. Roots to Branches (1995) and J-Tull Dot Com (1999) – the standouts among Tull’s five subsequent albums before The Zealot Gene – incorporate global music influences and ponder ageing. Anderson suffers from asthma and hasn’t been able to hit high notes since overtaxing his voice in the early 80s, but that instrument is currently in fine fettle. Asked what Tull’s legacy should be, Anderson first apologises for “nicking” the name of the Berkshire agronomist who invented the horse-drawn seed drill. “Our booking agent gave it to us, and when I realised who Jethro Tull was, I was embarrassed, but we couldn’t change it because we’d just got the Marquee residency and were beginning to get some positive responses. I’ve always felt a bit guilty about it. “Then I’d say that, over all those years, Jethro Tull tried hard. Some people might say we tried too hard, but it’s better to do that and fall on your face once in a while rather than sit comfortably backpedaling in order to keep on an even keel. I’d get restless if I did generic music like the Stones or even the Who, or the Ramones in the world of punk. I feel I’ve gotta get on and do something that allows me to get close to what I think I can do. “If you can elaborate all of that and put it in a three-line epitaph for my tombstone, I’d be most grateful to receive the result by email at some point,” Anderson says. “In fact, I could get the stonemason working on it right now.” The Zealot Gene is released on 28 January on Inside Out MusicThe prosecution: Hans Alicia eats the chocolate biscuits too fast. My upbringing means I want them to last longer We get sent a package of around 50 homemade shortbread biscuits by my mum and dad each year. Some are covered in cornflakes, others are made with marzipan and syrup, but some are covered with chocolate. They are the most delicious and our favourites, but my wife, Alicia, always eats them too fast. If I have something delicious, I want to enjoy it for the longest time possible. I like to evenly distribute my joy – I don’t eat all the best biscuits first. So I’ll take a chocolate one, then next time I’ll choose one with cornflakes or marzipan and syrup. It prolongs the joy of returning to a chocolate biscuit – you can save them for bad times. But Alicia has a completely different attitude. She wants all the good stuff now before it’s gone. The result is that we usually run out of the best biscuits too quickly. I will say each year, “Leave me some of those chocolate ones, I haven’t had many yet” and her response is, “Well, as long as they are still there, they are up for grabs.” But I don’t want to eat the best ones on her schedule; I simply want them to last longer. It makes sense to distribute them properly, but in our home if I don’t eat them quickly, I don’t get any. To keep up with her I would have to force myself to eat them more quickly, but that’s no fun. Sometimes I’ll ask her not to eat them as fast, but it doesn’t resonate. Also, the biscuits come from my family, so really I should get the most say. I grew up making these biscuits with my parents when I was a boy, so they are special to me. I was raised in a disciplined household and I’m used to being methodical. As a child I would eat my sweets a lot slower than my siblings. I just like to maximise my joy. I don’t want to speed up my biscuit-eating habits: why can’t Alicia try slowing hers down? The defence: Alicia Hans thinks you should save the best ones for later – but I am just not that restrained I think Hans likes having the biscuits there for the sake of it. The box is full for the first couple of weeks, so he has ample opportunity to go for what he wants. Sometimes I say, “If you want a chocolate one, eat a chocolate one.” But weirdly, he will go to the box and take another, normal biscuit. He says he doesn’t want to be forced to eat the good ones when I say so. I find it strange because Hans complains about not having access to the chocolate ones, but then when I encourage him to take one, he doesn’t want to. Perhaps he enjoys torturing me – or is he trying to teach me a lesson in self-discipline? Recently, we got down to the last two chocolate biscuits in the box. I’d had mine and I was waiting for Hans to have his since he’d complained that I’d eaten too many good ones. But it took him a whole eight days to take his chocolate biscuit! Every time I went to the box, it was there, staring back at me, tempting me. Last year the tension was heightened because my family came to our house to visit and we offered them some biscuits. The best ones disappeared more quickly because everyone likes the chocolate ones the most. It’s normal human behaviour to go for the best option first. It’s like with the chocolate selection boxes at Christmas – you just expect the nicest ones to be eaten first, you’re always left with the bad ones by the end. Hans has grown up thinking that you should save some good stuff for bad times ahead, whereas I’m not that restrained. I don’t have a huge sweet tooth, but when chocolate is in the house I do eat it quickly. If Hans wants some, I have to leave his bit in his study because if I see it in front of me, I will eat it. I think it’s silly to count out all the biscuits each year. Hans needs to stop rationing the biscuits. If they are there, just go for it. The jury of Guardian readers Should Alicia show some restraint with the chocolate biscuits? I understand Hans wanting to savour the chocolate biscuits and not gorge on them immediately. But leaving one for eight days is an extreme test of self-control, a legacy of his disciplined childhood. Why not ask his parents to send only chocolate biscuits and sack off the marzipan and cornflake ones? Vic, 54 Alicia is aware Hans grew up in a strict household and should let him eat the biscuits as he pleases. He is gracious to share them, albeit painstakingly. Though, Hans, I have to say, “Life is short, enjoy the simple pleasures, tomorrow isn’t guaranteed!” Kate, 30 Hans wants these biscuits to be eaten in precisely the way he thinks is correct. While they have some emotional importance to him, this feels rigid and uncompromising. It’s not as if Alicia is wolfing them down as soon as they arrive. He should try to relax a little. Peter, 52 I am sympathetic to Hans’s methods, but it’s not on Alicia to help maintain his discipline. I suggest he sets some biscuits aside to enjoy at his pace, or attempt a more challenging self-discipline: helping Alicia maximise her joy while he’s maximising his own. Ehab, 26 Alicia is not guilty. She doesn’t eat all the best biscuits– she encourages Hans to eat them, but he doesn’t. If Hans wants to save his share of the best ones, he could put them into a separate tin, then eat them at his leisure. Sarah, 39 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Alicia stop eating the chocolate biscuits so quickly? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Elsie’s brother Ollie should get her better birthday presents, as his lack of effort makes her sad. 51% of you said no – Ollie is innocent 49% of you said yes – Ollie is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereTom Tugendhat, the high-profile chair of the foreign affairs committee, once described the job of prime minister as like “winning the lottery”. With a dearth of options in the cabinet for the party’s centrist wing to rally behind in a future leadership contest, he is the name many more have started to mention should Boris Johnson lose a vote of no confidence. “Tom would be my first choice,” one former cabinet minister said. “I think a lot of people think he would be the best chance for a fresh start with someone who has a lot of relevant experience and deep thinking.” On paper, the MP for Tonbridge’s chances of success seem slim – his name comes up often as one of the rank outsiders to succeed Johnson, with odds of about 16-1. But his name is the one that MPs most often bring up of their own accord, once they have finished expressing their varying degrees of doubt about Rishi Sunak or Liz Truss. Tugendhat is from pure Tory stock, the nephew of the Tory peer Lord Tugendhat and the son of a high court judge. He had a long and distinguished military career, serving in Iraq and Afghanistan, working for the FCO in Afghanistan and for the then chief of defence staff Lord David Richards. During the fall of Kabul, he was furious at the chaos of the evacuation and the approach of world leaders, including Biden, and gave a raw and personal speech in the Commons that was widely praised. Like the prime minister, his speeches often lapse into multiple languages, in Tugendhat’s case, Arabic, Dari and French. But the pair have a unique loathing for each other, clashing pointedly at select committee hearings and Tugendhat has made little secret of his disdain for the prime minister’s approach. One senior MP said it would be “a relief, by all accounts, to have someone like that in the job at the moment”. Another minister said they were also hoping for Tugendhat to run – “though he’d need to convince other colleagues he’s got any sort of domestic policy ideas whatsoever. We all know what he thinks about China or Afghanistan.” One issue is Tugendhat has no ministerial experience, although an ally was quick to note he had “experience running governments, just not this one” – a nod to his time in Afghanistan. Observant MPs say they have noticed a slew of recent interventions by Tugendhat on wider policy matters – particular in the Mail on Sunday – on the need for nuclear reactors, action to stop the deaths of migrants crossing in small boats and social media regulation. There are aspects that could still attract some on the party’s right. Tugendhat has been prepared to judiciously vote against stricter Covid measures – an issue likely to be high on the agenda for any leadership race. He was also a key player in the China Research Group of Tory MPs calling for a more hawkish approach to China, including opposing Huawei’s role in building 5G networks in the UK and lobbying for an amendment to the trade bill as part of recognition of the Uyghur genocide. He was banned from China as a result, along with fellow MPs Nusrat Ghani, Tim Loughton and Iain Duncan Smith, although when Johnson invited them to the Downing Street rose garden in the aftermath, Tugendhat was not among them. But Tugendhat has his fair amount of detractors on the party’s right, the chief whip, Mark Spencer, is said to have nicknamed him “Tom Tugendtwat” for his pointed criticism of the government and its actions on the world stage, including rebellions on aid, the trade bill and vehement criticism of the Kabul evacuation operation. “That kind of saintly disposition is not popular among my lot,” one MP said. “I can’t see him realistically getting past the first round [of leadership voting’].” Another called him “the Rory Stewart of the race”, a reference to the former development secretary’s failed bid in 2019. One experienced MP said the legacy of Brexit was one that could damage Tugendhat. “There is likely to be significant resistance in [Tugendhat’s] wing of the party if the government goes down the road of triggering article 16. I don’t think we are in that place yet but for sure any block on that would not play well with the membership.” But he still has some admirers in the cabinet, particularly the levelling-up secretary, Michael Gove, whom he backed for the Conservative leadership in 2017. The pair almost cleared the dancefloor spinning enthusiastically to Whitney Houston at Conservative party conference’s karaoke this year. Whatever the future of his leadership ambitions, Tugendhat has made it clear he would at least like to be offered the chance at a cabinet role. “I will serve at whatever level I’m asked to,” he told Politics Home. “Would it be great to be PM? Yep, it would be. Would it be great to be foreign secretary? Fantastic. Would it be great to be defence secretary? Wonderful. Would it be great to be a minister of any kind? Yes, because all of those opportunities to serve are very much winning a lottery.”What’s the first thing an Essex girl does in the morning? Gets up and rebrands her home county as very different from the sexist and snobbish stereotypes of it that sadly prevail in the rest of Britain. Admittedly, this is even less funny than the original punchline – which, if you grew up near Chelmsford, like me, you’ve probably heard before, and which triggered a BBC internal investigation a few years ago when someone told it live on Radio 1. It is, however, very much of a piece with Essex council’s efforts to rebrand a county that – how to put this? – may not previously have topped everyone’s travel bucket list as a tourist destination. Forget the world of blindingly white teeth and “no carbs before Marbs” so artfully brought to life by the reality TV show The Only Way Is Essex. Instead, adverts featuring scientists, Michelin-starred chefs and Boudicca’s campaign of resistance against the Romans will form part of a £300,000 campaign portraying the county as an undiscovered oasis of culture, wine (as in rolling vineyards, not as in getting hammered on pink prosecco) and oysters for lunch on the coast at West Mersea. This forgotten Essex is the bucolic landscape immortalised by Constable, not the place you go to grab a selfie at Sugar Hut, the Towie crew’s nightclub of choice. All of which is technically true, of course. It’s just that the old, rackety Essex is the one I actually loved. This is not the first attempt to posh it up. Although, having just made a nostalgic pilgrimage back with old friends for someone’s landmark birthday, I’d say the poshing up quietly happened a while ago. The steady exodus of the priced-out-of-London over the last two decades means the comfortably scruffy countryside we grew up in is commuter land now; the muddy farms are spruced up to within an inch of their lives and the pubs in which we drank furtively, underage, have long since been converted into expensive-looking houses. Even the towns we remembered as a cheerful riot of white stilettos and fights in nightclubs are now all smart new shopping centres and sleek “riverside eating experiences” – which no longer seems to mean eating crisps while contemplating the shopping trolleys abandoned in the murky depths of the River Chelmer, but dressing up for brunch. Pretty much the only place so unchanged as to be instantly capable of transporting us back in time, as we wandered around arguing about where the Wimpy used to be, was the park where as teens everyone drank cheap cider and threw up in the bushes. Well, that’s just progress, or maybe middle age. You can’t go back to the past and expect to find it preserved in aspic, or even (judging by the estate agents’ windows) expect to be able to afford to live there now. But the row stirred up by this latest rebranding exercise is really about class rather than money. As the Towie star Gemma Collins indignantly told the Sun: “To say we need to change our ‘reputation’ is an affront to every hardworking person from Essex who has grafted to make something of themselves.” There was always more than one Essex – rural and town, the metropolitan bit that bleeds into London and the wilder marshy fringes, kiss-me-quick Southend and genteel Frinton – but its public face is brash, aspirational, emphatically working class, and not to be messed with or sanitised even in the name of flogging staycations. In her book Essex Girls, an intellectual attempt to reconcile that image with her own feelings about growing up in Chelmsford, the author Sarah Perry argues that there is a thread connecting Boudicca to Collins – and that it’s one of defiance. Essex girls have, she writes, for too long carried “the loathing and anxiety of both sides of the political spectrum, and all points in between” on their spray-tanned shoulders, having been not only slut-shamed or dismissed as airheads down the ages, but portrayed as heartless Thatcherites to boot – although it was “Basildon man” who was always said to have delivered the county for the Tories, as if “Basildon woman” (who also swung to Margaret Thatcher) was somehow too dim to get to grips with voting. The Essex girls Perry celebrates in her book are edgy and radical, from the 19th-century abolitionist Anne Knight to two suffragette sisters from Ingatestone, and the argument she constructs makes sense. But I gave up on the book halfway through in frustration, because my Essex isn’t to be found in literary essays. My Essex is a pancake-flat, dead ordinary hunk of East Anglia that has ingeniously vajazzled itself up into something much more interesting by leveraging the idea of Essex as a cheeky, sexy, loudly inappropriate cultural and economic phenomenon. That idea, much like Towie’s heavily scripted idea of reality, treads an admittedly hazy line between truth and fiction. But my Essex makes the most of its assets without pretending to be what it isn’t, and attempting to rebrand Brentwood as the historically significant birthplace of the peasants’ revolt – rather than as the home of the beauty salon that introduced a goggle-eyed nation to the concept of sticking jewels on your bikini wax – is its antithesis. How do you reinvent a place that has already reinvented itself in ways no other county would dare? Try it, and the joke’s on you. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistMagnus Carlsen is edging towards a minimalist victory at Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee this weekend after the world champion failed to convert a winning rook endgame in round 11 against Vidit Gujrathi on Friday, The India No 2’s accurate defence forced a draw by perpetual check in 51 moves after both players queened a pawn. Carlsen has Black against his old rival Fabiano Caruana in Saturday’s 12th and penultimate round, and will then receive a free point in his final game after Daniil Dubov withdrew from the tournament suffering from Covid. Carlsen (Norway) is currently on 7.5/11, followed by Richard Rapport (Hungary) 7/11, Anish Giri (Netherlands) and Shak Mamedyarov (Azerbaijan) 6.5/11; then four players on 6/11. Rapport had a bloodless victory in the 11th round due to Dubov’s withdrawal. The 25-year-old Hungarian is a creative tactician who has been hovering on the fringes of the world top 10 for some time and now has his chance for a break-through if he can defeat Andrey Esipenko and Giri in the final two rounds. If the 2018 Carlsen v Caruana world title match reunion is a draw, Carlsen may win Wijk on 9/13 but will still lose a rating point or so as his declared target to set an all-time 2900 rating record is already looking difficult to achieve. Giri, who was in second place half a point behind Carlsen with three rounds left, was well beaten in round 11 by his compatriot Jorden van Foreest, who won Wijk 2021 and has put in a solid performance this year. The player who will be most worried about Dubov’s withdrawal is Sweden’s Nils Grandelius, who sat opposite the infected Russian for seven hours on Wednesday, as several reader comments below have reminded us. Carlsen’s 2900 ambition, stated so publicly, was an open invitation to spoiler responses. Sergey Karjakin, who narrowly lost his 2016 world title match with Carlsen, responded in their 10th-round game, which was drawn by repetition in 16 moves and 15 minutes’ play after a Berlin Ruy Lopez sequence played many times before. Karjakin made a joke of it on Twitter, using the hashtag “saynoto2900” and adding “learned some tricks from the world champion” in reference to Carlsen’s three previous games with the identical sequence. Carlsen fans were furious, though the champion himself was relaxed about it, pointing out that it was the day before the rest day and that Karjakin was consolidating his move into the top half of the score table following a poor start. Carlsen’s most impressive win has been against Shak Mamedyarov at a stage when he and the world No 9 from Azerbaijan were tied for the lead. White’s use of his doubled rooks on the a1-a8 file to exercise board control is a rare technique well worth remembering. The Carlsen game which most interested this columnist, however, was his draw as Black against the 2018 US champion, Sam Shankland. The No 1’s choice of opening, which stunned experts watching online, was the rare Von Hennig-Schara Gambit 1 d4 d5 2 c4 e6 3 Nc3 c5 4 cxd5 cxd4!? 5 Qa4+ Bd7 6 Qxd4 exd5 7 Qxd5. One Twitter comment was: “He’s been reading the Guardian Chess Book,” while Nigel Short also recalled the same source. Published in 1967 as a Hodder and Stoughton paperback and timed just as the Fischer boom was getting under way, the book went to two editions and several reprints. It gave general advice for improvers and also provided a primitive opening repertoire, including the Goring Gambit 1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 d4 exd4 5 c3 dxc3 6 Bc4 with variations gleaned from Jonathan Penrose, who often used it against weaker opponents. The book’s recommendation of the Von Hennig-Schara as one offbeat reply to 1 d4 (the Tchigorin 1 d4 d5 2 c4 Nc6 was another) was based on the plan of speedy long castling followed by g7-g5 and an early attack on White’’s short castled king. Later it was shown that Black’s king is weaker than White’s after an energetic b2-b4 counter, but the gambit has recently gained a new lease of life as a strategic sacrifice with the aid of LeelaZero, as shown in this analysis. Its basic theme is that precise play, including castling short, can give Black a position where his piece activity coupled with White’s passive c1 bishop behind e3 and b2 pawns give full compensation for the gambit pawn. That is how Carlsen played it, with the innovatory Nb8-a6, against Shankland, but the surprised American found a way to return the pawn for a drawn ending. Anish Giri was only half a point behind Carlsen after round 10. The world No 5, who lost out on a tie-break in 2021, has had two lucky breaks. Fabiano Caruana blundered in a winning position, then next round Daniil Dubov defaulted because of a facemask dispute with the organisers. There are no spectators to urge on the Netherlands home favourite this year, and Giri has one White in the last three rounds to Carlsen’s two, Gibraltar’s annual open has been replaced this year by a Battle of the Sexes between 10-player teams of men and women, equally matched in terms of average age and Fide international rating. Both teams are rated around 2400, IM standard. Joe Gallagher, a former British champion and now Swiss, and England’s rising star Ravi Haria are playing, though some of their colleagues are little known. The women almost all rank in the top 50, and include two former world champions. The prize money is £100,000, split 75-25 rather than 60-40 as for the world championship. It will be a lifetime best chess payday for some participants, so a highly competitive match is assured. Status is at stake, too. A wide margin victory for the women’s team would probably be the biggest boost for female chess since Beth Harmon, and a major shock seemed possible when the men lost both the two (of 10) opening rounds by 3.5-6.5, but they struck back with 7-3 in round three despite having Black in every game. The men also won round four, 5.5-4.5. Play starts at 2pm daily and can be watched free on Youtube. Thursday’s fourth-round action is here. 3800: 1 Nb3! axb3 2 Kd2 Kc4 3 Kc1! sets up a fortress. If Black advances his king to d3, then Kb1! and Ka1! creates an impenetrable defence.E-scooters could all be given the same distinctive artificial sound to warn people when they are approaching, after engineers and rival operators announced a joint research project to identify the best noise for them to make. Acoustic researchers will work with firms licensed to run UK e-scooter rental schemes with the aim of developing a universal sound for the otherwise near-silent vehicles. The sound would help alert other road users, particularly people with sight loss. Concerns have been raised by charities for blind people about the safety of e-scooters after a number of collisions, although these have largely involved unlicensed e-scooters, which are illegal to drive on public roads, let alone pavements. The sound will be developed at University College London’s laboratories with input from the three licensed operators in London: Dott, Lime and Tier. The multinational operators want to give all their e-scooters the same sound, and hope to set an industry standard for the UK and around the world. Researchers are aiming for the new sound to be sufficiently distinctive and audible to alert those with sight loss, while not creating further difficulty for those with hearing loss and neurodiverse conditions. A spokesperson said a range of noises would be “ethically tested” at UCL’s Person-Environment-Activity Research Laboratory. Prof Nick Tyler, the director of the facility, said: “Through studying how the human hearing system has evolved, we can create sounds for e-scooters that are detectable without adding more noise to the environment. It is a huge scientific challenge, but one that will enable everyone to feel comfortable with this new form of micromobility that is quickly growing in popularity.” Fred Jones, a regional general manager with the e-scooter operator Tier, said developing “an inclusive sound for e-scooters will be crucial to protecting pedestrians and road users potentially made vulnerable through the introduction of this new transport mode”. The project will build on work done by operators with disability charities and other acoustic researchers. The chair of Transport for London’s independent disability advisory group, Joanna Wootten, said they were excited that the venture would be “breaking new ground where there are currently no standards or regulations in place”. Dr Antonio Torija Martinez, an acoustic researcher at the University of Salford, said they had developed a standalone system with variable noises reflecting speed, but were continuing to look into “developing warning sounds for an optimal balance between noticeability and annoyance”. Trials of legal rental e-scooter schemes continue across the UK, with the government still giving no indication of its long-term decision over the vehicle’s future. Sales of unregulated e-scooters have led to increasing numbers of crashes and deaths, according to a report from the Parliamentary Advisory Council for Transport Safety.The debut album from singer-songwriter Samm Henshaw has a heavy American flavour. Built from strains of rootsy, old-school soul, 90s hip-hop, bluesy jazz and gospel, tracks such as Chicken Wings – with its references to “curly fries super-sized, sweet tea and lemonade” – and Waterbreak, a dreamy sax interlude preaching hydration, seem to be marinated in its culture. It’s there in a literal sense too: Henshaw delivers many of his lyrics in an almost cartoonishly strong US twang. So it’s a little disorientating to discover that the 26-year-old actually hails from south London. In fact, it’s a piece of context that could easily nudge this record into the realm of clever, tasteful but unremarkable tribute, rather than bracingly personal work of art (although it should be noted that the gospel influence can be traced back to his reverend father; the British strain of the genre is perennially overlooked). What prevents Untidy Soul from falling into that category are Henshaw’s lyrics. His themes are intimate and of the moment: this is an album about modern notions of selfhood – fallibility, hypocrisy, self-improvement and self-worth. Enough meditates on perfectionism; opener Thoughts and Prayers is a frank internal monologue about morality and self-image; on Still Broke – written after he was dropped from Columbia – he fails to find validation in work, money and fame. Gratifyingly, none of this is carried out with a self-serious, woe-is-me attitude – instead Henshaw comes across as wry, low-key and self-effacing. Perhaps there is some distinctively British character here after all.Following last weekend’s slate of thrillers, what does the NFL do for an encore this time around? Sunday’s two championship games have a lot to live up to but there are more than enough storylines swirling around the four remaining teams to ensure plenty of fireworks (quite literally when it comes to the Chiefs). AFC Championship Game (Cincinnati Bengals at Kansas City Chiefs, Sunday, 3pm EST/8pm GMT) What the Bengals need to do to win: Everything perfectly. It all starts with quarterback Joe Burrow taking better care of the ball. Against the Tennessee Titans, Burrow was sacked nine times, tying a playoff record. Much of this was due to the porous offensive line – which will have to step up on Sunday – but some down to Burrow’s refusal to simply throw the ball away when under pressure. The Bengals beat the Chiefs 34-31 in the regular season, so they know they have a chance of an upset, but it won’t happen if Burrow can’t stay on his feet. What the Chiefs need to do to win: The defense needs to do better. Let’s be real: as entertaining as Bills-Chiefs was, Kansas City had to a) set up a game-tying field goal in the span of 13 seconds and b) win a coin toss to clinch the game in overtime. Their defense allowed 36 points against the Bills and they could be without safety Tyrann Mathieu, who suffered a head injury last Sunday. (He returned to practice on Thursday but his status for the Bengals game was still uncertain at time of writing.) Yes, the Bills were an extremely tough matchup, but Burrow and the Bengals are in the AFC title game for a reason. Key player: Patrick Mahomes, quarterback, Kansas City Chiefs. Mahomes only came into the league in 2017, but he has already won a regular season MVP award and is looking to take his team to their third straight Super Bowl (where he also has been selected as an MVP). If we’re living in the golden age of NFL quarterbacks – and it’s difficult to argue we’re not – Mahomes is the perfect example of why. Prediction: Chiefs over Bengals. It’s easy to root for this Bengals team, especially if you are a little tired of seeing Kansas City win the AFC yet again. That doesn’t change the fact that the Bengals are the underdogs for a reason: the Bills were the biggest obstacle between the Chiefs and the Super Bowl and Joe Burrow and co should present less of a challenge. This could be a blowout early. NFC Championship Game (San Francisco 49ers at Los Angeles Rams, Sunday 6.30pm EST/11.30pm GMT) What the 49ers need to do to win: They need to find a way to get the best out of their quarterbacks. Plural. The 49ers beat the Packers last weekend in spite of their signal-caller, not because of him. Jimmy Garoppolo looked determined to throw his second interception of the day late in Saturday’s game and it was telling that the season-changing play against the Green Bay Packers was a blocked punt returned for a touchdown. Garoppolo will start but don’t be surprised if the team runs a few plays for rookie Trey Lance in key spots, as they did occasionally throughout the season, particularly when the in-game situation calls for a more mobile quarterback. What the Rams need to do to win: Exploit the quarterback mismatch. Matthew Stafford is coming off a two-touchdown performance with 366 passing yards in the divisional round game against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, where he comfortably outplayed Tom Brady. This time around, the starting QB on the other side is Brady’s former understudy. This is exactly why the Rams made the move to trade Jared Goff to the Detroit Lions for Stafford in the first place: with Goff this one would be a coin flip, but with their new big-armed QB, they’re favorites on merit. Player to watch: Cooper Kupp, wide receiver, Los Angeles Rams. He’s not the most famous receiver on the roster – that would probably be Odell Beckham Jr (who is currently playing for fairy dust) – but Kupp is definitely the Rams’ No 1 receiving option. During the regular season, he led the league in yards after the catch: 848 in total, ranking him above Deebo Samuel, his more versatile counterpoint on the opposing team. Prediction: Rams over 49ers. This one promises to be a much more competitive matchup than the AFC title game and an influx of Niners fans may ensure that the Rams do not even have much of a home-field advantage in LA. Ultimately, though, the 49ers needed the Packers to commit some heinous special teams blunders in order to squeak out a 13-10 victory, and it doesn’t feel like the Rams will be quite as accommodating.It’s been a busy transfer window for Tottenham Hotspur, in terms of effort if nothing else. They’ve been working to close deals for Wolves winger Adama Traoré and Porto trickster Luis Díaz, but it’s increasingly looking like the pair are making respective runs to Barcelona and Liverpool instead. What the Rumour Mill would give to be a fly on the wall when Antonio Conte runs into Daniel Levy in the canteen this morning. Tanguy Ndombele meanwhile is off to PSG, but if Spurs fans sense optimism whistling out of the exit door with him, there’s a smidgen of hope in the form of Bayern Munich keeper Alexander Nubel, who is being lined up to shadow Hugo Lloris. This isn’t helping, is it. Wolves fans dismayed at the loss of Traoré will find succour in the news that Rúben Neves, currently on Arsenal and Manchester United’s radar, is staying put. Here’s a further blow for Mikel Arteta’s midfield, depending on which way you look at it: Granit Xhaka is off to Roma, where the red-card magnet will hopefully find some inner peace under the less combustible stewardship of José Mourinho. More bad news for Arsenal, to balance out the Spurs stuff at the top of the page: goalscoring target Dusan Vlahovic will soon be banging them in for Juventus, who have agreed a deal with Fiorentina for the best part of £63m. Armando Broja, fresh from giving Manchester City the runaround last weekend, is a target for West Ham, Leeds, Wolves and Everton. Southampton, who have dibs on him for the rest of the season before he returns to Chelsea, are interested too. West Ham also want Blackburn striker Ben Brereton Díaz, who on Wednesday night scored the sort of header for Chile against Argentina that would make Rovers legend Alan Shearer proud. The Hammers also have an eye on Liverpool defender Nat Phillips, as well as old boy Jesse Lingard, though he fancies a move to Newcastle. However, with Manchester United asking the freshly minted Toon for the earth, Lingard might end up at the London Stadium instead … or indeed Aston Villa, Leicester or Everton. Worth keeping an eye on this long-running saga, which if nothing else is likely to come to a satisfactory conclusion before Partygate.The Afterparty (Apple TV+) is one of those “oh, it’s them from that thing” shows, packed to the gills with comedy stars who have appeared in better series or films. Originally conceived as a film about a high school reunion by Lego Movie and 21 Jump Street creators Christopher Miller and Phil Lord, it has been transformed into an eight-part murder mystery, with each episode adopting a different genre depending on the character we are following. Tiffany Haddish plays Danner, the detective who puts herself in charge of investigating the crime. Smart and starry? What could go wrong? Not much, as it turns out, but its fundamental decent-ness is to its detriment. A group of old classmates are getting together for their 15-year reunion, and in among the archetypes is Xavier, formerly known as Eugene, now a famous rock star and actor whose sole purpose seems to be to mess with the heads of the people with whom he went to school. (Dave Franco plays him with ample slime and ooze). But Xavier ends up falling to his death from the balcony of his beach-side mansion, where the reunion’s afterparty has been taking place. Cue the arrival of Danner and her sidekick Culp (Search Party’s John Early, underused in the early episodes), there to grill the attendees and work out whodunnit. The partygoers’ testimonies offer up a cinematic kaleidoscope of stories. Like Stephen Merchant’s The Outlaws, this plays on the idea of each character being a well-known type. It opens with an extended episode on “adorkable loveboy” Aniq (Veep’s Sam Richardson), who designs escape rooms for a living. He is there to win back his mid-divorce high-school crush, “uptight artist girl” Zoë (Zoë Chao), who gets her own animated episode later. His episode is mostly rom-com, with a brief diversion into arthouse fare. But given that it has to establish the plot and style of the series, it has a lot of heavy lifting to do. It is busy with fun ideas and good performances, but lacking in pace. Even at 48 minutes, the opener feels far too long. It lacks the comedic punch to be truly funny and tries too hard to be funny to have dramatic heft. It cautiously puts one foot forward, then whips it back again. It was a wise move to launch this show with three episodes (the rest will follow weekly). Once it has set the scene, the instalments fall back to a more manageable and more flattering half-hour or so. Brett, Zoë’s ex-husband (Mindy Project alumnus Ike Barinholtz) gets his own action movie, which you could have guessed from the neckline on his leather jacket and his Matt Damon hair. The more bombastic scenes – car chases, handbrake turns, punchups with bouncers – are interspersed with his efforts to be a good dad, and it works surprisingly well. A literal pissing contest between him and Xavier hints at a surreal, slightly gross, very silly comedy that only appears sporadically. It could have benefited from more like this. The third episode stretches the show’s muscles again, giving Yasper (Parks and Rec’s Ben Schwartz) a musical in which he sings his feelings and gently mocks Hamilton’s My Shot with a song called Two Shots. It is all classy to a fault, but for all of its smart ideas, it doesn’t quite ignite. Each episode is an impressive achievement, in that it looks like a lot of work went into it, but I was left admiring that work, rather than immersed in the story. With all those stars, and the ability to borrow from every genre, it should zip along. Instead, it chooses to meander. Still, it is watchable, not least because we won’t find out who the culprit is until the final episode, and there’s a lot of fun to be had in guessing which genre each character will find themselves embroiled in. Stath Lets Flats’ Jamie Demetriou has a small role as running gag Walt, whom nobody can remember, and Broad City’s Ilana Glazer is Chelsea, the former queen bee who had “a total breakdown” and is acting erratically. This is enjoyable, steady, perfectly fine. But it is also classic prestige streaming service television, in that it is a little overdone, a little overlong and lacking the touch of ruthlessness that would have made it excellent.A theatre director once told me that you should never ask what a play is about, just as you should never ask a prisoner what they’re in for: instead, you should ask, “What’s the inquiry?”. What’s the difference, you might wonder. Well, Bill Hayes’s Sweat is “about” a history of exercise, indeed, that’s its subtitle. Yet his inquiry would be better summarised: “What does my body and its acts and competencies say about who I am? What, for that matter, did Plato’s? And from everyone in between, what can I learn about the self?” “Libraries, like gyms,” he writes, “have always been a refuge for me, just as gyms, like libraries, have always been places of learning.” There is a playfulness in Hayes’s writing, which reaches from a rich topsoil of endearing wordplay (“pas de dads”, he calls the sight of two middle-aged men playing squash) to the deepest layers of curiosity and empathy. He takes a profound, historian’s pleasure in tropes that echo across centuries – “The ancient Greek word for ‘gym rat’… literally translates as ‘palestra addict’”, to build an enthusiasm it’s impossible not to share. In one chapter, he learns boxing; it’s physically arduous, Plato had a thing or two to say about it (didn’t he always?), the diary is tearing along with pace and wit when Hayes leads the reader casually into the relationship that made him want to box in the first place. His boyfriend Steve – protective, capable, “always there. In our apartment, at my side, at the other end of the phone, a presence” – dies, suddenly, of a heart attack at the age of 43. It’s like being punched in the face. Hayes, by his own account, ends up medium-good at boxing, but as a storyteller, he’s Joe Frazier. The focal point of Hayes’s research, which takes him from London to Paris as he tracks down academics and translators, is Girolamo Mercuriale, author of De Arte Gymnastica, the first comprehensive book on exercise, from 1573. Mercuriale was wrong about a lot of things – his treatise on sweat is wild – and right about more. Hayes is wrong about some things – he thinks Mercuriale looks like Shakespeare, which he doesn’t at all - and absolutely fascinating in his own, idiosyncratic fascinations. In between, he splices in his personal sporting journey, from swimming to boxing to running, to being a gym rat, to glancing medit – certainly the route isn’t chronological –ations on his father, and somehow he arrives at today’s conception of exercise. The author describes the modern consensus on fitness as cohering relatively recently, in the early 50s. The epidemiologist Jerry Morris, known as “the man who invented exercise”, more accurately described, per Hayes, as “the man who invented the field of exercise science” spearheaded Britain’s Society for Social Medicine. From his large-scale studies of transport workers, the difference in baseline health between conductors (who walked about) and drivers (who were sedentary) formed the basis for his conclusions about the benefits of keeping fit. In the same year, two American epidemiologists did a similar study on a different cohort, school children aged six to 19, which ultimately led to Eisenhower’s Council on Youth Fitness. The Society for Social Medicine had been established with an explicitly socialist, internationalist agenda, and the cross-pollination of the respective groups’ work was equally explicitly resisted by authorities in the McCarthy-era US (as Morris’s colleague, John Pemberton wrote: “When the immigration officer at New York read my introductory letter stating that the object of my visit was ‘to study the teaching of social medicine in the USA’ he said, with some emphasis, “We don’t want any of that filth here”). In public health terms, there is a fascinating left-right divide: the left uses the body as an index of systemic inequality, while the right uses the body as the ultimate outward sign of self-sufficiency and personal responsibility. And while Hayes is extremely alert to race and gender politics, never gulled by the exclusions of historical record (“I suddenly imagined Tolstoy and Einstein competing in a triathlon. Which man would win? Maybe a woman would instead”), he’s not so hot on these big ideological fissures. If that sounds like a criticism, it isn’t; rather, a way of saying, I would have liked more views, more observations, on more subjects – basically, I would have liked this book to go on for a lot longer. Erudite, ludic, eccentric, energetic and historically transporting, it’s like falling through a gym and landing in a joust. • Sweat: A History of Exercise is published by Bloomsbury (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Kevin Dugar got a letter from his brother. It was fall 2013, and Kevin hadn’t seen his identical twin Karl in years – they were both serving time in different Illinois prisons. A murder conviction all but guaranteed Kevin, 36, would remain incarcerated well into his 70s. As kids, the twins had been inseparable. They would dress in matching outfits, making it difficult even for family to tell them apart. They would sometimes switch places to fool their teachers and friends. And in their 20s, while selling drugs on the streets of Chicago, they would both be known by a single nickname: “Twin.” They had a special brotherly bond, an unspoken promise to always have each other’s back. By the time Kevin received the letter, he had been languishing in decrepit conditions for years. When it rained, water would drip from the ceiling. In the summer, heat got so unbearable that Kevin would revel in the air that flowed through the crack at the bottom of his cell door. He described prison like a dog pound, except for one difference: people care more about dog pounds. Karl’s letter started with updates about his life. “I’m about to start my post conviction in a minute,” his brother wrote. “Hopefully I get some rhythm. Oh and my daughter is about to enter high school soon.” But the tone quickly changed, and Karl’s neat script, scrawled in black pen, began to scrunch together like he was racing to get to the end. “Look Kevin, I’m beating around the bush with you on some shit I’ve been keeping a secret for years, and I have to get it off my chest before it kills me. “First off, I’d like to say I’m sorry for all these years you’ve missed out of your daughter’s life and also for all the pain you’ve endured over the last decade or so.” “You know the case you were found guilty on and you swore you were being set up on? I know you was telling the truth … I’m the reason your life got fucked up.” The cops, he went on to confess, had grabbed the wrong twin. “Look Kevin, please don’t tell Momma or Dad. Let me be the one to tell them.” ••• Eight years before he read that letter, Kevin was handed a 54-year sentence for the killing of Antwan Taylor, a member of the Blackstones street gang. Kevin had been a member of a rival gang, the Vice Lords, though he had been desperate to leave that life behind. Kevin had always claimed his innocence. He even declined a generous plea bargain, refusing to admit to something he did not do. But one thing never left his mind: that his twin could have been the culprit. He’d even asked him 10 years ago, as he sat in jail awaiting trial. Karl had denied everything, and Kevin believed him. In the end, what brought Kevin down was a stack of Polaroids, and a system willing to convict based on the testimony of a single eyewitness. Mistaken identifications are one of the leading causes of wrongful convictions. Almost 30% of the convictions of innocent people recorded by the National Registry of Exonerations were influenced by inaccurate eyewitness IDs. Still, eyewitnesses are routinely used as primary evidence in US courts. Sometimes, as in Kevin’s case, they are the only evidence available. Despite their fallibility, they remain pretty convincing to the average juror – even though we know human memory to be unreliable, especially when tasked with recalling traumatic events. Shock, poor lighting and the time between a crime and the official identification are several factors that can degrade the accuracy of our memories. And then there was Kevin, who had the most glaring complication to a case hinging on eyewitness accounts – an identical twin. Somehow, investigators were able to push that inconvenience aside. ••• Both brothers were introduced to the criminal underworld at a young age by their cousins, who were members of the Vice Lords. At only nine years old, Kevin recalled being fed glorified tales of violence and cold-hearted revenge. “Our older cousins were doing everything under the sun to bring money in,” Kevin wrote to me from prison. Robberies and drug deals were the norm. The twins’ father, Isaiah, worked as a long-distance truck driver. Their mother Judy was often left alone to raise the twins and their two sisters. It was a fight for survival, and the Dugars needed to eat. “We wanted to help my mom out,” Kevin wrote. “There was no Santa and shit coming to the hood.” Kevin and Karl started building their records at 17 for offenses ranging from street fighting, disorderly conduct and gang loitering (the supreme court found Chicago’s anti-gang loitering law unconstitutional in 1999, which the ACLU called “a meaningful victory for young men of color” since the law gave police power to arbitrarily select people to arrest). After high school, Kevin started working as a barber while selling drugs on the side. In January 2000, officers caught him selling crack on a street corner. He was sentenced to four years. By the time he was released, Kevin, now 25, was tired of the gang lifestyle. He wanted out, and it was high time to make an exit: in the early aughts, Chicago had more homicides than any other city in the nation. Chicago police were cracking down on gangs with such force that the number of homicides dropped from 598 in 2003 to 447 in 2004 – the lowest since 1965. Kevin knew he’d be a target back on the streets. He also couldn’t stop thinking about a young woman he had fallen in love with. Kevin had met Rosalina Rosa in high school. One day, feeling bold, he had engaged her in conversation and was quick to grab her heart. “Kevin was the love of my life,” Rosa told me. “He was so strong. He was so handsome. He was what every girl wanted, you know what I mean? … He was a protector. He always took good care of me. And he was a mama’s boy. Outside on the streets, he was very tough. At home, he was a mama’s boy who loved her mac and cheese.” Rosa moved to Pennsylvania in 2000 to be with her sister, who was undergoing cancer treatment. It was supposed to be a short trip, but she fell in love with the pleasant pace of life in the countryside. She thought this new life could be an escape for Kevin too. “I said, if you really want to change and you’re serious, then come out here.” Kevin applied to parole in Pennsylvania, but his request was denied. This wasn’t going to stop him from seeing his beloved. In February 2003, a few weeks after his release from prison, Kevin boarded an Amtrak train using his brother’s ID and moved in with Rosa in Souderton, 30 miles north-west of Philadelphia. Karl covered for his brother by impersonating Kevin on the phone with his parole officer. In Pennsylvania, Kevin finally felt free. He had always believed the Vice Lords would lead to his death and would often picture his body left somewhere on the streets of Chicago – just another dead gangster shot by the cops or over some drug business. For the first time in his life, those dark thoughts went away. Kevin imagined a normal life with Rosa: marriage, kids, a stable and peaceful home in suburbia. But then Kevin got a call from Karl saying his parole officer wanted to meet in person. Rosa was nervous about Kevin returning to Illinois. She tried to get him to blow off his parole. “That’s how bad the streets were in Chicago at the time,” she said. But Kevin was worried his brother wouldn’t pass a drug test if Karl went to the in-person meeting. He was also hopeful a good impression would give him an opportunity to legitimately parole in Pennsylvania. On 16 March, Kevin got on a train to Chicago to meet his parole officer. That was the last time he and Rosa would see each other outside prison walls. ••• The night Antwan Taylor was killed began with a routine Saturday night stop at the corner store to buy blunt wraps. It was a dicey spot to visit, right in the middle of disputed gang territory in Uptown Chicago where the number of altercations between Blackstones and Vice Lords seemed to be rising. Not long after Taylor stepped out of the store, a man dressed in black came running down the street and shot him. Taylor’s friend, 24-year-old Ronnie Bolden (a fellow Blackstone), was outside with his 16-year-old girlfriend Monique Boykins. She ran to a nearby apartment building, calling out for help. Bolden tried to run, too, but was shot down in the middle of the street. He thought he was going to die until he heard the shooter’s gun jam: “Click, click.” Then he saw the man in black run away through a nearby park. Taylor, his blue tracksuit soaked in blood, died at the scene. Investigators arrived at the hospital hours after the shooting to interview Bolden. He was recovering and in relatively good shape, considering he had been shot in the back. Bolden said the shooter was Black, male, maybe a Vice Lord; he could identify him if he saw him, but didn’t know his name. Boykins, only a sophomore in high school, was immediately brought into the police station from the scene. She didn’t have much information either. All she knew was the shooter was wearing a black hoodie and black jeans. Leads were slim, so a month later, Chicago PD’s narcotics team conducted undercover buys on Vice Lords to get a few of them into custody to interview. One of them was Melvin Hughes, who happened to run into Taylor in the corner store moments before his death. When he exited the store, Hughes saw a guy dressed in black running down the street towards Taylor. He had recognized him as a Vice Lord called Twin. The day after Hughes’s interview, on 24 April, Bolden identified Kevin as the shooter from a photo array. In a signed statement, he said he knew Kevin and his brother for about 15 years, but he hadn’t identified Kevin earlier because he was afraid he would get killed by Vice Lords for snitching. On 28 April, the young Boykins, nervous and unsure among the men bearing badges, was asked to view a lineup. Kevin, who had been brought in, shook his head as he looked at his own reflection in the one-way glass. “Please, I didn’t do it, don’t put me in jail,” he pleaded. The other guys in the lineup looked at Kevin like he was crazy. He said it again, even after a detective ordered him to shut up. Boykins picked out Kevin. Kevin needed an alibi, but he couldn’t remember if he had returned to Chicago before or after the shooting. This was pre-smartphones; he could not check his calendar while he was being grilled. A lawyer would have kept Kevin quiet so he could straighten out the details, but he didn’t have one. He was nervous, so he kept talking. First he said he was home with his mom, thinking that was the safest answer. Plus, it was better not to admit to breaking parole in Pennsylvania. But Rosa had gotten word that Kevin was in custody. In an effort to help, she called the lead investigator and told him her boyfriend had been in Pennsylvania when the shooting occurred. When asked about it, Kevin admitted to traveling to Pennsylvania and said he lied because he knew it violated his parole. This slip-up handed the detectives what they needed. Not only did it seem like Kevin couldn’t keep his story straight, but police could lock him up for the parole violation. What Kevin didn’t realize until it was too late was that, on the night of the shooting, he was at his parents’ house attending a birthday party. He did have an alibi – but it was too late to use it. ••• Kevin spent two years in county jail before he went to trial – he could not afford the bond on a $2m bail. His defense attorney Charles Piet wanted him to take a deal: plead guilty to second-degree manslaughter, get 11 years, and be released in less than three with credit for time served and good behavior. Kevin flat-out refused. “I don’t take a plea for shit I didn’t do,” he told me. “I wouldn’t have cared if the death penalty was up on the table, I would’ve been one dead n**** and you can quote that! “When I didn’t accept the 11 years, my attorney at that time was pissed at me. He threw everything he could at me and, hell, he even said ‘you’ll never get to sleep with women again.’ Yeah, he went there.” Three more years behind bars would have been nothing compared with more than five decades in prison. Kevin was only 27 and a new father (he and his ex-girlfriend got pregnant from an affair not long before he was arrested). A plea meant Kevin could have been out to see his daughter grow up. He might have had a chance at turning his life around. But he would not – could not – admit to a crime he did not do. “I wasn’t hearing shit,” he told me. “I was ready for trial.” This whole time, Karl was harboring his secret. He frequently visited his brother in jail, standing by him every step of the way – or so it seemed. He could have ended the trial before it even started, but never had it in him to tell the truth. He knew Kevin was innocent, so why wouldn’t the jury see it that way too? On the day of the trial, Boykins, who by now was 18, recalled Bolden threatening her months earlier, putting pressure on her to tell the court Kevin Dugar was the shooter. She did not comply. “Monique,” said Ted Adams, the state attorney. “Do you see the person who you saw shoot Antwan Taylor, do you see him here in court today?” “I don’t know who did it,” Boykins said. “My question, Monique, is, do you see the person who you saw shooting Antwan Taylor here in court today?” “I see the person who I was told shot Antwan Taylor.” “Monique, I’ll ask you one more time, do you see the person here in court today that you saw shoot Antwan Taylor?” “I see the person who I was told who shot Antwan Taylor.” “Judge, I ask you to instruct the witness to answer the question.” “Ma’am, it’s either a yes or a no.” “No.” “Monique, do you remember after speaking to the state’s attorney, him writing out a statement recording what you told him and then you reviewing it and signing it?” Adams asked. Her signature was on a statement, written by a state’s attorney, identifying Kevin as the shooter. “I signed it,” Boykins said. She claimed she tried to tell detectives she didn’t get a good look at the shooter, but it wasn’t enough for them. They kept pushing other narratives. She was only 16 years old, had been at the station for hours and wanted to leave, so she agreed with what they wanted to hear. Any doubts cast by her testimony were overcome by Bolden’s. The defense argued that Kevin could have been mistaken for his identical twin, but Bolden convinced the jurors that he could differentiate the twins, even though he admitted he never knew their real names. “I just knew he was Twin, that’s it.” Bolden correctly identified Kevin in a photograph, and claimed he could tell Kevin and Karl apart because Kevin was supposedly heavier than Karl by about 30-40 pounds and used to have a braided beard. On the night of the shooting, Bolden said, the offender had a braided beard. But aside from Bolden’s word, there was no evidence that Kevin had ever worn a braided beard. What the jury did not know was that someone else had a beard around the time of the shooting: Karl. ••• Kevin was found guilty of first-degree murder and attempted murder. Judge Vincent Gaughan sentenced him to 54 years on 10 May 2005. The guilt of seeing his twin carted away for something he didn’t do weighed on Karl. “I was literally drinking myself to sleep every night,” he told Kevin when he first confessed. He also started to worry the truth would get out. Not only would he go to prison, but everyone would know what he did to his brother. His paranoia overwhelmed him, until he decided to go after the one person who could betray his secret: his friend Gabriel Curiel, who was with him the night of the killing and acted as the getaway driver. In January 2008, the two of them had a falling out over $700 Curiel suspected Karl stole from his house. Karl came back about a week later, partly to set the record straight about the money, but also to ensure Curiel would never reveal the truth behind Taylor’s murder. Karl, flanked by two masked goons, broke into Curiel’s apartment while he and his family were home, including Curiel’s three young children. Karl and his henchmen overpowered Curiel, taped him to a chair, shot him in the shoulder, stabbed him in the chest, then choked him until he fell unconscious. They stole $4,600 from Curiel’s safe and pistol-whipped Curiel’s brother, who escaped through the second-floor window on to the roof of a neighboring preschool. During the raid, Curiel’s six-year-old son David was shot in the head. The bullet went through his skull and exited above his left ear. Astonishingly, David survived and recovered, left with a scar on his forehead and an unimaginable trauma. A story in the Chicago Tribune days after the incident noted the suspect’s nickname: “Twin.” Karl was convicted of attempted murder, aggravated battery with a firearm, aggravated battery of a child, home invasion and armed robbery. He was given a 99-year sentence. ••• Kevin spent years unsuccessfully trying to appeal his conviction. The judgment was affirmed in 2007. Kevin then filed a petition to appeal in the Illinois supreme court, which was denied in January 2008. That summer, he filed a post-conviction petition, which was also dismissed. In 2010, he filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus, which was – of course – denied. Then, a decade after the shooting, Kevin got the letter from his brother. “I know you’re all fucked up reading this right now and you should be.” Karl wrote. “I could’ve told you what I did a long time ago. Bro I was scared to lose you lil brother … I was selfish … Please forgive me … I’m sorry bro.” Kevin didn’t respond to Karl’s first confession letter – he didn’t know how to. “I was so shattered,” Kevin said. He thought about the years he had lost, all the pain he endured, the fact that his daughter had to grow up without a father at home, all because of his twin brother – the man who shared his DNA. He got a second letter a few weeks later, in which Karl once again apologized. Kevin wrote back. “I told him to write investigators, innocence projects, the works to clear my name,” he told me. Two years later, Northwestern University’s Center on Wrongful Convictions took Kevin’s case back to court to seek a new trial. ••• Karl claimed he went on a spiritual journey during his incarceration. “I’m a changed person. You sittin’ in the cell 24 hours a day at Menard and you think about what you’ve done. So you’ve gotta find something to bring you peace,” Karl told state’s attorney Nancy Adduci in an August 2015 interview to put his story on the record. He recalled the night of the shooting for Adduci: around 7.30pm on 22 March 2003, after drinking and getting high at his girlfriend’s birthday party, Karl changed into black clothes and left the party at his family’s house with Curiel to go buy weed. They drove to the scene of the crime to meet a dealer, but they never ended up getting the drugs. Karl said he saw Bolden crossing the street. Karl told Adduci: “He used to be a Vice Lord and we used to be cool, at first. And he flipped into a Stone … So that caused us a little tension.” That tension was escalated by the ongoing gang war. He said Bolden looked like he was about to pull out a gun. “He reached for something at his waist,” Karl said, “my reaction was just to defend myself.” “He was never pullin’ anything on you, correct?” Aducci asked. “I know but I was paranoid. I guess I was scared,” Karl said. “You kinda shot first, ask questions later? Is that fair to say?” “That’s – that’s exactly what I did.” ••• In October 2018, after two years of consideration, Judge Gaughan shut down Kevin’s request for a retrial. He did not think Karl’s version of the events over 13 years prior lined up with the testimony of the other witnesses. The judge also weighed the twins’ history of switching places to cover for each other. Given Karl’s de facto life sentence, the court determined Karl had “nothing to lose” by now claiming he was the shooter. Judge Gaughan speculated that Kevin and Karl were conspiring to get Kevin out of prison. Kevin’s advocates at Northwestern kept fighting for him. Last year, Professor Andrea Lewis and her colleague Sara Sommervold brought Kevin’s case to the Illinois appellate court, trying to get Kevin a new trial. Emily Ross, one of Professor Lewis’s students from Cleveland, Ohio, was tasked with delivering the oral argument. Ross had never argued a real case before; she had only practiced in law school moot court competitions. But the caveat of the clinic’s pro bono legal service was that it doubled as an educational opportunity for Northwestern students. This time, as she made her argument for Kevin on 18 March 2021, a person’s future was on the line. Ross was well-studied. She didn’t just want to be Kevin’s last chance – she wanted to be Kevin’s best chance at seeing freedom again. That wasn’t lost on the three judges. After Ross finished her argument, Justice Mary Mikva said, “I think the panel joins me in noting that Ms Ross did an outstanding job.” Ross felt good about her performance, too. But even with the best brief and a great oral argument, she knew it was a hard case to win. The judges needed to be convinced that Karl’s confession could be enough to change the jury’s verdict – a very difficult standard to overcome. Kevin wasn’t too optimistic either, because he knew the system wasn’t on his side. He recalled Judge Gaughan presiding over the trial of a white police officer who had shot a 17-year-old Black man 16 times in 2014. “I watched my former judge give officer Van Dyke 81 months for killing Laquan McDonald and it was caught on camera. He gave me 54 years over the word of a rival gang member.” But in April 2021, in a two-to-one decision, the appellate court granted Kevin a new trial before a different judge. The court wrote that its decision did not necessarily rest on believing Karl, but “because it is indisputably evident that the confession could probably change the outcome”. When Kevin got the news, he cried like a baby. ••• On 25 January, Kevin was granted bond. Late on Tuesday night, 44-year-old Kevin walked out of prison alongside his family and got his first glimpse of life outside in almost two decades. But he’s not yet a free man. For now confined to a transitional facility, Kevin will wait for his official do-over. He’s dreading walking back into the courthouse – he needs to pause and take a few breaths just thinking about it. What Karl says he did – murder, attempted murder and letting his brother take the fall for it – is unforgivable. But even after all the pain caused by his brother’s alleged actions, Kevin holds the system – and only the system – responsible. “I love my twin brother,” he said. “It wasn’t my twin’s fault I was locked up.” That’s not really the case, in an objective sense. But consider this: both grew up in a world where everyone was out for themselves. Kevin understands why Karl didn’t incriminate himself: that’s how you survive when you’re hustling on the streets. The justice system, however, is supposed to serve each and every one of us with integrity. And yet it beat Kevin up over and over, betraying him at every turn.Pick of the week Apostasy Daniel Kokotajlo’s devastating debut feature is drawn from his own experiences growing up as a Jehovah’s Witness. Ivanna (a performance of quiet desperation from Siobhan Finneran) and her daughters Luisa (Sacha Parkinson) and Alex (Molly Wright), who has a serious blood condition, are dutiful members of a religious group in Oldham. But when Luisa falls pregnant by her non-believer boyfriend, she is “disfellowshipped” – cut off from her family and community. This act, and a subsequent tragedy, pick away at Ivanna’s life of unquestioning devotion, as the rigid rules of the faith stymie her love for her child and sense of humanity. Saturday 29 January, 11.30pm, BBC Two *** The Truman Show Before the Big Brother house and WandaVision’s Westview there was Seahaven, a pretty US coastal town where Truman Burbank (Jim Carrey) and his wife Meryl (Laura Linney) live – watched 24 hours a day by 5,000 cameras. In Peter Weir’s prescient 1998 satirical drama, Truman is the unwitting star of a hit TV reality show (and has been since birth), his every move tracked and manipulated for our viewing pleasure. But reality comes crashing in, and Truman has to choose between the perils of the unknown and comfortable picket-fence conformity. Saturday 29 January, 6.55pm, Great! Movies *** Dead of Night This 1945 portmanteau film is one of the greats of British horror, if only for the chilling final segment of its five tales-with-a-tale. The brilliant Michael Redgrave plays a tormented ventriloquist whose dummy starts to get ideas of its own about their partnership. The other stories – directed by the likes of Robert Hamer and Alberto Cavalcanti – feature a haunted mirror, premonitions of death and child ghosts in country houses, plus the bonus of Basil Radford and Naunton Wayne basically reprising their Charters and Caldicott double act from The Lady Vanishes. Sunday 30 January, 7pm, Talking Pictures TV *** In the Heat of the Night Norman Jewison’s 1967 crime drama is the late Sidney Poitier’s finest film – a fiery denunciation of racism wrapped up in a gripping murder mystery and decorated with a superb jazz-blues soundtrack from Quincy Jones. Poitier is Virgil “They call me Mister” Tibbs, a Philadelphia homicide detective passing through rural Mississippi who is roped in to helping bigoted sheriff Gillespie (Rod Steiger) investigate the death of a white industrialist. Poitier is magnetic and permanently on the boil, while Steiger nails the difficult shift from resentment of Tibbs to respect. Sunday 30 January, 10pm, BBC Two *** Lady Macbeth Florence Pugh first showed what a major talent she is in William Oldroyd’s dark 2016 drama, set in the north-east of England in the 19th century. She stars as the wilful young Katherine, married off to the son of a mine owner, whose feelings of neglect and humiliation push her into an affair with groomsman Sebastian (Cosmo Jarvis) – which nothing will stop her from enjoying. Interesting racial subtexts (a Black maid is rendered literally voiceless) add depth to a passionate, potent work. Monday 31 January, 11.50pm, BBC Two *** Oh Brother, Where Art Thou? Enjoy spotting the references to Homer’s The Odyssey or just revel in the silliest performance of George Clooney’s career – either way, the Coen brothers’ Great Depression-era comedy boasts a breadth of entertainment value. Clooney, John Turturro and Tim Blake Nelson play escaped convicts who hit the road to find supposed buried treasure. Chaplinesque comedy scenes vie with dramatic encounters with the likes of bank robber Baby Face Nelson, bluesman Tommy Johnson and the Ku Klux Klan – all backed by a cracking folk soundtrack – as the inept trio attempt to reach their goal. Tuesday 1 February, IMDb TV *** True History of the Kelly Gang Justin Kurzel’s impressionistic period adventure takes on Peter Carey’s Booker prize-winning novel about Australia’s near-mythical antihero Ned Kelly, and makes a good fist of the attempt. George MacKay plays Ned, whose hardscrabble upbringing in a poor Irish immigrant family leads him inexorably into criminality – events he writes down in an effort to keep control of his own narrative. Essie Davis is a fierce presence as Ned’s mother Ellen, while Russell Crowe has a nice cameo as Harry Power, Ned’s mentor in the ways of the bushranger. Friday 4 February, 11.20pm, Film4Forewarned is forearmed and clearly, at some stage in late November, Gregg Berhalter and US Soccer sat down, ran the tape, looked through the Edmonton squalls and saw in the frozen Mexican faces all the warning they needed. In truth they could have saved themselves 90 minutes and read the French advice. Just 19 words of it. “To survive the Canadian winter, one needs a body of brass, eyes of glass, and blood made of brandy.” Louis Armand de Lom d’Arce’s offering was published in the early 1700s but as Canada and the US men meet for their most consequential encounter for a generation, the message still sounds clear through winter’s air. Not least because the exploration that sparked such trauma in the third Baron Lahontan is within a stone’s throw of Sunday’s venue. Tim Hortons Field in Hamilton, a stadium sponsored by the country’s beloved coffee chain in a city about 70km south of Toronto, has no great footballing history. This potentially pivotal 2022 World Cup qualifier will in fact be the first time Canada’s senior men have pitched up at the stadium for a competitive international. But John Herdman’s young team are all about creating new stories, new history. When they did just that in November, turning Edmonton’s Commonwealth Stadium into the Iceteca and vanquishing Mexico in a qualifier for the first time since 1976, Canada’s coach pointed to the piles of pitch-side snow and the mercury bottoming out at -9C (16F) with a wind chill of -14C (7F). “Every country uses the terrain to their advantage,” the Englishman said after his finest night yet had seen Canada surge to the top of the Concacaf standings. “We see this as an advantage. There was a genuine opportunity here to bring out the Canadian in our players. They’ve all grown up on plastic pitches in cold conditions so for us, we wanted them to feel like it was home.” So, having brought out the Canadian in his side at the Iceteca, it’s safe to assume that Herdman wants to do something similar on Sunday by choosing to bring the US to Hamilton. Perhaps hoping a place locals call The Donut Box comes with extra frosting. Forecasted conditions predict an icy start to Sunday with a morning wind chill of -21C (-6F) with snow flurries and temperatures around -10C (14F) for the afternoon kick-off. Herdman has worked wonders with this new generation, instilling a positivity and belief that is in marked contrast to almost everything that has come before for the men’s team. But is there justification in his apparent belief that bringing Berhalter’s side to the wide open expanses of Tim Hortons Field, rather than taking things indoors in Vancouver, presents Canada with an advantage? Put simpler … great white north or great white lie? “Well … the more you are exposed to cold the better you may deal with it,” Dr Gordon Giesbrecht tells the Guardian. The University of Manitoba physiologist is the planet’s leading authority on freezing to death. Due to his remarkable research projects he is known as Professor Popsicle. “Our normal response to cold is vasoconstriction, or decreasing blood flow to the skin. So adaptation to continual exposure decreases that. It makes your skin warmer, your hands and feet more functional. Also your receptors will be warmer so you won’t be feeling that cold as much. That in itself will help you cope psychologically. “You know, we’re Canadian, we’re tough. There’s no question that Canadians think they’re tougher than anyone else when it comes to cold. So there’s some of that. It could be a couple of percentages but who knows.” Giesbrecht, whose research has included injecting ice water into his veins, corrected that Sunday’s cold wouldn’t qualify as “extreme”. Berhalter, though, clearly wasn’t going to take any chances. The US opted to acclimatize and host the qualifiers either side of Sunday in cold-weather cities – against El Salvador on Thursday night in Columbus and bringing Honduras to Minnesota on Wednesday. Canada flew back home from their qualifier in Honduras, where daytime temperatures were around 28C (82F), on Thursday. Ultimately the science has largely shown coping in the cold to be a matter of mind. “As soon as your body temperature comes up, there aren’t a whole pile of physiological advantages for someone who lives or trains in a cold environment versus someone coming in from a warmer environment,” Christopher Minson, a physiology professor who studies the body’s response to extreme environments at the University of Oregon, tells the Guardian. Minson works with professional teams and Olympic athletes to help them manage extremes. The progress of players from the US and Canada means the majority of both squads now avoid extremes – by playing in Europe. Sixteen of Canada’s squad are with European clubs to 14 Americans. Nonetheless both physiologists suggested Canadians who spent significant chunks of their lives here would retain those cold weather benefits, particularly in terms of mindset. Essentially, once Sunday’s battle warms up all things are equal – apart from the mind. Canadian striker Cyle Larin’s facial hair may freeze over but it will be nothing new to a player whose club career took him to Turkey but was born and raised in the Toronto area. On the flip side, rapidly icing whiskers may perturb Californian midfielder Sebastian Lletget, for example. “If you’re more accustomed to it, you’re more relaxed,” adds Minson. “You’re not going to have that fear in the mind. I’m a physiologist by trade. I’ve been doing this a long time. But I’m going to say it’s the brain. A large part is the psychology.” Minson also points to exercise-induced bronchoconstriction as a factor. In layman’s terms, it’s a tightness in the lungs caused by breathing particularly dry air and familiar minds may control it better by breathing through the nose and avoiding gulps. From altitude at the Azteca to the heat and humidity of Central America and the Caribbean, Concacaf qualification has always been affected by environmental factors. The pandemic-squeezed schedule combining with Canada’s emergence as the most improved team in the region and the world has brought a new factor in from the cold. This is the first competitive January-February qualifying window for the Canadians since 1985, when they were en route to making it to their solitary men’s World Cup. Berhalter seems acutely aware that psychological strength will decide a lot. “It’s a mindset,” he said. “I’ve played in Germany with short sleeves. Once you get running, once you get sweating, you’ll be ready to go.” Berhalter’s former long-time assistant at Columbus Crew, Pat Onstad, was part of multiple Canadian generations for whom winters were barren and inactive. “I remember playing one in November but it was a nothing game against Mexico,” Onstad, whose time in Canada’s goal spanned from 1988 to 2010, tells the Guardian. “It was in Toronto and it started snowing in the second half and I remember thinking ‘God, I wish this game mattered’. Now these games do matter.” Onstad, general manager of MLS side Houston Dynamo, argues that given their wealth of young attacking talent, Canada don’t need conditions on their side. Naturally, he spares a thought for the goalkeepers. Milan Borjan continued his emergence as a Canadian cult favourite that night at the Iceteca when the keeper donned grey sweatpants and a snood-turned-babushka-headscarf. “No lonelier place [than in goals] and no colder place,” laughs Onstad. “But it’s not about style. Just win baby.” That, ultimately, is the aim. If the Donut Box brings out the Canadian in his side and the percentages of Professor Popsicle prove true, they’ll be one step closer to wintering in Qatar. One step closer to making more new history. At which time Canadian blood may well be made of brandy.There is an uncanniness in listening to a musical instrument you have never heard being played for the first time. As your brain makes sense of a new sound, it tries to frame it within the realm of familiarity, producing a tussle between the known and unknown. The second album from Mexican-American producer Delia Beatriz, AKA Debit, embraces this dissonance. Taking the flutes of the ancient Mayan courts as her raw material and inspiration, Beatriz used archival recordings from the Mayan Studies Institute at the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México to create a digital library of their sounds. She then processed these ancient samples through a machine-learning program to create woozy, ambient soundscapes. Since no written music has survived from the Mayan civilisation, Beatriz crafts a new language for these ancient wind instruments, straddling the electronic world of her 2017 debut Animus and the dilatory experimentalism of ambient music. The resulting 10 tracks make for a deliciously strange listening experience. Opener 1st Day establishes the undulating tones that unify the record. They flutter like contemplative humming and veer from acoustic warmth to metallic note-bending. Each track is given a numbered day and time, as if documenting the passage of a ritual, and echoes resonate down the record: whistles appear like sirens during the moans of 1st Night and 3rd Night; snatches of birdsong are tucked between the reverb of 2nd Day and 5th Day. The Long Count of the record’s title seems to express the linear passage of time itself, one replicated in the eternal, fluid flute tones. We hear in them the warmth of the human breath that first produced their sound, as well as Beatriz’s electronic filtering that extends their notes until they imperceptibly bleed into one another and fuzz like keys on a synth. It is a startlingly original and enveloping sound that leaves us with that ineffable feeling: the past unearthed and made new once more. Also out this month Korean composer Park Jiha releases her third album, The Gleam (tak:til), a solo work featuring uniquely sparse compositions of saenghwang mouth organ, piri oboe and yanggeum dulcimer. British-Ghanaian rapper KOG brings his debut LP, Zone 6, Agege (Heavenly Sweetness), a deeply propulsive mix of English, Pidgin and Ga lyrics set to Afrobeat fanfares. Cellist and composer Ana Carla Maza releases her latest album, Bahía (Persona Editorial), an affecting combination of Cuban son, bossa and chanson in homage to the music of her birthplace of Havana.With a slowly unravelled mystery at its centre, Alistair McDowall’s uncanny new play delights in alien time fractures, the chaos of humanity and the unifying feeling of intense loneliness. This is, essentially, a rag-tag episode of Doctor Who. We start with a Victorian medium (an elegantly cruel Rakie Ayola) attempting to contact the dead. When the woman she’s using in her experiments (a chained-up, mud-splattered stranger stolen in the night, played by Ria Zmitrowicz) appears to become possessed, the medium takes it as confirmation of her powers. But she has simply lucked out with her victim, choosing a woman whose being is connected to death and a world in-between time. The short first half of The Glow is acutely strange. It is equal parts spooky and funny, with blunt dialogue and dreamy lighting. Vicky Featherstone’s production has great control in the way it slowly feeds us information, toying with the confusion it creates as myth and history collide. As we gradually learn more about the woman, Merle Hensel’s brutalist set shifts: the walls close in, time contorts, and the characters begin to glitch and overlap. “Like static,” a character played by the wonderfully comic Fisayo Akinade says, talking about the spirit world. “We’re wrapped around them.” As well being unnerving, The Glow is, for a long time, unmoving. The projected landscapes with dates in bold type, spanning from the end of the 20th century back to 500,000BC, are impressive but synthetic and cold. The temperature changes when Ayola returns as retired nurse Ellen in the 1990s, her character bursting with warmth towards the strange woman on her doorstep. Suddenly the play swells, and McDowall lets love seep in. Not everything works: a knight’s underdeveloped quest slows the action, although his presence allows an entertaining scene where a baffled Ellen patches him up after a sword fight, trying not to ask too many questions. Sci-fi is too rarely done on stage but here McDowall has chosen the perfect medium. How better to tell a story about the perils of immortality and the fear of carrying on alone than through an art form built for impermanence, with stories that can live longer than we do? At the Royal Court theatre, London, until 5 March.Rampant illegal logging of protected forests is threatening the cultural survival and livelihoods of indigenous people in Cambodia, according to Amnesty International. Members of the Kuy people, one of the largest of Cambodia’s 24 indigenous groups, told Amnesty how deforestation in two protected forests, along with government restrictions on access have undermined their way of life and violated their human rights. More than 6,200 hectares (15,300 acres) have been deforested across Prey Lang and Prey Preah Roka protected forests in 2021, according to a report published on Friday. Cambodia has experienced one of the highest rates of deforestation in the world, losing about 64% of its tree cover since 2011, according to the report. Richard Pearshouse, Amnesty International’s head of crisis and environment, said: “Rampant illegal logging in Cambodia is posing an existential threat to the country’s remaining primary forests, and the indigenous peoples who depend on them for their livelihoods, their culture and their spiritual practices. “Cambodia’s approach to conservation is characterised by official corruption and a complete disregard for indigenous people’s rights. If the Cambodian authorities don’t change course soon, the country’s protected forests will be illegally logged into oblivion.” The report, based on interviews with 20 community activists protecting the two forests, which are home to significant Kuy populations and contain protected wildlife sanctuaries, said Cambodian authorities were failing in their duty to protect indigenous people’s rights by not adequately policing the areas. Embedded corruption in the government and within the police is fuelling the illegal logging trade, and posing a risk to some of the country’s most important remaining forests, it said. Community members described government officers receiving bribes from timber traders and loggers in return for ignoring illegal activities, said Amnesty. One local activist told the organisation: “The big problem is that the authorities… are only interested in collecting money.” The activist added they had “tried many times” to tell provincial office officials about logging and given them photos and other evidence. “They go to investigate it – but they only investigate it to collect money from the loggers.” Illegal logging activities have had a devastating impact on the Kuy people’s livelihoods. They collect resin from trees, which is sold and used domestically for low-grade lighting and commercially for boat caulk, paints and varnishes. Loggers have targeted resin trees for timber production. Thyda (not their real name) told Amnesty that about 70% of resin trees had been lost in Prey Preah Roka in recent years. “Many people from outside … come and steal our trees when we are not in the forest – especially during the rice season when we are planting saplings or harvesting rice … Sometimes in one day, 30 or 40 resin trees will be cut.” The report also documented how grassroots activists were prevented from carrying out forest patrols to document illegal logging. Ministry of environment officials said the restrictions were allowed under Cambodian law; this is challenged by Amnesty. Neth Pheaktra, secretary of state and spokesperson of Cambodia’s ministry of environment, rejected Amnesty’s claims as “baseless”. He said Kuy people “have full rights to patrols allowed by law and get full cooperation from Ministry of Environment’s forest rangers and authorities”. He added: “The ministry of environment is very glad to emphasise that the large scale of natural resource offences in the protected areas including Prey Lang and Prey Preah Roka Wildlife Sanctuaries are no longer occurring, but there are still small scales of illegal logging.” Amnesty International has previously documented how Cambodian authorities have denied environmental activists access to the rainforests, and how their ban on community patrols allowed illegal logging to continue unchecked.A man stopped by police in Nottingham told officers he had been driving without a licence or insurance for more than 70 years. Officers on a routine patrol said they were stunned when they pulled over the driver in his 80s in a supermarket car park. The man, born in 1938, told them he had not had a driving licence or insurance since he was 12 years old, and had avoided being stopped by police ever since. Nottinghamshire police officers said they just happened to pull over the man driving a three-door Mini One in a Tesco Extra car park in the market town of Bulwell on Wednesday. Alongside the hashtag #rodehisluck, patrol officers wrote on Facebook: “We can’t quite believe what happened next, as the driver, who was born in 1938 (!!), coughed that he had been driving with no licence and no insurance, since he was 12 (yes TWELVE) years old ..... and somehow had managed to never be stopped by the police. (We’ll let you do the maths!!) “Thankfully he had never had an accident, caused anyone an injury, and never made anyone lose out financially, by hitting them whilst uninsured!” They added: “Due to the increased number of ANPR [automatic number plate recognition] cameras in Nottingham, even on the small trips, you are likely to hit a camera, so make sure your documents are in order ..... because it will catch up with you ..... one day .....” Driving without a licence attracts a punishment of between three and six penalty points, depending on the nature of the offence. It can also warrant an unlimited fine if the driver has no insurance. Police have the power to seize vehicles that are not insured. In this case, officers did not say what punishment the man received but hinted that he may have had to walk home. They used the hashtag #cantpaywelltakeitaway alongside a picture of his car.A woman is suing the R&amp;B singer Chris Brown for $20m for allegedly drugging and raping her on a yacht docked at a property in Miami owned by P Diddy, Rolling Stone has reported. The unidentified plaintiff – a professional choreographer, dancer, model and musician who is named Jane Doe in the lawsuit – and an unidentified friend were invited to the yacht on 30 December 2021 by a male friend. The lawsuit states that while the man was on the phone to Doe, Brown took it from him and told her “he had heard about her music and urged her to head over to Diddy’s home on Star Island as soon as possible”. On the yacht, the lawsuit alleges, Brown offered Doe a cup containing a mixed drink. As he “offered her tips about starting a career in the music industry”, he allegedly refilled her cup, after which she became “disoriented, physically unstable, and started to fall in and out of sleep”, according to the suit. It claims she was led to a bedroom where Brown closed the door and refused to let her leave. The complaint alleges that he undressed and raped her, and that after he ejaculated inside her, he announced “he was ‘done’”. It alleges that Brown demanded Doe take an emergency contraceptive the following day. Brown responded on Instagram Stories: “I HOPE YALL SEE THIS PATTERN OF 🧢 [lying] whenever im releasing music or projects, ‘THEY’ try to pull some real bullshit.” The Guardian has contacted representatives for Brown for comment. Doe’s lawyer Ariel E Mitchell told Rolling Stone that they wanted to “ensure all parties are held accountable so that we may begin to eradicate this behaviour from our society”. Brown has had several legal troubles since he was convicted of felony assault on his then girlfriend Rihanna in 2009. He has previously been denied entry to the UK, Canada, Japan, Australia and New Zealand on grounds of character. Brown, a major R&amp;B figure of the 2000s, is due to release his 10th album, Breezy, later this year. He has said he wants the music to “talk to women’s soul”.My earliest reading memory When I was four or five we had a cottage in Michigan and the previous owners had left some books behind. I was besotted with a children’s book about a lady toad with a big calico hat and a nasty temper. My favourite book growing up A book I found in my public grade school library, illustrated, about American history. I was nine and it was in Evanston, Illinois. All I can remember is a passage about Ben Franklin in Philadelphia who, exceptionally, wasn’t a Quaker: “The friendliest friend in the City of Friends wasn’t a Friend at all.” It was a big format book with plasticised covers. I liked it because it was clever and gave me talking points. The book that changed me as a teenager I was 12 when I read The Catcher in the Rye. That and the movie Rebel Without a Cause, which I saw when I was 15, were the first works of art that spoke to me in my own language. That both were “rebellious” without being political suited a teen in the Eisenhower years. The writer who changed my mind When I was 16 and a very horny if guilt-ridden gay boy I read Thomas Mann’s Death in Venice, which excited me because it was about homosexual desire, unsatisfied, which seemed right. I was being psychoanalysed, hoping to go straight. I read it on Walloon Lake in Michigan with lots of knotty pine staring at me. The book that made me want to be a writer When I was 17 at my Midwestern boarding school I wrote an essay on Proust. I had a theory of my own: that homosexual lying, in which one heterosexualises one’s experiences and makes one’s boyfriends into girls (the so-called Albertine strategy), is a crucial step in the novelist’s development (which would explain why there are so many great gay fiction writers). To reinvent one’s own experiences and to supply the new version with convincing details and to make all those substitutions consistent (and to remember them) is already the first major step in creating, as Proust did, a sublime autofiction. Of course that theory was (and is) very self-serving. The author I came back to I’ve read Proust several times in my life. As a teen I was pretty much faking it, only read part of it, pretended I could read French, drew the wrong conclusions from it (it is a damning critique of snobbism but reading it made me more snobbish). In my late 20s I read Proust with a group of New York friends and we drew life lessons from it and recognised our acquaintances in his characters. Finally I wrote a short biography of Proust in Paris in 1998, my last year (of 16) of living in France. This time I read Proust for the first time in French. The book I reread Henry Green’s Nothing. First as an 11-year-old in Evanston after discovering Green’s books in the open stacks of the public library. I liked the look of them and what I thought was the simplicity of their style. Now I read it every two years as an old man. It makes me sick with laughter. It is about late-middle-age love, blithe selfishness, the rekindling of old passions, sly maneuvering among privileged adults – a treasure house of sharp dialogue and vicious scheming that leads to complete contentment. The book I could never read again I have a book group of two with the novelist Yiyun Li. I suggested we read Evelyn Waugh’s Vile Bodies, which I’d read as a student and thought was terminally sophisticated. When we tried it a year ago I thought it was antisemitic (Father Rothschild!), heavy-handed and unfunny. The book I discovered later in life Flaubert’s Sentimental Education. I’d “read” it in my 20s in a desultory, uncomprehending way, but now I loved the Parisian social scenes, the seamless use of history, the progression d’effet, the cynicism about romantic love. I could see why Ford Madox Ford had memorised it entirely and he and Conrad studied it religiously. The book I am currently reading The Memoirs of the Comtesse de Boigne, about the ancien régime, the revolution, Napoleon, the restoration, the fall of the Bourbons in 1830, etc. As a Parisian lady who knows everything about court life (Bourbon, Napoleonic and Orleanist), who is a brilliant observer and has a historian’s memory and a gossip’s relish for detail, she is the perfect witness of a chaotic moment. Now I read it between midnight and 2am. My comfort read In my homebound loneliness, reading is my chief comfort. My comfort read is Lord Chesterfield’s letters to his illegitimate son, a dolt who he was trying to turn into a gentleman with reams of useful advice. It’s the only foreign book of manners that the French thought worth reading. Among other things it is a relic of an age when educated people spoke German, French, Italian and English and knew ancient Latin and Greek. • Edmund White’s latest novel, A Previous Life, is published by Bloomsbury. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.I was born in Budapest in 1921 and was living there when war broke out. I received my army call-up in May 1943; at the time, Hungary was one of the Axis powers and had been fighting the Soviet Union on the eastern front for the past two years. I received basic military training but, because I was Jewish, I wasn’t given a regular uniform. Instead, I was conscripted into a labour corps and sent with 3,600 others to the mines in Bor, Serbia, which provided copper for the German army. The labour camps were harsh environments, but I spoke good German and was able to secure a job as a stoker on a train that carried rocks from the mine, which meant I managed to stay warm. In September 1944, the approach of the Russian army led to the hurried closure of the mine and, to our delight, we learned we were to head back to Hungary, accompanied by the Hungarian guards from the camp. Each of us was given a loaf of bread and a few tins of food. We set out on foot. The guards had tents for the night, but we had to sleep in the open, under blankets. It was only after a few days’ walking that it dawned on me we weren’t heading to a train station; we were walking the entire 600km. Those who slowed down were threatened or beaten. The guards eventually took to shooting stragglers. As we pressed on, our path often coincided with retreating army units or civilians fleeing the battlefront. By the time we passed Belgrade, 200km into our journey, we began noticing smoke billowing in the sky and machine-gunfire in the distance. On 6 October, we stopped for the night on the outskirts of a village called Crvenka [which Hungarians know as Cservenka], where SS soldiers were evacuating the occupants. The SS unit was largely made up of local Volksdeutsche – ethnic Germans who spoke the language but had probably never visited the mother country. The following day, we saw some soldiers talking to our guards, who then split us into two groups. Those who weren’t Jewish set off with half our guards; the rest of us were left under the supervision of the SS soldiers. The village was abandoned. We were led into a partially enclosed area in a nearby brickworks, where we sat and waited. During my time at Bor I had bonded with four other men. We had stuck together during the journey and now found ourselves near the back of the enclosure. Late that afternoon, shouting broke out, then there was a burst of gunfire. In the silence that followed, I saw a small group of our men being led away. A few minutes later, there was a volley of shots. The soldiers returned and another group of men was taken, followed by more shots. As the cycle repeated, over and over, we realised they planned to kill us all. Like cattle in a slaughterhouse we were forced to watch helpless men led to their deaths, knowing our time would surely come. The shootings continued long after dark, but eventually those of us who remained were ordered to sleep. My feet were sore from weeks of walking, so I took off my boots and lay awake listening to the noises in the distance. I heard what sounded like an approaching battle. At first light, the killing began again. My friends and I were soon near the front, but when a couple of soldiers ordered us to get up, I found my feet had swollen overnight and I couldn’t get my boots on. I was determined not to be shot barefoot, and struggled with my boots until one of the soldiers became angry and hit me with the butt of his rifle. Then he clubbed me repeatedly, leaving me stunned. While my friends tried to help me, the soldiers chose another group of men and took them outside. As I regained my senses, I noticed the sounds of battle had grown closer still. We waited, but the soldiers never returned and the next people to enter the enclosure were our guards, who told us to get up and start walking quickly. They had left well over a thousand of us with the soldiers – now there were only a few hundred left. During the next six months, I was moved between three German concentration camps. When I was finally liberated in April 1945, I was the only one of my friends from Bor to have survived the war. Later, as a translator in the RAF military police, I was involved in the arrest of several war crime suspects. But no one was ever prosecuted for their involvement in the Crvenka massacre, during which between 700 and 1,000 men died. That night was unquestionably the worst I’ve experienced during my 100 years on this earth. I feel fortunate to have lived a long, good life – I could so easily have become one of the massacre’s victims. Instead, I am probably its last surviving witness. • As told to Chris Broughton. Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comThe hack Teabags are being touted as a solution to one of the most unsolvable beauty woes: the broken nail. The promise That you can use teabag fabric as a “plaster” to repair and strengthen a broken nail. Is there anything a cuppa can’t fix? The test There will always be one nail that breaks and ruins it for everyone else. Such is life. This week, that nail was my pinkie. While retrieving a lipstick from underneath the sofa, I broke a freshly manicured nail, hours before a party. To fix it, I removed the polish, emptied a teabag and cut off two small pieces of fabric – each roughly 5mm square – to cover the break. I then filed the nail down to ensure the tear didn’t worsen and, using tweezers, placed the fabric over the break before covering it with Nailkale Superfood base coat (£15 from Nails Inc) to seal it. After I had repeated the process again, the offending nail – although looking a little lumpy – blended in and lasted a week before I gave in and cut them all short. The verdict This works. Hurrah! But you could also use nail-polish stickers (Maniko has nice shades) to save faff. If your nails break often, though, find a more long-term solution. A protein-rich nail-repair cream (such as Rescue Rxx from CND, from £3.99) works for me.A portrait hangs above a fireplace in a living room. The artist’s hand must have hardly lifted off the page as he traced the sitter’s face. It feels odd to be taking in a piece by such a renowned artist, set above family photos and trinkets. I ask if I can take a photograph to remember it better, but the man sitting behind me in an armchair responds very politely that he’d rather I didn’t. He wasn’t a museum assistant, but a friend of the owner. They had been unable to meet me but allowed me to visit their home, tucked away in a well-heeled suburban street, on the condition that I didn’t reveal any identifying details about the work or its location. The painting, like thousands of other objects decided to be of pre-eminent artistic interest, is listed under HMRC’s conditional exemption tax incentive (Ceti). Owners are exempt from paying inheritance or capital gains tax when pieces pass to a new owner – either as the result of a death or as a gift – so long as they look after them, keep the items in the UK and make them available for the public to view. Art and tax make surprising bedfellows, and I wanted to find out exactly how the scheme works. It turns out that accessing the art – which includes works by Rembrandt, Rossetti, Goya, Renoir and Degas, among others – is easier in theory than practice. In a little-publicised online database, items can be searched for by category, location, artist and name of work. Descriptions range from the detailed (“A magnificent French circular ivory double mirror-case, each cover carved in relief with the Siege of the City of Love”) to the brief (“Oil painting – Man’s head”). Contact details to arrange viewings are more often than not out of date or incorrect. Out of 25 requests I made over an eight-month period, only six resulted in viewings. A report from 2013 found similar results, with only five appointments made out of 30 inquiries. Emails bounced, contacts had to be hunted down and legal intermediaries chased. In one instance, a surprised wealth manager had no idea what the scheme was, or why she was listed as a contact for a Henry Moore sculpture. When the requests did make it to owners, many were understandably cautious about allowing access to their work, on security grounds. To allay concerns, HMRC suggests asking visitors for identification and/or that viewings can be arranged in public spaces, rather than in private homes, leaving it to owners to arrange insurance and transport. One solicitor asked for a “reasonable charge” (which is allowed under the terms of the scheme) of £100 to arrange a viewing of a Rembrandt, which may not be extortionate given the logistics involved, but is arguably prohibitive for the general public. On occasion, such art is displayed in Britain’s museums or galleries, but for the most part, curators aren’t keen on displacing permanent works for those on short-term loans from private collections. When it was possible to arrange an appointment, speaking with the collectors was just as enjoyable as seeing the art itself. I arranged a viewing of a relief by Barbara Hepworth’s husband, the modernist artist Ben Nicholson. The painter had formed a long-distance friendship by correspondence with the owner, and when he died, he left her the wall-mounted sculpture with his nickname for her marked in pencil on the back of the frame. Being so physically close to the art, and by degrees of connection to the artist, is something no exhibition, no matter how expertly curated, can offer. While not without such moments of joy, the overwhelming difficulty in accessing the art raises the question of whether the tax exemption is worth the lost revenue – an estimated £1bn over the last few decades. But the inefficiency may be attributable to the fact that the scheme was never designed with the general public in mind. It was conceived in 1896 by the Tory government of the day after appeals from owners concerned about the integrity of their artistic collections. The previous Liberal government had introduced the death duty, a tax on the value of an estate, causing frantic landowners to give away their art in order to lower inheritance bills. As a way to keep art in the country, the Tories made any objects that might one day be taken into a national collection exempt. It wasn’t until the 1970s that the public was allowed to view items, and only in 1998 that public access became an absolute requirement. A path from private to full public ownership of art, which would see items taken into the permanent collections of Britain’s galleries, came about in the 1940s, with the acceptance in lieu scheme, which allows inheritance tax bills to be paid for by the transfer of art (among other things) to a public institution or charity. Over the years, both schemes would contribute to keeping the collections of Britain’s many historic buildings intact (including many open to the public as part of the National Trust), but today any overlap between the two is administrative (the same panel of experts decides which items are eligible for both schemes) or informal (a gallery that takes a piece on short-term loan may suggest that they’d one day like to own a piece permanently and put it forward for the acceptance in lieu scheme.) One of the most wonderful things about cultural life in the UK is the democratisation of art – rich or poor, anyone can walk through the doors of any public gallery and gaze at a masterpiece. Any incentive to allow the nation to see works of art that would otherwise be reserved for a few is something to be encouraged further, but it seems as if the Ceti isn’t living up to its promise. If collectors are sceptical about increasing access to their collections then it has to be asked whether we should be subsidising their ownership. For those who want to share their work with the public, the Treasury and the government can better support owners by updating and promoting the scheme, arranging exhibitions and, in the long term, encouraging pieces to be bought for permanent display in galleries up and down the country. Until then, it’s uncertain whether the scheme is preserving our cultural heritage or the tax bills of those fortunate enough to own such great works. Kirsty Major is the Guardian’s deputy opinion editorRafael Nadal lays down his towel, spreads it across two parallel courtside advertising boards. He gently tugs at the near corners to ensure it is taut. Then looks at it again, pulls the far right-hand corner just a little. He squinches his face and surveys the symmetry, pats it with his hand. Content, he turns on his heels towards the baseline, ready for his serving ritual. In the quarter-finals against Denis Shapovalov, Nadal completed his shirt-tug, hair-tuck, face-wipe routine 146 times. He won 100 of those points on his first serve over the course of five sets, in four hours and eight minutes. He lost 4kg in sweat under the sun. Two days later, against Matteo Berrettini, it was only 102 first serves (70 of those won), over four sets, and two hours and 55 minutes. This time we do not know his post-match weight but we do know Nadal when we see him. Defying the physics of his breaking body and straightening his towel throughout all the suffering and fighting he has poured into his two-decade career. “We need to suffer, we need to fight,” he said afterwards. “And that is the only way to be where I am today.” With each passing match at the Australian Open, Nadal’s march towards that coveted 21st grand slam title becomes clearer. Maybe not easier, but at least more deliberate. The Spaniard cannot see the stars aligning – the roof is rolled out over Rod Laver Arena and above it a thick blanket of cloud throws thick droplets over Melbourne Park. A storm has been brewing here all week, and now everybody is finally acknowledging it – except for the man right in its eye. It is unclear what the cogs inside Nadal’s brain are doing as he shrugs his shoulders post-match and reiterates that he is “still very far from the No 21, no?” That he does not even care so much for that ubiquitous No 21. Or that he could win his first Australian Open since 2009. He is not even all that fazed, he says, with winning this specific Australian Open. Rather, he simply feels alive to be playing tennis at all. Nadal’s apparent lack of a penchant for statistics means he may not have realised his very presence in this semi-final means at least one member of the big three has now made the final four of every grand slam since the 2003 French Open. The only blip was the 2020 US Open, which Nadal and Roger Federer sat out and during which Novak Djokovic defaulted in the fourth round. There may well have been another early in 2022 given Federer and Djokovic are absent and Nadal’s 35-year-old body was not supposed to be in any condition to contest this tournament. The congenital foot injury which has so heavily restricted his ability to compete over the last two years had him basically retired little more than six weeks ago. “Every day has been an issue in terms of problems on the foot,” he says. “The doubts are gonna be here probably for the rest of my career without a doubt, because I have something that we cannot fix.” It is evident in his shuffle, a quick sort of orthotic-assisted stride which punctuates every other point. His injuries over the years are so well-documented they are basically remembered by heart. The hip, the back, the hamstring. “A lot of them you know,” he says, “and some of them you don’t.” And so he conducts most of his business from the court’s central corridor – whatever reduces the load – backing Berrettini into both corners. The Italian especially does not like his left side, and by the end of the match his unforced error count is up at 39. Nadal continues to surprise the public even more than he surprises himself. And perhaps the person most in shock is the exiled Djokovic, who undoubtedly watched every minute of this match in Belgrade in the knowledge that there is no guarantee he will be allowed to contest another major so long as he is not vaccinated. The Spaniard’s other fellow near immortal, Federer, is 40 with a dodgy knee and may well not have a chance to add to his own grand slam tally of 20. This is Nadal’s first major appearance, over almost 19 years since his debut at Wimbledon in 2003, in which neither Djokovic nor Federer are joining him. “I just feel happy to be part of this amazing era of tennis, sharing all these things with another two players, that’s it,” he says. “In some ways it doesn’t matter if somebody achieves one more or one less.” The courtside crowd clearly have different ideas, and ride every wave of emotion through Nadal’s fast start and third-set slow-down. In the fourth he finally has his ascendancy. He watches the net bulge with Berrettini’s final shot and then stands smiling, still as a statue, before pounding the air with his fist. It is his first real show of emotion of the entire match. Then he embraces his opponent at the net, returns calmly to his bench and neatly lays out his towel.A review of the “crippling” insurance costs faced by residents in some buildings with unsafe cladding is to be undertaken by a watchdog, at the request of the government. Michael Gove, the communities minister, has asked the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) to establish within six months why insurance premiums have shot up for many customers while work started after the Grenfell tragedy to remove cladding from many sites. Despite investment and work to identify and tackle cladding safety defects in existing blocks, and a continuing decrease in the instances of fire in multiple-occupancy buildings, he said building insurance premiums had increased dramatically for almost all leaseholders in blocks of flats. “I am also concerned to hear that many insurers seem unwilling to offer new policies, forcing people to shop in a more limited marketplace with more restrictive terms or less coverage; in many cases, trapping people with their current provider,” Gove wrote in a letter to the Financial Conduct Authority’s chief executive, Nikhil Rathi. The minister said he shared the view of many policyholders who, “understandably”, do not view the market as offering accessibly priced, widely available insurance. “The market lacks transparency and there is not currently useful data to explain the rationale behind the increasing premiums charged by insurers and the conditions associated with the cover. The role and remuneration of brokers, managing agents and freeholders is also unclear.” The FCA said it had issued two letters on Friday, one to the CEOs of all the insurance firms and the other to insurance intermediaries. “Although insurance premiums are just one aspect of the rising costs faced by residential leaseholders in the wake of the Grenfell tragedy, we want to ensure products provide fair value and premiums fairly and accurately reflect risk,” the FCA said in a statement. It said that its letters outlined the work it was doing, which included examining firms’ approaches to pricing for multi-occupancy buildings and whether elements unrelated to risk, such as commissions, were increasing costs. Firms were also reminded of their obligations under FCA rules, including to consider the costs borne by leaseholders, when determining whether a product was fair value. It added: “We are asking firms to consider what actions they can take to help leaseholders, whether individually or by identifying collective solutions as an industry.” A government review into building regulations after the Grenfell Tower fire – which killed 72 people and injured more than 70 – concluded that indifference and ignorance led to a “race to the bottom” in building safety practices, with cost prioritised over safety. A national ban was introduced on using combustible cladding on new buildings, and sprinklers became mandatory on new builds of more than 11 metres. The full cost of fire safety work on all affected blocks has been estimated at about £15bn. By June last year the government had committed an estimated £5bn through the Building Safety Fund to remove flammable cladding on high-rise buildings. But under the leasehold system in England and Wales the cost is often borne by individual flat owners, some of whom have been struggling with spiralling insurance costs, service charges, and high fees for 24-hour “waking watch” fire patrols. Last week, Gove threatened a UK trading ban on manufacturers of combustible cladding and insulation unless they paid to fix dangerous housing, giving companies a March deadline to agree a settlement. In a letter to the industry, he highlighted more than £700m in profits made over the past four years by the three firms most closely associated with the Grenfell disaster – likely to mean Arconic, Celotex and Kingspan, which made the combustible cladding panels and insulation foam on Grenfell Tower. Earlier this year, Britain’s biggest housebuilding companies told the government they must not be the only ones to pay the potential £4bn cost of fixing fire safety problems in blocks of flats. The Association of British Insurers (ABI) said its members recognised and sympathised with challenges faced by leaseholders and welcomed Gove’s request to the FCA. James Dalton, director of general insurance policy at the ABI, said: “The cost of buildings insurance reflects the significant fire risks associated with many multiple-occupancy residential buildings, which go beyond cladding under a building control system that has been found to be ‘not fit for purpose’.”British companies have been urged to bolster their digital security over concerns of possible Russian cyber-attacks linked to the growing political crisis in Ukraine. The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), a part of the GCHQ intelligence agency, has updated its guidance telling firms to “build resilience and stay ahead of potential threats”. The NCSC said: “UK organisations are being urged to bolster their cybersecurity resilience in response to malicious cyber-incidents in and around Ukraine.” The NCSC said that although it was investigating malicious cyber-incidents in Ukraine, “which are similar to a pattern of Russian behaviour seen before in previous situations”, it was not aware of any “specific threats” to UK organisations. The NCSC is concerned that businesses could be targeted after the UK, US and EU issued warnings to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, against attacking Ukraine after he deployed 100,000 troops on its borders. “While we are unaware of any specific threats to UK organisations in relation to events in Ukraine, we are monitoring the situation closely and it is vital that organisations follow the guidance to ensure they are all resilient,” said Paul Chichester, the director of operations at the NCSC. A cyber-attack on Ukraine government websites earlier this month warned the public to “be afraid and expect the worst”, which Ukraine said was orchestrated by Russia. “Over several years, we have observed a pattern of malicious Russian behaviour in cyberspace,” Chichester said. “Last week’s incidents in Ukraine bear the hallmarks of similar Russian activity we have observed before.” The guidance, which is primarily aimed at larger organisations, comes after the NCSC warned businesses in the UK’s critical national infrastructure – such as energy, water supply, transportation and telecommunications – about specific vulnerabilities Russian hackers have been known to exploit. Ukraine was subjected to a crippling Russian cyber-attack in 2017, dubbed the NotPetya attack, which wiped clean computers in the country but spilled over into systems around the world. It gained access to computers by hacking a widely used piece of tax reporting software in Ukraine, which also affected foreign companies based there and spilled over to more than 60 countries. The attack was nominally a piece of “ransomware” – where affected targets are asked to pay a bitcoin ransom to unlock their hard drives – but there was in fact no way of decrypting the affected files, making it what is known as a “wiper” attack in industry jargon. Stuart McKenzie, a senior vice-president at US cybersecurity firm Mandiant, said that Russia would have planned any cyber offensive linked to a Ukraine conflict well in advance: “Russia is very strategic,” he said. “It will have been strategically planned over a number of years.” McKenzie said it was unlikely that a NotPetya-style attack would hit the UK. “The possibility of a wiper attack across the whole of the UK is incredibly unlikely. It is much more likely to be a strategic attack against limited targets.” However, he said that the NotPetya attack appeared to show a lack of regard for collateral damage outside the targeted country. The malware caused an estimated $10bn of damage around the world, with the Danish shipping company Maersk among those affected, after reporting costs of up to $300m related to the attack. He said: “I absolutely believe Russia will have strong strategic plans for what they are going to do but they don’t know what the unintended consequences will be.”Sanjeev Gupta thanked the Tory minister Nadhim Zahawi for his “personally instrumental” role in enabling Greensill Capital to make taxpayer-backed Covid business support loans, in a letter released by the government. Greensill collapsed last year, sparking a lobbying scandal involving the former prime minister David Cameron and a Serious Fraud Office investigation into more than £300m of loans to businesses linked to GFG Alliance, the metals conglomerate run by Gupta, under the Coronavirus Large Business Interruption Loan Scheme (CLBILS). Last year the National Audit Office said the government-owned British Business Bank, which has now suspended government guarantees backing the loans, gave Greensill Capital access to the scheme without subjecting the firm to detailed checks, leaving taxpayers facing a £335m loss. It has emerged that in October 2020, Gupta sent a letter to Zahawi, then a minister in the business department (BEIS), thanking him for getting the bank to approve Greensill’s access to the loan scheme. “Since you were personally instrumental in getting the BBB’s approval for Greensill Capital to provide financial assistance under the CLBILS programme, it would be very fitting if you could join us to mark this special moment that provides relief to thousands of workers,” said Gupta in the letter, released after a freedom of information request lodged by the Financial Times. In the letter, Gupta went as far as inviting Zahawi, who was promoted to education secretary in the autumn, to a “small gathering” at his steelworks in Rotherham to mark the Greensill loan success. The letter was sent days before a formal investigation into Greensill and the loans to GFG-linked firms was launched. “The department does not recognise the assertion made in Mr Gupta’s letter that Nadhim Zahawi played a role in securing the bank’s approval to accredit Greensill Capital,” said BEIS. GFG declined to comment. BEIS stated that Zahawi “did not respond to the letter, nor did he make any subsequent visit to a GFG Alliance site”. The FoI also revealed that “a text exchange or phone call between Sanjeev Gupta and Nadhim Zahawi took place at an unknown date” in relation to “Covid assistance”, according to the FT. In the FoI response, BEIS disclosed that there “was no longer an electronic record of the communication stored on the device used by Nadhim Zahawi, which was his personal mobile phone”. However, according to “information held about the communication” at BEIS, the minister explained to the steel baron that “requests would need to be directed through BEIS officials”, said the FT. A spokesperson for Zahawi said the decision to accredit Greensill was taken independently by the British Business Bank. “The government was not involved in the decision to accredit Greensill,” he said. “The decision was taken independently by the British Business Bank, in accordance with their usual procedures.” The spokesperson said GFG’s request for assistance was referred to Zahawi by its local Labour MP, and Zahawi told Gupta that requests would need to be directed through department officials. “The claim that Nadhim was instrumental in securing approval is little more than flattery from GFG in an overwritten letter from their PR team,” said the spokesperson. “He did not respond to the letter, or attend the event.” Greensill Capital specialised in supply chain finance, where businesses borrow money to pay their suppliers, but collapsed last March after losing insurance cover for loans issued to its customers. It emerged that former prime minister Cameron sent 62 text messages to former colleagues pleading for them to help, while earning millions of pounds as an adviser to Greensill. He had also previously lobbied ministers and civil servants across the government to give Greensill approval to hand out Covid loans. Intensive text message lobbying of ministers and high-ranking civil servants on behalf of Greensill Capital showed a “significant lack of judgment”, an official parliamentary inquiry has found. The Treasury select committee said it was inappropriate for the ex-prime minister to send 62 messages to former colleagues pleading for them to help the bank, in which Cameron held a “very significant personal economic interest”. Cameron earned millions of pounds as a boardroom adviser to Greensill, the lending startup founded by the Australian banker Lex Greensill. Cameron last year disclosed a series of text messages lobbying ministers and civil servants across the government to give his employer approval to hand out Covid loans. A parliamentary inquiry found that Cameron showed a “significant lack of judgment” but did not break lobbying rules. It said: “That reflects on the insufficient strength of the rules.” In June 2020, Cameron texted Zahawi: “Lex Greensill … says you are being v helpful over HMT and CBILS programme,” according to the former prime minister’s disclosures to the Treasury select committee, which did not include a response from Zahawi. GFG has previously denied wrongdoing and said it will cooperate with the SFO investigation.Rafael Nadal has revealed that during some of the lowest points of his six-month injury layoff last year he had conversations with his team and family about the possibility that he might have to “say goodbye” to tennis. After the 6-3, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3 victory over Matteo Berrettini on Friday that took him to his sixth Australian Open final, Nadal spoke candidly about the uncertainty surrounding his future before his return to competition. “I went through a lot of challenging moments, a lot of days of hard work without seeing a light there,” said the 35-year-old. “But still working and still receiving plenty of support from my team and from my family, too, without a doubt. A lot of conversations with the team, with the family about what can happen or what’s going to happen if the things continue like this, thinking that maybe is a chance to say goodbye.” After the loss of his French Open title in June, Nadal was forced to spend the best part of half a year away from the tour because of a recurrence of a long-standing foot injury which he has suffered from since childhood. He attempted to compete at the Citi Open in Washington in August but pulled the plug on his season shortly afterwards. “For a long time I wasn’t able to practise,” said Nadal. “Sometimes I went on court and I was able to practise 20 minutes, sometimes 45, sometimes zero, sometimes two hours, but it has been very, very rough in terms of imagine myself playing at the best-of-five at this moment.” Asked about how tough the past few months have been, Nadal noted that his problems do not compare to the loss people around the world have suffered during the pandemic. “Of course my months are not tough at all comparing to a lot of families that lost a lot of people,” he said. “But in terms of personal thing, yeah, because of course every day has been an issue in terms of problems on the foot.” Despite returning to compete at the highest level, Nadal insists his foot problems will remain until the end of his career, but in Australia he has been able to manage them and succeed. “The doubts are going to be here probably for the rest of my career, without a doubt, because I have what I have and that’s something that we cannot fix. But for me it’s amazing, and I’m super happy to be able to compete for the last three weeks at the level that I am doing.” He continued: “Not only about tennis, that’s for sure. It’s surprising for me to be able to play at the level that I am playing, but just compete and play tennis at the high level again, facing the most important players of the world, for me, it’s something unbelievable, no?”I look back on the first lockdown with a kind of fondness. Despite the turmoil of the pandemic, my partner and I were lucky to have a space to ourselves, which we made as homely as possible in the circumstances. We got a rare glimpse into each other’s professional selves and spent barely a minute apart, which was in stark contrast to our Before Lives, when whole weeks would pass without even a proper kiss. Ricocheting between lockdown boredom and dread, often within the hour, sex took on renewed importance for us. Making one another impromptu stovetop coffees, flirting in the “office” kitchen, and indulging in afternoon delight sweetened an otherwise horrific time. But as lockdowns lifted and restrictions yo-yoed, that sweetness soured. I made a big change by going freelance and his life was once again dominated by the to-ing and fro-ing of commuting and work. Although all the love and physical affection remained, I lost interest in sex, sensing my libido drop from scant to six-feet-under. Like most women, I’m used to using mental framing – AKA my imagination – to conjure desire, but getting into the headspace for intimacy required more energy than I could muster. It wasn’t a total drought, I just disliked how I felt about intimacy – dissociated, iced out, even a little bit disgusted. I tried to reassure my partner that the reluctance was about me, not him, but I couldn’t rationalise the epic extinguishing of sexual urges. We’ve had ups and downs in our eight-year relationship, however in my camp, something felt off. When I speak with Helen Mayor, a psychosexual relationship therapist and co-founder of The Thought House, I get a little emotional. I hadn’t realised the shame I had been carrying, and the way I’d squashed what I saw as an insignificant quibble amid a world on its knees. She suggests I could be feeling a loss now that my partner has returned to his normal work life, while mine is now entirely self-motivated, and shot through with the anxieties of self-employment. “What you’re feeling is often a normal point in life, where sex stops being a priority,” she explains. “Sex and sexual excitement is a muscle, and it needs to be exercised.” “In those lockdowns, you experienced spontaneous desire – free pleasure was on offer at home all the time and the more you had sex, the more you wanted it,” she says. Spontaneous desire means impulses show up instantly, with or without stimulation, while responsive desire happens as a result of stimulation. Dr Emily Nagoski’s research finds that men tend to be steadfast in their ability to feel spontaneous desire, but women fluctuate in this sphere. “If you wait for the responsiveness to come back, and it doesn’t, you don’t have sex,” explains Mayor. So how to thaw out my frozen urges? She recommends cultivating a relationship with the erotic through reading, audio erotica or watching porn. “Fantasy is about escape, and you’ve got no demarcation at the moment,” says Mayor. “Go somewhere new after work, order a different drink off the menu, and talk about sex: the best you’ve ever had, the things you want to do, what you love about each other, and in doing that, inhabit a totally different space.” As she explains, long-term love is falling in love with the same person again and again, because we see them differently. Emboldened by the conversation, I relay Mayor’s advice to my partner one evening. Sharing the possible reasons for my predicament is freeing and, unsurprisingly, the talking about having sex is quite a turn-on. The Christmas break arrives and with it, more time to explore. After dinner with friends one night, we peel off and stumble upon a flamboyant Brazilian bar for a nightcap. It feels spontaneous and a little like a package holiday. Talk turns to our fantasies, some of which we’ve shared before, and others are new. I investigate the iterations of a new wave of female-led and created erotica, and I’m spoiled for choice. No Mills &amp; Boon for me – it’s all very slick and discreet. I download a free trial of Ferly, an app designed by sex therapists for “mindful sex”, and find its audio erotica isn’t as cringe-making as I expected. I think I’m better suited to visual aids, though – watching ethical porn together goes down a storm. And while we’re no strangers to lube, Kynect [the new name for KY Jelly] is the kind of product I could imagine using for life, given it’s water based and contains no perfumes, making it gentle enough for daily use. One major block that Mayor sees among sex-neglecting millennials is sleep. Indeed, our bedtime setup is an affront to passion. The cat often sleeps on my chest, and the separate duvets (because I used to steal his half) don’t exactly encourage an explorative hand when the lights go out. “Avoid always making it something that happens at the end of the day,” says Mayor. The morning sex, the post-workout sex, the pre-dinner sex, the post-flossing, pre-bedtime reading sex is gold dust, especially as my partner’s eight hours of beauty sleep is sacred. Fun has been in short supply and desire dampeners have been rife these past few years – Covid scares, money worries, and the claustrophobia that comes from being trapped on our sad little island. I’d forgotten how transportative, fun – and funny – sex can be. We’ve been laughing a lot. Discussion of our fantasies don’t end on our night out, and we’re adding to our list whenever the thoughts arise. There’s a novel lightness in our approach, and the flirty undertones in the most mundane activities are enough to fire up some of that responsive desire in me. Reconnecting with myself and my partner has been like tuning a radio – the haze of white noise and static is gone, and in its place is something I could listen to for life. You can never have too much of a good thing. Enjoy more intimacy with your partner with a Kynect 200ml tube. Buy it hereThe messed up psychology of Batman, masked defender of Gotham City, is so dense and peculiar that entire books have been written about it. This is perhaps why so many fans took umbrage at the caped crusader’s depiction during the Joel Schumacher years as a batnippled lightweight. There is really nothing fun about getting under the skin of the dark knight, only to discover he has all the psychological complexity of a Ken doll, as George Clooney and Val Kilmer should probably have worked out the minute they picked up their scripts. Nobody can accuse Robert Pattinson of not doing his homework in this regard. Speaking in the new issue of Premiere magazine’s French edition, the new Batman reveals that he wanted to get into the nitty-gritty of the superhero’s psyche from the minute he signed on. “There is this rule with Batman: he must not kill,” said Pattinson. “It can be interpreted in two ways. Either he only wants to inflict the appropriate punishment, or he wants to kill and his self-control prevents him from doing so.” “I imagined it that way from the rehearsal of the first fight, I thought it was funnier: something in him just wanted to slit the guy’s throat! I told myself that if he spends his nights chasing criminals, it is impossible that he does not take pleasure in it. He suffers and it is a desire that overwhelms him. And by dint of knocking, his mind clears, he calms down, he reaches a state close to plenitude. I’m sure in this first fight, he manages to convince himself that every guy in front of him is the one who killed his mother [laughs]. And so that allows him to vent all his rage. “The interesting thing is that this Batman practically lives in the gutter. He’s nowhere at home except on the street when he’s wearing the suit. He lives a criminal life, but without committing crimes! I felt like I could get something out of that. Anyway, I could only play a superhero if he was really dirty!” It’s a fascinatingly grimy take that might give us some insight into how Pattinson’s interpretation of the character, soon to be seen in Matt Reeves’ The Batman, might vary from previous big screen caped crusaders. Both the Christian Bale and Michael Keaton versions stood out for being noble and reserved, bound to their duty to defend Gotham against criminals and supervillains alike. There was rarely any suggestion that they took pleasure in inflicting pain on their victims. Ben Affleck’s take came across very differently, as a pugnacious, brutal bully willing to use guns and heavy weaponry to take down anyone who got in his way – at least in the knuckle-headed Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. Pattinson’s comments have sparked a debate among fans over Batman’s moral grounding, or lack of it. But intriguingly (perhaps despairingly), the focus has been on whether the caped crusader should kill (in the comics, our hero rarely murders anybody) rather than the more interesting detail. The suggestion from meatheaded corners of the DC fanbase is that Batfleck would never have had such moral complexities, which is, of course, entirely correct. This is also the reason why many fans did not warm to Affleck’s take, and why sequel Justice League ended up being written in such a way as to represent a two-hour long grovelling apology for messing up the character. Affleck spends pretty much the entire movie – I am talking the weaker original Joss Whedon version here – saying sorry for being a jerk and “killing” Superman. It strikes me that everyone is missing a trick here. Surely the fascinating aspect of this new Batman is that he will restrain himself from killing his victims, even though he would actually quite like to splay them out like a raw chicken. Pattinson is pitching an anguished, cut-throat, vagabond caped crusader whose natural instincts are for cruel and murderous carnage, but who is restrained by a devastatingly rigid moral code. It makes me, finally, hopeful that Reeves’ itineration of Gotham City’s heroic defender will have something to say for itself beyond a shallow retread of the Batman mythos. It also makes me wonder if this might be one Batman movie to skip taking the kids to see. Here we are into the superhero’s ninth decade and maybe, just maybe (on the big screen at least) the dark knight is finally about to start living up to his nickname.A convoy of truckers and their supporters is set to converge on the Canadian capital in a protest which has spiralled from frustrations over vaccine mandates into calls for the repeal of all public health measures – and even the overthrow of the federal government. Ahead of Saturday’s protest in Ottawa, the prime minister, Justin Trudeau, dismissed the group as a “small fringe” that held “unacceptable views” and didn’t reflect the majority of Canadians. Earlier this month, Canada began requiring any truckers arriving from the US be fully vaccinated against coronavirus. Those who are not vaccinated – who are believed to constitute less than 15% of the country’s drivers – are required to quarantine for 14 days. Canada has recorded 2.93m Covid cases and 32,600 deaths from the virus. The convoy, which left Vancouver earlier this week, has more than 275,000 supporters on Facebook, nearly 40,000 supporters on the encrypted messaging app Telegram and has raised C$5.5m (US$4.3m) from 70,000 donations on GoFundMe. GoFundMe announced earlier this week it had frozen the funds until it could determine with the organizers how the money would be disbursed. One former intelligence analyst said the “speed and anonymity” of the donations has raised red flags. “It’s not really clear to me how many of those supporters donating online are actually even Canadian. A lot of the donations have been made anonymously and there’s very clearly some activity from foreign countries,” said Jessica Davis, a former intelligence analyst for the Canadian government and head of Insight Threat Intelligence. “It’s really difficult to get a sense for how many Canadians actually support this versus how many people globally are trying to oppose vaccine mandates and the associated political objectives,” said Davis. The convoy highlights the way in which public health measures such as vaccine mandates have become increasingly tied to political divisions. One of the main groups behind the protest is Canada Unity, which has opposed what it says are “unconstitutional” Covid rules. The group recently posted a “memorandum of understanding” to its website, saying that members plan to present it to politicians on Parliament Hill. The group claims that the leader of the senate and the governor general will sign the document to create a governing committee, which they claim would work to revoke the vaccine mandate. “This document is largely incomprehensible and is completely divorced from our political reality,” said Davis. Despite such fringe ideas, which have prompted comparisons to the January 6 insurrection in the United States, the convoy has received endorsements from federal Conservative politicians, including the former leader Andrew Scheer and deputy leader Candice Bergen, who called for peaceful protest. The Conservative leader, Erin O’Toole, who has expressed wariness to vaccine mandates in the past, said on Thursday he would meet with the truckers. But the group have received endorsements from Donald Trump Jr and Elon Musk. The son of the former US president posted a video on social media supporting the truckers for “fighting against medical discrimination”, while the tech billionaire on Thursday tweeted: “Canadian truckers rule.” Some Canadian conservatives have spoken out against the mandate, arguing it places a burden on truckers when supply chains are already strained. Some have posted pictures of empty grocery store shelves. But experts caution that the vaccine mandate is just one part of a “perfect storm” to hit the nation’s food system. Poor weather, highway closures and staffing challenges at grocery stores have also made it difficult to get food on shelves. “The supply chain is flexible, but it’s also fragile,” said Simon Somogyi, a professor at the University of Guelph who studies the food business and supply chain management. “The Canadian food system really rides on the back of a truck because of our short growing season,” he said of the C$21bn worth of food imported from the US each year, and trucks play a key role in moving it. In many way, Covid-19 has exposed the necessity of the trucking system as well as headwinds within the system, including a shortage of drivers. “At the end of the day, we need more trucks on the road. If everyone came to the table for an honest discussion about this, rather than making political statements, it’d be better for everyone.”Invasive king crabs have made their way to British shores, sparking fears that local brown crab and scallop populations could be decimated. This week, fishers in North Yorkshire found their pots heavy not with brown crab, but with the bright-red invader with long, spindly legs prized for their sweet flesh. London restaurants have already snapped up the haul, ready for weekend menus. The fishers were shocked – bar rumours of one or two pulled up over the last couple of years, these crabs had never been seen off British shores. The species, native to North America, was introduced to Russia in the 1960s by scientists who wanted to establish a new, lucrative fishery. Thriving in cold seas, the crab population exploded, and they travelled to Norway, where they caused a fishing industry boom. And now they seem to have travelled all the way to Britain. Fishers in the UK are tentatively excited, as many fisheries in Norway became rich off the invasive species, though environmentalists are alarmed about the potential impact on native species. Shaun Henderson is a fish supplier who sells to more than 80 London restaurants. He said one of his fishers pulled up 250kg of king crabs. He said: “My cousin is a fisherman. He’d been working on the boat for 15 or 20 years, and my dad was a fisherman and he was working on crabbing boats before that. None of them have ever caught a king crab before. It was quite funny to see them appear in our waters now. “I’m excited about it but they seem like quite an invasive species, so I feel wary. They seem to be eating up the scallops at the bottom and they could outcompete brown crabs. I am a bit worried about our native seafood.” His cousin was fishing in the North Sea off Bridlington when he pulled up the crabs. Henderson said: “They destroyed quite a lot of the fishing in Norway but obviously made a lot of people in Norway a lot of money as well because fishermen were quite happy that they were catching these different, more expensive, lucrative fish.” Will Murray, head chef at Fallow restaurant in St James’ Market, London, has bought up some of the haul. He said he planned to cook the crabs over charcoal and make a sauce with the meat from the head. The sauce will be poured over potatoes boulangère and the legs served alongside. “We are excited, but a bit terrified, as they really are invaders and could kill off all our brown crabs,” Murray said. “This could be the next grey squirrel, the next Japanese knotweed – but at least these are easy to cook and enjoyable to eat. This is some of the best seafood in the world, a real premium ingredient.” However, despite their delicious taste, he said the crabs did not bode well for the rest of his menu. The chef said it could be good for British fishers “if we react the right way and if we can export the commodity, but at the same time it’s bittersweet as it ultimately means that native populations are going to suffer. “They breed in a layer on the seafloor and can grow to a massive size. The potters are already getting bigger pots to fit these bigger crabs in. You can see from reports from the fishermen that the population has just exploded.”The Hindu god Shiva is an inspiration for aSH, and Indian kuchipudi dancer Shantala Shivalingappa has a presence so self-possessedly serene as to qualify as godly. Her stillness goes deep, but even when she’s moving there is hypnotic constancy in her circling limbs. Long arms stretch into precision-cut angles but she doesn’t slash or slice the air, it’s more like the air silently parts to make way for her. Shivalingappa’s remarkable quality of movement has led her to be a muse for Peter Brook, Pina Bausch, Maurice Béjart and now French director Aurélien Bory, who has conceived this solo that Shivalingappa herself choreographed. The dancer is not entirely alone on stage. There’s percussionist Loïc Schild conjuring gentle tremolos and ominous rumbles, and there’s the set, designed by Bory, which is a character in its own right. A vast sheet of thick metallic paper hangs behind Shivalingappa, the scene coloured a shadowy bronze. The paper begins to ripple and billow, launching forward like a giant beast or wave, threatening to engulf her. Yet it’s entirely possible to believe that Shivalingappa is silently controlling the forces around her. The sheet becomes an instrument, Schild rhythmically rapping his fingers on it; it’s also a cocoon and a canvas, where Shivalingappa draws circles with what’s essentially a giant pastry brush and then scatters ash across the surface, tracing rings in the dust with her feet. An image is slowly revealed, like a rising sun or a powerful vortex, something mighty and beautiful. aSH is a story of constant transformation and renewal, of destruction and creation, of life’s circularity, and there’s Shivalingappa, without forceful presence or exertion, at the core of all this visual wonder. At the Barbican, London, until 29 January as part of London international mime festival, which runs until 6 February.The New South Wales Liberal party has failed to resolve its preselection impasse for federal candidates and has delayed the issue until next week, dramatically raising the prospects that a federal intervention will be required. The 27-member state executive met on Friday night for less than two hours, but did not consider a controversial deal which was designed to placate the warring factions and settle a number of key seats by bypassing branch votes. Instead factional organisers said the proposed peace deal, which requires 90% support to be accepted, would be put to the state executive during the week via an electronic ballot. This would give the factional leaders more time to either scrap unpopular parts of the deal or try to win support for it. In particular a proposal to put the former Young Liberal president, Alex Dore, into the seat of Hughes had riled local members, who were denied the right to participate in a preselection process for the third time running and did not want to see a person from outside the seat parachuted in. Dore is from Manly. There were also questions about whether the part of the deal relating to Dobell would stick, after one candidate had allegedly withdrawn. This could not be confirmed. The process for filling the third spot on the Senate ticket was also still causing angst. New rules for choosing candidates in NSW, championed by the right and former prime minister Tony Abbott, introduced a much greater level of grassroots democracy into the party. But the rules have led to some unexpected outcomes, including challenges to two ministers and bruising competitions in others. As a result the Liberal party has been without candidates in many key battleground seats. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The deal, hammered out by factional negotiators a week ago, involves avoiding rank and file votes in all seats held by federal MPs who are facing challenges. That means the MP Trent Zimmerman would be re-endorsed for North Sydney; the environment minister, Sussan Ley, would survive a challenge in the southern NSW seat of Farrer; and the immigration minister and centre right faction heavyweight, Alex Hawke, would remain as the Liberal candidate in Mitchell. Some branch preselections would proceed – Bennelong, Warringah and Parramatta – but in these cases the outcomes are more certain. But other parts of the peace deal remain unacceptable, particularly to the branch members in Hughes. There have been threats of legal action against the director of the state division if ballots are scrapped, or the process delayed further. The other possibility is the federal branch takes over, but this too could prompt messy legal battles. There are also internal frictions over the NSW Senate ticket, with a proposal to automatically endorse the foreign minister, Marise Payne, as top of the ticket, but the next Liberal spot, No 3, would go to a ballot. This would likely see two current senators, Concetta Fierravanti-Wells and Jim Molan, face off for the winnable spot. There was also speculation that Dallas McInerney, the CEO of Catholic Schools NSW and a key figure in the right, would contest. The state executive has endorsed the candidate for Reid and confirmed the communications minister, Paul Fletcher, as the Bradfield candidate because there was no challengers.The way culture works today, you will either know everything there is to know about West Elm Caleb or nothing. For the uninitiated, he is a 20-something New Yorker who works at a furniture store and gained online infamy for his poor dating behaviour. A group of women who had met Caleb via dating apps and then connected with each other on TikTok have accused him of ignoring messages, recycling lines, sleeping with one shortly before going on a date with another and sending unsolicited nudes. After 15m views of the #westelmcaleb hashtag on TikTok, the facts of the situation are unclear and the ethics murkier still. I do, however, feel qualified to comment on one element: Caleb’s seduction playlist on Spotify. One of the claims against Caleb was that he sent at least two women the same playlist, each believing it to have been personalised; it’s now being circulated to inform our collective arbitration of his conduct. It is testament to the romantic power of music that this has been singled out as a transgression. It also demonstrates how, on dating apps, music taste has become one of the primary ways of signalling one’s suitability as a mate – and how, by reducing people to profiles of their likes and dislikes, this taste has been weaponised. The West Elm Caleb saga coincides with a competition from the dating app Bumble asking users to send a bespoke mixtape to a match, based on its survey that found that 59% of people believe music to be the most romantic way of expressing their feelings. Another survey last year by OkCupid found that there were almost 5m mentions of music on users’ dating profiles; 37% of daters surveyed said they would prefer their partner to be into music over movies, books or sports. A new dating app, POM (Power of Music), goes one further, claiming to pair users on the basis of their listening history. My own 15 years of dating can be sequenced into mix CDs and playlists, given and received; “exchanging favourite songs” registers between first and second base. Without music, I may not have ever had sex. As such I delved into Caleb’s tried-and-true playlist with interest – and trepidation. Would I fall for him, too? No. It’s obvious from track three that this guy is trouble. Mazzy Star’s best-known song by far, Fade Into You, is too obvious to be indicative of taste – and it’s too declarative of intention (“I want to hold the hand inside you”) to belong on Side A. It makes the case for Caleb as a common or garden “softboi”: the earnest young men on dating apps labouring to define themselves by their performed sensitivity and superior taste. (See the @beam_me_up_softboi account on Instagram, which documents the crude attempts at seduction or manipulation by men who believe themselves to be cultural iconoclasts for liking “alternative” music – like that little-known outfit Tame Impala.) Caleb’s playlist does include the softboi staples the Smiths, Ariel Pink and King Krule – but also more women and non-white, non-western musicians than one might expect of a dudebro out to maximise matches. This could equally mark Caleb out as somewhat attuned to racial and gender politics, or simply better at throwing his dates off the scent – testament to the funhouse mirror of modern dating. If we read too much into music taste, it’s probably because it is one of only a handful of data points we’re given to assess potential romantic compatibility. In the past, “Beatles or Stones?” and “Oasis v Blur” were icebreakers that you’d quickly move past if you fancied each other enough; on dating apps, they are the precursor to a conversation occurring at all. It brings to mind High Fidelity, specifically its protagonist’s dating dictum that “what really matters is what you like, not what you are like”; his eventual admission that it’s the other way round reflects an eventual maturity. Today dating apps conflate the two. OkCupid’s survey found that one in three singles believe musical preference to be a good indicator of intelligence. No wonder Caleb opted to hedge his bets. The overall impression from his playlist is of warm guitar tones and soulful vocalists: it communicates accessible, Pitchfork-friendly cool without saying much about sender or receiver, let alone who they are to each other. I showed it to my friend. “Wait,” she said, horror mounting, “I’ve dated this man.” (We checked; she hadn’t.) That pervasive universality speaks to the challenges of making a truly personalised playlist. There were unsettling similarities between Caleb’s and ones I’ve sent to love interests myself. Him: the Mark Ronson remix of Angel Olsen’s New Love Cassette, and the Magnetic Fields’ The Book of Love from 69 Love Songs. Me: the Chromeo remix of Green Light by Lorde, and the Magnetic Fields’ A Chicken With Its Head Cut Off from 69 Love Songs (“Eligible, not too stupid …”). I have even got in trouble for repurposing songs for new love interests. If you aren’t dating Caleb, it seems, you may be Caleb. But if it was as hard to make an original, effective mixtape as High Fidelity made out 27 years ago, it’s even harder now. Not only are you unconstrained by the runtime of a cassette or CD, you can pick from a library containing nearly every love song ever recorded – no wonder we end up picking from the same 69. Making a mixtape was “like writing a letter”, said High Fidelity’s Rob. Today creating a playlist can be like a social media status update: intended for an audience that is ambiguously defined and readily repurposed. Even those made with care and treasured as reminders of past relationships feel risky to revisit in such a connected ecosystem – I tend to switch to private listening, lest I be perceived from the “friend activity” panel to still be carrying a torch. If that sounds paranoid, one friend recently discovered that an ex-boyfriend was still adding to a playlist he had sent her, nearly six months after their last contact. (A recent addition: Jon Brion’s theme for Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind.) A mixtape’s lasting romantic charge came from the investment of time, the thought put into the sentiment: it was emotion trapped in amber. A playlist, however heartfelt, feels impermanent and less potent. As I wrote recently of Spotify’s personalised end-of-year roundup Wrapped, the fact that something as uncomplicated as bonding over music can be made so unsatisfying should be considered a platform failure. Indeed, algorithmic playlists (and the Spotify-friendly pop songs that open with the chorus) break Rob’s first mixtape rule: don’t give your listener what they want straight away – you remove the incentive to work for the good stuff. There are parallels here between streaming services and online dating. It’s no wonder that Caleb seems to have had such success operating at the intersection of both, pairing app-matches with playlists: they allow for endless easy introductions at the expense of serendipity and investment. See how POM, “the dating app for music lovers”, describes its approach to matchmaking: connecting users “based on their music history and emotional responses … to curate a perfect end-to-end dating and social experience”. Be still, my beating heart. I thought I’d found my own perfect music-history match on OkCupid the other day. He was wearing a Randy Newman T-shirt in his profile picture. I have a Randy Newman print framed in my hallway. Obviously, we were said to be 92% compatible. I got overexcited and sent him several messages in quick succession about Randy Newman, some in all caps. (“IS THAT RANDY NEWAMN?”) I assumed he would be excited as well, given that there are estimated to be around only 40,000 devoted fans of Randy Newman and most are middle-aged men. He never replied. I sent another message: “I cannot believe you would leave a Randy Newman fan with whom you are 92% compatible on read. What are your other messages like!!!” I was going for outrageous, alarming, courageous, charming. I may have just come across mad. But I like to think that, had we met at a bar or through a friend, we might have flirtily debated Good Old Boys versus Sail Away. Eventually I’d have shown him the print in my hallway; we might have played Love Story (You and Me) at our wedding as an excellent in-joke. As it is, we never made it past track one, side one.The death of an elderly couple who drowned when their car was swept away in the River Trent after heavy rain last year was accidental, a coroner has ruled. John Lillistone, 83, and his wife, Patricia, 82, could not be rescued when their car entered the water at Hoveringham, Nottinghamshire, on 1 February last year. Rescue teams could not retrieve the car for two weeks owing to high water levels caused by weeks of heavy rain. Nottingham’s senior coroner, Mairin Casey, said the incident was “an exceptionally rare event” and ruled out any suggestion it was a deliberate act, the BBC reported. Witnesses said there was nothing they could do as the car left a car park and entered the water without stopping, before floating downstream and eventually disappearing underwater. One onlooker, John Chell, said: “It didn’t appear to slow down, there were no brake lights. I didn’t hear any shouting, no sound from the car. I thought that was really strange.” Michael Priestly, another witness, said: “Their demeanour seemed bizarre. They were just sat in the car facing forwards. Neither were shouting or trying to get out.” Casey said the couple’s reaction could be explained by shock. “This presentation I find is likely to have been explained by suddenly having entered the fast-flowing river and realising there was little or nothing they could do to ensure their return to safety,” she said. She added that John, the driver of the vehicle, may have miscalculated the speed and distance of the river. “It is often reaction times which slow with age and vulnerability to distractions,” which in this case could have been the fast-flowing water. Casey said there was nothing in the couple’s medical records to indicate any mental health or medical issues in relation to the accident. “When people take their lives in this age bracket, it’s very common they leave notes and settle their affairs. The evidence points entirely in the opposite direction,” she said. The inquest heard that the couple, who were married for 60 years and had two children and four grandchildren, had started going for drives during the Covid lockdown as part of their daily routine. Additional signs have been placed in the area to warn drivers about high water levels, and a kerb is being installed between the car park and the grass verge leading to the river next month. The couple’s son, James Lillistone, said that while he welcomed the changes, he doubted whether they would have done anything to prevent his parents’ deaths. “They were just making the most of the end of the day and the nice weather and I’m not sure the signage would have made any difference to them,” he said.Why will I love it? The spider plant (Chlorophytum comosum) conjures up a retro 1980s vibe. It’s a laid-back plant and very easy to propagate, because its baby plants hang from long stems, so you can pull them off and plant them separately. The long, arching leaves come in two main types of variegation: “Vittatum” with central creamy-white stripes flanked by a band of green on each side, and its opposite, “Variegatum”, with green leaves and white margins. It’s non-toxic to cats and dogs. Light or shade? Bright, indirect light to partial shade. Where should I put it? Hang from the ceiling or place on a high shelf in a sunny kitchen or bathroom, as they love humidity. How do I keep it alive? It’s a low-maintenance plant; the only common problem is the leaves drying out or going brown at the tips. Avoid this by keeping it out of strong, direct light, placing it in a humid environment, and making sure the soil doesn’t completely dry out. Did you know … Thanks to their thick rhizomes, which act as water reserves, spider plants can endure dry conditions. But to see them thrive, water generously during their growing season (April-September).Clarence Thomas, the hardline conservative supreme court justice, is facing calls for his recusal in the case over race-based affirmative action in college admissions that the court agreed to hear this week. The case, which is being brought against Harvard and the University of North Carolina, is the latest potential conflict of interest involving Thomas and his wife Virginia Thomas. Ginni, as she is known, is a prominent rightwing activist who speaks out on a raft of issues that frequently come before the nation’s highest court. A one-person conservative powerhouse, she set up her own lobbying company Liberty Consulting in 2010. By her own description, she has “battled for conservative principles in Washington” for over 35 years. The challenge to the two universities’ race-conscious admissions policies is being brought by Students for Fair Admissions (SFFA). Its leader Edward Blum has been a relentless opponent of affirmative action and voting rights laws. His argument that race-based affirmative action is a quota system that discriminates against Asian students is framed with the supreme court’s newly emboldened rightwing majority in mind. A central player in that new six-justice conservative supermajority is Clarence Thomas, who is the longest-serving of the justices and at 73 will be the oldest once Stephen Breyer retires. Justice Thomas’s influence has soared in recent months with the rightward shift of the court following Donald Trump’s three nominations, to the extent that some pundits now dub him the unofficial chief justice of the court. SFFA’s lawsuit seeking to strike down affirmative action has received the enthusiastic backing of the conservative National Association of Scholars. It filed an amicus brief in support of the suit, accusing Harvard admissions officials of being prejudiced against Asian students and stereotyping them as “uninteresting, uncreative and one-dimensional”. Ginni Thomas sits on the advisory board of the National Association of Scholars. Observers are concerned that her position with a group that has intervened in the affirmative action case could present appearances of conflict of interest. Noah Bookbinder, president of the government ethics watchdog Crew, told the Guardian that while supreme court regulations may not legally require Thomas to recuse himself, there were serious questions to answer. “Ginni Thomas is an advisory board member of an organization that has taken a very specific position on a case in front of her husband. That will make it hard for the public to be confident that he’s going to be totally unbiased.” Bookbinder said that in the circumstances “the better course of action would be for him to recuse or for her to cease her involvement in that organization.” The potential appearance of a conflict of interest over the Harvard case was noted in a recent investigation by the New Yorker reporter Jane Mayer that takes a deep dive into the overlapping interests of the couple. The article chronicles in devastating detail the many instances where Ginni’s political activism appears to present problems for the image and integrity of the court. “Ginni Thomas has held so many leadership or advisory positions at conservative pressure groups that it’s hard to keep track of them,” Mayer concluded. “Many, if not all, of these groups have been involved in cases that have come before her husband.” In the most troubling recent instance, Ginni Thomas lent her voice to Trump’s big lie that the 2020 presidential election was stolen from him. She was vocal on the subject in the buildup to the violent insurrection at the US Capitol on January 6 last year that led to the deaths of five people and left more than 100 police officers injured. On the morning of the January 6 itself, Mark Joseph Stern of Slate reported, Thomas posted on her Facebook page words of encouragement for the “Stop the Steal” marchers in Washington. “LOVE MAGA people!!!!”, she said., “GOD BLESS EACH OF YOU STANDING UP or PRAYING!” Soon after the insurrection, Thomas was forced to apologise to her husband’s former supreme court law clerks for comments she made privately to them that appeared to lament Trump’s defeat in the 2020 election. The remarks were sent to a private email list called “Thomas Clerk World”. In the emails, disclosed by the Washington Post, she wrote: “Many of us are hurting, after leaving it all on the field, to preserve the best of this country. I feel I have failed my parents who did their best and taught me to work to preserve liberties.” An even more direct intervention in the politics surrounding Trump and the big lie was made last December when Thomas joined 62 other influential conservatives in signing an open letter to the leader of the Republicans in the House of Representatives, Kevin McCarthy. It urged him to expel the Congress members Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger from the Republican party. Their sin, the letter writers opined, was to serve on the House committee investigating the January 6 insurrection. They described the committee as an “overtly partisan political persecution that brings disrespect to our country’s rule of law [and] legal harassment to private citizens who have done nothing wrong”. Since the Capitol insurrection, the Department of Justice has arrested more than 725 defendants in relation to the storming of the building. Federal prosecutors have charged 225 with assaulting, resisting or impeding police officers, including over 75 charged with using a deadly or dangerous weapon or causing serious bodily harm to an officer. Last week the supreme court rejected attempts by Trump to block the January 6 committee from acquiring his White House records from the time of the attack. There was only one dissent from the bench to that 8-to-1 decision: it came from Clarence Thomas. “Ginni Thomas’s activities are unprecedented in supreme court history in terms of a spouse engaging in issues that are constantly before the court,” said Gabe Roth, executive director of Fix the Court, a non-partisan group which advocates supreme court reform. “The appearance of impropriety is in itself impropriety – all the supreme court has is the trust of the public, and once you chip away at that you are in trouble.” Roth added that Thomas’s comments in the days before January 6 were clearly problematic given her husband’s vote on the Trump documents. “It’s possible that the January 6 committee has emails between Ginni Thomas and administration officials from that day or the days leading up to it given how vocal she was. That’s definitely a place where Justice Thomas should have recused himself.” Should the rightwing majority around Thomas use its newfound muscle to ban affirmative action, as is widely predicted, it would mark the negation of more than 30 years of settled constitutional law on the matter. What lies ahead bears strong resemblance to Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 ruling that made abortion legal which the court is probably poised to weaken or even overturn outright. Mayer points out in the New Yorker that an amicus brief was filed in the supreme court case challenging Roe by Robert George who also sits on the advisory board of the National Association of Scholars alongside Ginni Thomas. Roth told the Guardian that a simpler solution to the full recusal of Clarence Thomas from the affirmative action case might exist. That would be to remove the National Association of Scholars’ amicus brief. “There is an easy way to deal with this perceived conflict of interest – strike the amicus brief,” he said. It is established practice in all federal appeals courts, though not in the supreme court, that amicus briefs brought by anybody with a connection to a judge hearing a case are routinely thrown out. The president of the National Association of Scholars, Peter Wood, told the Guardian that he knew of no conflict of interest relating to Thomas’s position on the advisory board. “Ms Thomas’s role is to provide advice to NAS in response to questions I put to her about NAS policy and initiatives. I have never discussed with her any NAS matter that was likely to come before the supreme court,” he said.What is television? After watching Getting Curious With Jonathan Van Ness (Netflix), I don’t think I know any more. This series is a spin-off from the Queer Eye star’s podcast of the same name, in which Van Ness quite literally gets curious about a topic, then speaks to various guests about it. The podcast is long-running, well-established and very charming, but the question of whether it needed to become a more visual experience is yet to be answered. Van Ness is clearly a star. The former hairdresser made their name with the extremely funny Gay of Thrones online recaps, and went on to become part of the new Fab Five on the updated, much improved Queer Eye makeover series, which is always good for a cathartic cry and a renewed sense of faith in humanity. Van Ness is the one participants often open up to, usually while having their hair spritzed. Amiable, warm and an impressive interviewer, they give the impression of someone who genuinely wants to listen and learn. They are also excitable. All of this sets them up well to host an all-sorts, magazine show. The first episode, Are Bugs Gorgeous or Gross? (we’ve all wondered), makes it seem as if the whole thing will play out like a high camp, low-budget take on The Green Planet. It sees Van Ness speak to a range of experts and entomologists about the importance of insects; if you can maintain a sturdy stomach while watching a termite queen do her thing you have more resilience than me. “That’s really cool,” coos Van Ness, though I’m not sure I believe them. It’s a high-octane mix of facts, footage and parody. Van Ness regularly pops up dressed as an angel or a devil, to declare that a bug is “Gorgeous!” or “Gross!” At one point, Drag Race star Monét X Change appears to co-host a spoof red carpet event, shouting about the “realness” of the bugs who are walking it. It is busy and discombobulating, but finds its voice pretty quickly. For all the fun snippets about insects and Van Ness’s willingness to get stuck in (they actually do get stuck in, when a chef serves them insects), it eventually swerves into a more nuanced zone – if you can call a choreographed dance routine about the cultural history of hairstyles featuring Angela Davis and Elizabeth I nuanced. The rest of the episodes are more suited to Van Ness’s open-hearted and zany approach to learning, with frank discussions on, officially, hair, snacks, the gender binary, skyscrapers and figure-skating. Below the surface, though, these end up as empathic explorations of identity. The episode about gender – Van Ness identifies as non-binary – features that rare thing, an onscreen discussion about non-binary people, between non-binary people, that is not adversarial. “Literally can’t talk,” Van Ness manages to say, clearly moved by the experience. There is much to recommend. Academics with unusual specialisms are great value on television, and seeing people’s unbridled dedication to wigs or spiders or 18th-century paintings is always entertaining. Van Ness is a delight to watch, so easy in conversation with strangers, and their wide-eyed enthusiasm is infectious. Their conversation with the congresswoman Ayanna Pressley, about Pressley’s relationship with her hair as a Black woman, and her experiences with alopecia, is unusually intimate for an interview with a politician. Perhaps a guest spot on Newsnight would not be a terrible idea. What’s curious, though, is that as a podcast, this format is fantastic, and if Van Ness released this show on YouTube, I would fully accept its giddy, scattergun energy. I watch Netflix on the same browser, and the same screen, but something about it here feels like a less easy fit. Does that mean this is television or not? I still don’t know. Maybe Van Ness can answer that one in another series.The first episode of Jackass is a seminal work of the 21st century. It is titled Poo Cocktail, and features in quick succession the early stunts, pranks and goofs that make up Jackass’s enduring DNA: the show’s breakout star Johnny Knoxville flies out of a cannon into a net; another of its regulars, Bam Margera, roly-polys down a hill through a group of nonplussed golfers while a cameraman giggles from inside a nearby bush; Ehren McGhehey, the most viscerally headlockable man ever committed to film, intercepts someone’s drive-thru order and throws it for a touchdown. Jason “Wee Man” Acuña, painted orange and dressed as an Oompa Loompa, skates down Venice Beach in a way that astonishes a bystander in wraparound shades. When Jackass first launched on MTV in October 2000, I was 13 and it was the funniest thing I had ever seen. Now I’m 34 and, well, there’s a bit in the first episode of Jackass where Knoxville knocks over someone’s drinking water with a fake erection while politely asking: “Where do you get sodas around here?” and it’s still the funniest thing I’ve ever seen. Its cast of daredevil idiots took vomiting, falling off things, and brief-but-agonising pain and made it into high art. The initial run of Jackass was only three seasons and 25 episodes long, but created an outsized ripple. There were spin-off series, a Knoxville Rolling Stone cover, carnivalesque live tours, and a deluge of scare stories saying middle American teens had suffered harrowing injuries while trying to copy the show’s stunts. Connecticut senator Joe Lieberman wrote to MTV’s parent company Viacom urging it to take greater responsibility regarding its programming to help protect children. By the middle of the third season, red tape and cultural handwringing had taken much of the fun out of pushing a man in a shopping trolley down a hill, and Knoxville announced the series would be the last. Jackass, as a TV show, burned bright, then – infinite MTV repeats aside – faded away. “For the PTSD of filming to subside, it takes three years and eight months,” longtime Jackass director Jeff Tremaine says over Zoom, while Knoxville cackles wildly in a browser window beside him. After the conclusion of the TV series, the main cast reunited for the unofficial send-off, 2002’s Jackass: The Movie. Then, in 2006, Jackass Number Two. You get the feeling that the entire franchise hangs on whether Knoxville feels like it is a good idea to get hit by a bull this year or not, hence the gap until 2010’s Jackass 3D, which really felt like the last instalment. But then, 10 years later, the old itch came back. “Listen, it’s never not funny to see someone else get hit in the nuts,” Tremaine, who is 55, explains. “There’s a certain cultural moment with Jackass, and it went away for a few years, but TikTok’s got a big thing for physical comedy, YouTube’s all about elaborate pranks. It never goes away.” In the late 2010s Knoxville invited Tremaine for lunch. “He dropped about a 200-page document,” Tremaine says with a sigh. “We go: ‘Let’s just shoot for two days and just see if it feels right.’ Honestly, five minutes in, we were ready to commit to making a movie.” And lo, pandemic delays aside, Jackass Forever – film number four – is ready to drop. Jackass Forever arrives at a time when pandemic restrictions have been ladled on top of the usual health and safety precautions. Cast and crew had to break for seven months while Covid raged. On their return, they were summoned to a room to be talked through the latest safety protocols. Only underneath the table was a hyper-inflatable bouncy castle that promptly exploded. “It was an awkward position because you told us we need to take this seriously, but then you just exploded a bounce house on us,” Knoxville tells a giggling Tremaine. “Totally mixed messages.” Jackass has been swerving inelegantly around health and safety legislation since it began, but there was some arch irony to Covid being a defining safety factor in a film where a baseball gets pitched directly into someone’s nuts. “It’s funny to think about having all these safety protocols to go through just so we could do dangerous shit,” Knoxville explains. “It’s like, ‘OK, wear your mask until you get to the alligator pit and take it off and jump in.’” Knoxville is 50 now, and has allowed his natural grey to show: fellow Jackass lifers have similarly aged on screen (Steve-O, a gravel-voiced trained clown willing to staple any part of himself to anything, looks LA-healthy with perfect beaming veneers; Chris Pontius, the show’s go-to whenever a stunt involved cheerful nudity, is glossy and muscular like an elder but thoroughbred horse). There is a strange sense of mortality to Jackass now: when Steve-O talks of concussions, it’s with the tired experience of someone who has seen too many X-rays of his own head. But while seeing the players age might change the texture of Jackass, the flavour is still the same: there’s something soothing about knowing that, after 21 years, the core concept hasn’t evolved at all: it’s still just men with high pain tolerance getting hit in the balls and laughing about it. “From the beginning of time, you see someone walk and fall down, even the cavemen are going to laugh, you know?” Knoxville says. Tremaine jumps in: “But there’s such a genuine bond between all the guys that to me is so funny.” One stunt in the latest movie sees the Jackasses taken in pairs into a room they are led to believe has a rattlesnake in it, then the lights go out and we are plunged into night vision. “The funniest thing is listening to them deal with each other in just the most horrific situation,” Tremaine laughs. “They’re like old married couples, yelling at each other. It’s just so funny how ingrained those relationships are.” Anyone could have feasibly got famous by letting a snake attack their penis back in 2001. The appeal of Jackass was that the gang did it while so visibly being friends. Forever sees changes to the original cast. Ryan Dunn died in a car crash in 2011. Margera’s near-absence (he appears in a single stunt) is due to his firing over substance abuse problems (his subsequent legal case against Paramount further delayed the release of the film). And while celebrity cameos have always been part of the Jackass identity (Brad Pitt appeared in series three), they are even more numerous now: Forever is studded with gleeful extended appearances from stars who grew up laughing manically as teenagers at the show, such as Machine Gun Kelly and Odd Future’s Jasper Dolphin. They are joined by – gasp! – a woman, in the form of comedian Rachel Wolfson. “Yeah we just brought her in to meet her and she was so game, and so smart,” Knoxville says. “Her mother was the judge who put OJ away!” Is there anything from Jackass’s past that doesn’t make Tremaine and Knoxville laugh any more? The answer is “not really”, which goes some way to explaining its enduringly puerile appeal. “Not everything works, but by the time we’re shooting, there’s almost always something funny about what we’re shooting,” Jeff says. “The really gross stuff I don’t find quite so funny any more,” Knoxville – a man who once clambered into a week-old portable toilet to secure an MTV pilot – admits wearily. “That said, I think I turned in some ideas for this that were pretty gross.” Tremaine butts in with an oddly earnest compliment – “You’ve never been much of a poo poo guy” – and Knoxville blushes in faux humility. “Aw, shucks: you say the sweetest things, Jeff.” So, is this the last time we’ll see Jackass? The term “never say never” is uttered exactly once every 10 minutes over the course of our conversation. Knoxville did take an incredibly heavy knock from a bull in one of the film’s crowning stunts (he and Steve-O were fairly significantly hospitalised over the course of filming). “I got a really gnarly head injury at the end. So I had to get all kinds of tests; I had to see a neurologist and get all these treatments and whatnot. But I feel like a million lira now.” As Tremaine astutely noted, seeing someone else get hit in the balls is always going to be funny. Until it isn’t, you feel, we will always have some form of Jackass. Jackass Forever is released in UK cinemas on 4 FebruarySix years ago it looked as if Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s footballing career was approaching the final whistle. After Sweden’s early exit from Euro 2016, the striker announced his retirement from international competition. At 34, he was getting on a bit for an elite athlete. Cut to November 2021 and, days after firing in a spectacular free-kick for his club, AC Milan, Sweden’s record goalscorer was helping keep alive his country’s hopes of making the next World Cup. The retirement chat was over. “I am trying to prove that 40 is just a number,” he said. Ibrahimovic had joined what feels like a growing club: the quadragenarian athlete holding back the clock. In an era of ever more punishing professional sport, these twilight stars seem to challenge notions that youth trumps all else. Members include American football superstar Tom Brady (44), the tennis legends Venus and Serena Williams (41, 40), Roger Federer (40), and Oksana Chusovitina (46), the eight-time Olympic gymnast from Uzbekistan. There have, of course, always been athletic outliers. But is something else happening? Is it improved nutrition, technology or psychology? Or are sports stars just better at looking after themselves? What are the secrets of prolonged high performance – and what can everyday fortysomethings do to stay healthy during what can be an exhausting yet pivotal decade? I’m only six months younger than Ibrahimovic. I bounded through my 20s and early 30s without a care for much at all. I cycled, ran and swam. I now juggle work stress and two children under four. I ride when I can, a few times a week on a soulless indoor bike, but if I’m not at my desk, I’m picking up toys, food or wriggling humans off the floor. I have watched a slightly dodgy hip and back get worse. I can’t run, feel uncomfortable on the bike and take ibuprofen to help me sleep pain-free. I’m also increasingly aware of my own mortality, and have told myself that 2022 – when I hit 40 – is the year I’ll sort myself out. I suspect my heart and lungs are OK, but I feel I have the physique and flexibility of a much older man. I can hear things creaking. Let’s keep things depressing for a bit. Because 40 is not just a number. “People reach a peak in most sporting events in their mid-30s,” says Stephen Harridge, professor of human and applied physiology at King’s College London. Harridge, 56, a former 400-metre hurdles runner, specialises in ageing. You then enter a “progressive decline in performance” that remains steady until your 70s (don’t ask). Measuring this decline can be tricky. Maximum heart rates are an indicator (they fall). So are 100-metre sprint times in masters and senior races. “During the 40s we see about a 0.6-second decline in men’s and women’s times,” Harridge says. A combination of small changes, including drops in muscle mass, aerobic capacity and neuromuscular control – the way the brain conducts our muscles – add up to a drop in what is possible. In people like me, abused knees, creaky backs, feeble cores and neglected niggles can further limit performance. The elite twilight club has several advantages that make the difference. “The big one is what we call the physiological reserve,” says James Moore, a consultant physiotherapist and director of sport and exercise medicine at the CHHP sports clinic in central London. “They have built up a training history and an ability to listen to their bodies.” A wise head can also count. “We all love older players who can’t run as fast as they used to but have developed this incredible tactical sense, so they don’t have to run any more,” says Jeff Bercovici, author of Play On: How to Get Better With Age. See also: money. We’d all be a bit more supple if we could surround ourselves with physios, trainers, cooks and nannies. Moore, 47, had a call last summer from Andy Murray, who was trying to return to winning form after two hip operations. The Scottish tennis star’s joint woes are unusual for his age (he’s 34), but less so in Moore’s other patients, who tend to be 40-plus high-achievers. Moore reviewed Murray’s rehab and training regime to help him cope better with the inconsistent demands of tennis, where matches can go on for hours, and there may be little time to recover between rounds in a tournament. With older patients, says Moore, the challenge is getting a sense of their changing limits. Anyone, whether they’re heading to Qatar for the 2022 World Cup or KFC via a five-a-side pitch, must be smart enough to go easy – and do less – or risk an injury. Can’t match your 5km personal best from a decade ago, or lift the same in the gym? Don’t sweat it. “You have to park your ego at the door,” says Baz Moffat, former Team GB Olympic rower and co-founder of The Well, a women’s wellbeing advocacy group. Finding enjoyment in an activity is more important than what you do, as then you’ll keep at it. “Let’s not forget that the majority of people hate physical exercise,” says Alexei Sharp, 49, a former decathlete, at the FitFor gym and physiotherapy clinic in south-east London. Moore, who was head of performance for Team GB in Rio, says he has seen so many battered bodies that he can determine a patient’s problem within the first 10 minutes of a consultation. “I spend the rest of the time trying to work out a solution that fits their lifestyle and will motivate them,” he says. Enjoyment often comes from competitive sport that is fun and perhaps nostalgic – five-a-side or netball, perhaps. But if an hour of intense exercise falls between a day at a desk and a session in the pub, you’re asking for trouble. “Five-a-side is so jarring on joints and muscles,” Moore says. The key, he adds, is flushing the chemicals out of muscles that cause pain if left to linger. “Going for a five-minute jog after the match, then stretching, is way better than stretching or just going to the pub.” Cold water also helps this flushing process by stimulating blood flow, whether it’s an ice bath, ice packs or a cold shower. Moore says elite athletes increasingly drink sour cherry juice. It contains natural anti-inflammatories that reduce muscle pain and strength loss after exertion. When pain does stop play, switching to low-impact sports such as swimming and cycling can be good for the cardiovascular system. But the loss of impact can be detrimental. Studies have shown that cartilage, including in the knees, benefits from impact as repetitive squeezing and releasing draws in fluid rich in nutrients and oxygen. Bones need impact to stay strong; studies have shown that competitive cyclists have thinner and more fragile bones than comparable runners. “It’s always a good idea not to just do one type of exercise,” Harridge says. Lifting weights and more resistance-based cycling, such as up a steep hill, can provide some impact, he adds, but regular jogs that are short enough not to trigger niggles will reduce the chances of developing brittle bones later on. Variety also means working a bigger range of muscles. I have a cyclist’s legs but the core and upper body of a lame rabbit. It’s not just about being strong, but protecting joints and promoting balanced movement throughout the body; squats and lunges, for example, strengthen muscles around the knee. It may be significant that Ibrahimovic is trained in taekwondo. His Milan teammate Paolo Maldini, who retired at 40, is also a big tennis player (he made his professional debut in 2017, aged 49, losing in the first round of a doubles tournament in Milan). Sleep is often neglected as a factor in ageing. And in this demographic, stress that results from heightened work responsibility can collide with the demands of a young family. A vicious cycle can develop; discomfort further reduces the quantity and quality of sleep, sapping energy levels. Sleep loss also contributes to a weakened immune system, and an increased chance of developing depression, dementia, type 2 diabetes and heart problems. We also produce vital hormones while sleeping, including testosterone, which has a broad range of effects in men and women, including burning fat, building muscle and strengthening bone. In short, by improving my physical state, I’ll get better sleep, which will further improve my physical state. Beyond mixing a manageable level of impact with more cardiovascular workouts, and working on my sleep and warming-down habits, there is a growing array of devices, diets and obscure protocols that promise to mitigate the effects of age. “I call them the one-percenters that contribute around the margins,” Bercovici says. Yet some have been shown to be effective. Moore is keen on Kaatsu, a form of training in which bands that restrict blood flow to muscles stimulate their growth and function. Like cold water or ice, he says handheld massage guns can also help flush out muscles after exercise. I have been advised to consult a physiotherapist for my own ailments, and be wary of following, say, a random stretching routine on YouTube that may make things worse. Targeted pilates moves, Sharp says, are what I need to rebalance my body and reduce lower-back strain. Then I can get back to running and should become stronger on the bike. And I’ll be able to lift my kids without thinking twice. Because the good news is, while elite athletes have to eke out a few more years at the top after being used to supreme performance, it’s perfectly possible for amateurs to peak in their 40s. “You see a lot of people take up new sports then and find they’re on that rewarding part of the curve where they’re getting better and better,” says Bercovici. Perhaps Ibrahimovic will pivot to completing an iron man in a couple of years. Meanwhile, he’ll play football for as long as he can. “I don’t want to stop until I’m kicked out, well and truly finished,” he said of his heroic comeback for Sweden. Two weeks later, he admitted to a certain frailty in an interview with the Guardian: “Every day I wake up, I have pain everywhere,” he said. There’s hope for us all.Later this year the founder of the far-right Oath Keepers militia and nine alleged co-conspirators will be the first to face trial on seditious conspiracy charges related to the insurrection at the US Capitol. The charges are significant because they allege that the January 6 attack went beyond disorderly conduct and assaults on law enforcement, instead constituting an organized and violent attempt to stop the democratic transfer of power. But because sedition charges so rarely go to trial, there isn’t a great deal of precedent for how such trials proceed, experts say. And US prosecutors have a checkered history in securing sedition convictions. “It’s been used in ways that have been absurd and has been used in ways that were slam dunks,” said Joshua Braver, an assistant professor of law at the University of Wisconsin. But unlike some previous uses of seditious conspiracy, many experts say the case against the Oath Keepers is strong. “This case is different. This case is a plan that was executed and the federal government is on much stronger grounds,” Braver said. “If anything is seditious conspiracy, this is it.” The checkered history of seditious conspiracy trials Seditious conspiracy is a broad statute that concerns attempts to overthrow the government, levy war against it or prevent, hinder or delay the execution of any law. It also can be applied in cases where suspects seize any government property and carries up to 20 years in prison if convicted. Partly because seditious conspiracy allegations carry so much political weight, prosecutors have generally been hesitant to bring such charges in the past. “Seditious conspiracy charges are rarely used in American jurisprudence,” said Jeffrey Ian Ross, a criminologist and expert on political crime at the University of Baltimore. Prosecutors can be wary of issuing such charges, even in cases that may fall under its broad statute, he added. The last successfully prosecuted seditious conspiracy case came in the mid-1990s, when authorities charged Islamist extremist Sheikh Omar Abdel-Rahman and nine co-conspirators with seditious conspiracy. Prosecutors alleged that Abdel-Rahman and his followers plotted to bomb the United Nations, the FBI building and several other landmarks around New York City. During the trial, prosecutors presented the jury with speeches of Abdel-Rahman and a recording from an FBI informant in which Abdel-Rahman discussed attacking military installations. The defense, meanwhile, argued that Abdel-Rahman’s speech was constitutionally protected and that he never directly planned attacks. After a week of deliberation, jury members convicted the group of seditious conspiracy along with numerous other charges. Abdel-Rahman died in prison in 2017. Decades before the Abdel-Rahman trial, prosecutors secured a seditious conspiracy conviction against Puerto Rican nationalists who stormed the Capitol building. The Puerto Rican independence activist Lolita Lebrón and three accomplices entered the House floor and fired dozens of bullets around the chamber, wounding five legislators. The group, along with numerous people charged as co-conspirators, were convicted of seditious conspiracy and spent over two decades in jail until Jimmy Carter commuted their sentence in 1979. Other seditious conspiracy cases have fallen apart once they have gone to trial, including the most recent attempt at the charge in 2012. Prosecutors alleged that nine members of the Christian far-right Hutaree militia committed seditious conspiracy through a plot to kill a police officer and then attack their funeral in order to incite an uprising against the government. The defense successfully argued that militia members’ discussion of violent rebellion was essentially fantastical boasting, protected by the first amendment and that any specific plots were instigated by an FBI informant who had infiltrated the group. The militia members were ultimately acquitted of sedition, albeit with several pleading guilty to less severe weapons charges. A 1988 seditious conspiracy trial involving 13 white supremacists accused of plotting to overthrow the government and assassinate a federal judge provided an even more severe cautionary tale. Prosecutors in the case cut a plea deal with a white supremacist leader, Glenn Miller, who potentially faced decades in prison for other crimes, agreeing to reduce his charges in exchange for him testifying in the sedition trial. But Miller’s testimony turned out to be weak and unreliable, leading to an all-white jury acquitting all 13 white supremacists. The national chaplain of the Ku Klux Klan hugged several defendants following the verdict and touted it as a victory for white nationalism. In the years after the trial, Miller was released from prison and once again became active in the white supremacist movement despite being in the federal witness protection program. In 2014, he killed three people, including a 14-year-old boy, at a Jewish community center and retirement home in Kansas. He died in prison last May. The case against the Oath Keepers The case against Rhodes and the Oath Keepers is more straightforward than past seditious conspiracy charges against the far right, experts say, both because there appears to be extensive evidence of planning before the Capitol attack and because numerous members took tangible actions to breach the Capitol. Even Rhodes, who is not believed to have actually stormed the building, is alleged to have plotted to bring weapons to the area and coordinate militia movements. In the weeks before the insurrection, Rhodes allegedly purchased tens of thousands of dollars worth of weapons and began communicating to other Oath Keepers in an encrypted group chat. “We aren’t getting through this without a civil war,” he messaged days after the presidential election. One Oath Keeper admitted as part of a plea deal last year that he brought an M4 rifle to a Comfort Inn hotel near the Capitol, while Rhodes and others allegedly discussed “quick reaction force” teams that could move into Washington DC with firearms. Once inside the Capitol, prosecutors state in their indictment that one group of Oath Keepers moved in a military “stack” formation and went in search of the speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi. The Oath Keepers “coordinated travel across the country to enter Washington, DC, equipped themselves with a variety of weapons, donned combat and tactical gear, and were prepared to answer Rhodes’s call to take up arms”, the charging documents against Rhodes state. Rhodes this week pleaded not guilty to the charges and has repeatedly denied that he has done anything wrong or broken any laws. After federal agents used a warrant to seize his phone in May last year, Rhodes stated that he sat for a nearly three-hour interview with authorities and claimed he had nothing to hide. He claims that Oath Keepers who entered the Capitol went “totally off mission” and that he was only there to prevent his militia members from getting into trouble. At a Texas rally in the months following the insurrection, he told a crowd that he may go to jail for “made-up crimes”. Rhodes was denied bail, in part because the federal judge overseeing his detention hearing stated that the militia leader had installed “elaborate escape tunnels” on his property and posed a flight risk. As one of the most prominent leaders in the far-right movement over the past decade, Rhodes’s trial is set to be the highest-profile case so far in the investigation and one of the most significant domestic extremism cases in years. More than 700 people are charged with crimes related to the insurrection, but the majority of those cases have involved less complex charges that don’t require proving the type of coordination and planning that seditious conspiracy indictments involve. Meanwhile, most of the more than 150 people who have so far pleaded guilty in the investigation have received relatively short sentences or no jail time at all. “They’ve gone for the low-hanging fruit first and things are going to get more interesting as the days go by,” Ross said.The attorney general is reviewing the sentence given to a man whose then girlfriend was left with catastrophic brain injuries when she fell out of a van travelling at 60mph after he kidnapped her. Angel Lynn, 19, has been left unable to walk or talk after she sustained a fractured skull and brain injuries when she fell from the vehicle on to a dual carriageway near Loughborough in September 2020. Her then boyfriend, Chay Bowskill, 20, was sentenced to seven and a half years at a young offender institution on Wednesday after being found guilty of kidnapping, and coercive and controlling behaviour. He was also convicted of perverting the course of justice after he put pressure on his mother to withdraw her police statement. The attorney general, Suella Braverman, has received a complaint that the sentence is unduly lenient and will now examine the case before deciding whether to refer it to the court of appeal, which would then decide if it should be increased. CCTV footage played to jurors at Leicester crown court showed Bowskill grabbing Lynn as she walked away from him after an argument and bundling her into a silver Transit van that was being driven by his friend Rocco Sansome, 20. Bowskill was cleared of causing grievous bodily harm as the defence claimed Lynn jumped or accidentally fell on to the road, and the prosecution failed to prove she was pushed or thrown. During sentencing, the judge Timothy Spencer QC said Lynn “was belittled by [Bowskill] to a point she must have felt, on a regular basis, worthless”. “You bombarded her with repulsive, degrading messages, sometimes within a timespan of a few hours. You controlled her freedom of movement by a variety of means and she was not allowed any sort of life apart from you,” he said. The judge said she “would not have suffered those devastating injuries” had he not kidnapped her. Sansome was also found guilty of kidnap and sentenced to 21 months in a young offender institution. He was disqualified from driving for 12 months after he was found to have been over the drug-drive limit at the time of the offence. Police said Lynn was found lying seriously injured in the carriageway of the A6 near Loughborough, and remained in hospital requiring round-the-clock care for her injuries. Her father, Paddy Lynn, said in a statement on behalf of the family that their lives “have been changed beyond recognition for ever”. He said: “Angel was so full of life and had such a great future ahead of her. That future has sadly been taken away from her. The catastrophic injuries Angel suffered will mean life will never be the same for her or our family. “Every day is not only a huge struggle for Angel but also a huge struggle for our family and friends. We are lucky in some ways as we are a close family, we have lots of lovely friends who help us and people that care in other ways. “We don’t know what the future holds for our daughter but we try to put smiles on our faces each day but inside our hearts are bleeding out.” DCI Tony Yarwood, the senior investigating officer in the case, said: “Because of the extent of her injuries she now faces constant medical treatment and round-the-clock care. No verdict or subsequent sentence can make up for the quality of life this young woman has lost.”Energy efficiency measures have already saved the average British household about £1,000 a year in energy bills, and further insulation and home improvements could halve future bills, analysis has shown. But the future savings are unlikely to be realised unless the government focuses swiftly on insulation, as the savings to date have come largely from efficiency improvements in electrical appliances and boilers, which will not be repeated. The energy price cap is forecast to rise to £2,000 for a typical household in April, owing to the gas crisis, from about £1,300 today. But average household energy bills would be £3,000 a year if it were not for a range of regulatory measures that have brought down energy use in the last two decades, according to the Regulatory Assistance Project (RAP), an analyst organisation. Jan Rosenow, director of European programmes at RAP, said the analysis showed the failures of the government in the past decade to take action that would have staved off much of the current energy price crisis. “If the government had acted, we could have had a properly funded programme that would have reduced greenhouse gases and energy bills,” he said. Electrical appliances such as lightbulbs, fridges and washing machines now use much less power than 20 years ago, owing to EU directives. A 2005 UK government regulation mandating the use of condensing boilers has brought down average gas use significantly. Energy consumption overall has declined by 16% since 2000 despite a 15% increase in the number of homes, the average home being 10% larger and the rise in appliance ownership, the RAP said. Insulation, double glazing and similar home upgrades have also somewhat reduced energy use, Rosenow said, but by far less than could have been possible, as the UK has fallen behind on such improvements. Insulation rates have plummeted in the past decade, after successive government schemes have been scrapped and not replaced. At least 14m households have missed out on insulation because of the abandonment of the green deal scheme, which was set up in 2013 and stopped in 2015, with only about 15,000 homes upgraded. A further 47,500 were improved in the most recent successor scheme, the green homes grant, instead of the 600,000 promised, when the scheme was scrapped after only six months. The “stop-start” nature of the government’s insulation efforts has also stifled the growth of the insulation industry, which requires skilled workers and a broad network of suppliers, Rosenow added. Thousands of jobs have been lost in the industry over the past decade. The RAP analysis suggested it would be a mistake to cut the energy company obligation (ECO), which the government is considering. The £1bn a year programme, the cost of which is added to energy bills, channels funding to insulation for people on low incomes. Cutting ECO “would slow down the much-needed transformation of our housing stock and leave more people exposed to rising energy prices in the future”, RAP said. The RAP findings tally with separate estimates from Carbon Brief that cutting insulation programmes in the past 10 years has added about £1bn a year to the UK’s energy bills. Rosenow said the failure to keep up consistent action on insulation was a massive missed opportunity, but that action now could still reduce bills in future years. Some analysts have forecast high gas prices for at least the next two years, as the world recovers from the coronavirus pandemic and economic shocks. “Gas boilers are now about as efficient as they can be. The big area for improvement is insulation,” said Rosenow. “You can’t get to net zero without insulation. It’s impossible, it would be far too expensive and impractical.” Some Conservative MPs and rightwing commentators have argued that the net zero target should be reconsidered in light of the energy crisis, and have called for more oil and gas exploration. However, analysts have shown that renewable power has reduced the cost of electricity generation, and that overreliance on gas is the leading cause of high prices. “Green” Tories have also stepped up their defence of the net zero targets in recent days. Alok Sharma, president of the Cop26 climate summit, in a speech to the Chatham House thinktank said: “Clean is competitive, and the global race to supply the technologies and solutions a net zero world needs is on. The train is pulling out of the station and countries and companies that want to remain competitive need to leap on now.” Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, told the Bright Blue thinktank: “People who are sceptical about net zero worry that it’s going to add to the cost of energy bills … [But] this is all about taking a lead, jobs and exports. We can steal a march on the world by learning how to decarbonise. For decarbonisation, we want to be the pilots, not the passengers.” A government spokesperson said: “We welcome this research and have always said energy efficiency is key to cutting bills. That’s why we are investing over £6.6bn to decarbonise homes and buildings, and bringing in higher minimum performance standards to help reduce energy bills and tackle climate change. “Government plans for the energy company obligation include increasing the value of the scheme to £1bn per annum and extending it from 2022 to 2026, as set out in our fuel poverty strategy.”Good morning. The US and Germany have increased warnings to Russia that the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline will not open if Moscow invades Ukraine, as efforts to find a diplomatic solution to the crisis continue. The multibillion-dollar pipeline, which would more than double the supply of Russian natural gas to Germany, has been completed but it requires testing and regulatory approval. “If Russia invades Ukraine, one way or another Nord Stream 2 will not move forward,” said Victoria Nuland, the US undersecretary of state for political affairs. “I think the statements coming out of Berlin even today are very, very strong.” What is Russia asking for? It denies planning to invade but last month demanded a number of security guarantees. The main one, which was rejected, was that Ukraine be indefinitely barred from joining Nato. What else has the US offered? Joe Biden told the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, that the US was considering offering economic support. It has provided $650m in military assistance in the past year. Could Nato troops be involved? Nato has put 8,500 troops on standby. There are more than 100,000 Russian soldiers at its border. Sarah Palin repeatedly dined out after positive Covid test The former Republican vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin has been spotted dining out on multiple occasions in New York despite testing positive for Covid. The ex-Alaska governor, who is unvaccinated, was seen eating outdoors in the upper east side restaurant Elio’s on Wednesday after a positive test, according to photos published by Mediaite. Palin, who confirmed her positive test on Monday, was also seen dining outdoors on Tuesday night at Campagnola, according to Gothamist. CDC guidelines state that people with Covid-19 should isolate for a minimum of five days to avoid infecting others. What has the reaction been? City officials have said Palin needs to “follow the rules just like everyone else”, saying she has shown “a complete disregard” for the safety of others. Killings in LA highlight crisis of gun violence facing Black women Three recent killings in Los Angeles have highlighted the way gun violence affects Black women and girls and the lack of coverage their stories receive. On 8 January, officials found the body of Tioni Theus, 16, on the 110 freeway. She had been shot. Two weeks later, on 23 January, sisters Breahna Stines, 20, and Marneysha Hamilton, 25, were among four people shot dead at Stines’ birthday party in Inglewood. Neither case received much attention beyond local media. Authorities this week announced a $110,000 reward for information leading to an arrest in Theus’s case, an intervention that her family and Black Los Angeles residents had been calling for weeks. By how much have killings increased over the pandemic? Homicides rose by 30% between 2019 and 2020 in California and across the US, the biggest single-year increase in the 60 years the FBI has been tracking such data. In California, homicides of Black women nearly doubled in 2020. A total of 99 women were killed, compared with 55 in 2019, according to FBI data analyzed for the Guardian. In other news … The death toll from Tropical Storm Ana has risen to 77 after three southern African countries were battered by torrential rain this week. Madagascar declared a state of national disaster on Thursday night as the toll climbed to 48. Mozambique reported 18 dead and Malawi 11. The death on Tuesday of a 37-year-old Polish woman who had been refused an abortion has sparked protests against Poland’s restrictive abortion laws. Although her cause of death has not been confirmed by the hospital, the family of Agnieszka T suspect she died of sepsis and accuse the government of having “blood on its hands”. A convoy of truckers is heading from Vancouver to Ottawa to protest against Canadian vaccine requirements and other public health measures. Alongside support from Canadian conservatives, the group have received endorsements by Donald Trump Jr and Elon Musk. Stat of the day: average American produces 585 times more CO2 emissions than a Congolese person The average American produces climate emissions 585 times higher than someone from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, analysis by the Center for Global Development (CGD) has found. The research, which underlines the “vast energy inequality” between rich and poor nations, was prompted after the “climate hypocrisy” of rich countries at Cop26 caught the attention of Euan Ritchie, a policy analyst at CGD Europe. Don’t miss this: Inside the Encanto-mania sweeping the world Disney’s 60th animated feature film, Encanto, came out as the Omicron variant emerged, denting its box office success. But two months on, the animated movie, which is soundtracked by Lin-Manuel Miranda and is partly about the challenge of living up to family expectations, is having a cultural moment. The movie has particularly resonated with Latinx audiences, with the producer, Yvett Merino, saying: “I heard how hard my parents worked to give us a better life. You hold that in you … I think that’s really part of what hits, what is connecting with people.” Last Thing: Lithuanian girl’s letter from Polish penpal delivered 51 years late What with the pandemic and shipping crisis, many people have become resigned to occasional delays in getting their mail. Few expect to wait 51 years, though, as Genovefa Klonovska, a Lithuanian woman in her 60s, did. The letter, from a penpal in Poland she can no longer remember, was one of several to fall out of a ventilation shaft in an old post office over the summer. “It’s so good that the letter was inconsequential. The loss was not life-changing,” said Klonovska. “What if they delivered a lost letter from a suitor to his love, and their wedding never happened?” Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comAn investigation by an EU watchdog into text messages sent by European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, to Pfizer’s CEO has found the EU’s executive arm guilty of “maladministration”. Von der Leyen’s aides are heavily criticised in the ruling from Emily O’Reilly, the European ombudsman, for their handling of requests for publication of the messages sent during negotiations over vaccine purchases. The commission initially claimed that after a thorough search it had not “identified” any text messages between Von der Leyen and Albert Bourla, whose company is forecasting revenues of $36bn (£26bn) from vaccine sales this financial year. But the EU ombudsman’s investigation found that the search carried out by commission officials for conversations by text message was restricted to an internal record of documents. Von der Leyen’s texts had not been stored there and the commission president’s personal office had not been asked if any such messages existed. The commission later claimed it did not believe that text messages were covered by the EU law regarding the requirement to store documents relating to policy as they were “short-lived”. O’Reilly said the commission’s behaviour fell short of the levels of transparency required under EU law. She said: “The narrow way in which this public access request was treated meant that no attempt was made to identify if any text messages existed. This falls short of reasonable expectations of transparency and administrative standards in the commission. “Not all text messages need to be recorded, but text messages clearly do fall under the EU transparency law and so relevant text messages should be recorded. It is not credible to claim otherwise.” The commission has now been instructed to carry out a further comprehensive search for the text messages, the existence of which was first reported in an interview with Von der Leyen about her “personal diplomacy” carried in the New York Times in April 2021. “When it comes to the right of public access to EU documents, it is the content of the document that matters and not the device or form,” O’Reilly said. “If text messages concern EU policies and decisions, they should be treated as EU documents. The EU administration needs to update its document recording practices to reflect this reality.” Von der Leyen, who was Germany’s defence minister before moving to Brussels, was engulfed in a similar scandal shortly after leaving Berlin for Brussels in 2019. She denied having anything to hide after it emerged that one of her two mobile phones being sought by a German parliamentary committee had been wiped. The committee had been investigating whether lucrative defence contracts were awarded to outside consultants without oversight and whether personal connections were behind those deals. Von der Leyen, who was later cleared of responsibility, admitted to the German parliament in 2018 that “negligence by overworked officials” had led to “mistakes” during her time in the ministry. Sophie in ‘t Veld, a Dutch MEP, said the commission had become less transparent over its decisions under Von der Leyen’s leadership and called on the European parliament to hold her to account. She said: “This is bigger than just text messaging between Von der Leyen and Pfizer. In a democracy, transparency is the cornerstone of any relationship between an executive and the legislature that checks the executive’s power. The European Commission has become less transparent, less accountable to the European parliament and frankly more unhinged from European democracy.” Pfizer has signed multiple contracts with the European Commission for its vaccine. The most recent reserved an additional 1.8bn doses, at a higher price than previously set, to be delivered between the end of 2021 to 2023 among the 27 EU member states. The commission has been criticised for the high prices negotiated for the mRNA Covid vaccines, with one analysis suggesting the EU paid €31bn (£25bn) above the cost of production. A European Commission spokesperson said on Friday that they did not have any comment to make until their formal response to the findings had been given to the ombudsman.TV. There’s a lot of it. Too much to watch, unless you have enough screens to consume 13 shows at once, like Ed Harris in the Truman Show. Between trusty old broadcast telly and the insurgent forces of Netflix, Disney, Amazon, Apple and co, there is an astronomical amount of programming currently being pumped out. And, while Succession, Squid Game and the like attract plenty of column inches, there are plenty of other shows that fall between the cracks, either by dint of appearing on a niche network or through being under-promoted by one of the giants. So this week we’re giving overdue props to five of them. And if we’ve missed any (we definitely have), feel free to let us know: more info on that at the bottom of this newsletter. My Brilliant Friend (Sky Atlantic/Now TV) Adapting Elena Ferrante’s sprawling yet finely-drawn Neapolitan novels always seemed like an impossible task. And yet, this series – a co-production between HBO and Italian public broadcaster Rai – manages to effortlessly captures the essence of the Italian writer’s coming-of-age saga. Despite this, the series seems to largely fly under the radar in discussions about the best shows of the moment: perhaps its third series, which airs next month in the UK, may push it over the top. Pls Like (BBC iPlayer) You’ll only need a spare four hours to watch all of “greying millennial” Liam Williams’s super satire of the world of vloggers: every episode in each of its six-part series is just 15 minutes long. Last year’s third outing was the best yet, expertly skewering influencer culture, but also finding time to poke fun at pandemic-era rules and regs. The Bureau (Amazon/Sundance Now) Between Call My Agent, Spiral, Lupin and Baron Noir, French TV is en bonne condition at present. This series, about a deep cover unit (the fantastically titled Le Bureau des Légendes), is widely considered to be the best of the lot, but has barely been seen in the UK, where it is only available on Amazon’s Sundance Now channel. You’ll need to cough up for an extra subscription, but you’ll be rewarded with a fantastically taut drama that combines the better moments of Homeland with layered, Le Carré-ish spycraft. Dark Side of the Ring (All 4) It’s been a very long time since I’ve been able to watch professional wrestling with a straight face. But a documentary series about the real life stories behind professional wrestling? That’s another matter. Vice’s documentary exposes the industry’s grim underbelly with tales of addiction, corruption and even murder. At times it veers into salacious true crime territory, but it’s impeccably researched, boasts an impressive roster of talking heads, and manages to pack some truly eye-opening tales into its three seasons. Patriot/Perpetual Grace Ltd (Amazon/Starzplay) Steven Conrad is the best TV showrunner you’ve (probably) never heard of. His Amazon comedy-drama Patriot – about a wayward yet lethal, folk song-singing intelligence officer who has to go undercover in a midwest piping company – was one of the most audacious and original shows of the past decade, yet was unceremoniously dumped after two under-watched seasons. He followed it up with Perpetual Grace Ltd (available on another Amazon premium channel, Starzplay), a Coen brothers-ish neo-western which, despite starring Ben Kingsley and Luis Guzmán, ended after season one. Both are very much worth your time, and I’m also looking forward to catching Conrad’s new animated series Ultra City Smiths, which seems to be Raymond Chandler crossed with Team America. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.The Guardian’s parent company has hired a former chair of Channel 4 to lead its board of directors, as part of a wider corporate restructuring at the owner of the Guardian and Observer. Charles Gurassa left Channel 4 this week after six years in the role, having spent the second half of his tenure fighting government plans to privatise the broadcaster. He will take up his new role as chair of Guardian Media Group (GMG) in March. Gurassa’s appointment follows changes to the Guardian’s governance structure and the departure of the former chief executive Annette Thomas. GMG operates the Guardian and its associated outlets on a day-to-day basis. It is in turn owned by the Scott Trust, which is backed by an endowment fund designed to give the Guardian financial security and freedom from editorial interference by an individual proprietor. A governance review published in December found that the old relationship between GMG and the Scott Trust boards no longer suited the needs of the organisation. It concluded that while the Scott Trust would retain responsibility for appointing the Guardian’s editor-in-chief and ensuring the independence of the outlet’s reporting, its board would focus more on managing its financial endowment and making long-term investment plans. In turn, the directors of Guardian Media Group will have responsibility for overseeing the Guardian’s business strategy and appointing a chief executive to run commercial operations. As part of this change, two Scott Trust board members with journalistic backgrounds – Emily Bell and Mary Ann Sieghart – moved across to Guardian Media Group. Gurassa will take control of GMG at a time when its finances are in a healthy state and reader contributions are continuing to rise. The Scott Trust provides up to £30m a year to fund GMG’s operations but last year the company required only half of this. Gurassa’s early decisions will include the appointment of a new chief executive. In addition to Gurassa’s part-time role at the Guardian he will remain chair of the board of directors at other organisations including the aid charity Oxfam, the Migration Museum in London and the rail tour company Great Rail Journeys. He is also a trustee of English Heritage. Gurassa said: “I have been an admirer and reader of the Guardian for many years, and its purpose as an independent media organisation has never been more vital, both in the UK and globally. I look forward to working with my new colleagues to achieve the Guardian’s commercial ambitions, in support of its vital journalistic mission.” The outgoing GMG chair, Neil Berkett, who is stepping down after eight years in the job, said he had been proud to lead the organisation: “Despite the volatility the media sector has been through, the board, management team and most importantly the staff of the organisation have had many tremendous successes, turning the Guardian from a leading British newspaper and website into one of the world’s leading digital news media organisations.”Claire Fuller’s Costa prize-winning novel begins with 70-year-old Dot getting up in the night in her farm cottage and collapsing from a stroke by the kitchen hearth. Her body is found in the morning by her two adult children who face an uncertain future in the wake of her death. Twins Jeanie and Julius are 51 years old and have led desperately sheltered lives, never venturing far from home, living off the land and eschewing modern necessities such as bank accounts, television and the internet. Unsettled Ground provides a richly detailed portrait of two outsiders out of step with the world and forced to confront the lies their late mother told to keep them at home. As well as showing the siblings’ emotional implosion, Fuller depicts the harsh realities of life in a remote rural community where work is scarce and many live in dire poverty. Reader Rachel Bavidge – who has narrated works by Paula Hawkins and Adele Parks, and Fuller’s own Bitter Orange – deftly gives voice to Jeanie and Julius, capturing their frustration and heartbreak as they realise the scale of their mother’s deception, as well as the peripheral figures who variously help and hinder their journey towards a new life. These include Dot’s old friend Bridget, who provides emotional support as the twins deal with the bureaucracy of bereavement; Spencer Rawson, the wealthy neighbour whose cottage they live in and who threatens them with eviction; and the family doctor who delivers some shocking news that causes Jeanie to reassess not just her mother but her entire existence. • Unsettled Ground is available from Penguin Audio, 9hr 29min. Further listening Damn Shame David Pevsner, Random House Canada, 11hr 5min The actor David Pevsner reads his eye-wateringly candid memoir, looking back on his career during which he supplemented his screen and stage income by working as a male escort. White Debt Thomas Harding, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 10hr 8min Ben Onwukwe and Mark Meadows narrate this sensitive account of the uprising of enslaved people in Demerara (now part of Guyana) in 1823, and the role of the author’s ancestors in colonialist oppression.At a time when some of the Premier League’s biggest names are dotted across the world, with Arsenal and Newcastle opting for warm-weather training camps in the Middle East while other players, often towing obscenely big graphite suitcases, have escaped for exotic destinations such as the Bahamas and the Maldives, the English Football League rolls on. Bernardo Silva, binoculars at the ready, has been spotting elephants and leopards on a safari in Sri Lanka and the Brentford head coach, Thomas Frank, is using the break to zigzag down ski slopes in Switzerland. But for the Championship it is full steam ahead, the division ready to savour its moment in the sun. Just because there is no top-flight football this weekend does not mean there is nothing worth watching. Far from it, given that for the next generation of players the Championship represents a Premier League waiting room of sorts. For many, the secret is already out. Brentford have seen several bids rejected for the exciting Nottingham Forest winger Brennan Johnson and the Blackburn striker Ben Brereton Díaz’s rise has equally not gone unnoticed (he scored again for Chile on Friday and remains on international duty). Among those who appear capable of playing at a higher level are the Bristol City forward Antoine Semenyo, the Hull centre-back Jacob Greaves, the Huddersfield pair Sorba Thomas and Lewis O’Brien and Forest’s on-loan Middlesbrough full-back Djed Spence, released by Fulham in 2018. Luke Southwood and Nathan Baxter are goalkeepers grasping their first taste of the second tier at Reading and Hull respectively, the latter on loan from Chelsea. Millions of fans do not need convincing, with combined attendances in the second tier totalling more than 5.1 million in 2021- 22 – the biggest crowd, 29,832, coming at Middlesbrough v Forest on Boxing Day. But the Premier League is where almost all 24 Championship sides pine to be and, such is the division’s unpredictability, more than half will still fancy their chances of claiming one of the three promotion places. If anything typifies the erratic nature of it all, it was the confirmation this week that Hull’s new owner, Acun Ilicali, who revealed his £30m takeover was happening while live on television presenting a Turkish adaptation of The Voice, had sacked Grant McCann despite successive victories over Blackburn and Bournemouth, who are second and third respectively. The former Rangers striker Shota Arveladze, whose last job was in Uzbekistan with Pakhtakor Tashkent, is the new manager. On Saturday Blackburn, this season’s surprise package under the wily Tony Mowbray, visit a creaking Kenilworth Road, home to Luton for the past 117 years. Mowbray is the definition of level-headed but even he let his guard down on Monday, punching the air after they edged out Boro, one of his former clubs. More than 1,000 away fans will clink through the turnstiles, via a portal nestled among terraced houses on Oak Road, making the pilgrimage up a steel stairwell that overlooks back gardens and washing lines before they get their first glimpse of the pitch. For Blackburn, it marks game 31 of a marathon season but others have it tougher, with Wigan and Cambridge of League One, and Hartlepool of League Two, in line to play at least 59 games each owing to their progress in the FA Cup and EFL Trophy. The Championship pacemakers are a yo-yoing and free-scoring Fulham who, given the ease with which they have dispatched opponents of late (they have scored 22 goals across their past four matches and recorded two 7-0 away wins in three months), could be forgiven for already thinking about how to ensure they are at least the 17th-best team in England next season. Aleksandar Mitrovic is Fulham’s ringleader (he has scored 30 goals in 31 games for club and country this season) but others, including Harry Wilson and the Lisbon-born teenager Fabio Carvalho, who has contributed seven of Fulham’s 73 league goals from attacking midfield, have also flourished. Carvalho, who joined Fulham from Balham amid interest from Chelsea and Manchester United eight years ago, is the kind of talent worth tuning in for and another example of a player who looks set to count the Championship as a key rung on the ladder to a fine career. Last season Ivan Toney and Michael Olise excelled for Brentford and Reading respectively, and have since thrived in the top flight, the latter for Crystal Palace. Jarrod Bowen, who started his career at Hereford United, joined West Ham from Hull midway through the 2019-20 season, while Ollie Watkins and Eberechi Eze earned moves to Aston Villa and Palace for the following campaign. All four midfielders who ended up in the last England squad after withdrawals and replacements – Conor Gallagher, Jude Bellingham, Emile Smith Rowe and Kalvin Phillips – played in the Championship within the past two years and in all 16 earned their stripes at EFL clubs, including Reece James, who starred on loan at Wigan from Chelsea. Gallagher made his league debut for Charlton in the Championship before joining Swansea and Smith Rowe spent the second half of the 2019-20 campaign at Huddersfield. Phillips had six seasons in the second tier with Leeds, playing in a variety of positions for a mixture of managers. Those journeys provide obvious inspiration but for some teams expectations have had to be realigned and any thoughts of personal accolades put on the back burner. Surviving the season would represent success for a Derby side weighed down by a 21-point deduction and the threat of liquidation amid protracted takeover talks, while Reading are in the midst of a worrying tailspin that has left them teetering above the relegation zone, with six points deducted, and Barnsley, bottom and winless in the league since 3 November, look doomed. The race for the play-offs, as ever, is most intriguing, with several teams, including Coventry and Sheffield United, armed with games in hand. Seventh-placed Forest are the flavour of the month, though – four straight wins in January, including against Arsenal in the FA Cup, showcased their credentials under Steve Cooper, a young coach with a budding reputation. On Sunday his side visit struggling Cardiff, where the former Swansea manager is guaranteed a cold reception, despite his father, Keith, a former referee, being a Cardiff fan at heart. Forest represent formidable opponents and have lost only once on the road since 21 August, when they were bottom of the pile. In the Championship it is wise to expect the unexpected.It looks to be a sublime matchup of contrasts when first-time grand slam finalist Danielle Collins of the United States takes on Australian native and world No 1 Ash Barty in the Australian Open final on Saturday in Melbourne. While Barty, seeking her third major title, is the clear favorite she’ll have to stave off the inspired Collins, who is in the best form of her career. For the 30th-ranked Collins, 28, reaching the final is the culmination of years of hard work and stick-to-itiveness as her powerful, high-risk, aggressive game is finally paying dividends. Further, Collins’ rebound from surgery to treat endometriosis last spring has given her a renewed sense of optimism and focus. Before her semi-final demolition of Iga Swiatek, one of the pre-tournament favorites, Collins spoke about her physical recovery. “It finally got to the point where I couldn’t deal any longer with it physically or mentally. Once I was able to get the proper diagnosis and the surgery, I feel like it’s helped me so much – not just from a physical standpoint but from a mental standpoint.” Indeed, since July, Collins has a sterling 32-7 singles record. Collins’ emergence at the top of the sport runs counter to the prevailing norms in women’s tennis. Compared to her American peers who reached a high level of success or renown at a young age (the Williams sisters, Sofia Kenin, Sloane Stephens, Madison Keys, Coco Gauff among others), Collins is coming into her own in her late 20s, normally late middle-age in women’s tennis years. Consider, Collins didn’t even turn pro until she was 22, after a stellar collegiate career that saw her win two NCAA titles at the University of Virginia. The all-court, go-for-broke game that Collins possesses has always made her one of the most enjoyable players for fans to watch. And while many of the high-ranked women have ferocious groundstrokes, what makes Collins unique is that she is just as adept in the forecourt, allowing her to finish off points in swift fashion. Yet part of the reason why Collins’ game has taken longer to mature into the top-tier player she has become is that her on-court decision-making was lacking. But she has now married her all-court abandon with a newfound strategic acumen and increased mental focus, rapidly developing into one of the most dangerous players on tour. (On the men’s side Denis Shapovalov is undergoing a similar transformation.) Collins’ full arsenal of shots was on view during her comprehensive beating of the slam champion Swiatek on Thursday. It was perhaps the finest win of her career. So far. Collins would love to play as soundly in the final against Barty as she did in the semi-finals. This is a much, much tougher ask. As noted above, this is a final with as many contrasts as one could hope for. The differences are numerous: Barty turned pro at 14, while Collins was 22; Collins plays with extraordinary power and takes high risks to pummel her foes, while Barty utilises touch and a staggering array of spins and angles to stymie her opponents; Barty is relatively diminutive by women’s tennis standards, at 5ft 5in while Collins is 5ft 10in. The two have played four times, with Barty leading the rivalry 3-1. Collins won their last meeting, at an Australian Open tune-up event in 2021. Look for the service return to be the key to the match, especially for Collins. While Barty doesn’t possess the power of Collins, she is nonetheless one of the best servers in women’s tennis – if not the best – with a simple, natural motion and a preternatural ability to place the ball in all corners of the box. To wit: during this Australian Open Barty had a streak of 63 consecutive service games held. Which is why Collins will have to take chances with her return, especially on the second serve. In her semifinal vanquishing of Swiatek, Collins won an astounding 86% of second-serve return points (including seven all-out winners). It’ll be imperative for Collins to dominate court-positioning early in points so she can immediately put Barty on the defensive. Collins will likely move forward into the court on the return, especially on Barty’s second deliveries. Finally, will the ever-lurking force at any slam final – nerves – be a deciding factor? All the pressure, as well as the home-crowd support, will be on the Barty’s side. The immensely affable home favorite knows the history she’s up against: an Australian woman hasn’t won her home Slam since Chris O’Neil in 1978 (Mark Edmondson was the last Aussie man to win, in 1976). How she handles the expectations may well determine the outcome of the match. Whatever transpires on a muggy Melbourne Saturday evening, it appears to be a contest that’s guaranteed to please.Baby, Sleepy Baby by Atinuke and Angela Brooksbank (Walker, £12.99) This dreamy, unrhymed lullaby for the tiniest listeners is based on a song from the author’s own childhood. Illustrated in soft moonlit tones, it’s filled with smiles, stars and a sense of boundless love. Monster! Hungry! Phone! by Sean Taylor and Fred Benaglia (Bloomsbury, £6.99) A starving monster calls multiple wrong numbers – including a jaguar in Nicaragua and a panda called Amanda – in his ill-fated quest for pizza. A shouty, colourful picture-book romp, begging to be read aloud with gusto. I am NOT a Prince! by Rachael Davis and Beatrix Hatcher (Orchard, £12.99) Unlike the others in the magic lagoon, Hopp doesn’t want to be turned into a prince; this little frog has another dream. Crisp rhymes and bold illustrations combine in this sweet, satisfying fairytale, challenging gender stereotypes and asserting every frog’s right to choose their own path. Mike Falls Up by Candy Gourlay, illustrated by Carles Ballesteros (Little Tiger, £5.99) On a hot day in the Chocolate Hills, Mike and his dog, Bowow, find a crack in the earth and an invitation reading: “Birthday. Come now. Just fall up.” Gourlay’s pared-back text and Ballesteros’ involving images create the absorbing sense of a child’s imagination at play in this splendidly surreal adventure for 5+. There’s a Dog in My Brain by Caroline Green, illustrated by Rikin Parekh (Walker, £6.99) Dog-lovers of 6+ with a taste for slapstick will relish this riotous body-swap, in which Danny (boy) and Dudley (dog) switch brains with outrageous consequences, including wedding-cake demolition, unwanted baths and regrettable leg-lifting. Leonora Bolt, Secret Inventor by Lucy Brandt, illustrated by Gladys Jose (Puffin, £6.99) Confined to a secret island laboratory by her awful Uncle Luther, Leonora invents a range of crazy devices – until the arrival of a castaway forces her to make a daring escape and a thrilling discovery. A hilariously silly adventure for 7+, full of fishy foodstuffs and ingenious gadgets. Frankie’s World by Aoife Dooley (Scholastic, £8.99) Frankie has never fitted in. Is it because her dad is not in the picture? Perhaps finding him will provide the answers she craves. Readers eight and older who like quirky, misfit heroes will snap up Dooley’s warm, funny and original graphic novel, drawing on her own experience of growing up autistic. When the War Came Home by Lesley Parr (Bloomsbury, £6.99) Natty is sick of her mother getting fired for talking back to bosses – and now they’ve landed up in Ynysfach with Mam’s annoying relatives. When Natty encounters injustice in her new school, though, she finds she is more like Mam than she knew. And when she meets a young soldier who has lost his memory, she may have just the right ideas to help him rediscover his past. For age 9 and up, an assured, thoughtful historical novel with a richly evoked postwar Welsh setting. Jummy at the River School by Sabine Adeyinka (Chicken House, £6.99) When Jummy wins a place at the prestigious River School, she’s thrilled to be plunged into a world of midnight feasts and fierce sporting competition. But when she finds her best friend, Caro, working there as a maid, she is determined to ensure clever Caro becomes a pupil, too. The traditional girls’ boarding school story is joyously reinvigorated in this riveting Nigerian-set debut. The Ivory Key by Akshaya Raman (Hot Key, £8.99) Ashoka’s economy is based on magic, but magic is running dry. After the maharani is assassinated, her four children are desperate to find the Ivory Key that might restore it – but each of them has their own private plan … Book one of an epic fantasy duology layered with Indian folklore and traditions, Raman’s YA debut deals intriguingly with ideas of power, belonging and temptation. The Blue Book of Nebo by Manon Steffan Ros (Firefly, £6.99) Originally published to acclaim in Welsh, this staggering novel collates the alternating accounts of 14-year-old Dylan and his mother, written in the blue notebook of the title. For eight years, ever since the power went out and the old normal disappeared, they’ve worked to survive in the remote village of Nebo. What Mam misses, Dylan has no use for, being perfectly adapted to the new world and his place in it. A tender, tragic post-apocalyptic story, told with great simplicity and power. The Revelry by Katherine Webber (Walker, £7.99) The inhabitants of Ember Grove know better than to talk about the Revelry, the ritual end-of-year party that happens in the woods – and Bitsy Clarke, who has lived there all her life, should really know better than to let her best friend, Amy, talk her into gatecrashing. When the girls wake up with new scars, wiped memories, and a weird imbalance of luck, it’s up to Bitsy to discover the truth in this gripping YA fantasy, perfect for fans of Holly Black and Melissa Albert. Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Restaurant columns don’t generally begin in the ladies’ loo for several reasons, but in real life they often do – or at least they do for me. Some time after the first plates of starters at a new opening, such as at Kibou in Battersea last week, I often find myself staring into a bathroom mirror – a freshly installed bathroom mirror, mind – and the words are already bubbling, because when you know, you already know. Kibou’s new south London branch is the third in a chain of beautifully staged, Japanese-inspired restaurants with a loyal following in Cheltenham and Bristol. The Battersea branch has two enormous, fluttery lashed, mascara-laden eyes painted on to its Hague Blue frontage. Those eyes are made prettier still by faux Japanese rose blossom. Kibou is certainly, from the outside and at night, the loveliest, quirkiest-looking new opening London has seen in a while. Inside, vast murals of Tokyo metropolitan life brighten the walls. The best seats in the house are the booths at the back, bedecked with even more faux blossom. Romantic as heck. But it’s less so if you’re seated near the front door on one of the tiny, draughty, exposed tables. But then this restaurant is very much a place of contradictions. Kibou markets itself as a non-serious place – ideal for groups, they say – that’s deadly serious about sushi, as well as, well, many, many other things. So many dishes. Kibou’s sushi offering alone is plentiful, with a dozen types of nigiri, alongside hosomaki and futomaki rolls, gunkan, temaki and, of course, sashimi, with plates coming in around the £8 to £13 mark, and larger sharing rolls, such as the 10-piece “Volcano” – salmon, avocado and tobiko dipped in tempura – at about £18. If Kibou were solely a sushi restaurant, it could be a pleasant enough place to grab a plate of the absolutely fine hamachi nigiri or scallop sashimi, while accepting that it will arrive almost instantly and be served by someone who appears to know absolutely nothing about the menu, but is at least smiling. The menu is vast, however, and offers dozens of the crowd-pleasing, Asian-inspired dishes you see in chains such as Wagamama, Tonkotsu and Yo! Sushi. Kibou does bao buns, chicken karaage with sriracha mayo and baked aubergine nasu dengaku alongside gyoza, eel yakitori skewers and agadashi tofu, and that’s before you even get to the ramen, donburi bowls and yaki udon sections. Clearly, there’s a lot happening here, and a lot of covers to cater for, which is ambitious, and things such as agadashi tofu – which is meant to be crisp, fried soft tofu perched in an umami broth – are easy to get very wrong. At Kibou, it came in flabby lumps, thinly battered in potato starch, topped with chopped spring onion (rather than bonito) and sitting in a slightly anonymous puddle. Seconds later, teeth-chatteringly sweet, soggy aubergine nasu dengaku arrived, accompanied by a brazenly inedible “seasonal mushroom tempura” bao that sounded delicious on the menu, but turned out to be an almost raw, breadcrumbed portobello mushroom sandwiched in a very non-pillowy bao bun. Next, some overcooked chicken karaage arrived, recently refreshed in a deep-fat frier, with an unobtrusive pink mayo that was rumoured to have once met sriracha. Pale, wobbly prawn gyoza “pot stickers” arrived without even the merest of sears. It was at this point that I excused myself to go to the ladies’ room, where the towel on the old-fashioned roller dispenser on the wall had been pulled out and trailed along the floor, to have a long think about my life choices and, more specifically, about how the likes of Tonkotsu can bang out perfect chicken karaage on a mass scale, deftly and accurately at any hour of the day, and how my favourite small Korean chain Yori can offer heavenly kimchi jeon pancakes every time, regardless of who made them and when. And yet other restaurants, once they expand, have a tough time nailing their popular dishes. Even so, it is undoubted that Kibou, in its outside-London forms, at least, inspires a lot of customer love. Almost everything we ordered came in the space of five minutes, including those lukewarm eel yakitori skewers drizzled in yuzu. Fresh sea bream sashimi, served with a hostile and, for that reason, awesome wasabi, was the greatest thing on the table. I’d also ordered the yaki udon, but fortunately they forgot to bring it, because, at £92 down already and without alcohol, it felt a good time to head for the door. Kibou in Battersea has a lot of room for improvement before it will inspire the sort of adoration and dependability that it gets in its other locations, but if you’re up for a party atmosphere, cocktails, nice photographs of fake flowers and a place to take groups who won’t quibble over the details, then, in its current form, you’ll be well suited. • Kibou 175-177 Northcote Road, London SW11, 020-7223 8551. Open Tues-Sun, noon-11pm (10pm Sun). From about £35 a head, plus drinks and serviceAt least 2 million people in the northern Ethiopian region of Tigray are suffering from an extreme lack of food, with the 15-month conflict between rebel and government forces pushing families to the brink, the UN’s emergency food agency has found. In the first comprehensive assessment the World Food Programme (WFP) has carried out in Tigray since the start of the war, 37% of the population were found to be severely food insecure, meaning they had at times run out of food and gone a day or more without eating. Families were found to be “exhausting all means to feed themselves”, with 13% of Tigrayan children under five and almost two-thirds of pregnant and breastfeeding women suffering from malnutrition. “Before the conflict we were eating three times a day but now even once a day is difficult. I was borrowing food from my family but now they have run out. We just sleep and hope we do not perish,” Kiros, a single mother of six children living on the outskirts of the region’s capital, Mekelle, told researchers. The assessment, which was based on face-to-face interviews with 980 households in accessible parts of Tigray, was carried out from mid-November until mid-December. However, researchers were unable to travel to areas where fighting is impeding humanitarian access. Moreover, since the assessment was carried out, the needs of the region are thought to have become even more acute as no aid convoy has reached Tigray for about six weeks. “This bleak assessment reconfirms that what the people of northern Ethiopia need is scaled up humanitarian assistance, and they need it now,” said Michael Dunford, WFP’s regional director for eastern Africa. “WFP is doing all it can to ensure our convoys with food and medicines make it through the frontlines. But if hostilities persist, we need all the parties to the conflict to agree to a humanitarian pause and formally agreed transport corridors, so that supplies can reach the millions besieged by hunger.” Across northern Ethiopia, where fighting has raged in the regions of Afar and Amhara as well as Tigray, WFP estimates that 9 million people are in need of humanitarian food assistance, the highest number yet. In Amhara, hunger has more than doubled in five months, it says. In Afar, where fighting has intensified in recent days between the Tigray People’s Liberation Front and forces loyal to the prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, recent health screening data showed malnutrition rates for children under five were at 28%, far above the standard emergency threshold of 15%. Since the conflict erupted in November 2020, it has been difficult for the UN and other humanitarian organisations to gauge the level of need in Tigray due to a lack of on-the-ground access and telecommunications. The UN has accused the federal government of preventing food and essential medical supplies from coming into the region in a de-facto blockade. The government denies this. On Wednesday, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) said it had made its first delivery of medical supplies to Mekelle since last September. The drugs are understood to have included enough insulin supplies to last about a month, after medics at the Ayder referral hospital raised the alarm over severe shortages. Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director of the World Health Organization, recently accused Abiy’s government of imposing a “hell” on Tigray by denying entry to medical supplies. “It is a huge relief that this first shipment is reaching hospitals,” said Apollo Barasa, health coordinator at the ICRC delegation in Ethiopia. “This assistance is a lifeline for thousands of people, and I can’t emphasise enough how crucial it is that these deliveries continue.”In 2016, Norwich-based childhood friends Rosa Walton and Jenny Hollingworth – AKA Let’s Eat Grandma – were so close that they often pretended they were twins. A lot has changed since the early days of this uncanny, left-field pop duo. Taking to the stage at a tightly packed XOYO, they have grown to be individuals, Walton in diamante-spangled blue velour, grinning, poised and assured around the stage; and Hollingworth in black, saturated with gold and silver sequins, initially a little more demure and reserved behind her synths. Two Ribbons, their forthcoming third album, finds the pair largely writing individually, laying bare growing apart and learning new parts of themselves: notably for Hollingworth, processing the bereavement of her late boyfriend, musician Billy Clayton. Still, it’s not tension or grief that hangs in the air tonight – rather, it’s love. On the euphoric opener Happy New Year, synths pummel the air, met with the pair’s heady vocal harmonies and a cascade of firework sounds. 2018’s Hot Pink, with all its singsong chanting and thrilling, Sophie-produced whirrs and squelches, remains a wonder. But it’s when Hollingworth steps into the centre of the stage and her voice fills the room on the powerful, sprightly pop of Watching You Go, an as-yet-unreleased track that tries to grapple with some of the emotion of her grief, you can hear just how much they have grown as people and artists. Her eyes are a little glassy, but when the song ends she seems looser, and the tenderness between her and Walton shines through. None of this is to say they haven’t remained playful: spooky debut song Deep Six Textbook is still performed with handclapping routines, Walton on glockenspiel, and head movements akin to robots powering down. During proggy Falling Into Me there’s even a (quickly abandoned) attempt at the Macarena before Hollingworth runs off to do her sax solo. An abundant, glorious pop show with its heart on its sleeve, it ends on an exuberant encore of Donnie Darko. Rainbow lasers cut through the smoke machines while the pair cut loose: dance moves, a knowing flurry on the recorder from Hollingworth, arms slung around one another joyously; two sisters who have found each other again.The Bloody Sunday killings cast an indelible stain on British history and scarred the life of more than 30 families and the wider communities of Derry. A later inquiry unveiled an army cover-up and led to the first apology by a British prime minister. But there have been no prosecutions. 30 January 1972 British soldiers shot 31 unarmed civilians who had gathered for a civil rights march through the small city to protest against discrimination against Catholics in housing and employment. Troops from the Parachute Regiment fired more than 100 times, killing 13 people. One of those injured died five months later. The army claimed they were acting in self-defence. The Widgery inquiry The day after, the home secretary announced an inquiry led by the lord chief justice, Lord Widgery. It was considered a whitewash by victims’ families, sitting for just three weeks in February and March of the same year with a report published in April, one of the fastest inquiries ever. It concluded there was “no reason to suppose” that the army would have opened fire unless it had been fired on first. The Saville inquiry After decades of campaigning for the truth, the families got a new inquiry in 1998. The Saville investigation lasted 12 years, the longest and most expensive inquiry in recent times. It concluded the killings were “unjustified and unjustifiable” and that “none was posing any threat of causing death or serious injury. In no case was any warning given before soldiers opened fire”. David Cameron offers the first apology In a powerful watershed moment, the then prime minister, David Cameron, took the conclusions on board and stood in the House of Commons in 2010 to make a solemn apology for what had happened. “The conclusions of this report are absolutely clear. There is no doubt, there is nothing equivocal, there are no ambiguities. What happened on Bloody Sunday was both unjustified and unjustifiable. It was wrong. “Some members of our armed forces acted wrongly. The government is ultimately responsible for the conduct of our armed forces and for that, on behalf of the government – and indeed our country – I am deeply sorry,” said Cameron. Were there prosecutions and convictions? No. Eighteen former paratroopers were reported to Northern Ireland’s Public Prosecution Service over the killings but none were tried. An agreement before the inquiry opened with the attorney general meant that none of the evidence given by soldiers could be used to incriminate them at a later stage. What Saville says today In an interview screened last week with the BBC’s veteran journalist Peter Taylor, Saville described Bloody Sunday as “a catastrophe for Northern Ireland”, which had “put back any chance of a resolution to the Troubles by decades” and as “a very efficient recruiting sergeant”.Prince Andrew’s 30-year association with the Royal &amp; Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews has ended, after the club confirmed he is no longer an honorary member. The Duke of York informed the R&amp;A of his decision, which should remove the potential for controversy around the 150th Open due to be staged at St Andrews in July. The R&amp;A, whose corporate wing presides over the Open, informed members of the situation on Friday morning. A spokesperson for the club in Fife said: “I can confirm that the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews has received notification that the Duke of York will relinquish his honorary membership. We respect and appreciate his decision.” The Queen sought to distance the monarchy from Andrew by removing royal patronages – including at a number of prominent UK golf clubs – as the 61-year-old prepares to fight a civil sexual abuse lawsuit brought against him by Virginia Giuffre. A US judge rejected his attempt to have the case against him dismissed. The duke denies sexual assault allegations made against him. Andrew was the captain of the R&amp;A in 2003 and 2004, which coincided with the club’s 250th anniversary, and has been a regular attendee at the Open. Andrew’s sister, Princess Anne, was given honorary status at the R&amp;A shortly after the club’s 2014 decision to admit female members. A picture of Andrew driving in as captain remained on the R&amp;A website on Friday morning. An adjacent blurb reads: “A member of the club since 1992, Prince Andrew is the only member of the royal family to have served on committee. He was a member of the Amateur Status Committee from 1999 to 2003. “The Prince drove into office on 18 September 2003 and was Captain during the year in which the Club celebrated its 250th anniversary. Describing his feelings towards the role he said, ‘It is an enormous privilege, an honour and a dream come true for me to be invited to become the Captain of The Royal and Ancient Golf Club, especially in this, its 250th anniversary year.’ “A painting, specially commissioned by the club to mark its anniversary, shows The Duke of York driving into office. Painted by Anthony Oakshett, it contains over 600 individuals and was completed in 2006.” The status of the portrait following Andrew’s relinquishing of his membership is unknown.Adrian Dunbar is to lead a commemorative event to mark the 50th anniversary of the Bloody Sunday killings in Derry. The Line of Duty actor will host a weekend of talks, walks and reflections evoking what Tony Doherty described as the years “beyond the silence” from the army, police and Westminster that families faced after the killing of 13 innocent civilians by British soldiers in 1972. Doherty, chair of the Bloody Sunday Trust, was nine when his father was killed while taking part in a civil rights protest 50 years ago. “It is a sort of recognition of the hurt, but it’s also a recognition of the resilience of the city and the families over the years,” he said. He and other members of the trust have been appealing to all communities to attend or participate in events, including a walk of remembrance at 9.15am on Sunday. The programme of events is designed to mark how the city has moved beyond the killings, which have left an indelible stain on British and Irish history, he said. Participants will include the former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, who will give the annual address to mark the event, and the president of Ireland, Michael D Higgins, who will make pre-recorded remarks. Doherty’s father, Patrick, was 32 when he was shot dead leaving six children behind, the youngest six months old. He had gone out to march with his wife, Eileen, who came back home a widow. Soldiers from the Parachute Regiment had shot 100 times into the crowds, killing 13 people and wounding 15. No one has been tried for the killings despite the 12-year Saville inquiry, which rejected the commanding officer’s claim they had acted in self-defence. Lord Saville told the BBC’s Peter Taylor last week that Bloody Sunday was a “catastrophe” that had set back peace by decades. Doherty said no one should have to wait 50 years for justice, and that along with the other families and victims of the Troubles he would continue to fight for prosecutions even in the face of proposed legislation to offer an amnesty to any soldiers or police officers involved in historical killings in Northern Ireland. “The ability to attain justice in any society is an absolute core value that should be ingrained in how society functions,” he said. “These things never close. Bloody Sunday and my personal experience will always be here. The issue of justice is still very, very core. It’s sort of feeling citizenship and equal citizenship and equality before the law. And we’ve never felt that.” He said Derry had healed significantly since 1972 and praised the local Democratic Unionist party councillors, the local mayor and members of the legislative assembly for engagement and bridge-building. “They say things about what is going in Derry that you would rarely find outside the city,” he said. “They have a better feeling for the genuine emphasis towards sustaining reconciliation, because reconciliation isn’t an event, it is a process.” There is an evolving recognition in Northern Ireland of the inter-generational trauma that children and grandchildren of victims of the Troubles can inherit from the locked-in experiences of living the aftermath. Doherty speaks with regret about his childhood. “I have no specific memory of the killing, but when I was growing up I was always known as ‘Paddy Doherty’s son who was murdered in Bloody Sunday’. I liked the idea of being Tony Doherty from Derry. I sort of quietly resented that. You knew it very, very deeply and very, very clearly that Bloody Sunday was part of my identity, but it sort of, in a sense, robbed me of my own identity as a human being.” He has hopes for his own two children, who are 25 and 16. “I think among our extended families, there is a great sense of pride about what people like myself, of my age [at the time] could have achieved in the face of great adversity,” he said. “There may be an element of trauma within that which has yet to sort of reveal itself but, for the most part, it registers as a sense of pride in the Derry community and what it has had to deal with over the years.”It is now just a week to go until the opening ceremony of the 2022 Winter Olympics. Beijing has spent seven years preparing to become the first city to have hosted both the Summer and Winter Games, after it narrowly beat Almaty in Kazakhstan in a two-horse bidding process in 2015. There are 15 sports to enjoy and 109 gold medals to be won, from the thrills and spills of alpine skiing to the endurance races of biathlon and cross-country. There’s the artistic beauty of ice skating, the high-tempo discipline and risk of speed-skating, and the aggression of ice hockey to look forward to. Plus the quadrennial rediscovery that they really do use brooms in curling. And our daily briefing will be there with you every step of the way, bringing you up-to-date results, a preview of what is to come in the 24 hours ahead, and the best of the writing from our team on the ground in China. If you are receiving this via email and weren’t expecting it, it will be because you previously signed up for our Tokyo 2020 daily briefing for coverage of the Summer Olympics and Paralympics last year. I hope you’ll want to stick with it and join me for our Winter Olympics coverage too, but we appreciate you maybe aren’t interested. If so, it is easy to unsubscribe from the footer of the email, and hopefully we’ll see you back again for Paris 2024. Here’s a selection of some of the preview pieces and Beijing news for the Games we’ve been running over recent days: 15 Winter Olympians from around the world to watch Ellia Smeding named as 50th and final Team GB athlete Charlotte Bankes leads medal hopes of GB snowsport squad Fifteen Team USA athletes to watch at the Beijing Games Protesting athletes ‘face punishment’, suggests Beijing official China says it is ready for a Winter Games demonstrating the Olympic movement’s newly-enhanced motto “Faster, Higher, Stronger – Together”, but the ongoing threat of the Covid pandemic and the diplomatic boycotts and expected protests over the host nation’s human rights record are sure to feature in the story of these Games. And once again Russian athletes will be competing under the neutral banner of “Russian Olympic Committee” rather than as a nation – as a result of the Wada ban for state-sponsored doping offences. What to look out for next Like the summer Olympics, some of the sporting action actually gets going before the opening ceremony. Here’s what you can enjoy on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday next week. Times in the Beijing briefing are all going to be local. For Sydney add 3 hours, for London subtract 8 hours. If you are in the US then for New York it is -13 hours and San Francisco is -16 hours. Wednesday 2 February 8.05pm Curling – the very first session sees four mixed doubles, round-robin matches, including Sweden v Great Britain and the US v Australia 🥌 Thursday 3 February 9.05am and 2.05pm and 8.05pm Curling – there are more mixed doubles match-ups across three sessions 🥌 6pm and 7.45pm Freestyle skiing – first the women’s and then the men’s moguls qualification 1 takes place ⛷ 12.10pm and 4.40pm and 9.10pm – the women’s ice hockey preliminary round pool matches begin – the US play Finland in the day’s final game 🏒 Friday 4 February 8.35am and 1.35pm Curling – Australia face Great Britain in the afternoon session as the mixed doubles, round-robin match-ups continue 🥌 10.02am and 11.41am and 13.22pm Figure skating – there are three sessions of figure skating, starting with the team event – men’s single skating, short program, followed by the ice dance, rhythm dance and pair skating short program, also in the team event ⛸ 12.10pm Ice Hockey – two more matches from the women’s pool stage – including Denmark v the hosts 🏒 8pm Opening Ceremony – Beijing’s National Stadium – known as the Bird’s Nest – will once again stage an Olympic opening ceremony, which is sure to be spectacular ✨✨✨ Thank you for reading. I will be back on Friday next week as we get ready for the opening ceremony. In the meantime you can get in touch with me at martin.belam@theguardian.com – I’d love to hear about what you are looking forward to and how you are planing to watch the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics.We would like to hear from people with long term health conditions about their experiences accessing healthcare. What has your experience been of receiving care for your condition, during the pandemic, due to being housebound, for example? Have there been any changes to your routine treatments? Has accessing the healthcare you need become easier or perhaps more difficult in any way? You can share your experiences using the form below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.We’ll wrap this blog up now – congratulations to Rafael Nadal and Daniil Medvedev, who are through to the final of the men’s singles at the Australian Open, at the expense of Matteo Berrettini and Stefanos Tsitsipas respectively. The women’s singles final between Ash Barty and Danielle Collins is tomorrow, so more to come soon. In the meantime, here are our most recent articles from the year’s first grand slam event: Medvedev, who has now won 13 grand slam matches in a row following his US Open triumph, assures the crowd he’s going watch Ash Barty v Danielle Collins tomorrow night. “I’m very happy that I had the opportunity to perform here,” says Tsitsipas. “My Greek and non-Greek fans ... Australia has a special place in my heart and I always feel at home here. I strongly believe I will be able to do very well here, one day, and give that joy and happiness shared with the fellow Aussies here, and the Greek community. It’s a tournament I very much love, and that I want to thrive in one day.” It was noticeable, indeed, that Medvedev started hitting the ball harder in the third and fourth sets. There was one down-the-line forehand in particular that Tsitsipas was in position to hit, but could only pat meekly into the net. Medvedev’s serve dropped off a little in the second set, partly because Tsitsipas was playing so well and partly because the Russian flew into a rage with the umpire. But once he settled down again, he was by far the superior player, and Tsitsipas ran out of steam somewhat. Medvedev on Eurosport (continued): “I feel like today was the match in the whole tournament where I was missing a little bit more than I wanted to ... especially on the backhand, there were a few crucial mistakes that could cost me the match ... so I was definitely not happy with myself in a few moments. But when you’ve played four hours and forty minutes before [in the quarter-final against Félix Auger-Aliassime] it’s not easy to go out there and put every ball in. At the same time it’s not something I’m going to work on for three hours. I just hope, next match, I’ll be more fresh and ready to put more balls in the court, because against Rafa, it’s important.” Medvedev spoke to Eurosport a few minutes ago: “Every match against Stefanos is kind of special ... it’s great, it was a really tight match, with some emotional moments on both sides ... I’m just super happy to manage to win it because I feel like it was very close. “It was a rollercoaster ... Stefanos is an offensive player ... as soon as he has a forehand he tries to take control of the point, so we all know it, and I was a little bit tired today ... I don’t know if it was the pace of his forehand was too fast and if I was late on the ball, or if my legs were not fast enough, but I’m happy that at the end of the set I managed to ‘turn this light’ a little bit on and it was enough to be on some shots maybe where he would not even expect it, because before I was not ... I managed to put some spark on it ... I didn’t really try to change my position, I think I just tried to hit stronger when I had the ball on my racket, to not give him these easy balls to dictate the points.” I just caught the end of a snippet of Tsitsipas’s press conference: “I see today’s performance as a lesson that I can use to move forward,” he says. He looks devastated. Out snap report from Medvedev’s win: Daniil Medvedev, the US Open champion, has progressed to the Australian Open final, where he will meet Rafael Nadal. Nadal will be attempting to win a record 21st grand slam title. Tsitsipas fought bravely today and his game plan, which included a liberal amount of drop shots to try and upset Medvedev’s rhythm, worked well to begin with. But there was always a sense that Medvedev could go to a higher level than Tsitsipas and switch it on when it counted. And that’s how it worked out as he streaked away to win the fourth and final set with a double break. Hats off to Medvedev, he is an incredible player, and the final against Nadal will be a must-see. On Eurosport, Mats Wilander was just defending Medvedev for his angry second-set outburst at the umpire, saying that the crowd was booing before his second serve. If you missed it, Medvedev was complaining that Tsitsipas’s father was coaching him from up in the stands, which is not permitted. Later in the match, Tsitsipas did receive a coaching warning, and to be fair to Medvedev, he appeared to apologise to the umpire at the end of the match. Still, I don’t buy Wilander’s reasons in trying to justify Medvedev’s behaviour. The way he spoke to the umpire was unacceptable, it’s as simple as that. More reaction from Medvedev: How did he bounce back physically after his semi-final? “When I went out from the match with Felix, I talked to my coach, and I was like: ‘How do I do it [again] in two days? I was so dead ... I sat down in the locker room after the match and I barely could move. I tried to do the recovery well, and next day I woke up, and I was like: It’s not too bad. I felt some pain here and there but it was not too bad, I can recover. I was more tired than usual [today] ... that’s why some mistakes happen, especially on the back hand. I’m happy today was not five hours, so I can look forward to the next one.” “I’m going to play again against one of the greatest [Nadal in the final] ... what’s funny is that again I’m going to play someone going for the 21st slam [as Djokovic was last year]. I guess last time Rafa was watching the TV, I don’t know who he was cheering for, but I think Novak will be watching this one in two days also! [laughs] ... Grand slam finals are special ... of course I remember the match with Rafa at the US Open, we played like five hours, or something close to it ... We’ve played a few matches since then and I’m ready. I know that Rafa is a very strong player, I know I will need to show my best to try to win this match.” Is he going to watch Barty v Collins in the women’s singles final tomorrow night? “It depends what time they play ... 7.30? I’m usually going to dinner at 8.15 so I’ll watch the beginning of the match ... “I’m trying to set you up to win this crown over,” Courier jokes. “I’m going to watch it on my phone, guys, I’m going to watch it!” The crowd cheers. Rafael Nadal lays down his towel, spreads it across two parallel court-side advertising boards. He gently tugs at the near corners to ensure it is taut. Then looks at it again, pulls the far right-hand corner just a little. He squinches his face and surveys the symmetry, pats it with his hand. Content, he turns on his heels towards the baseline, ready for his serving ritual ... Nadal news, from Tumaini Carayol: Medvedev speaks to Jim Courier on court and is asked about his second-set meltdown with the umpire: “I don’t think bad emotions [when he had a go at the umpire] help me too much ... many times I lose a match because of this, you lose concentration, you lose energy ... as soon as I’ve done it, I was like: ‘That was a big mistake,’ but I’m happy that I managed to re-concentrate for the beginning of the third set ... I pulled out some serves, and that brought me back into the match and I was like, OK, I lost some energy but I have to refocus, the match is quite important, I think [laughs] ... I tried my best, and I’m happy it worked. “Sometimes it was very even, a feel like a few moments, I maybe missed some balls where I could have gotten this break ... he missed a few in the beginning of the third set, and starting from 5-4 in the third, I found some momentum like in the eyes, to read his serve and to put every ball in and made a few very important passing shots... his energy went down because of this. My energy was going up, and I think it would go even more if the match would continue. “I was more tired than usual ... I’m happy today was not five hours, so I can look forward to the next one. “I’m going to play against one of the greatest [Nadal in the final] ... I think Novak will be watching this one in two days also. Grand slam finals are special ... I’m ready. I know that Rafa is a very strong player, I know I will need to show my best to try to win this match.” Is he going to watch Barty v Collins in the women’s singles final tomorrow night? “It depends what time they’re playing ... I’m usually going to dinner at 8.15 so I’ll watch the start of the match ... “I’m trying to set this up for you to win over the crowd,” Courier jokes. “I’m going to watch it on my phone, guys, I’m going to watch it!” The crowd cheers. “Not the warmest of handshakes,” observes the commentator as the two players meet at the net. Medvedev looks for some eye contact, but doesn’t get any. He then says sorry to the umpire for his ridiculous outburst earlier. First up, a massive serve down the middle for 15-0. Then two stunning passing shots, just world-class from Medvedev, and he speeds to 40-0 and three match points. He crashes another clean winner out wide and he’s done it! He will face Rafael Nadal in the men’s singles final. Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 4-6, 1-5 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas hammers his first serve down the middle. Medvedev gets it back, but Tsitsipas has a simple task to end the point with a drop shot. Medvedev digs out an impressive point for 15-15 and then Tsitsipas, looking a little fatigued now, can’t deal with a brilliant deep return which sets up a break point for the Russian. He is totally focused, he breaks serve again, and he’s a game away. *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 4-6, 1-4 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Medvedev has won 86% of points on his first serve. Tsitsipas has won 68%. Another gynormous serve here and there, in the latest game of the fourth set, and Medvedev is closing on the finish line and a final against Rafael Nadal. Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 4-6, 1-3 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Medvedev breaks! An exquisite backhand pass from the back of the court helps Medvedev to break Tsitsipas, and it feels like the level of resistance from his opponent has dropped significantly now. This is Medvedev’s moment. He is hitting with supreme authority. “I don’t get it, to be honest,” says the commentator on Eurosport, regarding the coaching warning, as to how Tsitsipas’s masked-up father is managing to get any kind of message across from the stands. Maybe he’s coughing? *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 4-6, 1-2 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Bang, bang, bang, Medvedev holds serve easily again, although there was one eye-catching winner from Tsitsipas in amongst that game. Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 4-6, 1-1 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas produces one of the shots of the match to settle the first rally of the game, punching a crosscourt forehand from the baseline that Medvedev can only watch and admire. The younger player then sets up 40-15 with a nice combination of a huge serve and a delicate drop at the net. Medvedev soon hits long, and we’re all square in the fourth. And then a coaching warning comes for Tsitsipas! Tsitsipas smiles, strangely, but that’s a victory of sorts for Medvedev who complained vociferously about it earlier. “It must be hand signals,” says Henman on commentary. “How can you hear what he’s saying with a mask?” *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 4-6, 0-1 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Medvedev holds to open up the fourth and then takes a sip of water. He smells a chance here. Can he crush his opponent’s challenge in the next few minutes? Medvedev produces a delicate drop for 0-15. Tsitsipas comes forward on the next point, and the Russian belts an unerring backhand pass beyond him down the line. Power and precision. Quick as a flash it’s 0-40 and three set points. Tsitsipas saves one of them with a powerful serve down the middle ... but on the next point, Medvedev is all over his opponent, working him around the court, and eventually creating a chance to smash for the set. Tsitsipas tries, heroically, to get the smash back but hits it wide. Medvedev is back in front! Tsitsipas has to come from a set down if he is going to delight the Greek fans and set up a meeting with Nadal. *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 4-5 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Medvedev, who looks more in control now, continues to serve with punishing accuracy and power. He’s such a difficult player to deal with, when you combine his enormous serve with his speed and mobility in defence. But Tsitsipas is certainly giving it a go. “It looks like these two didn’t cut any corners,” observes Tim Henman, in reference to the physical shape both are in. Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 4-4 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Another booming wide serve seals the hold for the Greek player. The score in this fixture last season was 6-4, 6-2, 7-5 to Medvedev. But he’s not having things all his way today ... *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 3-4 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Guess what? Medvedev holds to love. He rounds off the game with a dismissive forehand volley. Tsitsipas just stands there. The players will take a drink, and a pat-down with a towel, and we remain with serve in the third set. Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 3-3 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas fluffs a close-range volley for 0-15. He bring it back to 30-15 and then slaps down a good wide serve which sets up the point and 40-15. However, Medvedev isn’t willing to give this game up without a fight, and he forces it back to deuce with some thunderous hitting from the back of the court. At deuce, Tsitsipas again has no hesitation in attacking the net, and pulls off a beautifully controlled forehand volley for the advantage. Medvedev, though, unloads an obscenely powerful forehand on the next point, cranking his whole body into it and giving it everything ... and Tsitsipas can’t get it back. Tsitsipas stays cool though and a wide serve, followed by one down the middle, and eventually seals the hold. Tsitsipas nods to himself emphatically. That was a test and he came through. *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 2-3 Medvedev (* denotes next server) A love hold for “Mr Angry”, Daniil Medvedev, who is striding around the court like a bear with a sore head. A very tall bear, who is very good at playing tennis, admittedly. It remains with serve at 2-3 in the third. Tsitsipas 6-7(5), 6-4, 2-2 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas cracks a sublime forehand down the line (which Tim Henman, on commentary, calls ‘inside-in’, which I’ve not heard before) ... and then hammers down his fourth ace of the match, at 212km/h, to make it 2-2 and all square in the third set. A choice rally from a little earlier: *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 1-2 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas musters a solitary point on his opponent’s serve, but Medvedev holds nice and easily. Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 1-1 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) A booming wide serve by Tsitsipas seals his latest hold. He clenches his fist in celebration. A set all, a game all ... who is going to crack in the third set? The quality of tennis may have dropped slightly but the drama has intensified. *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 6-4, 0-1 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Medvedev seems to collapse slightly in the middle of the game, and gives up a couple of break points, but he pulls himself together and holds. The crowd is against him, and he seems to think the umpire is against him. But he does the necessary and edges in front at the start of the third. Medvedev really lost it with the umpire Jaume Campistol on that changeover, and at the end of the set, he has another go on the issue of Tsitsipas’s father coaching him from the stands. On the changeover, Medvedev’s tirade included the following: “His father can talk every point! Can you answer my question please! Oh my God, you are so bad man! How can you be so bad in the semi-final of a grand slam? Look at me! I’m talking to you!” At the end of the set, Medvedev said that if the umpire doesn’t take action: “You are ... how can I call it? A small cat.” Medvedev isn’t the most popular player on tour, it’s fair to say. And it’s not hard to see why. It’s all square. Tsitsipas is whipping the crowd up now. The crowd are responding. But Medvedev battles back from 40-15 and saves two set points. Tsitsipas then gets a warning from the umpire, I think for taking too long over his serve. At deuce, a phenomenal rally and some phenomenal defence from Medvedev ends with a clean winner from Tsitsipas! And then he seals the game, and the set! Medvedev just had a go at the umpire during the changeover, saying that Tsitsipas’s father is coaching him from his seat in the stands, which is a familiar refrain from the Greek player’s opponents ... *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 5-4 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Medvedev double-faults for 30-30, the first of the match from either player ... he then butchers a forehand to hand his opponent a break point ... and then he double-faults again to hand Tsitsipas the break! That is incredible! What’s going on with Medvedev? Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 4-4 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas speeds through his latest service game with some power-packed hitting. A hold to love. *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 3-4 Medvedev (* denotes next server) It’s pouring with rain in the darkness of Melbourne, but the roof is closed and the fans are happy. Especially with what’s generally been a high-class match, even if the previous game was characterised by a succesion of unforced errors. Medvedev holds, again, and leads for the first time in the second set. Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 3-3 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) At 15-15 Tsitsipas tries another drop shot. Medvedev gets there, and his attempted pass kisses the net, which makes it next to impossible for Tsitsipas to get it back ... the Greek player then coughs up an unforced error and suddenly it’s 15-40. Medvedev then errs, hitting long to gift his opponent a glimmer of hope at 30-40. Medvedev hits long again for deuce, after Tsitsipas shows incredible mental fortitude to carry on going for his shots despite being on the brink of losing this service game. Another unforced error from Tsitsipas and eventually, Medvedev grabs a break point, and he’s back on terms with the break back in this second set. He’s one won out of eight break points. *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 3-2 Medvedev (* denotes next server) The Medvedev serve is back to its best and he conjures up another hold to love. But Tsitsipas, of course, only needs to hold serve to claim this set, being a break up. Tsitsipas 6-7(5), 3-1 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas races to another hold of serve, including a second ace of the match. We’ve been going for just over an hour ... if Medvedev felt he had delivered a decisive blow in that first-set tiebreak, nothing could be further from the truth. *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 2-1 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Medvedev holds to love. Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 2-0 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Top-class stuff from the 23-year-old Greek. He seals the hold, to back up the break of serve, with his first ace of the match. He is on top. *Tsitsipas 6-7 (5), 1-0 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas takes his opponent’s serve to 30-30 ... Medvedev then shanks a horrible forehand long and wide and it’s break point! Tsitsipas duly seizes his moment, working his opponent around the court relentlessly on the next rally, unafraid to take on his shots. Medvedev’s defence is exemplary but Tsitsipas eventually wears him down, maybe wears him out, and breaks at the opening of the second set with an angled forehand winner that even the lightning-quick Medvedev can’t run down. Medvedev is under sustained pressure but he delivers when it really counts. Medvedev finds a wonderful down-the-line winner to edge back to parity at 4-4. Then he hits long, uncharacteristically, an unforced error which hands the lead back to his opponent. Unbowed and unflustered, Medvedev wins his next two service points, including a world-class double-handed backhand down the line for 6-5 and set point. Tsitsipas hits a fraction wide and it’s the first set for the US Open champion! Tsitsipas 6-6 Medvedev (4-3 tiebreak) At 4-1 Medvedev spanks two big serves, when he needs them most, and it’s back to 4-3 in the tiebreak. Still advantage Tsitsipas. Tsitsipas 6-6 Medvedev (4-1 tiebreak) Tsitsipas, on the second point of the tiebreak, mixes things up beautifully to seize the mini-break. He opens up a 4-1 lead after Medvedev hits wide, an unforced error. Tsitsipas is growing into this match, really growing into it, and Medvedev is in grave danger of losing this first set! First set: Tsitsipas 6-6 Medvedev Easy as that, Medvedev holds comfortably (although Tsitsipas did win a point on his opponent’s serve, finally) ... and we’re into a first-set tiebreak. *Tsitsipas 6-5 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas crushes a few big serves of his own, including a huge one down the middle for 40-0. Then he pulls off a sumptuous drop shot to seal the game. That’s brilliant stuff. Neither player has hit an ace yet, and we are with serve in the first set, but Medvedev passed up four break points in the ninth game. Or rather, Tsitsipas saved them. *Tsitsipas 5-5 Medvedev (* denotes next server) The Russian holds to love again. Tsitsipas hasn’t mustered a point on Medvedev’s massive serve just yet. But he’s certainly hanging in there. Tsitsipas 5-4 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) The longest, and most fascinating, game of the match arrives. A chance for the Russian comes at 0-30 after Tsitsipas comes in behind his second serve. He digs out a volley – just – but Medvedev sprints to the net and tucks away the winner. On the next point, it’s an epic 34-shot rally, which Medvedev wrestles control of and eventually claims with a fine angled winner. Medvedev raises his arms to greet the roar of the crowd. At 0-40 Medvedev goes for it – he crushes a powerful attempted forehand winner which lands a fraction out. Tsitsipas puts away a volley to save another break point, making it 30-40. He then belts a wonderful, powerful backhand which Medvedev can’t get back for deuce – seriously impressive from the No 4 seed – but then hits wide, disappointingly, on the next point for break point No 4. He saves that with a big serve down the middle ... and then a wonderful piece of anticipation from both players, Medvedev running wide to his left and attempting a backhand pass which Tsitsipas volleys confidently for another advantage ... There is a bit more back-and-forth from advantage to deuce ... and Tsitsipas holds! Well done! Four break points for Medvedev ... but none taken. *Tsitsipas 4-4 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Another crushing hold to love from Medvedev. He is getting those long levers working in the rallies, too, and Tsitsipas looks helpless to win a point on his opponent’s serve, let alone break him. Tsitsipas 4-3 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Tsitsipas gets the better of Medvedev in another long exchange, at 15-15, and allows himself a little fist-pump. Tsitsipas is hitting the ball sweetly and the Russian eventually dumps a shot into the net from the baseline in that long rally. No worries for Tsitsipas and he holds easily. *Tsitsipas 3-3 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Another game ticked off. Another comfy hold. To these eyes, it’s Tsitsipas who is having to work harder to keep parity with his opponent. Medvedev looks ready to pounce on any inaccuracy. But Tsitsipas is certainly not letting him dictate. Tsitsipas 3-2 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) Again Tsitsipas opts for a drop, and he races to game point. At 40-0 Medvedev gets a slice of luck with a forehand that flicks off the net and drops in. He holds a hand up in apology. No worries for Tsitsipas, though, who tucks away a forehand with a minimum of fuss to hold again. This is moving fast. It’s with serve. Who is going to blink first? *Tsitsipas 2-2 Medvedev (* denotes next server) Another hold to love. At 0-40, Tsitsipas tries another cute drop shot, but gets it wrong and flops it into the net. It’s clearly a tactic though. Aside from that, Medvedev winds up a couple of big ground strokes and holds with authority. We’re racing through this first set. Tsitsipas 2-1 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) A delightful drop shot from Tsitsipas for 15-0 – the Russian races to the net and gets it back but Tsitsipas easily lobs him, to the delight of the crowd. Tsitsipas then opens up the court with an angled forehand and puts the volley away crisply for 0-30. It’s another comfortable hold – and there are signs that Tsitsipas is going to try and mix things up a bit, and not let Medvedev get too comfortable with his power game from the baseline. *Tsitsipas 1-1 Medvedev (* denotes next server) A protracted baseline rally to begin the game: Medvedev climbing into that impressive double-handed backhand with enthusiasm. Tsitsipas gains some ground in a long exchange but eventually nets from the baseline and Medvedev tonks down a couple of big serves after that to hold serve, like his opponent, comfortably at the outset. Tsitsipas 1-0 *Medvedev (* denotes next server) A stunning drop volley on the first point of the match from Tsitsipas as he attacks the net after sending a solid forehand down the line. That sets the tone for the game, and Tsitsipas holds with a minimum of fuss. A good start. Here we go. Tsitsipas to serve. A few minutes late, the players are out on Rod Laver Arena. The umpire asks Tsitsipas if he’s OK with the red towels. The Greek player says he prefers the blue. Red towels for Medvedev it is, then. The players are knocking up now. The roof is closed and the auditorium is packed with plenty of fans – up to the 65% capacity that is permitted, anyway. Medvedev dispatched Tsitsipas in straight sets at the same stage of this tournament last year. Can he make short work of him again? Tsitsipas looks buoyant since having surgery on his elbow late last year. He has spoken in the last few days about how it feels to play pain-free after a long time struggling with that injury. So perhaps he’s a different proposition this year. Over on Eurosport, they’re playing a few snippets of Medvedev’s progress to this stage. Following his last-eight win against Felix Auger Aliassime, Medvedev explained this devastatingly simple game plan: “I’m going to win one set ... maybe two ... maybe three ... and it worked out.” Is this the future of tennis? “It has to be,” said Nick Kyrgios. When Kyrgios says something there is usually no turning back. Actually, sometimes there is, because we know he is prone to the odd backflip, or flip-out, or flippancy in general. Who do you like for this one? Medvedev or Tsitsipas? You can email me or get in touch on Twitter. He said he would live if he did not win, and live Dylan Alcott shall. Without an eighth consecutive Australian Open title but with his nation behind him. Ash Barty will face Danielle Collins in Saturday’s women’s singles final. Tumaini Carayol reports: Rafael Nadal is into the men’s singles final. Can he make it grand slam number 21 against Medvedev or Tsitsipas? Here’s our semi-final report: A men’s singles semi-final at the Australian Open. They don’t come any bigger than this, do they? OK, yes they do, namely in the final, but this is still a very, very big day. The 25-year-old Russian, Daniil Medvedev, is the man who defeated Novak Djokovic in straight sets to claim last year’s US Open, his first grand slam title. The world No 1 Djokovic, as you may have heard, was sent home in controversial circumstances last week, which helped to create a remarkably open men’s singles draw in the first grand slam tournament of the year. At 23, the Athens-born Stefanos Tsitsipas is – relatively speaking – the young pretender, without a grand slam title to date, but it is surely only a matter of time. Could this be his moment? Rafael Nadal defeated Matteo Berrettini in four sets to reach his sixth Australian Open final earlier today. Over the next few hours, we will discover who is going to face him in that final. Let’s get it on. The match is scheduled to start at 8.30am UK / 7.30pm Melbourne time.Italian police are trying to catch a suspected thief by fingerprinting a digit he accidentally cut off on barbed wire while fleeing the scene of a robbery, although they hope the suspect will surrender in the hopes of retrieving his lost wedding ring. The injured man sent a friend back to the area, a recycling plant in Milan, to search for his body part and the ring, but the friend was spotted by a security guard rummaging through leaves, local media reported. When the guard at the plant asked him what he was doing, he reportedly responded calmly: “I’m here for a friend, I’m looking for his finger with a ring on it.” Before police could arrive, the man escaped with an accomplice who had been waiting in a nearby parked car. The finger, or specifically two phalanges of a right ring finger, were found poking out of rubbish close to the fence of the recycling plant a little later, but without the ring, according to Corriere della Sera newspaper. It was not clear if the police had since found the ring. In CCTV images captured from the night before, two men were seen climbing over the fence of the recycling plant, only to abandon their attempted break-in after being spotted by a security guard who activated the alarm. As they clambered back over a gate, one of the men got his finger entangled in the barbed wire. The digit is being kept at a morgue while police work to identify its owner through the fingerprint ID system. It is not the first time a thief in Italy has been injured during an attempted burglary. In October last year a man who tried to imitate the suave master thief in the French TV series Lupin injured his arm while smashing through the glass door of the church oratory he was attempting to burgle.They sang, recited poems and reminisced fondly about that wonderful winter’s day when the town of Port Talbot woke to find a mural by the street artist Banksy on the walls of a steelworker’s garage. Three years on, the piece – Season’s Greetings – is on the brink of leaving this industrial corner of south Wales, and residents gathered to bid farewell to an artwork they have come to love. “We knew this day would come,” said Bev Simmonds-Owen, one of the organisers of a candlelit vigil arranged to mark the end of an era. “We’ve been lucky to have it for three years and wherever it goes it will always be the Port Talbot Banksy. It will stay in our hearts.” A local poet, Derek Davies, performed his bittersweet piece: Port Talbot’s Got a Banksy. Children sang Little Snowflake, the tune Banksy’s people dubbed over video footage of the mural. Speeches were made calling for it to be left in Port Talbot. But Simmonds-Owen preferred to be optimistic, pointing out that the Banksy had given a huge boost to the cultural life of the town, prompting others to take up spray cans and leading to the creation of an ever-expanding street art trail. “We can claim to be the street art capital of Wales. We may not have the funding to build a big, fancy art gallery, but we have the power to turn our streets into a gallery,” she said. “Port Talbot has a reputation of being an industrial town, a grey town, the colour of concrete, the colour of steel. But I think it’s a beautiful thing to make it a colourful town.” The Banksy appeared just before Christmas 2018 in the Taibach area of the town, close to the Tata steelworks (and the childhood home of Richard Burton). From one angle it shows a child apparently enjoying a snow shower and trying to catch the flakes on their tongue. From another it becomes clear that what is falling on the child is ash. Tens of thousands of people visited. Round-the-clock security had to be introduced to protect the artwork, and it created a cottage industry in souvenirs – mugs, coasters, keyrings – carrying images of the work. An Essex art dealer, John Brandler, bought the piece from the garage owner and in May 2019 the Banksy, all 4.5 tonnes of it, was moved to a former police station in the town. But the owner of the building now wants its space back and Neath Port Talbot council is not prepared to meet the cost of transferring it to another venue. Any day now the Banksy will be trucked out of Wales. Brandler said he was sad it was having to leave Wales, and said it may next surface in the east of England, or could even head out of the UK. There are some who argue the council should do more. The Plaid Cymru councillor Nigel Hunt said that if his party were in power it would buy the Banksy and build a gallery around it. “Banksy is a modern master,” he said. “For this town to lose such a wonderful piece of art is a travesty.” So many people have a story about the piece. Steve Bevan, a decorator, was passing on his bicycle on the morning of the Banksy’s appearance when he saw a member of the artist’s team filming drone footage. “I nearly fell off my bike when I saw it,” he said. At the vigil, Bevan sang his song Black Smoke, honouring Banksy and the mural’s public health theme. Paul Jenkins, a Cardiff theatre director, has been collecting reactions to Port Talbot for a play telling the story of the town’s Banksy and has secured funding for ARTwalk, which has given a platform for local artists and has also commissioned works from internationally renowned artists such as the Bristol-based HazardOne, who has created a mural of Richard Burton and is set to do one of another Hollywood star who hails from Port Talbot, Michael Sheen. “We feel the Banksy has opened the door for Port Talbot,” said Jenkins. “There’s no reason why Port Talbot can’t be known for art and creativity as well as industry.” A local street artist, Steve Jenkins, has just finished a mural on the garage used by Banksy. Called Speedings Greetings, it draws attention to the air quality problems caused by vehicles on the nearby M4. “There is a sadness that it is going,” he said. “Many in this area feel it belongs in Port Talbot, but there are plenty of local artists that will help out brightening up the town.”Intrigued? Find out more at teach-in-further-education.campaign.gov.ukPerhaps you’re an engineer. Or a social worker. Or a lawyer, or a care worker, or an accountant. You’ve worked in your industry for a number of years and now you’re thinking about a change. Maybe you’d like to share your skills with the next generation, reinvigorate your enthusiasm for the job, or even just move away from unsociable working hours. If any of those apply, then a career in further education (FE) teaching could be for you. The beauty of teaching in FE is that it doesn’t have to be all or nothing: you can even teach alongside your current job. The skills you’ve honed over many years will be of just as much value in your new role, as the knowledge gained in industry is an integral part of the job. Sounds interesting? Here’s everything you need to know … So what exactly is FE? FE is study, usually for learners 16+, that takes place after secondary school. It can be the next step for young people and school leavers, but is equally accessible to adults looking to broaden their skills or change careers. FE providers include (but are not limited to) sixth-form or specialist colleges, prisons and independent training providers, and there are a wide range of subjects and qualifications on offer, with a unique choice of technical and vocational courses that aim to equip learners with practical, work-based skills. Students can gain qualifications in a broad range of subjects, including engineering, manufacturing, construction and trades, legal, finance and accountancy, digital and IT, and health and social care – to name but a few. FE offers qualifications across many different levels, from basic literacy and numeracy to advanced and higher education qualifications in traditional academic subjects. The recently introduced T-levels are studied for in FE, for example. These two-year courses, equivalent to three A-levels, are delivered by FE providers in partnership with local employers and are accepted as qualifications for university admissions. They range in subject area from healthcare science to building services engineering. Apprenticeships also fall under FE. Combining work-based training with an employer with teaching at an FE college or other provider, they prepare students for work and can lead to a variety of qualifications, from chartered surveyor to data technician. What does being an FE teacher entail? Vocational – ie courses closely related to jobs – can be taught by people who have hands-on experience of what they’re talking about. This is where you could come in. Teaching in FE is an opportunity to change lives without changing your career, by sharing your industry skills with others. Depending on the subject, you might be based in the classroom, a laboratory or a workshop. You might even do some of your teaching on the premises of employers where your students are undergoing work experience. From day one, your students will be reaping the benefits of your expertise – and you’ll be learning too. In fact, many FE teachers find that their students’ questions not only keep them on their toes, but also reignite their passion for their industry. A student who wants a career in healthcare or engineering, for example, will best learn what’s really involved in those jobs from someone who has recent – or current – experience of them. FE providers are equipped with specialist facilities such as science labs, engineering workshops and even hospital wards, so much of the teaching is as hands-on as it can get. The other great thing about teaching in FE is the readily available part-time contracts, giving you flexibility over the number of hours you work. In FE, you can work full-time, part-time, evenings, or even on a casual, hourly basis. If you want the best of both worlds, you can continue with your existing job while teaching part-time. So, how do you become an FE teacher? Unlike becoming a schoolteacher, as long as you have appropriate industry experience, you may not need a degree or teaching qualification to get started. FE employers will usually want you to work towards a teaching qualification, but there is support in place so you can train on the job. For example, there are programmes that cover the cost for new industry recruits to undertake teacher training while they work as a salaried teacher, such as the government-funded Taking Teaching Further programme. You may also be offered the opportunity to do a teaching apprenticeship which will combine training alongside your teaching responsibilities. Alternatively, you could choose to train in your own time before getting a job in FE if that feels like a better fit for you. What can you expect from a career in FE? People who have made the switch talk about the variety of the job, the satisfaction of passing on skills, and the energising feeling that comes from spending time with people who are committed and enthusiastic. When you’ve reached the stage of feeling comfortable in a well-established industry career, starting a new – or secondary – career as an FE teacher is the perfect way to challenge yourself and make the most of what you know. Passing your skills on to a new generation can be invigorating, inspiring and, quite possibly, the most rewarding thing you’ll ever do. To find out more about a rewarding career as a teacher in further education, head to teach-in-further-education.campaign.gov.ukIf you’d like to make more of what you know in 2022, look no further. The Department for Education’s new further education (FE) teacher recruitment campaign and digital service aims to attract skilled industry professionals from a number of key sectors – including construction, engineering and manufacturing, legal, finance and accounting, digital/IT and health and social care. FE is study, usually for learners 16+, that takes place after secondary school in FE colleges and other providers. It can be the next step for young people and school leavers but is equally accessible to adults looking to broaden their skills or change careers. There are a wide range of subjects on offer, with a unique offering of technical and vocational courses that aim to equip learners with practical, work-based skills. So, if you have industry experience, the FE sector is actively looking to recruit people like you to pass on your knowledge and experience to the next generation of learners, and help prepare them for the world of work. Sounds interesting? Here are six of the top benefits to teaching in FE … Your industry skills are totally transferable Your skills are more valuable than you realise. Real-world industry experience is highly valued for FE teaching roles – in fact, it’s exactly what FE employers are looking for. As many of the courses are technical, they are usually quite hands-on, so you can directly apply your industry expertise to a new role. From practical know-how to workplace etiquette, all are considered to be transferable and relevant to teaching in FE. You can teach in FE alongside your current job Industry professionals can continue their current job alongside FE teaching, as part-time and flexible contracts are readily available. Flexible contracts enable FE teachers to continue to stay fully up to date in the industry they’re passionate about while taking advantage of the unique benefits of FE teaching. In fact, according to the 2018-2019 Further Education Workforce Data for England report, 46% of FE teachers at colleges and 43% at other providers work part-time. You can earn while you train You can jump right into teaching in FE. You don’t always need prior teaching qualifications or experience, and funding is available for some subjects so that new teachers can start earning straight away and train on the job. For example, the government-funded Taking Teacher Further programme covers the cost for new industry recruits to undertake training while they work. You don’t always need a degree If you want to teach an FE course that relates to your industry – such as an apprenticeship in construction – you won’t necessarily need a degree. The real-world skills you have gained working in the sector can often be accepted in the absence of a degree in your subject area. You can use your experience to change lives If you like the idea of changing lives without changing your career, look no further. Becoming an FE teacher means that you will be training the next generation of workers in your sector, and passing on your knowledge and experience to future talent. It can be hugely rewarding and give you the opportunity to make a real difference in both a personal and professional capacity. You can shape the course, showcase your skills and experience, and help prepare your students for bright and fulfilling careers. There are FE teaching roles, right now, near you! There are thousands of publicly funded FE providers in England, including colleges, which means there is almost definitely an FE teaching job available somewhere near you. You can also work in adult and community education centres, prisons and youth offender organisations and voluntary organisations. If you’d like the chance to share your skills, what are you waiting for? To find out more about a rewarding career in further education teaching, head to teach-in-further-education.campaign.gov.ukBefore Zhang Hua goes down for breakfast, he puts on a mask and rubber gloves. He leaves his hotel room and walks through halls while keeping a safe distance from others. Then he boards a specially commissioned bus driven along dedicated lanes to his job assisting foreign broadcasters preparing for the Winter Olympics. In the media centre he takes his daily Covid test, and he could eat a meal delivered by a robot. Depending on where he’s staying, Zhang may be allowed to visit his hotel gym later, or go to another hotel’s restaurant, but otherwise this is the only journey he can take. This is life inside one of the “closed loop” bubbles set up by China in an attempt to keep the Winter Olympics, which are due to begin on 4 February, Covid-free. Zhang, who used a pseudonym, has been inside a bubble since 21 January. “With the buses, going out is easy,” he told the Guardian. “It [the loop] doesn’t affect how we work much but it affects our lives, especially meals, and life is not as free as outside the loop.” Throughout the pandemic, China’s government has maintained, with large success, a “zero-Covid” strategy, assisted by strict border controls. As recently as a few months ago, weeks would go by with no community cases, and outbreaks were swiftly brought under control. But then Omicron arrived. Case numbers are low relative to the rest of the world but infections have been found in multiple provinces and cities, including Beijing. The closed loop system is now tasked not only with keeping the Games as Covid-free as possible but also ensuring that the influx of about 11,000 foreign athletes, officials, employees and guests does not spark a wider outbreak that China cannot control. What is the loop? The “closed loop” system designed for the Games consists of three interconnected competition zone bubbles, where participants and employees will work or compete, eat and sleep, without ever coming into contact with the general population. The first covers Beijing’s city centre and the venues for ice competitions and the opening and closing ceremonies. The second is the suburban Yanqing site for Alpine skiing and sledding events, and the third is way out in Zhangjiakou, 200km (125 miles) to the north-west in Hebei province, for the Nordic biathlon, freestyle skiing and snowboarding events. Each holds a number of stadiums and venues, convention centres, and dozens of designated hotels, and are linked by high-speed rail with designated loop carriages, and highways with dedicated loop lanes. Other drivers who cross into these lanes face fines, and people have been warned against rushing to assist if a loop vehicle has a crash. On arrival The process for foreign participants starts long before they get to Beijing. For two weeks before departure they are required to monitor and upload their temperature and other information to a health app every day. After receiving two negative Covid tests within 24 hours, they will get on a dedicated plane. When they disembark in Beijing they will be met by workers in biohazard suits. “In the airport it’s a bit scary, it’s almost like a hospital that was treating Covid patients in the second wave,” one journalist told Associated Press. Participants will go through dedicated gates and receive their third test, before one of about 4,000 special vehicles takes them to their bubble, and a hotel barricaded from the public. They will be policed and protected by officers who have gone through three weeks of quarantine and isolation, and assisted by thousands of staff such as Zhang, who will have to quarantine again before they can go home. In at least one venue, employees are wearing underarm thermometers that sound an alarm if their temperature rises too high. What if someone tests positive? A participant who tests positive goes to an isolation centre for quarantine, or hospital if they are sick. It might start with a midnight knock on the door. The isolation rooms are about 25 sq metres and have an openable window. People staying in the rooms will get three meals a day and free wifi, according to the Games playbook, and they will be there for at least 10 days. If they are not showing symptoms and tests show a low viral load for three consecutive days, they can rejoin the closed loop under the measures for close contacts. People found to be close contacts and whose jobs can be done by someone else must go to the isolation centre for at least 21 days, or leave China within 24 hours of testing negative. If their job is critical or they are a competitor, they must isolate in their room, travel to competitions alone, train in their room or an isolated space, and be tested every day, including six hours before their event. So far just a few athletes have tested positive since arriving in Beijing. Some, such as the US bobsledder Josh Williamson, caught Covid while still at home. Williamson is hoping to recover and test negative in time to get to Beijing for his team’s event on 15 February. “Isn’t it ironic,” he said recently, “that after four years of hard work, all there is to do is sit, rest, recover and have faith? Things I struggle to do the most.” After the Games Tokyo’s Summer Olympics were also run under extraordinary pandemic measures, but foreigners were allowed to travel around the city after two weeks. At the end of Beijing’s Games everyone will be sent straight back home on a plane without detours. For some of the visiting foreigners the closed loop is a frustrating experience – so close and yet so far from life outside. Zhang says he is happy about the measures and supports China’s effort in combating Covid, but he is worried about the added complexities and influx of people. Outbreaks and lockdowns are still happening around the country. Beijing has shown no sign of changing its zero-Covid strategy and is banking its international and domestic reputation on the closed loop system and staging a successful, outbreak-free Olympics. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian ZhuThe latest Covid-19 vaccination figures show that almost 37 million people in the UK have received their booster jabs, with approximately 52 million people having had their first vaccination and about 48 million their second. But even though huge numbers of the population have had the booster vaccination, a significant proportion of people are still unsure or hesitant about receiving it. Here, we look into concerns around the booster, and find out why it’s so vital to have it. Who can have the booster? Everyone aged 16 and over is now eligible for a booster vaccine. Also, 12-15-year-olds who are clinically vulnerable are now able to get their booster. Why should I get the booster vaccine? It’s important we take up all vaccinations offered, including boosters, since they deliver the best possible protection against the virus, significantly reducing our risk of serious illness and hospitalisation. Research shows that unvaccinated people are eight times more likely to be hospitalised than those who have had both doses of the vaccine and a booster. And because the booster vaccine lessens our chances of contracting the virus, it also lessens our chances of suffering from long Covid, which can have serious and debilitating long-term effects. A&amp;E doctor Dr Emeka Okorocha says: “I have seen firsthand the effect that Covid-19 can have on people – you can still get seriously ill with the virus. Covid-19 is highly infectious and the vaccine remains our best line of defence against it.” Is the booster jab actually effective against the Omicron variant? Yes, it is effective. “Two doses of the vaccine are very good at protecting against the Delta variant but, as we know, the dominant variant now is Omicron,” says Dr Viki Male, a reproductive immunologist at Imperial College London. “With Omicron, a third dose boosts protection against hospitalisation up to around 90%,” she says. Dr Lucy Pocock, an academic GP at the University of Bristol, agrees about the benefits. “It is true that vaccine effectiveness against symptomatic disease with Omicron is lower than with the Delta variant, however protection against hospitalisation is much greater after a booster dose, so it’s really important people take them up when they are offered.” I’m concerned about the side-effects of the vaccine. Is the booster safe? Yes, the booster has been approved for use by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). “In the UK, most people are offered an mRNA vaccine (Pfizer or Moderna) as a booster,” says Pocock. “Millions of people worldwide have now received doses of these vaccines with the risk of serious side-effects being very low. Symptoms people have experienced – such as short-term pain and swelling at the injection site, fatigue or a headache – are usually mild and only last for a couple of days.” If, on the other hand, you test positive for Covid-19, you may need to take significant time off work to isolate and recover from the illness. I had my second dose of the vaccine not long ago. When can I get a booster vaccine? You can get a Covid-19 booster vaccine three months after your second dose. “If you weren’t able to get your booster dose because you had Covid-19, remember to book your booster jab 28 days after you no longer have the virus too,” says Okorocha. I am immunosuppressed and more vulnerable to infection. What should I do? In certain circumstances – for example, for people who are immunosuppressed – it’s even more important you are protected against the virus. In which case, you may be eligible to receive a booster vaccination sooner. If you haven’t had yours, go to the NHS.uk website to book an appointment or to find your local walk-in vaccination centre. I’ve already had two doses of the Covid-19 vaccine, am I not protected enough? Unfortunately not. Taking up a booster will strengthen protection against serious illness from Covid-19 and give you the best possible defence for you, your family and anybody you come into contact with. I’m pregnant and I’m concerned about the efficacy of the vaccine. Why should I get it? If you’re pregnant, it’s even more important you take up the booster as soon as you can. Research shows that pregnant and recently pregnant women with Covid-19 are more likely to be admitted to an intensive care unit than non-pregnant women. Data from the UK Obstetric Surveillance System also indicates that 96% of pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid-19 symptoms between May and October 2021 were unvaccinated, and a third of these required respiratory support. About one in five pregnant women hospitalised with the virus need to deliver babies preterm, and one in five of their babies need care in the neonatal unit. “Along with a higher risk of preterm birth for women with symptomatic Covid-19, UK studies have also suggested a higher rate of stillbirth in infected women,” says Pocock. But does research indicate that it’s definitely safe if I’m pregnant? Yes, it does. “Safety trials of the booster have shown that, in the general population, the booster doesn’t have any side effects that we don’t see with doses one and two,” says Male. “Safety studies looking at more than 100,000 people who received doses one and two during pregnancy have shown that there’s no increased risk of pregnancy complications with the vaccines. Putting those two together, we have every reason to believe that, just like doses one and two, boosters are completely safe during pregnancy.” Pocock agrees, saying: “The Covid-19 vaccines are safe for pregnant women and have no impact on fertility, either.” I don’t have time to get a booster jab, is it really that important? The Covid-19 vaccine is quick, simple and free. It has never been easier to get jabbed – you can get it near your home or work, and at a time that’s convenient (including the weekend or evenings). Either book online or visit a walk-in centre – and encourage friends and family who haven’t had theirs to book in, too. “It can be difficult to make time in a busy schedule for the booster,” says Pocock. “But having symptomatic Covid-19, or even long Covid, is likely to be much more disruptive to your life. Appointments are on offer on weekends and evenings, and are quick and easy. Think of it as an investment in your health and future productivity.” Get your booster now by visiting nhs.uk/covidvaccination. If you are in Scotland, visit nhsinform.scot/covid-19-vaccine, for Wales, visit gov.wales/get-your-covid-19-vaccination and for Northern Ireland, visit covid-19.hscni.net/get-vaccinated. This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (“Get boosted now”) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit gov.uk/coronavirusThere is art that mirrors life, life mirroring art – and then there is Station Eleven. In February 2020, filming was under way on an HBO Max adaptation of the critically acclaimed novel, which is set 20 years after a deadly flu outbreak has decimated the global population and brought civilisation as we know it to an end. Its plot centres on a nomadic troupe of actors who perform Shakespeare to the scattered settlements of the Great Lakes. But after shooting two episodes showing the “Georgia flu” bringing the city of Chicago to a stop, production was shut down by the very threat it depicted. The book, which was a bestseller in 2014, was discovered anew as the real-life pandemic made us seek out stories to help process the emergent threat. (See the spike in streams of Steven Soderbergh’s 2011 pandemic thriller Contagion; the return of Camus.) Its author, Emily St John Mandel, is often declared to have “predicted” the future, a claim she resists. “There are tiers of how much it blew your mind,” says Station Eleven star Mackenzie Davis by phone from Los Angeles. “Talking about a virus making its way round the world from Asia to Europe to Chicago, and then halting production to let that actual event happen – it was really quite chilling.” If the collapse of fact and fiction was coincidental to the book, it is inherent to the show – and the source of its substantial pathos. Premiering in the UK this week but recently concluded in the US, it has been hailed as a rare uplifting story of the pandemic. Its creator, Patrick Somerville (who also wrote revered post-apocalyptic drama The Leftovers), describes it as: “a post-apocalyptic show about joy”. “That’s something I really love about the show … because why survive, if it’s just misery?” says Davis – who is perhaps best known for the Black Mirror episode San Junipero. She plays Kirsten, the Traveling Symphony troupe’s star player, in “year 20” when the threat of the virus is long past and post-pandemic civilisation has stabilised. “There has to be something that pushes you to want to live through extreme difficulty and tragedy – and it has to include laughter and joy.” The events of the 10 episodes tell a story that is extremely nonlinear. Narratives are looping and layered, with the present intruded upon by memories of “year zero”. When the Georgia flu arrives in Chicago, Kirsten is eight years old and acting in a production of King Lear alongside movie star Arthur Leander (Gael García Bernal). Arthur dies on stage, and in the ensuing confusion Kirsten is taken in by audience member Jeevan (Himesh Patel, also seen having a panic attack about the end of the world in Don’t Look Up) and his brother Frank (Nabhaan Rizwan). Meanwhile, Arthur’s ex-wife Miranda (Danielle Deadwyler) has completed her graphic novel, years in the making, about a stranded spaceman – titled Station Eleven. As society collapses, characters shape each others’ fates in ways that take decades to be uncovered. If these connections sometimes seem dependent on coincidence, they are consistent with how many of us experienced the pandemic: how small our worlds became, the fluidity of past and present. The surrealness of that time still weighs on Davis. “It’s all strange,” she says. “I mean, I keep finding myself in conversations being like: ‘How’s your pandemic? What have you been doing for the last few years?’ Just sort of catching yourself, like, wow, we’re using the word ‘pandemic’ colloquially – the casualness – as a unit of time.” In the “infinite void” of quarantine, Davis – who holed up with a friend in LA – kept feeling overtaken by memories of places she had once been and past homes. (Davis, 34, is Vancouver-born, but moved from LA to London later in 2020.) “I just kept feeling shuttled back in time, or to other planes of time where I was still living other lives.” Restarting production on Station Eleven in Toronto in February 2021 – drawing on the recent past, projecting far into the future – blurred her reality even further. “This show was like a living document while we were making it … it felt like excavating the present, in a weird way,” says Davis. As well as the looping timeline, multiple episodes were shot simultaneously, “so I didn’t have the comfort of thinking: this is a whole narrative with a beginning, middle and end that I fully understand,” she says. “It was weird to explore your relationship to this big, traumatic event when it was still going on, and you had no idea what part of it you were in.” I found the year zero episodes especially hard to watch, bringing back memories of those weeks in March 2020 when the situation was as fast-moving as it was uncertain; that exhausting oscillation between (as Jeevan succinctly puts it) “it’s going to be OK” and “we’re fucked”. The parallels are often painful: the emptied airports, the thwarted goodbyes, the shortcomings of language. “We need new words,” a woman tells Jeevan, struggling to articulate her relationship to the man she hopes to be reunited with. Depicting a pandemic while actually living it was “an emotionally fraught time”, says Davis. “There were a lot of open, aching hearts.” The further out from year zero Station Eleven gets, however, the similarities fall away. The Georgia flu quickly ravages the globe, with a survival rate of one in 1,000. In year 20, the trauma of those so-called “first 100” days distinguishes the “pre-pans” from the “post-pans”: the first generation to be born with no memory of the “before”. They press Kirsten for her recollections of smartphones, Uber, the internet. They weren’t that great, she tells them (though she admits she liked Instagram). What does endure through the collapse of civilisation is art: not just Shakespeare but Independence Day, Lisa Loeb, TLC. Even at the violent onset of the pandemic, the instinct to sing, write, stage plays, watch films is as strong as it is to survive. The young Kirsten clings to Miranda’s self-published graphic novel Station Eleven, its spaceman protagonist’s wistful recollections of a faraway home and the “sweetness of life on Earth” allowing her both to escape her circumstances and process them. “When I read it, it didn’t matter that the world was ending, because it was the world,” she says in year 20, still quoting the story like scripture. This vision of the post-apocalypse is certainly more peaceful than most, with civilisation rebuilt round art and community. The motto of the Traveling Symphony (lifted from Star Trek: Voyager) is “Survival is insufficient”; in humanity and the humanities, Station Eleven suggests, we find something worth living for. “I like how the show is earnest about the importance of art. It’s not cloying or masturbatory, but it makes the case that creation, for no reason or accolade, is essential to being alive, and I think that’s true,” says Davis. Kirsten even fulfils her dream of becoming an actor, Davis points out – despite, and because of, her traumatic past. “She figured out how to do it after the world collapsed. There’s something really beautiful about that sort of resilience … You’re always pursuing the thing that makes your heart beat.” It is a comforting view of the future – but, she adds, humanity’s enormous capacity to adapt is so often applied to the wrong ends. “I think about the space exploration that occurred last year, despite our planet being under the biggest natural threat we’ve ever experienced. This progress at all costs … it’s at the expense of accepting reality.” Indeed, one criticism of Station Eleven the novel was that it made surviving the apocalypse look too easy, with Sigrid Nunez writing in the New York Times in 2014 that Mandel depicted less suffering than the present day. But the author has said she intended Station Eleven as an appreciation of the best of our world, as much as the story of its end: “a love letter in the form of a requiem”. Whether its vision of a post-pandemic society could arise from our present depends on what we decide to save – you could say we get the apocalypse we deserve. For now, Station Eleven might be the closest we come to closure. “We tell ourselves stories in order to live,” says Davis, quoting the late US writer Joan Didion. “It’s not always beautiful stories, but we crave the sense that there’s some narrator taking care of us, and seeing us through to the end. Because, at the end, things are OK.” The end might be a way off yet, though. Davis feels the desire for the pandemic to be past, to “declare the end of a thing that isn’t over, because then we can start telling the story of this time … But it’s not a text: it’s not going to end one day, and life gets back to normal. It’s going to bleed into our lives. We’re going to be altered by this for ever.” Station Eleven is on StarzPlay from Sunday 30 JanuaryEmily has it in Paris. So does her frenemy Camille, and her boss, Sylvie. Carrie has it in And Just Like That – as does Lisa, who has replaced Samantha as Sex and the City’s fourth Beatle. Moira and Alexis both had it in Schitt’s Creek, and it was on every other lounger in White Lotus. Every woman on television right now has the exact same hair: straight from the crown to the top of the cheekbone, and then wavy to the ends. It has been around for a while, this hair – Laura Dern had it in Big Little Lies, and Sandra Oh flirted with it on Killing Eve. But after a month of the in-depth sofa-based research otherwise known as Dry January, I can confirm that it has reached a new level of ubiquity. It does not feel likely that And Just Like That – Sex and the City’s midlife sequel – will be remembered as a high water mark of popular culture, but the capitulation of Carrie to mermaid waves represents the moment when this hairstyle became the shampoo-and-set of the 21st century. The bubble curls of the original Carrie Bradshaw were an iconic look in their own right – but they could not survive the reboot. This is not just a telly thing, this hair. It is very much the go-to look for public-facing real-life glamour. It works for day or night, whether you are going to a nice restaurant or giving a Ted Talk. Everyone has this hair (me included, see?), which is weird, because actually no one has this hair. There is no hair type that is naturally straight at the top and bendy at the bottom. Sure, if you have slightly wavy and preternaturally well-behaved hair and you tie it in a bun and then let it down a couple of hours later, you might, once in a blue moon, get this perfect combination of hair that drapes elegantly from your parting, then springs into bouncy, face-flattering width at the exact right point. But you can bet your bottom dollar that this would happen when you had just got home and changed into your pyjamas, or moments before you got drenched in a rainstorm, not the night you were going to a party. You won’t get it naturally, but you can make it happen quite easily. The key to the look is its relatability. Barrel tongs and straighteners are part of everyday life for many of us, me included, so if you can wind a clump of hair around a metal stick (like spaghetti on a fork) and count to 10, you can pull off a school-gate-passable version of this Netflix glamour in the time it takes to listen to the news headlines. And because your loops of hair are marshalled into biggish chunks, they tend to behave themselves. This is another reason why this is television hair: high fashion has tended to prefer the kind of poker-straight hair that requires a full-time team of stylists on alert for gaps and strays, but straight-to-wavy can bounce through several takes and keep looking presentable. The lacquered ringlets which were once shiny bullets in the weaponised femininity of The Apprentice and Fox News have evolved into this shape, somehow more low-key and more sophisticated. Hairdresser George Northwood, godfather of the coolest hair, has been perfecting this look on Alexa Chung and a million Alexa-wannabes for years. See also Tess Daly and Claudia Winkleman on Strictly, Michaela Coel in pastel pink on I May Destroy You, and Jemima Kirke in the latest series of Sex Education. What you see on screen isn’t real life. But this hair has a storyline all of its own.Since 2014, the French photographer Guillaume Herbaut has been going to Ukraine several times a year to cover the war in a country divided between those turned toward Europe and those drawn to Russia. A Ukrainian soldier walks in a trench in the former Zenit military airbase. The base has become one of the Ukrainian army’s positions on the frontline The frontline in the Donbas region has been more or less settled from Luhansk to Mariupol and the Black Sea since the Minsk II agreements in 2015. Though the conflict never ended, it had given way to an ongoing war of attrition, relying on trenches and shelling. But since the end of 2021, the words of Vladimir Putin and the movement of more than 120,000 Russian troops to the border have raised fears of an escalation of the conflict. Ukrainian soldiers walk through the former Zenit military airbase Ukrainian soldiers in an underground position in the city of Avdiivka Having witnessed the evolution of the conflict year after year, Herbaut noticed during his last trip, from 17 to 23 January, a stark change compared with the previous eight years, and even compared with his last visit in November: the daily exchange of gunfire, the targeted bombings, the threat of snipers and the attacks from drones equipped with grenades had decreased, and life in the trenches was disturbingly calm for the soldiers on the frontline. Like the calm before the storm. A Ukrainian soldier at a frontline position near the village of Opitne, opposite the Donetsk airport occupied by Russian-backed separatist forces, on 21 January According to the Ukrainian government there have already been more than 14,000 casualties from the war, and this number is sure to rise if the fighting intensifies. With a landscape and population already left in ruins by the fighting, more than 2 million Ukrainians have fled their homes. A Ukrainian soldier in a military position in the former Zenit military airbase This long-lasting conflict has always been volatile, but the uncertainty of the coming weeks has engrossed politicians and activists globally. Soldiers of the Ukrainian army in an underground shelter on the frontline near the town of Niu York. In the centre is Lt Maj Alexander, 24, from Zhytomyr After years of constant noise, the quiet worries those who fear what may happen when the silence breaks. A destroyed building in the village of Opytne‘When you are up in the air, it almost feels like you’re flying,” says Kirsty Muir, the youngest member of Britain’s Winter Olympic team, as she describes the sensation when her body is twirling like a spinning top high above ground. “When you are doing an easier trick, like a 360, everything seems to slow down. There’s time to look around. To see the world. And then comes this spectacular rush of adrenaline when you land.” Muir is 17 but her name has been on people’s lips ever since, at 13, she won three events in the BRITS championship against a star-studded – and significantly older – field. Medals at the Europa Cup, Junior World Championships and the Youth Olympics followed, before she achieved her first World Cup podium place in Colorado last year. Yet that may only hint at her potential. Lesley McKenna, a three-time Olympian and programme manager at GB Snowsport reckons Muir is a “once in a generation” talent. Certainly Muir is improving so quickly that a medal in Beijing is not out of the question. Her best chance is probably in slopestyle, in which athletes ski a course which includes a variety of obstacles and ramps, and earn points for their quality and originality of their manoeuvres. But the unpredictability of big air, which requires skiers to launch from an enormous ramp and perform jaw-dropping tricks, also offers a realistic shot at glory. Does she believe she can do it? “I’m telling myself that I should only think about my performance,” she says. “If I do my best run, but the other girls go better than me, I will still be happy.” There are two huge things in Muir’s favour: talent and temperament. Both attributes merged when she came second in the World Cup slopestyle in Colorado last March. “That was my breakthrough moment,” she says. “But it didn’t start well as I crashed and broke my thumb and tore a ligament on the first of my two qualifying runs.” Not that it stopped her. “In between runs I went to the physio, and I remember my coach saying to me, ‘Just give it a bit of a squeeze so you can get the adrenaline out now.’ It did the trick and I did a run that got me through to the finals. I then had to go to hospital to get a brace on my thumb before the final two days later. And it was there I landed my dub 12 for first time in competition - which got me into second.” The dub 12, in which the skier has to make three full 360º rotations with an extra 180º in the switch landing, is Muir’s signature move. But it took time to get right. “Learning the trick, with all the progressions, took maybe two years. I started by using a trampoline and going into the airbag then taking it to snow. There’s a lot going on.” When she races on the slopestyle course in Beijing she will encounter a replica of the Great Wall of China as well as a rail on top of a house. “I’m going to try that feature, even though it’s going to be scary,” she says, laughing. To calm the nerves, she listens to music - usually the Arctic Monkeys - when she competes. “It takes the focus off the competition and on to skiing.” What makes Muir’s achievements more impressive is that she has combined them with studying for her Scottish Highers. Last year she took biology, while in the summer she will do chemistry, history and PE. “If I want to go to university I have to apply in the next two days,” she says when we speak on Wednesday. “And I haven’t started yet. But I think I will apply.” So what makes her so good? Muir attributes it partly to learning to ski in Aberdeen, aged three. “When you ski in Scotland you are having to dodge all the heather and ice and rocks, which are good skills to have,” she says. “When you go on trips the snow is usually much smoother, but having a good skiing technique really helps to manoeuvre between the different features and ski well into the jumps.” Having a multisport background was also important. “I was maybe six or seven when I properly started freestyle,” she says. “Like most kids, I was put into every sport just to see what I liked. So I was doing some gymnastics, then trampolining, and I just kind of progressively got into thinking: ‘that’s what I want to do’. The final thing is determination. It is a hard sport and you know you’re going to take quite heavy crashes, so you need to be determined to get through it.” That is something Muir has in spades. So what might lie ahead in Beijing? “I don’t want to put any pressure on myself. But I also want to be proud of what I do there.”Protests are under way across Poland after the death of a 37-year-old woman this week who was refused an abortion, a year since the country introduced one of the most restrictive abortion laws in Europe. On the streets of Warsaw on Tuesday night, protesters laid wreaths and lanterns in memory of Agnieszka T, who died earlier that day. She was pregnant with twins when one of the foetus’ heartbeat stopped and doctors refused to carry out an abortion. In a statement, her family accused the government of having “blood on its hands”. Further protests are planned in Częstochowa, the city in southern Poland where the mother-of-three was from. “We continue to protest so that no one else will die,” Marta Lempart, organiser of the protests, told Polish media. “The Polish abortion ban kills. Another person has died because the necessary medical procedure was not carried out on time.” All-Poland Women’s Strike has called on people across the country to picket the offices of the ruling Law and Justice party (PiS) and organise road blockades in the coming days. Agnieszka was first admitted to the Blessed Virgin Mary hospital in Częstochowa with abdominal pain on 21 December. She is said to have been in the first trimester of a twin pregnancy when she arrived and was in “a good physical and mental shape”, according to her family, who said her condition then deteriorated. On 23 December the heartbeat of one of the twins stopped and, according to Agnieszka’s family, the doctors refused to remove it, quoting the current abortion legislation. They waited several days until the second foetus also died. A further two days passed before the pregnancy was terminated on 31 December, according to the family. A priest was then summoned by hospital staff to perform a funeral for the twins, the family said. The family say that the doctors refused to terminate the pregnancy earlier, citing Poland’s abortion legislation. “Her husband begged the doctors to save his wife, even at the cost of the pregnancy,” Agnieszka’s twin sister, Wioletta Paciepnik, said on Tuesday. After the termination, Agnieszka was moved from the gynaecological ward and her health continued to deteriorate. Her family suspect that she died of sepsis but the cause of death was not identified in a statement released by the hospital. Shortly after her death, a statement by her family accusing the hospital of neglect was published on Facebook, alongside a distressing video of Agnieszka’s last days. Agnieszka’s death marks the first anniversary of the 2021 ruling that declared abortion due to foetal abnormalities illegal. Abortion can now only be carried out in cases of rape, incest or if the mother’s life and health are in danger. Her death comes after that of a woman known as Izabela last September, who died after being denied medical intervention when her waters broke in the 22nd week of her pregnancy. Her family claim the 30-year-old was refused an abortion or caesarean section and that the hospital cited the country’s abortion laws. An investigation found that “medical malpractice” led to Izabela’s death and the hospital was fined. Soon after, an anonymous man from Świdnica in south-west Poland came forward to share that his wife, Ania, died in similar circumstances in June last year. While “selective abortion” is possible in the case of a twin pregnancy, it is unclear whether aborting an unviable foetus to save its healthy twin is permitted by the new abortion legislation. The Polish court has not referenced the questions raised by this situation, presented by opposition senators last year, in the new legislation. “We want to honour the memory of my beloved sister and save other women in Poland from a similar fate,” Paciepnik said in a video appeal. The case is now being investigated by the regional prosecutors in Katowice, who also investigated the case of Izabela. The family are represented by Kamila Ferenc, from the Federation for Women and Family Planning, who confirmed that an autopsy of Agnieszka’s body has been ordered by the court. According to a statement from the hospital, Agnieszka tested positive for Covid before her death, although she tested negative twice when first admitted. “We stress that the hospital staff did all the necessary actions to save the patient,” the statement read. The hospital has also denied that a termination was requested. • This article was amended on 28 January 2022. The first foetal heartbeat stopped on 23 December, not 21 December as stated in an earlier version.It’s 60 years since the consecration of the new Coventry Cathedral, built alongside the ruins of the medieval one that was destroyed by bombing in 1940. The opening of the building was marked by a number of significant music commissions, including Arthur Bliss’s Beatitudes, Michael Tippett’s opera King Priam, and, most famously, Benjamin Britten’s War Requiem. And it’s Britten’s work that provides the starting point for Nitin Sawhney’s Ghosts in the Ruins, commissioned as part of Coventry’s year as UK city of culture to mark the anniversary. Promised as a site-specific work reflecting present-day Coventry’s role as a “city of sanctuary”, it proved to be disappointingly bland. The first part of the 75-minute work is performed in the new cathedral, the second among the atmospheric ruins of the old, yet it never manages to articulate the dialogue between past and present and war and peace that I suspect is intended, and much of the work has the inert feeling of a dutiful school concert. A distant recording of the Libera me from Britten’s requiem was intended as the work’s ghostly beginning, though on the first night its effect was ruined as latecomers were still being noisily seated after it had begun. The choral setting by Sawhney that followed – very well sung by the Coventry Cathedral choir – set the tone for what is a curiously Anglican sequence, far removed from Sawhney’s usual richly varied musical palette. The choral numbers are interspersed with poems written and read by local Coventry poets, led by the city’s Poet Laureate, Emilie Lauren Jones and its Young Poet Laureate, Hawwa Hussain, and interludes of pulsing ambient music from the violinist Eos Counsell and vocalist YVA, during which images from Coventry’s wartime past and hugely diverse present (assembled by Mark Murphy) were projected on to screens flanking the cathedral’s nave. It all unfolds very sedately, without a hint of drama or theatricality, but the second half, framed by the ragged walls of the old cathedral, at least offers a change of pace: a series of choral numbers over a persistent rhythm for which the cathedral choirs are joined by members of the Spires Music choir and the Choir With No Name, decorated by Counsell’s multi-tracked violin. The style is somewhere between Carl Orff’s Carmina Burana and Philip Glass’s Koyaanisqatsi. The ending, however, is perfunctory, and the total effect puzzling. It would have helped greatly to know what the texts for the choral settings were; in a work in which the words obviously matter so much, they were nowhere to be found. • Further performances on 28 and 29 January • This article was amended on 29 January 2022 to correct the spelling of Emilie Lauren Jones’s first name.Claims shared on social media, including by the former Brexit secretary David Davis, that the true number of deaths in England and Wales caused by Covid could be 17,000 have been debunked as “spurious” and factually incorrect by the Office for National Statistics. The ONS responded after tweets by Davis suggesting that the figure 17,371 represented the death toll in people with no other underlying causes. Davis tweeted: “Up to the end of September 2021, the official count of the deaths of people with Covid was 137,133.” He added a freedom of information (FoI) request indicated only 17,371 of those deaths occurred in people with no underlying causes. The FoI request to the ONS asked for all deaths in which Covid had been given as the sole cause on the death certificate, which is about a tenth of the generally stated toll. James Tucker, an analyst at the ONS, said that to suggest the lower figure “represents the real extent of deaths from the virus is both factually incorrect and highly misleading”. It was common for Covid victims to have had a pre-existing health condition, but that did not mean they were at “imminent risk of dying from that condition, or even considered to have reduced life expectancy”, he wrote in a blog. Diabetes was the most common pre-existing condition for those dying from Covid, but, he wrote, “this does not mean they were at risk of dying from it”. There was a huge range of pre-existing conditions that could be listed on the death certificate, from heart disease and cancers to obesity and heart arrhythmias, he wrote. The ONS distinguished “between deaths that are ‘due to Covid-19’ and those ‘involving Covid-19’ to provide the most comprehensive information on the impact of the disease on mortality”. “More than 140,000 deaths have been due to Covid-19, meaning that it has been determined as the underlying cause. To exclude individuals with any pre-existing conditions from this figure greatly understates the number of people who died from Covid-19 and who might well still be alive had the pandemic not occurred,” he wrote. Davis appeared to have come across the statistic after watching a video he described as an “excellent summation” made by the YouTube blogger Dr John Campbell. Davis did not say that the figure represented the true pandemic toll, but described the video as “disentangling the statistics”.Ambitions are high and talk is cheap in January, before the bike racing season has truly got going. However, when Tom Pidcock says that a win in Sunday’s world cyclo-cross championship might be the first step in a hat-trick of world titles this year, it’s far more than mere motivational talk. At 22, the Yorkshire racer’s career has already been so prolific, his improvement curve so steeply inclined, that it’s hard to be sceptical. First up, Sunday, when Pidcock will start as favourite in the cyclo-cross in Fayetteville, Arkansas, hoping to add to his junior title from 2017 and his under‑23 rainbow jersey from 2019. He came close to winning twice last weekend in his final warm-up races and believes he will kick on this week. “I’d come off a big block of training and didn’t back off going into the races, it wasn’t exactly what I’d planned but it wasn’t a big issue. After a bit of rest and getting over the jet lag I’ll be good this weekend.” Cyclo-cross was something of a Cinderella discipline in the UK until the past few years when fields in local races have grown drastically, competitors drawn by a sport which is traffic free and accessible, if far from easy. A cyclo-cross is a brief, intense circuit race, run off-road on courses devised to challenge the riders’ bike handling, with multiple dog-leg corners, jumps, off-camber sections and stairs. In wet weather, the courses become a mudbath, with the racers forced to run with their bikes. “It’s low profile, certainly in the UK,” Pidcock said. “But it’s growing. It’s the most difficult thing I do – the weather, the physical aspect, how intense it is and how much you have to concentrate. You’re flat out mentally. At Christmas I did four in five days, and it’s harder than a five-day stage race.” The course in Fayetteville is, Pidcock believes, less technical than most – “super-fast” with a long climb which should be in his favour, and only a single set of stairs. The discipline’s heartland is in the Netherlands and Belgium, where winter races drew huge, paying crowds in the pre-Covid era. There is generous start money for the biggest stars, notably the duo who have dominated the sport in recent years and gone on to make headlines at the Tour de France: Wout Van Aert of Belgium and Dutch rider Mathieu van der Poel. Both are absent on Sunday – Van Aert because he wishes to prepare fully for the road race season; Van der Poel with a nagging back injury – which can only enhance Pidcock’s chances. There are two ways of seeing this, as Pidcock recognised this week. “For sure they are the best,” he said of his absent rivals. “It’s an opportunity to take, but there’s always going to be that cloud, that they weren’t there. If I can win this year, I can focus on beating them next year. It’s a blessing, but not good at the same time.” With Van Aert and Van der Poel absent, Pidcock’s biggest rivals will be the Belgian Eli Iserbyt – who controversially beat him into silver in the 2017 European under-23 championship – and the Dutchman Lars van der Haar, who is 30 and took the first of his three elite medals in 2013, when Pidcock had yet to reach the junior ranks. “I’ve probably got the biggest engine, on this course the climb is so long that it plays into my hands,” Pidcock said. In the morning’s women’s race, most eyes will be on the evergreen all-rounder Marianne Vos of the Netherlands, now 34 and aiming for an eighth title. Or at least her 12th medal since her first in 2006. After Fayetteville, Pidcock plans to race a full Classics season this spring and the Giro d’Italia for the Ineos team. He will then target the mountain bike world championship in July and the world road race championship in late September. Given he is already Olympic mountain bike champion – having won last year in Tokyo – and finished sixth in last year’s world road race in Leuven, the magic hat-trick is not an unrealistic goal. “Possibly,” is his verdict. “I was a little bit worried about the road race world’s – that it wouldn’t really suit me and I was thinking whether or not I’d go. But it seems to have quite a lot of climbing, 4,500m, if that’s true that’d be good for me.” Pidcock’s Olympic title last July was just the latest phase in perhaps the most meteoric rise any British cyclist has enjoyed in recent years, taking in a plethora of national titles, two world junior championships, both the junior and the U23 Paris-Roubaix, two U23 world mountain bike titles, and a seamless transition to road racing as a professional at just 21. You can look at his goals for this year and contend that he is aiming high; you observe his record and it’s clear he has every right to do so.Exhibition of the week Van Gogh: Self-Portraits Harrowing and intimate encounters with a man who saw right through himself. • Courtauld Gallery, London, from 3 February to 8 May. Also showing Mike Nelson A claustrophobic installation by an artist whose gothic imagination can claw at you. • Matt’s Gallery, London, from 3 February to 5 March. Francis Bacon: Man and Beast Humans and other animals in some of the most uneasy masterpieces of modern art. • Royal Academy, London, from 29 January to 17 April. The Tudors Britain’s most impressive royal dynasty glare on from their portraits. • Holburne Museum, Bath, until 8 May. Show Windows with the British Museum George Shaw and Kathe Kollwitz star in an innovative public art display. • Various shop windows in Coventry until 1 May. Image of the week Fraud in the Garden (1930) by Yves Tanguy A surrealist masterpiece that was believed to have been lost or destroyed when a fascist mob raided an arthouse cinema in 1930s Paris has made a triumphant return. Fraud in the Garden, painted by Yves Tanguy, is back, with its wounds healed by a restorer’s surgery. Its rediscovery has been confirmed by Professor Jennifer Mass, an American conservation scientist, who said that the painting had been presumed “lost to history”. Read the full story here. What we learned There are privately owned art treasures the public has a legal right to see Multimedia artist Noémie Goudal depicts our predicted climate future A surgeon has tried to sell an NFT of an X-ray showing a bullet lodged in a Bataclan survivor’s arm The Royal Academy’s Francis Bacon show made our critic want to run away Bowie was a gent, according to photographer Anton Corbijn What caused the fire that destroyed Glasgow School of Art ‘will never be known’ Artists are trying to tackle the dangers of rising sea levels The Canadian painter Allison Katz creates curious illusions … and Julien Creuzet’s sculptures seem to have a life of their own Artist and ‘death doula’ Every Ocean Hughes knows how to help the dying Tasmanian public spaces “dripping in colonialism” have been disrupted by First Nations artists Judy Baca, renowned Chicana muralist, paints LA’s forgotten history Hermès is suing an American artist over NFTs inspired by its Birkin bags Masterpiece of the week Portrait of Girolamo (?) Barbarigo by Titian His sharp eyes and even sharper nose call you from across the gallery and order you to stand in front of him. This is one of the seminal portraits in art history. Rembrandt emulated its pose in a self-portrait the National Gallery also owns. That’s because Titian discovers here how to go beyond a depiction of outward appearances, and convey the enigma of the man behind the nonchalantly leaning, silk-sleeved arm. His pose appears momentary, as if he’s about to rush off, and this adds to the sense of energy and dynamism he projects. He also seems to be sharing a joke or conversation with the painter. Although the title reflects the latest theory about his identity, he lives forever as a mystery man, at once social and secretive, communicating in his alert self-consciousness the complexity of the self. What a piece of work. • National Gallery, London. Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comIn the lead-up to the Beijing Winter Olympics there have been two major side issues unrelated to sport: Covid, and human rights protests. Chinese authorities have implemented an ambitious “closed loop” system to try to keep the Games free of a coronavirus outbreak, or at least keep any outbreaks away from the general population. When it comes to protests, authorities have put in a great deal of effort to contain them. Below we look at what issues may arise during the Games, and how authorities could react. Surveillance and censorship “Athletes must be aware that the information they provide on their visa applications has been used to create files and open-source collection efforts on them,” Nicholas Eftimiades, a US academic and former intelligence official, wrote for the Diplomat. “That research effort identifies and places athletes into at least two categories: first, those who have espoused public views that the CCP [Chinese Communist party] deems threatening … and second, those that have made public statements in support of China.” Mobile phone tracking, CCTV systems and facial recognition technology would also be used, he said. A mandatory app called MY2022 requires all those attending to upload personal and health information and report daily. It allows encryption protecting users’ voice audio and file transfers to be “trivially sidestepped”, according to Citizen Lab, it does not make clear who can access the information, and it also contains a feature allowing users to report “politically sensitive” content. Citizen Lab also discovered a series of online search terms earmarked for potential censorship, raising questions about promises made by the Chinese authorities of access to a less restricted internet for foreigners attending. The terms relate to topics including Xinjiang, Tibet, the Tiananmen Square massacre, insults against China and its leaders, but also included neutral references to Chinese government agencies and figures. Athlete protests Opinion among activists is split on whether athletes should use their platform during the Olympics to protest against the Chinese government’s human rights abuses. Some, such as the director of the Tibet Action Institute, Lhadon Tethong, have appealed to them as “perhaps the most privileged and protected group in the world in China” to use the historic moment and speak out. Others, including former Olympians and human rights groups, have advised that it may be safer to wait until they are on home soil, citing a warning from Chinese officials that behaviour that breaks Chinese rules or laws would lead to “certain punishment”. “I personally think it’s unlikely [an athlete would be punished] during the Olympics, but then again they detained the two Michaels [Spavor and Kovrig], and other prominent foreigners,” said William Nee, of Chinese Human Rights Defenders (CHRD). “Every year they get incrementally more repressive and less concerned with international opinion.” He said there was also the risk that an act of protest sparks a nationalistic reaction from Chinese people, which would force the government to respond strongly, particularly if it targeted Xinjiang, Tibet or Hong Kong. Demonstrations In 2008 Beijing authorities designated three “demonstration zones” where permitted protests could take place. In reality no permits were approved and at least one activist was reportedly arrested after applying. This time around authorities “don’t even want to pretend”, said Teng Biao, a US-based human rights activist and University of Chicago scholar. “A few days ago the Chinese Olympic officials said athletes can’t say something which is against Chinese law. That’s sheer intimidation of athletes. I think it’s not possible to have some kind of demonstration zone.” Sui Muqing, a Chinese human rights lawyer, said anyone who might protest was likely to be monitored. “The probability of protests during the Olympics is not high because the Chinese authorities attach great importance to major events, [and implement] social stability maintenance and control measures.” Before major sensitive events such as the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre, authorities in China often send dissidents and activists on enforced holidays to home villages for the duration, or, in more extreme cases, detain them. Human rights activists say this is happening for the Olympics. Several activists point to the recent detention of two prominent activists, the lawyer Xie Yang and the writer Yang Maodong, and note that the human rights lawyer Tang Jitian has not been heard from since early December. Authorities have also reportedly restricted WeChat accounts. Boycotts The Beijing Games have been the subject of a large boycott campaign calling for sponsors to dissociate themselves over China’s human rights abuses, particularly those against Uyghurs in Xinjiang. None have dropped out and the major sponsors are not responding to press queries, but there is a distinct lack of the big Olympic-themed promotions that normally appear this close to the opening ceremony. Burton, a snow gear company that is not a sponsor but does operate in Xinjiang, granted an interview to the BBC but it did not go very well for them. Many of the recent boycott campaigns have focused on the use of cotton sourced from Xinjiang, where there are widespread allegations of forced labour, among other abuses. Last week the IOC said no forced labour was used in the making of Olympic uniforms, after concerns were raised by the US congressional committee on China. Peng Shuai Sporting stars are generally not so involved in politics and protests, but last year the case of the Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai proved a large exception. Peng disappeared from public view for weeks after she posted an essay to Weibo describing an alleged sexual assault by a former senior official with whom she had previously had a secret relationship. Athletes and activists have continued to publicly voice their concerns – most recently at the Australian Open – about Peng’s wellbeing. But inside China the topic of Peng remains completely censored. There are big questions now on whether foreign athletes will raise her case while on Chinese soil, and if they do, who will see it. Nee said the censorship was still there, and we were unlikely to see an appearance by Peng “if they can get away with it”. The International Olympic Committee has largely backed Beijing’s claim that Peng is under no control or duress, and has said its president, Thomas Bach, will meet her during the Games.France’s far-right leader Marine Le Pen has described her niece’s decision not to support her presidential campaign as “brutal, violent and painful”. Marion Maréchal, who dropped Le Pen from her name in 2018, said she was considering whether to transfer her allegiance to Éric Zemmour, who is even further to the right. In an interview with Le Parisien, Maréchal, who at 22 became the youngest MP in the Assemblée Nationale in 2012, before stepping down in 2017, said her aunt’s “incessant ideological and programme changes” showed a “lack of logic and vision”. On potentially backing Zemmour, she said: “I’m thinking about it. I haven’t decided. If I support Éric, [it] would not just be a question of passing by and saying hello. It would mean returning to politics. It’s a real life choice, a heavy decision.” On Friday Marine Le Pen, who has spearheaded efforts to “de-demonise” her party, now called National Rally (RN – Rassemblement National), appeared shocked by Maréchal’s decision, describing it as a personal as well as a political blow. “I have a special relationship with Marion because I raised her with my sister during the first few years of her life, so obviously it’s brutal and violent … it’s difficult for me,” she told CNEWS television. She also expressed her “incomprehension” of the politics behind the decision. “I didn’t really expect it. She [Maréchal] indicated she would support the candidate that is best placed to reach the second round. Undoubtedly, I am better placed than Éric Zemmour is today.” A rift within the family has been widening for more than a decade. After Marine Le Pen took control of what was then the Front National in 2011, she fell out with her father, Jean-Marie Le Pen, the party founder, and later expelled him. In recent weeks she has lost two former close allies to Zemmour. In 2017 Maréchal said she was leaving politics to set up a private university teaching conservative political studies in Lyon. Opinion polls suggest Emmanuel Macron, who has not yet declared he will stand but is expected to seek re-election, will win through to the second round to face either Le Pen or the mainstream-right Les Républicains candidate, Valérie Pécresse. Last week Le Pen described Zemmour’s anti-migration programme as “extremely brutal”. “Does he want to be in the second round – I don’t believe so – or is he in fact a stepping stone to allow Valérie Pécresse to be in the second round in place of Marine Le Pen?” she said.Many will know John Patrick Shanley’s 2004 parable from the Oscar-nominated film adaptation with towering performances by Meryl Streep and Philip Seymour Hoffman. This taut production walks out from under its long shadow to dazzle with its own invention. Father Flynn (Sam Spruell) has been seen alone with 12-year-old new boy Donald Muller in a school governed by nuns. Altar wine has been drunk. The principal, Sister Aloysius (Monica Dolan), is sure some wrongdoing must have occurred between the priest and the boy and so begins her campaign to unearth the truth and take Flynn down. Shanley’s script harkens back to a 1960s Catholic corner of the Bronx in New York but like all good parables, its story feels both timeless and more timely than ever, its ideological arguments speaking to our world of social media silos and Punch and Judy political debates. In a production directed by Lia Williams, intention and truth stay opaque – it is not only the Sister’s tyranny of certitude that is complicated but also the Father’s silver-tongued sermonising on doubt. Is she smoking out the truth or clinging to absolutes in a fast-changing world? Is he mobilising arguments in an effort to escape blame? Each character’s cards are played close to their chest and the performances elevate themselves beyond any comparisons with the film. Dolan brings an unsettling humour and swagger to her role. She is not a likable character – and not as seemingly reasonable as the Father – but that does not make her position wrong. “It is my job to outshine the fox,” she says, and she could be Miss Marple in a habit – gimlet-eyed, ever suspicious, performing Catholic duty to the letter and seeing heresy even in Frosty the Snowman. There is something magnificently rebellious about Dolan’s portrayal: she is never going to win against a “man in a robe”, says Mrs Muller when she visits the school to talk about her son’s apparent abuse. But the Sister squares up to a patrician church and its nakedly patriarchal power structures, even as Flynn pulls rank, telling her what women can’t do in the church and threatening to get her fired. Spruell is equally magnificent, by turns beseeching, vulnerable, explosive and entitled, at once both victim and arch manipulator who talks to schoolboys about making sure to keep their nails clean, as if appearance is all. “Children need warmth,” he says, and the drama’s ground constantly shifts between his truth and hers. Their confrontations are bare-teethed and full of Pinteresque savagery, while the two ancillary characters, Sister James (Jessica Rhodes) and Mrs Muller (Rebecca Scroggs) bring added moral complications and controlled, compelling performances. Joanna Scotcher’s extraordinary set is bleached of colour, almost Amish in its starkness, and has a gothicism that emanates from a gigantic cross created out of slivers of cross-hatched light against a wall of thunderous black. In an almost mischievous touch, there is a single bare-branched tree that could be from the forgotten landscape of Waiting for Godot. The lack of an interval makes the play all the more powerful, without seeming too hurtling. Actors pace themselves but sustain every moment of dramatic tension. The grey gulf between Sister Aloysius and Father Flynn’s entrenched positions is where the audience are left to swim. The play leaves us, unnervingly, in that place of doubt. • At Chichester Festival theatre until 5 February.Theresa May has made her first intervention in the row over Downing Street parties, saying she was angry to hear about them. The former prime minister, who has frequently criticised Boris Johnson on other issues, has been conspicuously silent in the weeks since the “partygate” allegations first emerged at the end of November. Now, however, she has said that if evidence were to emerge of deliberate wrongdoing then “full accountability” should follow and that “nobody is above the law”. In a letter to her local newspaper, the Maidenhead Advertiser, she wrote: “It is vital that those who set the rules, follow the rules … This is important for ensuring the necessary degree of trust between the public and government. “Like so many, I was angry to hear stories of those in No 10, who are responsible for setting the coronavirus rules, not properly following the rules. All those working at the heart of government should conduct themselves with the highest of standards which befits the work they do, and this applies as much to those working in No 10 as to other parts of government.” The letter was sent before the Metropolitan police launched an inquiry into alleged parties after receiving evidence from Sue Gray, the senior official who has been asked by Downing Street to investigate possible Covid rule-breaking in Whitehall. May said that “if there is evidence of deliberate or premeditated wrongdoing, I expect full accountability to follow”. News of May’s intervention came as it emerged that key parts of Gray’s report into the parties could be pared back at the request of the police. Scotland Yard revealed it had asked for references to matters it was now investigating to be removed. Johnson’s resignation from May’s cabinet was seen as one of the blows to her authority that led to her leaving No 10 in 2019. She has since been a vocal critic of her successor, making a number of sharp interventions in the Commons and the media. She accused him last year of abandoning Britain’s “position of global moral leadership” by threatening to break international law during Brexit trade negotiations. She also attacked the government’s decision to cut foreign aid, saying it had “turned its back on some of the poorest in the world”, and she dismissed government assurances on post-Brexit security arrangements as “utter rubbish”.Archant, the publisher of dozens of titles including the Eastern Daily Press, London’s Ham &amp; High Express and the former owner of the anti-Brexit weekly the New European, is up for sale only 18 months after being sold to a private equity group. The Norwich-based newspaper group, one of Britain’s oldest publishers – co-founded in 1845 by the mustard magnates the Colman family – was sold to the investment group Rcapital in August 2020 in a deal that promised a “bright future” for the company as the pandemic accelerated the decline in its already strained finances. Rcapital, which during its short period of ownership sold the New European to a consortium including the former New York Times chief and BBC director general Mark Thompson and the ex-Financial Times editor Lionel Barber, has put out an information memorandum to prospective buyers and is understood to have appointed Ulmus Advisory to oversee the process. It is understood that interest has been expressed by several groups including National World – the owner of more than 100 local and regional titles including the Scotsman and Yorkshire Post – which lost out to Rcapital when Archant was sold. Newsquest, the UK’s second biggest regional player, with 200 titles, including the Argus in Brighton, the Northern Echo in Darlington and the Glasgow Times, has also expressed interest. Reach, the owner of the Mirror, Star and Express national papers and almost 200 regional print and digital titles, including the Manchester Evening News and Liverpool Echo, is another potential suitor. Bids are due by the end of the day on Friday. The involvement of Reach, which has the largest combined online readership of any UK newspaper group and in December overtook the BBC as the biggest news website by audience, could cause regulatory issues. While the publisher does not own print titles that overlap with Archant, which also owns about 75 specialist magazines such as London Bride and Pilot, it has made a big investment in the region, launching the competing digital brands NorfolkLive and SuffolkLive backed by 50 journalists as part of plans to launch local news brand in every county in England and Wales. If Reach were to succeed, the company has the deepest pockets to make a bid, it could trigger media plurality concerns with the industry regulator, Ofcom. Like other regional publishers, Archant has been hit by the growing shift of readers and advertisers to digital platforms. The company makes about £50m in annual revenues, down from almost £100m in 2017, and is barely profitable. It is expected to be sold for about £5m to £10m, the same price range as National World paid for JPI Media in December 2020, a business that was sold for £160m by the Barclay brothers in 2005. When Rcapital announced its takeover of Archant it described the deal as a “one-of-a-kind” investment. The private equity group owns 90% of Archant, with 10% owned by the Pension Protection Fund, as part of a company voluntary arrangement to unburden Archant from its pension and life assurance scheme.With lunar New Year being celebrated next week, there’s a chance you might be having a Chinese meal over the next few days, but I wonder what you’re planning to drink with it. Wine-wise, at least, the same suspects – usually off-dry whites such as riesling and gewürztraminer – tend to get trotted out all the time, so I was particularly interested that this week’s guest contributor Amy Poon and her husband, Michael, who happens to work in the wine business, suggested some different options to go with her recipes. With the wok-roasted char siu, they went for a Saint-Estèphe, suggesting Château Capbern (Laithwaites, 15%), Château Meyney (Majestic, 13.5%) “to balance the rich, smoky flavours of the pork” (though, at £28 and £35.99, respectively, neither is what you’d call cheap), or a traditional Loire red such as a chinon or bourgeuil. And for her father’s classic zha jiang noodles, they recommend a rosé champagne or an English sparkling wine such as the Woodchester Valley in today’s pick. It depends, of course, on the type of Chinese food you’re eating. Supermarkets are still relatively conservative with their ready meals, so if you’re having sweet-and-sour chicken or chow mein, riesling might well be the answer, after all. But there are many dishes with which you could drink a red – the Chinese themselves are particularly keen on bordeaux, and in recent years have invested heavily in the region. Given that a range of dishes may be on the table at the same time, I find it most helpful to look at the overall style of the food, rather than individual dishes. If you’re having dim sum or delicate seafood dishes, for example, crisp, dry whites such as pouilly-fumé or sparkling wines tend to work best. Fizz is also good with anything deep-fried such as spring rolls and prawn toast. With more savoury, umami-rich dishes such as duck or braised meats, on the other hand, I’d definitely be inclined to drink a red. As well as bordeaux, I like a good pinot noir, although with the likes of beef in black bean sauce, I’d go for a bolder red such as a grenache. Meanwhile, with spicy dishes – mapo tofu or a chilli-spiked hotpot, say – I’d be more likely to drink the very forgiving grüner veltliner below , or a lager. And if you’re on the last couple of days of dry January, the 0.5% Lucky Saint would hit the spot. Another good alcohol-free option is sparkling tea, which I’ve mentioned before. I’ve just come across a delicious limited-edition one from Saicho called Eight Treasures. At £32.99 a bottle, it’s definitely not cheap, but it is made from a rare oolong and is beautifully packaged, so it’s ideal for a New Year gift. Three wines to see in the new year Woodchester Valley Brut Rosé 2018 £28.95 Woodchester Valley, 12.5%. Deliciously fruity, with a heady aroma of freshly picked strawberries and raspberries (so a good choice for Valentine’s Day, too). Château Jouanin Castillon Côtes de Bordeaux 2019 £9 larger Co-ops, 13.5%. An appealingly soft, fruity bordeaux that would work really well with crispy duck pancakes. Rainer Wess Grüner Veltliner Kremstal 2020 £9.95 The Wine Society, 12.5%. Austria’s grüner veltliner is a really versatile white that could take you through a whole range of dishes. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comWhen the poet Mary Oliver wrote “Instructions for living a life,” she reminded us: “Pay attention. Be astounded. Tell about it.” This past autumn, wildlife officials announced that a bird, a male bar-tailed godwit, flew nonstop across the Pacific Ocean 8,100 miles from Alaska to Australia in just under 10 days. Fitted with a small solar-powered satellite tag, the godwit achieved “a land bird flight record”. But of course godwits have been doing this for centuries. Come next April-May, all things well, determined godwits will make the trip in reverse, bound for Alaska to nest and raise their young. They won’t be alone. Northern wheatears, songbirds less than six inches long, will arrive in Alaska from sub-Saharan Africa. Arctic terns will return from Antarctica, with each bird flying the equivalent of three trips to the moon and back in a single lifetime. Bar-headed geese will fly over the Himalayas at altitudes exceeding 20,000 feet. PT Barnum was wrong. The circus is not the greatest show on Earth. Nature is. How diminished our world would be without birds, those dinosaurs with feathers and songsmiths with wings. Not that I was born John James Audubon. I used to ignore birds, and was poorer for it. Once, in my teens, while out with my .22 rifle, I spotted a red-tailed hawk riding a July thermal. I aimed and fired, and watched it drop from the sky. Stunned, I ran to it and found it thrashing in the dry summer grasses, dying. I walked away, fell to my knees, and threw up. Now, decades later, I love birds – how they bring me joy and give me wings; how they enlarge my world, slow me down, make me listen. In every hawk I see a velociraptor. In every thrush I hear exquisite music. In every swallow I witness an aerial dance as they snap insects in midair. In every epic migration I find myself redefining what’s possible. And always the same question arises: can we, the human race, in all our commerce and carbon-burning, somehow save our winged cousins? In the past half century, North America has lost more than one-fourth of its birds. Nearly everywhere, they are in decline. Massive die-offs of flycatchers, swallows, bluebirds, sparrows and warblers – described as thousands of birds “falling out of the sky” – have been recorded in recent years in New Mexico, Colorado, Texas, Arizona and Nebraska. Smoke from intense California fires forced tule geese to reroute their migration and take twice as long. Elsewhere, as birds lay their eggs earlier, due to a warming climate, more chicks die from sudden inclement weather events. This is where we find ourselves, trapped in a diminished world of our own making. Today only 30% of all birds are wild; the other 70% are mostly poultry chickens. In essence, Earth is now a coalmine, and every wild bird is a canary – what ecologists call a “bio-indicator” – in that mine. Their fate is ours. Soon after news broke of the flight of the godwit, the US Fish and Wildlife Service announced newly extinct species including the ivory-billed woodpecker and Bachman’s warbler. “When the last individual of a race of living things breathes no more,” the naturalist William Beebe once observed, “another heaven and another earth must pass before such a one can be again.” The author and climate crisis activist Kathleen Dean Moore writes, “Unless the world acts to stop extinctions, I will write my last nature essay on a planet that is less than half as song-graced and life-drenched as the one where I began to write.” Of all the species that have ever existed, more than 99% are now gone, most having winked away during five major extinction events, the last caused by an asteroid that struck Earth some 66m years ago. Today, given global habitat loss (especially deforestation and prairies turned into cropland) and widespread persistent toxins, we – modern humans – are the asteroid. The sixth mass extinction is here, with about 600 species of North American birds at risk from human-caused climate change. We must safeguard one of nature’s greatest creations: wild birds. Build a better world for them, and we’ll build one for ourselves. We must defend a livable planet by electing politicians who have empathy and an ecological conscience. Vote blue, act green. Restore native habitats and environmental health. Keep domestic cats indoors, and affix silhouetted hawk decals to windows. In the US alone, an estimated three to four billion birds die each year from cat predation and window strikes. Put a birdfeeder out the window of a nursing home and watch the patients inside brighten. Birds bring happiness and improved health. A European study suggests that a backyard full of birds creates greater human satisfaction than a modest pay raise. Our survival and mental wellbeing are intricately tied to that of healthy lands, waters and biodiversity; nothing proves it better than wild birds. In August 2020, as the Trump administration sought to weaken the 1918 Migratory Bird Treaty Act, a federal judge ruled in favor of the act and quoted Harper Lee’s famous novel: “It is not only a sin to kill a mockingbird, it is also a crime.” I celebrated the ruling. Later, in 2021, when the Biden administration reinstated and strengthened the act, I took a walk along the ocean near my home, binoculars (not a gun) in hand, and felt a deep sense of gratitude – even hope – knowing that more than tens of thousands of people around the world would volunteer in the annual Christmas Bird Count, a century-old tradition to pay attention, be astounded, and share stories about birds. Godwits might come to mind, and Mary Oliver’s poem Wild Geese: Whoever you are, no matter how lonely, the world offers itself to your imagination, calls to you like the wild geese, harsh and exciting – over and over announcing your place in the family of things. A frequent contributor to the Guardian, Kim Heacox is the author of many books, including The Only Kayak, a memoir, and Jimmy Bluefeather, a novel, both winners of the National Outdoor Book Award. He lives in Alaska. His favorite bird is whichever one he’s watchingWith solo artists currently dominating the charts and the zeitgeist, now is not the ideal time to be in a band – unless it’s Glass Animals. This week, the Oxford quartet became the first British group to top Spotify’s global songs chart with their synthpop single Heat Waves, racking up 4.26m plays per day on the streaming platform. It was a feat their fans saw coming: last year, Heat Waves was the fourth most-streamed song in the US and the most-streamed in Australia, having been played more than 1bn times worldwide. This is a remarkable achievement for an act with no previous big hits – but that’s not the only strange thing about their success. A sultry, wistful number with an extremely catchy chorus, Heat Waves has had an unusually slow rise to prominence: it was released in June 2020 and for months it failed to break into the UK Top 40 or US Billboard Hot 100. Its subsequent ascent up the charts – peaking at No 5 in the UK, No 1 in Australia and No 3 in the US, where it currently stands – was unprecedented in its leisurely nature; it now holds the record for the longest climb to the Top 5 in the US chart’s history. Although the band weren’t exactly languishing in obscurity – 2014 single Gooey eventually went platinum in the US despite never actually breaking into the charts, while their 2016 album How to Be a Human Being was nominated for the Mercury prize – even a year ago, it would have been difficult to imagine Glass Animals achieving the popularity they have today. Frontman and songwriter Dave Bayley wrote Heat Waves alone in the spring of 2019 in a recording studio complex in London. Or at least he thought he was by himself – towards the end of his session he turned round to discover Johnny Depp was watching him. The actor, unfortunately, did not spot Heat Waves’ potential. “He literally didn’t react in any way to the song,” recalls Bayley. “He almost spoke to me afterwards as if there had been a fart in the room – something weird and slightly negligible. There was no compliment.” Initially, Bayley wasn’t even sure he wanted to perform the song himself, and attempted to pitch it to another artist. Despite the track’s enormous success, he still thinks it may have worked better in somebody else’s voice. That’s because the subject of the song is so personal he can barely perform it without crying: the bittersweet, nostalgic nature of the chord progression made him think of his best friend who died. Afterwards, he decided to make the lyrics more vague, so it could also apply “to a relationship situation” and appeal to a wider audience. “Songs that are insanely specific, I don’t relate to as much,” he says. Bayley was downbeat about its prospects in the run-up to the track’s release. The band had only just survived a very stressful period: the previous year, drummer Joe Seaward had sustained a serious head injury when he was hit by a lorry while cycling, and for a while it was unclear whether he would walk or talk again. Soon after his recovery – and just as the band were preparing to release their third album, Dreamland – the pandemic hit, plunging them straight back into the doldrums. “I was so worried,” says Bayley. “It immediately felt like there was no space in the world for new music. Everyone was listening to old music, finding comfort in the past. I was floored, for two weeks I just sat in my pants. My managers were like: you just have to put the record out and it’s going to be a dud. Start writing the next one.” In fact, Glass Animals did the opposite. There is no single secret to Heat Waves’ sleeper-hit success – instead there were many minor individual efforts to drum up interest in the song. Bayley himself was behind some of the more off-the-cuff approaches, including an impromptu gig on a Hackney street corner that was cut short when the police “sweetly” notified them that they were standing next to a sign that read “no music”. More successful tactics included releasing the individual audio files from the album online so fans could remix the tracks. Helen Fleming, the band’s marketing manager at their label Polydor, says engaging audiences in such ways is now hugely important: “Fan-created content is becoming more and more fundamental in how music travels so we knew we’d want to lean into that.” A TikTok trend has also helped Heat Waves gain popularity in recent months, with users soundtracking videos about absent loved ones with the song. Bayley describes the trend as “quite sad and sentimental which really fits the song – I’ve seen some other TikTok trends where it’s just someone putting mustard on a watermelon and jumping over milk crates.” But by the time TikTok entered the frame, the song had been building an audience for more than a year thanks to its inclusion on the Fifa 21 soundtrack, its popularity on the video game Minecraft, and TV and radio promotion, says Fleming, meaning it “was primed to explode in the way that it has”. Modern methods aside, both Bayley and Fleming attribute a chunk of Heat Waves’ global popularity to the years Glass Animals spent touring the US, giving them a good foundation in a country where you actually need to be physically present, explains Fleming. Australian acclaim was also crucial. Heat Waves was voted the No 1 song of 2020 in the Triple J Hottest 100, the taste-making radio station’s annual music poll. Bayley thought it was so unlikely that the band would top the chart that he promised to get his first tattoo – an outline of Australia on his bum – if Glass Animals triumphed. He removed the bandages last week. Fleming says her team were also caught off-guard. “At the beginning of the campaign we weren’t talking about the singles chart,” says Fleming. “It’s unusual for a band to break a single in the way Glass Animals have.” It is especially rare for an act with a traditional band set up to have a huge hit single nowadays. Over the past decade, the popularity of such groups has dived, in part due to the dominant cultural forces of pop, electronic music and rap, explains Hannah Ewens, Rolling Stone UK’s features editor. Paradoxically, however, this also may be why Glass Animals have thrived. “Their music doesn’t really sound like guitar music or ‘band’ music,” says Ewens. “It’s fairly close to being what’s been called Spotify-core: quite electronic, catchy, mid-tempo, muted, pensive but neutral in mood. The sort of inoffensive sound that could live on lots of playlists.” Thanks to that broad appeal, Glass Animals’ rise looks set to be exponential. The band are currently awaiting next month’s Brit awards – where they are up for song of the year and best rock act – and the Grammys, where they have scored their first nomination, for best new artist. In the meantime, Bayley is taking some time off from Glass Animals, but not music-making. He is currently working with Jae5, best known for producing rapper J Hus’s work, as well as a female artist he cannot name, but who he describes as “one of my favourite songwriters of our generation”. Collaborating, he thinks, is “the best way to learn: to see how other people work, and steal their tricks.” After Heat Waves’ success, he may need to closely guard his own.Wayne Rooney has said he turned down an approach from Everton to be interviewed for their manager’s job, describing it as a tough decision. Rooney, a boyhood Everton fan who joined the club aged nine and had two spells as a forward there, has been the Derby County manager since 2020. The financially stricken club are in administration and have been docked 21 points, making their tally of 14 points as the Championship’s second-bottom side impressive. “Everton approached my agent and asked me to interview for the vacant job, which I turned down,” Rooney said. “I believe I will be a Premier League manager – I believe I’m ready for that, 100%. And if that is with Everton one day in the future that would be absolutely great. But I’ve got a job here that I’m doing at Derby County which is an important job to me.” The pull of Everton, for whom he played in the first team from 2002-04 and in 2017-18, did cause Rooney to consider the approach. “They got in touch with my agent [Paul Stretford], my agent let the administrators know as well, and yes of course it was a difficult decision for me,” he said. Everton’s pursuit of a successor to Rafael Benítez is in its second week, with the club on Friday undergoing final interviews with Frank Lampard, Vítor Pereira and Duncan Ferguson, who is in a second stint as the caretaker manager. Farhad Moshiri, the Everton majority shareholder, was due to fly to London from his Monaco base to conduct the interviews with members of the Everton board. Lampard’s first job in management was, like Rooney’s, at Derby. The 43-year-old was in charge for a year until he left in 2019 to take over Chelsea, who sacked him last season. Pereira, a decade older than Lampard, is 18 years into his managerial career, the Portuguese’s most recent club being Fenerbahce. He started a second tenure there last summer but lost his job in December. Ferguson has never taken charge of a team on a full-time basis. There was a hostile reaction from Everton fans to Pereira emerging as Moshiri’s preferred choice on Tuesday, prompting Pereira to take the unusual step of pitching for the job and defending his record in a live television interview the following day. Supporters have staged several protests over the running of the club.My dad died two years ago, exposing a sea of secrets and lies. He’d had a degenerative condition, but was totally in denial – and while it was a known excuse for his moods and lack of interest in his family, he did little in his lifestyle to mitigate its effects. After he died, we discovered there was a dominant gene he could have passed to his children. My brother and I have been tested – my sister does not want to be – and my brother was found to be positive. After I had my genetic test, I was advised to contact our extended family. Thinking I was being honest, I emailed our cousins the information, sharing my brother’s diagnosis paperwork to help them get referrals. Now, my brother is livid that I shared his medical history. I’ve apologised for sharing his information but not for sharing my dad’s. I can’t believe our wider family don’t deserve to know this. A dominant gene is relevant – particularly because it indicates a causal link, but not a definite diagnosis, meaning it could be dormant and be passed down. I’m writing to ask if I did the right thing and how best to move forward. I’m tired of the legacy my father has left behind but I feel like I’m being punished for doing the right thing. I’m sorry to hear about your dad and the legacy he’s left you with. I wonder if you’ve had the results of your test? That must weigh heavily on your mind. But your brother’s testing positive must be a big worry for him, and it sounds, by your own admission, as if that hasn’t been acknowledged. It’s clear that you’re very angry with your dad, and he’s not here to take it. I wonder if you are now misdirecting it. To help me answer you I consulted psychotherapist Katherine Walker (psychotherapy.org.uk) and lawyers Jonathan Wheeler and Amanda Garner from Bolt Burdon Kemp. While Walker empathised with what you were trying to do, we all agreed that sharing your brother’s information without his consent was a no-no. The fact remains you could have satisfied your need for helping others, and sharing the information about the degenerative condition, without involving your brother and certainly without passing on his medical data. As Wheeler and Garner pointed out, passing on his papers without his consent is a breach of data protection laws. Your brother could, if he wanted to, make a complaint about you to the Information Commissioner’s Office, although the chances of it being interested in this (it mainly concerns itself with organisations leaking data) are minimal at best. However, it’s important to realise that what you did was wrong and no amount of justification can make this right. “You need to own what you’ve done and take responsibility for it,” says Walker. “You’re trying to correct the generational pattern and right wrongs of the past, but when we do this we sometimes overcompensate. While you’ve avoided secretive behaviour, you’ve invaded your brother’s privacy in pursuit of the truth.” Walker suggested you try to explain to your brother that you did it with the best intentions but admit that “you went too far and his information wasn’t yours to share”. With a bit of time, you’ll see that a more nuanced approach is best. Discretion and secrecy aren’t the same thing. Also, it’s not up to you to (try to) right your dad’s wrongs. It sounds like your family may have difficult times ahead; I hope you can find a way of supporting each other. • Every week Annalisa Barbieri addresses a family-related problem sent in by a reader. If you would like advice from Annalisa on a family matter, please send your problem to ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.As “partygate” continues to threaten Boris Johnson’s premiership, the two rivals most likely to succeed him – Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss – are in a tough spot. Do they pipe up or keep quiet? Show loyalty to the PM, or keep a safe distance? Here we look at what they’ve been up to this week … Interviews Sunak Zero from the chancellor. Not a peep. He last broke cover on 18 January – but that interview came to an abrupt end when he was asked about his support for Johnson. An aide stood in front of the camera. Truss The foreign secretary was everywhere. On Wednesday she did interviews on Sky News, BBC Breakfast, LBC and Radio 4’s Today programme, defending Johnson in a series of tortuous interviews. Warm words for Johnson? Sunak Er, no. Zippo from the chancellor. Truss She acknowledged concerning reports, but added: “That shouldn’t diminish the fantastic work that has been done under this government and this prime minister.” Proximity to the PM? Sunak He has taken a distinctly arms-length approach to the boss so far. And at this week’s prime minister’s questions, he did not sit next to Johnson on the frontbench. Truss Not so, the foreign secretary. She arrived a full 15 minutes before the noon session, to ensure she sat next to Johnson. Keeping their heads down? Sunak He has certainly tried. Sources say he is alarmed by speculation that Johnson may abandon the rise in national insurance, but he hasn’t said so himself. He posted on Twitter to deny he was ignoring eye-watering fraud in Covid support. Truss Lots of airtime to talk about Ukraine, but then was castigated for taking a private jet to Australia for official business rather than using a scheduled flight. What’s being said about them? Sunak “A solo traveller with a small group of people around him” – an unnamed serving minister quoted by Politico. Truss “Not an iron lady but a chocolate soldier” – a writer in the Chinese state tabloid the Global Times. Odds on being next PM Sunak His odds have been shortening – 13/8 with Ladbrokes and 11/8 with William Hill. Truss Hers are drifting … 6/1 with Ladbrokes and 9/2 with William Hill. Star rising or falling? Sunak Rising, just, if the bookies are anything to go by. A YouGov poll on 10 January of 1,005 Tory members had 33% wanting him to replace Johnson. Truss It may be time for the foreign secretary to do a few more “fizz with Liz” evenings for wavering MPs. That same poll put her on 25%. Sir John Curtice, a professor of politics at Strathclyde University, told the Daily Express that supporters of Truss would not want to initiate a leadership contest as an early one would suit Sunak.Europe needs to end its reliance on Russian energy and Germany should accept that the Nord Stream 2 pipeline was never just a commercial project, the Estonian prime minister has said in an interview conducted against the backdrop of soaring tensions over Ukraine. Kaja Kallas also said she detected a wider debate within Germany about its approach to Russia after Angela Merkel’s departure, and that she was waiting for an official response from Berlin on the transfer of Estonian weapons of German-origin to Ukraine. Germany has a longstanding policy against exporting weapons to conflict zones, which Kallas said she accepted, though she argued that any ban would favour Russian aggression since the weapons were intended for Ukraine’s self-defence. Kallas, who took office in January 2021, is the daughter of the former prime minister Siim Kallas. Her mother and grandmother spent time in Siberian gulags during the mass Soviet deportations from Estonia during the second world war. In recent weeks she has become one of the most forthright advocates in the west of the argument that Vladimir Putin only responds to shows of strength. She said the Russian president’s demands that Nato returns to its pre-1997 borders put her country’s future at stake. Estonia, in common with the other Baltic states, joined Nato in 2004 and is protected by the alliance’s article 5 joint self-defence clause. Her longstanding call for extra troops to be posted in Estonia, including a substantial US presence, is likely to be answered shortly. A group of five F15s landed in Estonia this week, part of a wider strengthening of Nato’s eastern flank. “It is quite a deterrent if you plan an attack on a country where US troops are based. If a big bully is threatening you, it is good to have big friends,” she said. Kallas said clear signals were now emerging from Germany’s leaders that the Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia to Germany would not go ahead if Russia invades Ukraine, and she said she wanted the pipeline permanently abandoned. “We have been saying for years that Nord Stream is a geopolitical project not an economic one,” Kallas said. “If you are connected to someone, then the person on the other side of the connection can hurt you. It is not of benefit to Europe, or European energy security. These connections can be destabilising. “We in Europe have been talking about dependence on Russian gas for quite some years already, but if you look at the numbers, the dependence on Russia has been increasing not decreasing. It is a big worry. Europe has to increase its independence from Russian gas. It is so important.” On Estonia’s proposed transfer of German-origin Howitzer weapons to Ukraine, she trod carefully but said it was wrong to think a ban would represent a simple contribution to a de-escalation. “Ukraine has no intention of attacking Russia,” she said. “They need arms to protect their country. These are defensive weapons to be used against an aggressor.” She said she was following closely the debate in Germany about its security role and relations with Russia. “We have a new government. Everyone is trying to figure out where it will go. Germany is a big player and Merkel a longtime leader, and everyone knew how she operated and what her positions were. It was more predictable. Any change of government – I would not call it a mess – but there is an interim time before a government starts to run properly.” “This is a broader test for the west and much broader than just Ukraine. Putin only understands strength, and Russia’s goal has always been to divide the west, the EU and Nato.” Kallas said there was a very clear pattern to Russian negotiations and it was best summed up by the former Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko. “He said there are three basic rules of negotiating with the west. First, demand the maximum, do not meekly ask but demand. Second, present ultimatums, and third, do not give one inch of ground because there will always be someone in the west that will offer you something maybe half that you did not previously have. It is so characteristic of how they operate. “We are already discussing what we can offer to de-escalate, and if we do that the west will fall into their trap. Nato has not caused this crisis and is not planning to attack anybody. Nato cannot do anything on its side to de-escalate. We should not take any expensive steps so they end up with something they did not have before.” Kallas said that did not mean she opposed dialogue, and said she was happy to see talks about transparency on military exercises, even if she was “very doubtful that Russia will keep its side”. But she saw no sign of concessions being made by Nato in its discussions with Russia. “The level of consultation on the Nato side has been excellent. Being a small country of 1.3 million people, it is easy for the big ones only to consult amongst themselves, and go over our heads, but this has not happened. Overall the level of unity we have shown will have surprised Putin.”Neil Young this week issued Spotify with a blunt ultimatum: it’s me or Joe Rogan. The Canadian-American musician criticised its exclusive hosting of the Joe Rogan Experience podcast in a letter to his manager and record label published online, which asked his music be removed from the streaming service. Spotify chose Rogan, removing Young’s entire back catalogue. Young’s objections were based on what he saw as “life-threatening Covid misinformation” being pushed by Rogan. This claim was supported in a letter sent to the streaming service earlier this month, signed by 270 medical and scientific professionals who called for Spotify to stop spreading Rogan’s unfounded point of view. Young had the courage of his convictions – and the backing of his long-term label Reprise Records (part of Warner Music Group), because, as he said in a statement on his website, removing his music would mean “losing 60% of my worldwide streaming income in the name of Truth”. The decision from Spotify draws an entirely new battle line for the service when facing down artists. In the past, fights tended to be around commercial issues, with artists arguing the micro-payments it made for streams were unfairly low; this new conflict is remarkable for being entirely ideological. These recent moves feel like a grand betrayal of Spotify’s roots in liberal Sweden, where it was founded. This is a company where diversity is applauded, paternity leave is encouraged, the mental wellbeing of staff is deemed paramount and efforts to promote artists from outside of a heterosexual and Caucasian orthodoxy have become part of the raison d’etre – such as the Unlike Any Other initiative around Pride 2020 and the Frequency campaign in 2021, which was intended to help elevate Black artists. What is unfolding is a complex ethical and financial conundrum for Daniel Ek, Spotify’s co-founder and CEO. Is he happy for Spotify to amplify medical misinformation through, among others, its crown-jewel podcast, a show it paid a rumoured $100m (£75m) to have on an exclusive basis? Or will he have the company tightly police and factcheck what its podcasters say? The rapidly curdling, and inherently Faustian nature of the Rogan deal should not surprise anyone. Rogangate says a tremendous amount about Spotify’s new priorities. No longer just a music streaming service, Spotify now regards itself as an audio platform and podcasting as its new centre of gravity. Part of the appeal of podcasts for Spotify is that they represent a different type of listening: rather than an album every two or three years from a favourite artist, there is new content every week, at least. Such frequency of output reinforces consumer loyalty – and so subscribers – far better than any single artist can, which may be why Spotify is so hesitant to let Rogan go, or even just to curb some of his more extreme opinions. Rogan draws in listeners – with an estimated 11 million for each episode – and he holds them there. We can date the shift to April 2018, when the company launched its direct listing on the New York stock exchange – and Manhattan, rather than Stockholm, became the company’s geographical and cultural epicentre. This was the moment Spotify became more Wall Street, and less Stortorget. Spotify has a history of making bad decisions. There was an ugly and public war with Taylor Swift in 2014 over its royalty rates. Then there was its bungled “hate content and hateful conduct” policy in 2018, which was seen to remove a disproportionate amount of content by Black artists. But in those instances, Spotify eventually softened its stance. This tendency to conciliation has collapsed as the company recalibrates its ethical and ideological viewpoints to be much more American: naked capitalism, regardless of the negative consequences, seems now to triumph internally at the company over all. The problem, though, with not just flirting with, but financially enabling, someone who prides themselves on “saying the unsayable” is that they may go further and wilder with every utterance. It’s not as if Spotify was hoodwinked into giving Rogan a show: he self-produced his podcast since 2009 and the media provider signed him up precisely because the controversy he generates brings in audiences. While it might make sense in terms of its balance sheet, fighting Rogan’s corner could prove to be Spotify’s most reckless, arrogant and hubristic decision yet: the ultimate cost being not its market cap, but its reputation, its listeners’ loyalty and its soul. Eamonn Forde is a music business and technology journalistThe Twenty20 series against West Indies is a special one for Chris Jordan. The England seamer is back in Barbados where he was born and raised and surrounded by family and old friends. “The first thing I do when I get back here is go home, and as soon as I get there my mum or my dad will have something cooked up,” he says. “The second thing I do is go to the beach. I’ve got a particular beach, I really enjoy the vibe there, and I go straight there and take a dip. That’s literally the first things I do as soon as I land.” But as Jordan revels in his return to this glorious, sun-kissed Caribbean island serious concerns are being raised about whether the 33-year-old still looks at home in England’s T20 side. His place in it has been a given for more than six years. When Jordan was rested for Wednesday’s defeat in Bridgetown it was only the third match he had missed since November 2015. But in recent months his death bowling has been regularly seized upon by critics and opposition batters – his final overs in the World Cup semi-final and in Sunday’s second T20 cost 23 and changed the momentum of the game. “The reality of it is that as a team we probably haven’t excelled in that facet of the game for a little while,” Jordan says, “but in both those games it could have gone slightly different. If you look at it in black and white both overs went for big runs, but chances were created and at various points it could have been different. What I would say is I just try to keep my mindset as calm as possible in those situations and live with the results.” Jordan suggests the only thing that has changed in his death bowling over his career is the number of variations he has to choose from. “I wouldn’t say I’m bowling a hell of a lot differently,” he says. “When I started I didn’t have a lot of skills that I now have, in terms of adding a couple of slow balls to my arsenal, so it was quite simple. As things evolve you develop skills, ways of working out what could be the best thing to do. The fact of the matter is we and I have not been good enough in that phase, but when it has gone well I’ve been at the forefront, when it hasn’t gone well I’ve also been at the forefront, and changing that dynamic going forward I want to be at the forefront of that as well.” It is not just England’s death bowling that has been less reliable of late. After two games of this series Jordan was revelling in the unlikely position of being the leading run-scorer on either side (a status he lost after sitting out Wednesday’s run-fest), but he was only in a position to demonstrate his batting prowess because of failures further up the order. He has faced more than 10 balls only four times in the last five years: once in 2018, once in 2019, and then in the first two games of this series. “I’ve been feeling in good nick with the bat for quite some time,” he says, “but the fact I haven’t had the chance to show it is actually a testament to our batting line-up and the consistency they’ve shown over such a long period.” Though Covid regulations in Barbados are more strenuous than in England, the player bubble has been relatively relaxed, with players allowed to eat out, do some appropriately distanced socialising and go for early-morning dips at favourite beaches. “When the pandemic first started, I feel like the whole world thought it might last two weeks,” Jordan says. “Then we had that initial time off, and everyone was itching to get back into cricket, however it looked. If it had to be a bubble, it had to be a bubble. “No one anticipated that this dynamic would have gone on for so long. That rhythm of playing the game and then doing something to take yourself away from the game, that goes away a bit with bubbles. And that’s been the main challenge through all of this, because all of a sudden you’re spending 24 hours with the game, and when it’s not going so well that’s where the real challenge lies, because you start to overthink things. I think everyone would say it hasn’t been as enjoyable, because it has been unnatural.” Jordan’s year, at least until October’s T20 World Cup, will be a tale of two Ovals, starting at Kensington and continuing at Kennington, where he returns as Surrey’s T20 captain after eight years at Sussex promising a gentle style of leadership. “I’m quite a relaxed person first and foremost, I definitely like to empower people as well,” he says. “Just trying to have a bit of empathy and understanding. I’ll try to lead from the front – I definitely don’t want to be asking people to do things that I’m not doing myself.” Happily the two Ovals also happen to be his favourite grounds. “Definitely top two,” he says. “Kensington holds a special place for me. It’s where I watched my first cricket game, my first international. My dad used to take me along to watch the West Indies play. To know that I’m now playing in a similar fixture, having watched and aspired to be at that level one day, is quite special.”Think of the world map and it’s likely we all imagine the same one. But that map, created by Flemish cartographer Gerardus Mercator in 1569, is inaccurate. It makes the western world seem bigger, diminishing the size of Africa and equatorial nations (Greenland looks as big as Africa – it’s roughly the size of Algeria), and prompting criticism that it promotes an imperialist viewpoint. So should we get a new world map? I asked Donald Houston, professor of geography at the University of Portsmouth. Why is the internet telling me the map is a lie? Mercator created the map on the eve of exploration for Europe, and wanted something that was useful for sea navigation. The problem is, the world is round and a map is flat. I give my first-year students an orange and ask them to peel it in one piece and lay it flat. It can’t be done – it rips and deforms. On a sphere, the longitudinal lines converge at the poles but at the equator run parallel. Mercator kept those longitudinal lines parallel throughout, prioritising the accuracy of the shape of the land. It ends up exaggerating land mass nearer the poles. Oh, so he was only accidentally racist? I’m not sure we could say he was a racist – he never travelled, and was more of a devout Catholic scholar. Donald, I’m joking, I’m not trying to cancel Gerardus! I’m impressed he did all that with just his brain and a ruler. But we should probably have something accurate. That’s the thing – it’s fundamentally impossible to get a nice, neat, rectangular but accurate map of the world. People have been suggesting using the Peters projection, but where Mercator distorts size but keeps shape, Peters is accurate with size but not shape. The best thing, I think, is a physical globe. It’s quite poetic, really – how we humans long to hold the world in our hands but we never can. Also, we don’t really need Mercator’s projection, because ships navigate using GPS. There are just so many reasons to move away from it. It emphasises nation states and borders, which are a western concept anyway. Why not a map that shows people, population numbers? Right … that’s why maps are so brilliant, because they also tell you about a society’s priorities. But GPS isn’t perfect. I went up the Brecon Beacons using GPS – the signal crashed, I got lost, I must have trespassed on a dozen farms. Frankly, I’m surprised I didn’t get shot. That’s because your GPS is different from the ones ships use. But I do worry about Google Maps becoming the only map. It’s just a street map. Oh my! I just opened Google Maps now and zoomed out to see the world. Even with all their tech, it looks as if they’re using something like Mercator. Greenland is huge! Great … so an alien new arrival can think the world was made up of multinational food outlets. Mercator produced a map for navigation; the fact that it wasn’t challenged as the dominant map until the 1970s, and still adorns some Google maps, is shocking. Right, I’m ordering a globe right now. How about the one that you can keep booze inside? Well, they don’t have the poles, but why not. It might be a good thing to compensate for centuries of Mercator’s projection.Sharp, creamy, sweet and slightly caramelised, these lemon tartlets are delicate but easy to make. Being small, they bake more quickly than a large tart – and they require no rolling. The tricks are to rest the pastry, watch the tarts carefully while they’re baking and have patience while they cool. Baked lemon tartlets I used 2cm x 8cm round pastry rings to make these. Prep 15 min Chill 6 hr+ Cook 45 min Makes 7 small tartlets For the pastry 140g plain flour A pinch of sea salt 45g icing sugar Zest of ½ lemon 75g unsalted butter, cold and cubed 1 egg (50g) For the filling 375ml double cream 150g caster sugar A pinch of salt 120ml lemon juice (ie, from 3 large lemons) 6 egg yolks (20g each) For the pastry, in a large bowl, or the bowl of a stand mixer or food processor, combine the flour, salt, icing sugar and lemon zest, and mix well. Add the cold, cubed butter and, using your fingertips, the paddle attachment of a stand mixer or the pulse setting on a food processor, rub into the flour mixture until it has the texture of breadcrumbs. Add the egg, mix until it comes together, then tip on to a work surface and knead gently to form a smooth ball. Wrap tightly, pat into a disc, then refrigerate for four hours, until chilled. Remove from the fridge and knead gently, then divide into seven even balls. Press these into the individual tart cases using your thumbs, then return to the fridge to rest and firm up. Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Put the lined tart shells on an oven tray, put a scrunched-up sheet of greaseproof paper in each tart shell and fill to the top with baking beans. Bake for 25-30 minutes, until the edges are golden brown. Remove from the oven, carefully lift out the paper and beans, then return to the oven for five minutes, until the insides are also golden brown. For the filling, warm the cream, sugar and salt until steaming, leave to bubble a little, then pour in the lemon juice and stir. Whisk the egg yolks in a bowl. Pour the hot lemon/cream mixture on to the yolks, whisk to combine, then pour through a fine sieve into a jug. Turn up the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Fill the tart shells with the warm lemon custard filling and put the tray on a rack close to the top of the oven for four to seven minutes. Keep an eye on them: the filling should bubble and caramelise in patches. Once baked, leave to cool at room temperature, then refrigerate for two to four hours, until cold and set. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoA senior official at the Foreign Office has apologised for misleading MPs over whether Boris Johnson intervened in the evacuation of animals from Kabul during the chaotic retreat from Afghanistan last August. Sir Philip Barton, the Foreign Office’s permanent undersecretary, told the foreign affairs committee that Nigel Casey, the prime minister’s special representative for Afghanistan, had not received any correspondence referring to an intervention by Boris Johnson in the evacuation of animals from the Nowzad charity. This week Barton said he was “not aware” of support for the decision to evacuate the animals from No 10 or from the prime minister. Asked whether Casey had received any correspondence referring to the PM’s intervention, Barton said: “No.” But emails revealed by Newsnight showed Casey did “seek clear guidance for us from No 10 asap on what they would like us to do” in the case. Barton has now written to the committee’s chairman, the Tory MP Tom Tugendhat, to apologise for giving “inadvertently inaccurate answers”. He said: “On the day the email was sent, Nigel was almost entirely focused, in his role as Gold in our crisis response, on the terrorist threat to the evacuation”. Last month in evidence to the committee, Barton was challenged about a letter sent by the MP Trudy Harrison, the parliamentary private secretary to Johnson, to the Nowzad founder, Pen Farthing, setting out confirmation from the Foreign Office and Ministry of Defence that the animal evacuation flight could take place. Labour’s Chris Bryant, questioning Barton, said: “That feels to me very much like a direction from the prime minister … that does not equate with what you’ve told us, does it?” Barton replied: “I am not aware of the letter you are talking about. I am happy to look at it, but we have not set out this afternoon to mislead you.” During the session to the committee, Barton was also criticised by MPs for remaining on holiday after Kabul fell in August. In his apology letter, Barton said Casey had “no recollection of having seen emails in which staff attributed this decision to the prime minister”, adding: “Nor do I.” His clarification and apology will fuel the continuing row about the prime minister’s honesty. On Thursday Johnson said any allegations that he personally intervened to get the animals out of Afghanistan were “total rhubarb”. And Downing Street has repeatedly denied intervening in any individual cases in the final days of the mission as thousands of people who sought to flee the Taliban were left behind. But the prime minister has been accused of lying after leaked correspondence suggested the involvement of No 10. An email leaked this week to the committee from a Foreign Office official working in the private office of the Tory peer Zac Goldsmith said: “The PM has just authorised their staff and animals to be evacuated.” The BBC reported another email from the same day saying the then foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, was “seeking a steer from No 10”. BBC Newsnight’s Sima Kotecha obtained an email from the deputy principal private secretary to Raab at the time discussing Nowzad staff being called forward for evacuation. “The FS is seeking a steer from No 10 on whether to call them forward now,” it read. Another email from Casey showed him asking a security official “to seek clear guidance for us from No 10 asap on what they would like us to do”. On Friday night, Farthing told Channel 4 News that he did not think the prime minister had facilitated the evacuation from Kabul. “I’ve never, ever had his phone number, messaged him. I believe it’s just absolutely crazy, because if he had prioritised me, he didn’t do a very good job because I almost never made it out of Kabul,” the former marine told the broadcaster. Allies of Johnson have tried to downplay the situation, with the leader of the Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, dismissing calls for a debate as “fussing about a few animals”. The emails to the Commons inquiry were leaked by Raphael Marshall, who worked for the Foreign Office at the time and alleges the animals were evacuated after an order from Johnson. The prime minister’s official spokesperson said: “It’s not uncommon in Whitehall for a decision to be interpreted or portrayed as coming directly from the prime minister even when that’s not the case, and it’s our understanding that’s what happened in this instance. We appreciate it was a frenetic time for those officials dealing with this situation.”Monday Fans of FC Magdeburg clearly have a sense of humour. Back in 2012 when their team was lying bottom of the fourth tier of German football and had gone five successive games without scoring, supporters gathered behind the goal with a banner saying “Don’t worry, we’ll show you where the goal is” and hundreds of large, luminous arrows all pointing to the back of the net. Amazingly it worked, with Magdeburg managing to score, though not, alas, to win as they conceded twice. Still, small steps and all that. I may be impatient but I felt like doing something similar at Stamford Bridge on Sunday when I watched Spurs lose to Chelsea for the third time in as many weeks – the fourth in total for the season – without scoring a single goal in the process. Worse still, a disallowed goal for a foul on a defender aside, Tottenham only had three shots on target in the entire game, two of which were scuffed straight at the keeper, and never really threatened to score until the 88th minute, when a Harry Kane header was well saved. It wasn’t quite as dismal as my earlier trip to Chelsea for the Carabao Cup, in which I can’t remember us once looking like scoring, but it was still hard going watching Spurs consistently giving away possession and having to endure the home fans singing “It’s happened again”. Which it had. Just as all of us had expected it would. I’ve been going to Stamford Bridge for decades and only once seen Spurs win. Even the players now seem to expect to lose. Nor is the pain necessarily over for the season. It will be sod’s law, if we manage to beat Brighton in the fourth round of the FA Cup, that we draw Chelsea next. Tuesday At the beginning of the week it felt as if all of Westminster was in a state of more or less peaceful limbo, with everyone waiting for the publication of the Sue Gray report. That lasted less than a day before all hell broke loose. First, on Monday night, ITV broke the news of yet another party at Downing Street, in which Carrie Johnson and 30 members of staff had commandeered the cabinet room to surprise Boris with cake and to sing “happy birthday”. Come this morning, the story had moved on, with the Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, announcing there would be a police investigation into various parties that took place in Downing Street and Whitehall. Bizarrely, some Boris apologists spun the fact that Johnson was now facing a criminal investigation as good news for him. Almost immediately it was then announced that Gray’s report would not now be published until after the police had concluded their own report. This soon changed to parts of the Gray report that the police weren’t interested in could be published immediately, with the rest withheld, before, later in the afternoon, word slipped out that the entire report could be released after all. Come the evening, though, Downing Street had still not had sight of the report nor said whether it would make the whole thing public when it did. In short, Westminster was in chaos with no one knowing what the hell was going on. The evening ended with Jacob Rees-Mogg on Newsnight pledging his unswerving support to the prime minister no matter what he turned out to have done. Moral relativism was alive and well. Wednesday For years now I’ve considered myself to be one of the worst ever financial advisers. Before I cleaned up my act in the later 1980s, I worked for a company whose main business was selling life insurance linked to monthly savings policies, which even I could see were hopelessly bad value for money as they mainly seemed designed to make as much money for the company as possible. When I raised this with my manager, he just shrugged and said it was better for people to be saving something rather than nothing. Not entirely convinced by this, I passed on my doubts to prospective clients, with the result that I hardly sold any policies at all. I even managed to mis-sell myself my own endowment for our mortgage. But it turns out that I might have done some good after all. Last week my friend Alex reported back on a pension he believes I must have sold him in 1986. Now, it goes without saying that neither of us has any recollection of me selling him this pension, but the dates fit and he can’t think of anyone else who might have sold it to him. Anyway, he must have paid in £50 a month for four months before stopping, presumably on the grounds that by then he had worked out I didn’t have a clue what I was doing and had, in any case, already been fired from the company. Mysteriously though, since then the £200 has grown into a healthy £8,000. More remarkably, Alex found that when he came to draw down the pension it was paying an annuity of £1,000. Quite why it was offering such a generous return, he didn’t ask. In case it was a mistake. So if he had had more faith in the pension and stuck with it, he could have been a made man. If he had just continued to pay in for another four years, he could have got a pension of £10K. So just think what he might have got if he had stuck with it for even longer. I only wish I had been dumb enough to buy one of the pensions I was selling. Thursday With everyone still waiting for the publication of the Sue Gray report, I’ve taken to filling the time by collecting some of the excuses Conservative MPs have been making for Boris Johnson’s behaviour. Less than a month ago, the standard defence of most Tories was to say “Let’s wait to see what Sue Gray finds”. Now everyone who bothers to defend him in public has long since given up pretending that Boris – or The Suspect, as he should be more accurately known – has told the truth and has been busy constructing their own realities. Pride of place goes to the Northern Ireland minister Conor Burns, who tried to convince Channel 4 viewers that Johnson had been “ambushed with cake”. That Colin the Caterpillar can be a right bastard. Meanwhile, Andrew Rosindell said it wasn’t as if The Suspect “had robbed a bank”. Imagine having such low expectations of a prime minister. Edward Leigh thought it absurd that Johnson might be brought down by a piece of cake when we were on the brink of war. A claim that might have been more compelling if Boris had either been to Ukraine or spent any time negotiating a peaceful solution for the country instead of firefighting a sleaze scandal at home. Theresa Villiers thought it was fine for The Suspect to go to as many parties as he liked because he had been prime minister while the vaccination programme was underway, Mark Jenkinson thought the parties were all a media conspiracy, while Richard Bacon thought lying about what you were doing was too trivial an offence to be worthy of a mention. Crispin Blunt had the most unusual take. He was certain everyone else had been breaking the law, so there was no harm if the prime minister did as well. Way to go, Crispin. Insult the vast majority of people who did obey the law and didn’t see their families. Even when they were dying. Keep it classy. Friday Our dog, Herbie, is now older than me and my wife. In dog years, at any rate. In September he turned 10 and he’s beginning to show his age. He’s still up for a walk every morning and is an enthusiastic chaser of squirrels and sticks. In the past he would still be quite lively when he gets home, but now he just wants to curl up on the sofa or the bed and nap for the rest of the day. Come the evening, he perks up and dashes round the garden a few times to see if any foxes are about, but he’s then happy to come up to bed when we do. Not for the first time, it has occurred to me that Herbie is showing me how to grow old gracefully. For a start he’s in better shape – he has no signs of arthritis, while I have an artificial knee and a creaky back – and he doesn’t seem to moan or worry at the things he can no longer do. He just gets on with things. I, on the other hand, still miss not being able to go running, despite not having been able to do so for over 10 years. The cross trainer in the gym just can’t replace the freedom of exercising outdoors. In short, I’m just not that accepting of my limitations. I can see the future and it’s not pretty. There’s no way I am ever getting a Stannah stairlift in the house; I’d rather drag myself upstairs on my hands and knees. I say that now, of course. Watch this space. Digested week, digested: Grayja-vuFrom open-heart surgery on a snake to putting your dog through chemotherapy, there have never been so many options to treat unwell pets. But vets are warning that too many owners are spending huge amounts of money on keeping their pets alive, even when it’s not always the most humane option. Channel 4’s Supervet and news stories such as Goldie the pufferfish’s tooth surgery are making pet owners aware of the increasingly advanced and complex surgical and medical procedures that pets can undergo. While veterinary science has made impressive advances in recent years, allowing many pets to be healthier for longer, vets say extending an animal’s life at all costs is not always the best option for them, and can result in bills of thousands of pounds for their owners. Danny Chambers, a vet in Hampshire who runs a phone-in on BBC Radio Devon, said: “There are some situations where for the welfare of the animal, euthanasia would be appropriate to end the suffering. If you’re going to put them through quite complex surgery which has many months’ recovery time with complications, there is an ethical discussion to be had around that.” Chambers cited the example of a person undergoing chemotherapy. Although it is a long and painful process, humans are able to rationalise suffering as a means to get better, or to enable them to spend time with family or to do things they’ve dreamed of. “Animals don’t have a desire to live a long life, they don’t want to make it to Christmas or someone’s birthday or to be 10 years older. They just want to be happy day by day.” He said most vets were able to give a list of three to five options for treatment plans, and owners should not feel as if they have to choose the most expensive one if they can’t afford it, especially since it won’t always be best for the animal’s welfare. “I hope people don’t feel guilty for not being wealthy enough to try these advanced procedures when the reality is that dogs are quite happy when given the best treatment you can afford.” Andrew Knight, a veterinary professor at the University of Winchester, said part of the reason for higher expectations from owners was that they “are increasingly viewing their animals as important members of their households and families”. He added that as people were treated for free on the NHS, they often did not understand the costs of some of the most advanced medical and surgical procedures, especially without pet insurance. “These can be unexpectedly expensive, even though they constitute very good value, compared to the costs of medical care for people.” Sean McCormack, a vet in Surrey who writes a newspaper advice column, said that where previously people would consider complex treatments only for pets such as dogs and cats, he was seeing an increase in demand from people who had developed “a close emotional bond” with more unusual pets such as turtles, rabbits and snakes. He has removed tumours from fish, done open-heart surgery on a snake, spayed a gecko, removed a bladder stone from an iguana and pinned, plated and fixed broken wings on birds. Justine Shotton, the president of the British Veterinary Association, said owners should be assured that vets always conduct a quality-of-life assessment and will advise on health and welfare impact and the costs involved. She said: “In some cases, they may recommend that euthanasia is in the best interests of an animal if their quality of life is low, or if a treatment option may cause them a lot of pain and suffering or carry low chances of success. These are very difficult conversations, which take an emotional toll on all involved.” ‘He’s everything to me’: A dog-owner on keeping her pet alive while he still has quality of life Readers who replied to a Guardian callout shared their stories of complex surgeries for their pets, and the thousands of pounds they had spent, with many considering it worth it to keep their beloved animals alive. Lisa Kucyk, from Swansea, estimated veterinary bills for her dog Nambo at up to £20,000. He had four operations on problems with his legs, including damage to his cruciate ligament, patella and cartilage, before he was diagnosed with degenerative myelopathy, the canine equivalent of motor neurone disease. He now has weekly physiotherapy, acupuncture and laser therapy. Kucyk said she had bought the highest insurance coverage available for Nambo at the time, but still had to dip into savings to cover his final two operations, at £3,000 each. Nambo is now paralysed, and Kucyk is able to keep him alive while she works from home, but she knows her physio will tell her when his quality of life has deteriorated to the point he needs to be euthanised. Kucyk said the bills and care were worth it: “He’s a member of our family, and to be honest I prefer my dog over most people. He’s everything to me.”You’d think we’d be absolutely dripping in zombies by now, wouldn’t you? It feels a fairly obvious genre for TV shows to get into at the moment. After all, look where we are. We’re in the third year of a once-a-century pandemic that has ripped its way across the entire planet without pause, killing millions and devastating families. Sound familiar? Honestly, swap out a dry cough for a ceaseless undead thirst for human flesh and Covid is a zombie analogue. It’s not as if we’ve been reluctant to use them in the past. The original Haitian archetype used zombies as a metaphor for the dehumanisation of enslaved people under French colonial rule. Over the years, Hollywood has dusted them off to symbolise everything from consumerism to McCarthyism to immigration to globalisation to emotional stuntedness. Maybe in time more producers will use zombies to make sense of the Covid era. But for now we’re going to have to make do with All of Us Are Dead, Netflix’s new South Korean zombie drama. Which isn’t such a bad thing, because it’s great. Set in and around a Korean secondary school, All of Us Are Dead is your classic zombie outbreak story. A girl gets bitten by a lab rat, and then she, in turn, bites a classmate, and, before you know it, the whole city is overrun by mutilated, gargling zombies. What keeps it fresh, though, is the setting. Having high school students as the main characters is a very clever move. Flung about by their hormones, the students’ oversized reactions to the situation heightens the mood of the show. And the fact that they’re always preoccupied with their own stuff, no matter how apocalyptic things get, means that the story can tick along nicely independently of the zombie horde. Watching All of Us Are Dead, I couldn’t help but wonder if this was designed as a Covid metaphor or whether, just like every other vaguely disaster-themed film and show of the last two years, it was simply a case of bad timing. My feeling is that, even if it was the latter, it went to great pains to reverse-engineer itself to our times. Here, the zombies are created by a virus and – by dint of the fact that it’s set in a school – we get plenty of GCSE-level infection talk. Most pressingly, however (and I need to be coy for fear of spoiling it), this is a virus that behaves like Covid in one key way. That’s as much as I can get into, but it’s the masterstroke of the series. God, South Korea is good at this sort of thing. This is the third Korean Netflix original in just a few months to blow me away. And while it won’t repeat the planet-crushing success of Squid Game – nothing will, not even Squid Game season two – it still reverberates with the same winningly doomy existentialism of Hellbound. Of course, they were going to crush at zombies too. Anyone who has seen Train to Busan will know that South Korea are world beaters when it comes to telling stories about the undead. That said, I still have to confess to being on the fence about long-form zombie stories. As much as everyone liked The Walking Dead, I still prefer my zombie stories to be told in the form of a finite movie. The very best zombie movies – and Train to Busan is a perfect example – gets the premise out of the way neatly and quickly, before breathlessly shoving its characters through a series of obstacles before (if we’re lucky) extinguishing all hope of survival just before the credits roll. Meanwhile, All of Us Are Dead is about 12 hours long. There are only so many things that you can do with a zombie story, and this show doesn’t invent any new moves, so we do spend a lot of time repeating the same basic scene set-up. The biting. The sneaking. The saying goodbye to the newly infected before their humanity evaporates. It’s a testament to the power of the characters, here, that this carousel of secondhand tropes never quite manages to slip into tedium. You can even forgive All of Us Are Dead for hedging its bets at the end, too. As I’ve said, my favourite zombie stories are the ones where all of humanity gets swamped and there is no escape. All of Us Are Dead seems to have been written with a second season in mind, so things don’t end in an especially satisfying way. But, hey, if that means there’ll be more of this, bring it on. We have to take our zombie stories where we can find them these days.John Terry has removed the Premier League trophy from the cartoon ape non-fungible token (NFT) digital assets he has been promoting on Twitter after a legal intervention by the league. The Premier League trophy is protected by its trademark and its use in any commercial venture requires a licensing agreement with the league. The league wrote to Terry and “Ape Kids Club”, the NFT collection promoted by the former Chelsea and England captain, to make that point this week. Other tweets featuring NFTs, a digital asset bought and sold online, of famous players portrayed as cartoon apes beside the Premier League trophy have been deleted. One tweet featuring the Premier League, Champions League, Europa League, Community Shield and FA Cup trophies was on Terry’s Twitter profile at the time of writing. Chelsea have also looked into the cartoons because some have included images of the club’s badge. Uefa, which organises the Europa League and Champions League, has taken legal advice and is investigating the matter. The Football Association is also aware of the NFT activity related to Terry’s account, which includes use of the FA Cup trophy, the Community Shield and the England kit. Terry, who has taken up a consultancy role in Chelsea’s academy, has been heavily promoting the “Ape Kids Club” NFTs on Twitter. Others who have endorsed them are Bobby Zamora, Jack Wilshere and Nigel de Jong. Terry’s former Chelsea and England teammate Ashley Cole retweeted one post containing an image of the trophies. The Chelsea and England full-back Reece James has tweeted about acquiring a “Mutant Ape” NFT. “Ape Kids Club” NFTS are an offshoot of another popular NFT, the “Bored Ape Yacht Club”. The collection features 10,000 digital illustrations of cartoon apes. The “Ape Kids Club” features 9,999 different ape NFTs available for purchase. NFTs are unique digital assets stored on the Blockchain and traded in cryptocurrencies. The ownership and provenance of NFTs are verified by the Blockchain, an online ledger. The two biggest cryptocurrencies are bitcoin and Ethereum, but there are more than 5,000 different varieties. Critics argue the tokens are potentially dangerous financial assets. NFTs remain part of an unregulated financial sector.Across 8 tree frog RE in FORGET (anag) 9 avers (w)AVERS 10 aged (c)AGED 11 Bates Motel BE LATE MOST (anag) 12 smells MS(rev)/ELLS 14 Trollope T  OPE 15 enacted A DECENT (anag) 17 intuits IN  UITS 20 scallion CALL in IS NO (anag) 22 Mahler MA  LE + heaRts 23 underscore cryptic def [number less that 20] 24 Ludo loo dough (hom) 25 ember MBE in RE (rev) 26 Cranford C(onservative)/RAN/FOR/D(emocrat) [Elizabeth Gaskell] Down 1 dragoman DRAGO  N 2 lewd LE  D 3 probes P(retentious)/ROBES 4 agitate A/G  ATE 5 mass noun M(oney)/ASS/NO  N 6 be no slouch O(ld) NEB + S(shoo)L/OUCH [neb = bird’s bill] 7 asleep AS + PEEL (rev) 13 local derby RACE BOLDLY (anag) 16 emissary MISS in YEAR (anag) 18 Theodore T  O-DO + RE 19 invoice IN/V  ICE 21 center C(aught)/ENTER [American spelling] 22 maenad A(one) in MAE (West) END dropping E [e = a tab] 24 life onE FILm (hidden rev)The head of hospitals in Paris has raised the question of whether Covid patients who have refused to be vaccinated should be charged for emergency treatment if they become seriously ill with the virus. Martin Hirsch said the door to hospital treatment was open to all people but questioned whether this had to go hand in hand with “responsibility, allowing everyone to benefit,” in what he said was a “delicate debate”. “When a free prevention tool is available, can be used, is recognised as something useful by the scientific community, and you refuse it, do you do so without suffering any consequences? Or do we say we will treat you, but there is no reason why you should have no consequences when there will be for other patients who are having difficulty getting treatment and can do nothing about it,” Hirsch told the television programme C à vous. His comments have provoked outrage and calls for his resignation, including from a number of candidates in the April presidential election. The Socialist party’s Anne Hidalgo said making the vaccine-hesitant pay for treatment was not the answer. “We have a strategy and we have to keep on educating people,” she said. Danièle Obono of the hard-left La France Insoumise (LFI), was among those calling for Hirsch to resign, saying vaccinated and unvaccinated people had each contributed financially to pay for the health system. Julien Aubert, an MP for the mainstream-right Les Républicains, accused Hirsch of “mixing politics with administrative functions”. About 30,000 people are being treated for Covid in hospitals in France. Non-vaccinated Covid patients are reported to represent 70% of patients in intensive care in Paris and Bordeaux and more than 90% in Marseille and Nice, according to doctors. One day in intensive care is estimated to cost the French taxpayer about €4,628 (£3,850), while a vaccine dose costs the state €20 (£16.60). Christopher Prudhomme, of the ambulance service in the Paris banlieue, said Hirsch’s comments were scandalous. “This isn’t his job. Looking for a scapegoat is catastrophic. If we enter the spiral of patient selection, are we to make smokers pay for the lung cancer treatment or punish the obese because they eat too much?”It’s been two months since the first cases of Omicron were identified in the UK. In the weeks after it emerged, modelling scenarios presented to Sage suggested we were facing a situation even worse than last winter, with potentially tens of thousands of hospital admissions and thousands of deaths a day. Thankfully, as we now know, these scenarios did not materialise. The numbers of admissions and deaths peaked below the level expected in even the best-case scenarios. Pressure on hospitals remained very high, but in most cases, the situation was better than feared. The editor of the Lancet, Richard Horton, this week described scientists’ response to Omicron as “a case study in error”. He attributed this to an “over-reliance on mathematical modelling and too little emphasis on the experience of health workers on the frontlines of care”, with insufficient attention paid to the views of South African doctors. “Following the science” in relation to restrictions was always a misnomer, as “the science” was often uncertain, leading to models that inevitably provided a very wide range of scenarios with different levels of restrictions. Many people are now understandably concerned about the potential negative impact of ending plan B restrictions. But again, it is important to look at what’s actually happened to see how effective these restrictions have been – and whether they’ve led to better outcomes. Plan B restrictions have effectively been in place in Wales and Scotland since July (in England, the government announced the move to plan B on 8 December). A comparison of death rates since 19 July from ONS data shows that England has actually had the lowest death rates. (It is not possible to directly compare case and hospitalisation rates due to differences in how they are measured, but these are both closely linked to death rates.) Many have long assumed that more and earlier restrictions lead to better outcomes than voluntary behaviour changes. This assumption is largely based on evidence from the pre-vaccination era, when the countries that locked down quickly against Covid experienced far fewer deaths and hospitalisations. But over the last few months, the real-world evidence no longer appears to support this assumption: now, the main determinant of hospitalisation and death rates is the level of immunity in a population, through both vaccination and natural infection. This is especially the case among older and higher-risk groups. This is why England – where 98% of over 15s have some immunity to Covid-19 – appears to have fared relatively well since July compared with other European countries, despite having fewer restrictions. Behaviour change and compliance to rules also play a role, of course. There is evidence that household mixing in England rose and fell along with perceptions of risk rather than necessarily because of the rules in place at the time. And we have now seen that it is voluntary behaviour changes over the last few weeks, such as reducing contacts, that has led to the same reduction in admissions and deaths that the models showed would be produced by a return to step 1 of the roadmap. At the other extreme, lockdown sceptics now say that because lockdowns and other non-pharmaceutical interventions such as social distancing are no longer needed, they were never needed – even though before the vaccine programme, Covid-19 overwhelmed the NHS and the health service was not able to provide all of its services. Even during this wave, the pressure on the NHS remains very high – particularly due to staff absence – and many of my colleagues on the frontline are physically and mentally exhausted. That is why it’s so important for everyone to continue to follow the public health guidance – including wearing masks – even after mandatory restrictions end. Medical and public health interventions are usually judged by the criteria: do they have a clinically significant benefit? Does that benefit outweigh any harms? And are they the best use of resources – or would spending money on something else produce greater benefits? Of course, during the first wave this evidence was lacking – which is why lockdown measures were justified. Even in the second wave, there was sufficient evidence to show that the benefits of lockdown outweighed the costs – especially with the arrival of vaccines, when lockdowns were not just delaying admissions and deaths but actually preventing them. Vaccines have since transformed the situation. The cost-benefit equation has changed, and the benefits of lockdown restrictions do not outweigh the harms. It’s important to remind ourselves of we are trying to achieve – not just a reduction in harms from Covid, but also from the measures used to control it. This is best measured by quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), not deaths – a measurement that takes into account disability too, and has been used in the most comprehensive analyses of the impact of Covid and restrictions. The key is to implement restrictions that have the most favourable cost-benefit and are most acceptable to the public to ensure these benefits are actually realised. So it makes sense to now focus on interventions that cause the least harm and that people are most likely to comply with. The use of lateral flow tests is one example; so is improved ventilation in schools and workplaces. Of course we must not ignore the needs and concerns of those who are most vulnerable to Covid, including those with long Covid and especially people for whom vaccines don’t provide good protection. Fortunately there are things clinically vulnerable patients can do to protect themselves – including wearing well-fitted FFP2 or FFP3 masks, which have been shown in hospitals to greatly reduce the risk of infection. The arrival of antiviral drugs will also provide additional protection from hospital admission and death. We need to establish the effectiveness of any potentially harmful restrictions before they are brought in again, and ensure their benefits outweigh the harms. Most importantly, although restrictions are ending, Covid is far from over. With our new freedoms we all have the responsibility to continue to protect others and be considerate of those who are more vulnerable to the virus. Raghib Ali is a senior clinical research associate at the MRC epidemiology unit at the University of CambridgeVladimir Putin said the US and its Nato allies had ignored Russia’s main security concerns, but promised to continue talks with the west, in a call with Emmanuel Macron amid simmering tensions over possible war in Ukraine. In his first public comments on US and Nato responses to Russian proposals to rewrite the post-cold war security architecture, Putin said Moscow’s concerns about the expansion of Nato and the deployment of strike weapons near its borders had not been taken into account, according to a Kremlin readout of the phone call with his French counterpart. Macron told Putin that Russia had to respect the sovereignty of states, according to the Élysée. Putin agreed to continue talks, so there was a feeling that “things have moved”, a French presidency official said. The Pentagon said that the Russian military buildup around Ukraine was unprecedented since the end of the cold war and, if unleashed, would cause “horrific casualties”. The US has called a UN security council meeting on Monday for Russia to explain its military operations. The diplomatic manoeuvres came as Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, suggested the White House was panicking about an imminent Russian attack. More than 100,000 Russian troops have massed at the border with Ukraine, prompting the US president, Joe Biden, to tell Zelenskiy, on Thursday there was “a distinct possibility that the Russians could invade Ukraine in February”. Asked about the call, Zelenskiy said he did not consider the situation more tense than before. “There is a feeling abroad that there is war here. That’s not the case,” he said. “I am not saying an escalation is not possible … [but] we don’t need this panic.” Europeans have taken a more cautious approach to predictions of a Russian attack than Washington. The head of Germany’s foreign intelligence service said on Friday that Russia was not yet fixed on an invasion, although it was prepared. “I believe that the decision to attack has not yet been made,” Bruno Kahl told Reuters. In Washington, the chairman of the US joint chiefs of staff, Gen Mark Milley, agreed: “We don’t think final decisions have been made.” However, Milley said the current buildup of Russian troops was greater “than anything we’ve seen in recent memory”. “Given the type of forces that are arrayed – the ground manoeuvre forces, the artillery, the ballistic missiles, the air forces, all of it packaged together – if that was unleashed on Ukraine, it would be significant. Very significant,” the general said. He added that such an operation would lead to heavy casualties, especially in urban areas. “It would be horrific. It would be terrible,” Milley said. “And it’s not necessary.” In a call with Macron lasting longer than an hour, Putin said the US and Nato had not taken into account Moscow’s “fundamental concerns” about the expansion of Nato and deployment of strike missiles near the Russian border. Washington and European capitals rejected Russia’s demands to veto Ukraine’s Nato membership, but set out proposals on other ways to improve security on the continent in the unpublished documents. “The key question was ignored,” Putin was reported to have said, according to the Kremlin statement. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and Russia’s relationship with Nato, the Russian president went on to say, were based on the principle that “no one should strengthen their security at the expense of other countries”. The Russian leader also promised to “carefully study” the US and Nato written responses and continue a “Russian-French dialogue on the entire range of European security questions”. Putin told the French leader Russia would continue talks in the so-called Normandy format that brings together representatives from France, Germany, Ukraine and Russia, following talks earlier this week between the quartet of countries. Putin told Macron that the French president was “the only one who he could have such serious discussions with”, according to the French presidency source. There was “disagreement, but agreement in the necessity for dialogue and that the Europeans and France are part of the ongoing dialogue”, said the French official. “Dialogue is difficult and there were no solutions from this call.” The French president has long called for dialogue with Russia, sometimes angering other EU member states that have preferred a more distanced approach. EU divisions rose to the surface after Latvia’s defence minister, Artis Pabriks, launched a no-holds-barred attack on the German government for what he called its “immoral” refusal to allow Estonia to ship guns of German origin to Ukraine. In an interview with the FT, Pabriks said: “If a person is walking in a dark alley and somebody is being beaten up and I’m saying, ‘Once you’re beaten up I’ll call an ambulance,’ it’s not proper.” His comments attracted scathing criticism from the veteran German Green MEP Reinhard Bütikofer. “That’s the way to go, Latvia! Let’s turn Nato and the EU into a circular firing squad. That will teach [Vladimir] Putin and Xi [Jinping] a lesson. Right?” he wrote on Twitter, clarifying it was a “sarcasm tweet”. Germany has ruled out shipping weapons abroad, citing its own past, a stance upheld by the foreign minister and Green party co-leader, Annalena Baerbock, on Thursday. Meanwhile, EU officials say there has been an increase in pro-Kremlin disinformation since last autumn. “The last week of November is give or take the time when we started seeing again – as was the case in spring last year – intensified rhetoric and more aggressive rhetoric,” an EU official said. Pro-Kremlin outlets, which EU sources describe as “machines of content” have made numerous claims, depicting Ukraine as a tool or toy of the west. Some of the more lurid stories have claimed the Ukrainian government is running a campaign of terror equivalent to Nazi rule, or that western governments are plotting a “false flag” chemical attack on the Donbas region of Ukraine. A second EU official said sometimes the strategy appeared to be to “throw mud at the wall and see what sticks”. Other times it was “outright false stories, sometimes narratives with a grain of truth, sometimes decontextualised issues … But the important thing is this is a clearly coordinated, connected – and from our perspective – intentional use of these elements.” Many of the stories emanate from comments or interviews with Russian officials, such as the Russian foreign ministry spokesperson Maria Zakharova. Outlets include websites and news agencies, such as Sputnik and Ria-Novosti, which have published these stories in several EU languages including Polish, Lithuanian and Spanish. Separately, Brussels and Washington pledged to work together on energy security, as questions mount about the fate of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline connecting Russia with Germany, which Berlin has said would be part of any sanctions package if Moscow ordered an invasion. In a joint statement, Biden and the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said they were working together on “continued, sufficient, and timely supply of natural gas to the EU from diverse sources across the globe to avoid supply shocks, including those that could result from a further Russian invasion of Ukraine”. The US is already the biggest supplier of liquefied natural gas to the EU. “As we are preparing for sanctions, we are also preparing for possible counter-sanctions and our perception is that the energy field is one to look very carefully at,” a senior EU official told reporters. On Friday, Russia again rejected claims it was seeking conflict. “If it depends on Russia, then there will be no war. We don’t want wars. But we also won’t allow our interests to be rudely trampled, to be ignored,” Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, told Russian radio stations. While western capitals are increasingly alarmed about the drift to war, Ukraine’s government has sought to play down the threat. The Ukrainian defence minister, Oleksii Reznikov, said on Friday that the total number of Russian troops near the border –was about 130,000, a number comparable to Moscow’s military buildup in spring 2021, when it eventually pulled its forces back after massive military exercises. “We haven’t observed any events or actions of military character that significantly differ from what was going on last spring,” with the exception of the deployment to Belarus, Reznikov said. Ukraine is still embroiled in a war with Russian-backed separatists in the east of the country that has claimed 14,000 lives.A new exhibition of portraits of Tudor monarchs highlights the continuing relevance of the issues that defined the 16th century, including relations with Europe, religious conflict and the birth of empire, according to its host museum. The paintings of the five Tudor monarchs and their key advisers tell a story of the “beginning of modern Britain, Britain in the world,” said Chris Stephens, the director of the Holburne Museum in Bath. “And what we’re seeing now perhaps is the beginning of postmodern Britain.” The vivid likenesses are some of the most instantly recognisable images in British portrait painting, with many schoolchildren readily able to identify Henry VIII and Elizabeth I. It is the first time some of the paintings have been seen outside London. The portraits in The Tudors: Passion, Power and Politics, which opened on Friday, are organised thematically – dynasty, religion, queenship, conflict and empire – and hung on a regal purple background. “This was one of the most compelling periods of British history,” said Stephen. “And so many of the issues that define the 16th century are still with us. It’s the era of the birth of empire and it’s only now that we’re really engaging with what that means and how we interpret its legacy. “Similarly, the tensions with Europe, fraught relationships and alliances between Britain, France, Spain, the Low Countries, but also the continuities. You can see how some of those marital alliances that the monarchs are negotiating are all around continental European relationships. Britain isn’t and never was isolated. “Again, the tensions between Elizabeth and Mary, Queen of Scots, and the beginning of the process towards the union of England and Scotland – which is also under stress today.” Alongside Henry VII, Henry VIII, Edward VI, Mary I and Elizabeth I, who ruled from 1485 until 1603, are some of the most significant figures of the era: Sir Francis Drake, Sir Walter Raleigh, William Cecil, Thomas Cranmer, Thomas More and Thomas Cromwell. Many of the artists who painted the images in the exhibition were unknown but showed “extraordinary craftsmanship”, said Stephen. Royal portraiture flourished under Henry VII, said Monserrat Pis Marcos, a curator at the museum. “The turmoil caused by the Reformation resulted in an increased demand for paintings of the monarch, so his portraits were copied and circulated in an unprecedented manner. Elizabeth I and those closest to her also realised the power of portraiture to convey different messages.” Portraits also played an important part in marriage negotiations. “Basically, the fate of an entire dynasty could be sealed by one bad portrait,” said Pis Marcos. According to Stephens, the powerful images of Tudor figures created hundreds of years ago partly explain the enduring fascination with the era – as evidenced by the popularity of television dramas and documentaries, and the success of Hilary Mantel’s Wolf Hall trilogy. The exhibition, in partnership with the National Portrait Gallery in London, currently closed for redevelopment, and National Museums Liverpool, runs until 8 May.Brighton are braced for another bid for their central defender Dan Burn from Newcastle before the transfer window’s closure on Monday night. By then Eddie Howe should have added the Lyon midfielder Bruno Guimarães to his squad as well as, potentially, a left-back and a striker, with Arsenal’s Eddie Nketiah high on his list. Newcastle’s manager has prioritised recruiting at least one centre-half. He believes the 6ft 7in, 29-year-old Burn could help his side avoid relegation and is expected to persuade the St James’ Park board to increase the £8m offer rejected by Brighton this week. Burn, born in Blyth, Northumberland, grew up supporting Newcastle and is believed to be keen on a move to the north-east and a return to the region where he played for Blyth Spartans and Darlington. Coincidentally he has recently been in the best form of his time at Brighton, contributing to some impressive results for Graham Potter’s side. Although Potter would like to keep him, a fee in excess of £10m from a Newcastle board frustrated in their pursuit of Lille’s Sven Botman and Sevilla’s Diego Carlos could alter that stance. Steve Nickson, Newcastle’s head of recruitment, is in Brazil, finalising Guimarães’s £33m switch and Nketiah remains very much on the club’s radar, with the 22-year-old forward much admired by Howe who has been frustrated in a long-running pursuit of Manchester United’s Jesse Lingard. Howe – who has signed the right-back Kieran Trippier and striker Chris Wood this month – has spent the past week at a training camp in Jeddah, where he and his players have met representatives of Saudi Arabia’s Public Investment Fund, the club’s majority owners. Howe’s squad have met PIF officials informally at their Red Sea base and received “a motivational and inspirational” talk from Yasir al-Rumayyan, Newcastle’s chairman. “It was a great experience to hear his thoughts on the club and his vision and what the future looks like,” said the manager. “It was a motivational and inspirational talk based on collective aims and collective team spirit. “We were all very impressed with what was said and the players left very enthused. A lot of people from the PIF have been here as well so it’s been a very good experience to bring everyone closer together.” Asked about criticism of the trip to a country with a dismal human rights record where women frequently find themselves segregated, Howe maintained he was focusing on football. “I’m doing it from a football perspective to try and stimulate the players mentally in a new environment and to forge unity,” he said. “It’s a footballing trip. “It’s been really good and the weather’s been really good. The lads had an afternoon on the sand with the local people and we’ve been go-karting, doing a lot of other sports and we attended a Saudi v Oman World Cup qualifier with some staff and players. But training’s been the priority.”Aston Villa have had a €25m (£20.8m) bid for the midfielder Rodrigo Bentancur turned down by Juventus. They were offering a guaranteed €20m with the rest in add-ons but the Italian club are demanding more because of a sell-on clause with Bentancur’s previous club, Boca Juniors. Bentancur, a Uruguay international, joined Juventus from Boca in 2017 and has continued to be a regular this season, starting five of the club’s six Champions League group games and 13 matches in Serie A. Villa have been among the Premier League’s most active clubs in the transfer window, their acquisition of the defender Calum Chambers from Arsenal on Thursday taking to four the players signed since Steven Gerrard took over as manager. Lucas Digne, Philippe Coutinho and Robin Olsen have also been brought in. Bentacur is with Uruguay for their World Cup qualifiers and started Thursday’s win in Paraguay. The team are at home to Venezuela on Tuesday so any medical would have to take place in South America. Juventus are monitoring Borussia Mönchengladbach’s Denis Zakaria and Cagliari’s Nahitan Nández, another Uruguay international, as targets if they sell a midfielder. Crystal Palace are continuing to push to bring Donny van de Beek on loan from Manchester United. The clubs are discussing salary coverage and a loan fee, with Patrick Vieira keen to sign the midfielder. There would be no option for Palace to buy the Netherlands international. West Brom have signed Andy Carroll until the end of the season. The 33-year-old striker was a free agent after his deal at Reading ended this month.Lee Westwood has spoken of a December battle with Covid-19 continuing to affect him as he starts his professional year. Westwood, who is asthmatic, revealed last week in Abu Dhabi was the first time he had walked 18 holes since competing in Houston in mid-November. Westwood is in contention at the Dubai Desert Classic after delivering back-to-back 69s. He is five from the halfway lead, held by Justin Harding. Westwood’s explanation of circumstances renders his performance here especially impressive. “Covid has knocked me back quite a lot,” he said. “It felt like the flu and a chest infection. I’m not very often ill and I hate being ill and it takes a lot to stop me but I didn’t really get off the couch for two weeks in December. It surprised me how bad I was. It’s draining. I don’t feel like I can get as much air into my lungs at the moment. I am glad I was vaccinated.” Westwood, who will compete in Saudi Arabia next week, shrugged off comments from his former Ryder Cup teammate Colin Montgomerie. The Scot referred to “that evil word, money” in respect of those playing in the Saudi International. “Everybody has got their own opinions,” said Westwood. This issue continues to linger. Paul Casey matched Westwood’s aggregate despite visibly struggling with a neck problem. “I need full physical ability if I want to try and compete against the guys at the top of the leaderboard,” said the defending champion. “So I’m hoping I actually feel better tomorrow.” Harding added a 68 to Thursday’s 65 to earn a two-stroke lead over Tyrrell Hatton. “It would be pretty special to win this tournament,” said Hatton. “I remember when I was at school, waking up early in the morning to start watching it.” Meanwhile, Rory McIlroy’s 66 for a seven-under total means he retains legitimate hopes of what would be a third Desert Classic success. The highlight of McIlroy’s day two was a chip-in eagle at the 13th. “I hit the ball well enough for that score to be a good bit lower,” said McIlroy. “I missed a few opportunities. I certainly hit the ball as well as I’ve done in a long time, it could have been a few better but 66 this afternoon is a good score and sets me up for a nice weekend.” Ian Poulter and Robert MacIntyre were among those to miss the halfway cut.A rapist who was caught on CCTV carrying his victim through Leeds city centre before he attacked her has admitted his guilt nearly seven years after the incident took place. West Yorkshire police released the footage in 2015. It showed a smartly dressed man now known to have been Austin Osayande carrying a woman through deserted streets. Police said the 24-year-old victim had been walking to get a taxi home at about 5am after a night out with friends. Osayande, 40, was not caught until last September when he was arrested in connection with a separate sexual assault. On Thursday at Leeds crown court, Osayande pleaded guilty to one count of rape and one count of sexual assault by penetration. He was remanded in custody and a sentencing hearing was scheduled for 23 February. Police said at the time that the CCTV footage showed a man, who had the appearance of a doorman, “walking with purpose” around the city centre before approaching the woman. He was described as black, aged 30 to 40, tall and with a shaved head. He was wearing a long black overcoat and black trousers. The then head of crime for Leeds district, Det Supt Pat Twiggs, said: “The footage of the victim being carried off by this man clearly makes for disturbing viewing. We gave very careful consideration to releasing it and secured the consent of the victim who has been left understandably traumatised by what this man did to her. “I think the CCTV gives a really stark illustration of the very serious nature of this offence and we hope it will focus the public’s minds on helping us to identify and trace the man responsible.” Police said the man appeared a number of times on CCTV cameras. One piece of footage showed him loitering in a car park. Another showed him approaching a woman at 4.45am. “The other footage we have released shows this man walking around Leeds city centre and we strongly believe he was looking for someone to attack before he focused on the victim,” said Twiggs. “The way the offender is dressed does give him the appearance of a doorman and we have been making extensive inquiries with licensed premises. However, there could be other reasons why he was dressed smartly like this.” Leeds Live reported that Osayande, of Leeds, previously denied the charges but replied “I’m guilty” to the two charges when they were formally put to him on Thursday.In this new series we’ll be asking authors, Guardian writers and readers to sharewhat they’ve been reading recently. This month, recommendations include a damning biography of Robert Maxwell, a mind-bending mystery novel and a delicious history of spaghetti with tomato sauce. Tell us what you’ve been reading in the comments. Megan Nolan, novelist One of the nicest things I find about going through a non-fiction spell is that a great book naturally leads me into its related territories, and the books I find there push me onward again. I can see with hindsight the widening concentric circles of my reading all making sense of one another in a comforting way, a way that makes the world seem like something a person could figure out and touch the sides of if they really tried. At the beginning of the year I happened across a 2004 Guardian article by the older sister of the writer Lucy Grealy, who died in 2002. It was critical of a memoir by Ann Patchett named Truth and Beauty which recounted Patchett’s friendship with Lucy. Intrigued, I went on to first read Grealy’s memoir Autobiography of a Face, a precise, beautifully written account of her childhood cancer and resulting facial disfigurement and multiple plastic surgeries. I then read Patchett’s memoir about their relationship, the proximity of the two texts making me appreciate anew how incomplete any single perspective on a shared relationship is. Reading the brilliant Empire of Pain by Patrick Radden Keefe about the Sackler family and the creation of the opioid crisis in America, led me on to one of his source materials, Pain Killer by Barry Meier. Its publication in 2003 led to Purdue Pharma convincing Meier’s employer the New York Times to remove him from his opioid beat, claiming that the book represented a conflict of interest. I also read Dope Sick by Beth Macy, published in 2018, which comes to the epidemic in a much more advanced stage, following a devastating array of outcomes that could scarcely have been imagined a few decades ago. In fiction this month I binged Maeve Binchy, who died 10 years ago. I reread Tara Road, whose punishingly rendered romantic betrayal left me winded in a way it did not when I first thumbed through as a teenager, and then read four more in the space of two weeks, and now I’m not sure I’ll ever really enjoy another non-Binchy novel again in my life. My standout of January, though, was the rightly lauded Fall: The Mystery of Robert Maxwell by John Preston, which achieved the nigh-on impossible by exposing the psychic wounds that lay beneath Maxwell’s deranged personal behaviour and wicked professional conduct, without undermining the seriousness of his actions. Acts of Desperation by Megan Nolan is now out in paperback (Vintage £8.99). To order a copy go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. Rishi Dastidar, poet and critic January has been a month of hunkering down with a big, big stack of books. As one of the judges for the Costa book awards this year, I have been immersing and re-immersing myself in the five category winners announced earlier in the month – the debut novel by Caleb Azumah Nelson, Open Water; best novel winner Unsettled Ground by Claire Fuller; John Preston’s rollicking biography Fall: The Mystery of Robert Maxwell; The Crossing, Manjeet Mann’s young adult novel in verse; and Hannah Lowe’s The Kids, a collection of sonnets inspired by her experiences teaching in an inner London sixth form. They’re all brilliant, and well worth reading and rereading. Elsewhere, I’ve been taking my mind off England’s shambolic Ashes performance with CLR James’s meditation on cricket, politics and identity, Beyond a Boundary. One of those titles that has been recommended to me often, I felt a little scared it might not live up to its reputation. It does, magnificently so. James’s intellect is present on every page, but never overwhelming. It’s wry, elegant and fierce. It reminded me why the complexities and intricacies of the sport are precisely the things we should savour about it. James acknowledges a debt to Victorian literature including William Makepeace Thackeray, and it’s felt apt that I have been nibbling away at Vanity Fair too, a chapter a day. I can’t believe it’s taken me this long to get to it, and I fear I am already having conversations in a more circumlocutious fashion, so glorious is the prose. I’ve got to the Battle of Waterloo and am hoping the smirk gets wiped off George Osborne’s face. Michael Pollan’s Food Rules is a quick snack of a book, but it’s punchy enough to have made me start trying to eat less meat. Will I stay the course? Hopefully. But when I tell you that I would travel far for a good ragu, you’ll appreciate why I also devoured Massimo Montanari’s A Short History of Spaghetti With Tomato Sauce, an anatomy of a culture on a plate, and delicious with it. gladarvor, Guardian reader I took East of Eden on my first trip back home to Brittany in two years. It had been sitting in my drawer for the same amount of time. I had seen this centennial edition on a charity stall at the university hospital where I work, and got intrigued by its deckle-edge pages. I spent two beautiful weeks with the Trasks and the Hamiltons, who became like close friends I wanted to hear news from every night. Steinbeck writes powerfully of his profound fascination for the Californian land and shares with you his love and understanding for complex humanity. Sam rebelling against an unimaginative world, Lee piercing through prejudices one person at a time, Abra refusing to be crystallised into an impossible ideal. I finished the book on a beach at sunset. It was the perfect setting for a perfect ending. Back in the UK, I am now two thirds into the second volume of Thomas Cromwell’s tribulations, Bring Up the Bodies. I know it is supposed to be as good as Wolf Hall, if not better, but I’ve been finding myself less engaged. Perhaps I have been emotionally drained by East of Eden, or maybe I cannot care as much for Thomas as I did before, now that we no longer see him care for others. He has ascended to power, his wife and daughters are long dead, his proteges grownup. Alison Flood, books reporter and critic I have been doing an awful lot of “work” reading since coming back after Christmas, and it has in the main been a joy. I raced through the forthcoming new Mhairi McFarlane, Mad About You – she’s my absolute favourite romantic comedy author and this was a January tonic. Then I read Janice Hallett’s second novel The Twyford Code – it’s a mind-bending, code-cracking mystery and it helped get my sluggish brain working again. Whenever I get the chance I’ve also been working my way back through Diana Gabaldon’s Outlander books for a second time, after interviewing her last year; I’m currently on book six, A Breath of Snow and Ashes, and Jamie and Claire are contemplating the imminent revolution. Also on my bedside table right now is Silvia Moreno-Garcia’s The Beautiful Ones, a sort of magical version of Georgette Heyer / Bridgerton. It’s pretty different to Moreno-Garcia’s excellent Mexican Gothic, a fantasy set in 1950s Mexico, but I’m loving it. And I’m a chapter in to Elizabeth Day’s Magpie – a book I’ve been looking forward to reading for ages.Audrey Hepburn, Amy Winehouse and Eartha Kitt are all icons, known for their distinctive eye makeup. Now Julia Fox has joined their ranks. The actor, model, and partner of Kanye West was photographed at fashion shows in Paris this week wearing an extreme take on eyeliner – with the “wing” of the black makeup extending far beyond her browbone. Strong eyeliner was also seen all over the haute couture catwalk at Chanel and Schiaparelli this week. Jacqueline Kilikita, senior beauty editor of Refinery29, sees Fox’s look as part of a wider shift in makeup towards creative experimentation, with eyes the focus. This is down to a few factors, she says. “TikTok is behind a lot of the bold liner trends out there right now, thanks to experimental makeup artists. Wearing masks more also means it’s all about the eyes.” “We’ve endured two years’ worth of on-again off-again lockdowns thanks to the pandemic, and during that time makeup was sidelined in favour of skincare,” says Annie Vischer, the beauty editor of Grazia. “Now our social lives are back on the table many are craving a change-up.” Television has played its part. Vischer points to Euphoria, where experimental eye makeup is a signature of the character Jules. There’s also the upcoming Pam &amp; Tommy, a miniseries about the Baywatch star and eyeliner icon Pamela Anderson, played by Lily James, and the musician Tommy Lee. These shows are, says Vischer, “romanticised 90s and 00s beauty trends. The inspiration is there for the taking.” Whether or not this extreme eyeliner experimentation will have an impact on the average makeup look remains to be seen.AN ATTEMPT TO CHEER UP SPURS FANS THAT MAY OR MAY NOT HAVE BEEN COMPLETELY THOUGHT THROUGH It sounds counter-intuitive on the face of it, but failing to sign all of your targets during the transfer window need not be a bad thing. Take Manchester City, for example, who are currently shoo-ins for the Premier League having already scored 55 goals, yet if they’d got what they wanted last summer, would now be lumbered up front with a slow, sour-faced, superannuated crosstown legend getting in the way of all the kids, and, even worse, five-goal spent force Harry Kane. Conversely, successfully getting your own way can end up backfiring. Yes, it’s Spurs and Harry Kane again, isn’t it. That we’re specifically setting this up to make Tottenham fans feel a little less down today speaks volumes, but this is where everyone is at the minute, so let’s try to make the best of it. Spurs have spent the majority of the current window trying to land Adama Traoré from Wolves and Porto’s Luis Díaz, but it now looks as though the pair of wing wonders are off to Barcelona and Liverpool, respectively. This unfortunate state of affairs has plunged the fanbase into a deep funk, while sending Antonio Conte’s lid hovering in mid-air on a constant jet of steam, as if constantly daydreaming about what they’d have done with all that £125m cash-in bounty for Kane, and where they’d be right now, wasn’t distressing enough. But if champions-elect City’s positive reaction to marketplace misery is anything to go by, this needn’t ruin Tottenham’s season. That’s why The Fiver confidently predicts a similarly staunch response from Spurs, maybe a fifth- or sixth- or seventh-place finish. Well, it’s all relative. After all, Son Heung-min is world-class, Lucas Moura is fun to watch, and Ryan Sessegnon has to come good at some point. Harry may chip in with a couple more goals too, if he starts getting away again with those egregious shoves and exaggerated spills. So there’s no need for Spurs fans to be chasing Daniel Levy down the Seven Sisters Road waving pitchforks quite yet. Save all your protesting energy for the summer, just on the off-chance Conte abruptly ups sticks in high dudgeon, which, well, y’know. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I’m addicted. I’ve built Wembley and Old Trafford. When you’re doing Lego your mind’s taken off everything else, it’s the only thing that matters and, by the time you finish, you can’t believe two or three hours have just gone. It stops me thinking about football all the time” – Leicester City’s Jess Sigworth gets her chat on with Louise Taylor and, among other things, reveals she can build it like Beckham. FIVER LETTERS ON ITS OWN WINTER BREAK Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Rollover. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Frank Lampard will vie with fan favourite Vítor Pereira and Duncan Ferguson in a last round of interviews for the privilege of overseeing Everton’s survival fight. Meanwhile, Wayne Rooney says he turned down the chance to talk to Goodison bigwigs because he has his hands full at Derby. Lyon are the latest club to have seen Newcastle coming and reached an agreement over the signing of Brazil international Bruno Guimarães for a fee that could rise to £40m. “From my perspective I don’t imagine that would be the end of our interest in bringing new players in,” cooed Eddie Howe. Aston Villa are trying to prise Rodrigo Bentancur out of Juventus with the aid of £20.8m, but the Italians want more. Calum Chambers has left Arsenal for Aston Villa on a freebie. “It’s a massive club and they’re in a great moment,” honked the defender, of a team that has won one in their last five. The Gambia head coach Tom Saintfiet insists his team aren’t in the Afcon last eight to make up the numbers as they head for a showdown with hosts Cameroon on Saturday. “When you’re there it’s because you deserve it,” he explained. “We know it won’t be easy. Against Cameroon, all the players are available, it can help to get a good result. Cameroon are big favourites, we have to relax and play our football.” Fun and games in South America dept: Liverpool’s Alisson had not one, but two red cards overturned by VAR during Brazil’s dramatic 1-1 draw with Ecuador. “I am happy with the VAR,” he cheered. USA! USA!! USA!!! are a step closer to the Human Rights World Cup after beating El Salvador 1-0. Away wins for Canada and Mexico in Honduras and Jamaica, respectively, mean the pair also look set for Qatar. Next up: Canada v USA! USA!! USA!!! on Sunday. The Andy Carroll roadshow is heading for West Brom. “Andy can help us to get exactly the power we need in the box,” tooted boss Valérien Ismaël. And NFT bro John Terry has been forced to remove the Premier League trophy from that ape-based business he’s offering, after a legal intervention. STILL WANT MORE? Shaun Walker enters the Dragan’s den as he meets Southampton’s new billionaire owner. Jamie Jackson dons his mac and shades to investigate the mystery of Donny van de Beek. Ten things to look out for in the Prem … ah … hang on. The Championship gets its time in the sun this weekend, folks, so look out for fluctuating fortunes and future stars, writes Ben Fisher. Le Havre are not even in Ligue Urrrrrrrn, but that hasn’t stopped them from becoming un world-class talent factory, reports Karan Tejwani. Catch up with today’s Mill, including a potentially entertaining chemistry experiment at Roma. The -10C temperature could be Canada’s chief weapon when they host USA! USA!! USA!!! shivers Joe Callaghan. For further reading on matches played in baltic conditions, get on to this. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! LADIES AND GENTLEMEN …Unusually fast ground for the time of year has left several races on Trials day at Cheltenham with only five or six just runners, so the 17-strong Sky Bet Chase at Doncaster is likely to feature prominently in most betting plans on Saturday. Few can be ruled out with any confidence, but Debece (3.20) is arguably the best-handicapped horse in the race and could be worth backing at around 8-1 on his second start for Dan Skelton. The 11-year-old has clearly been a tricky horse to train and will be making only his eighth start over fences but he is on a very fair mark on his best form and his two chase wins to date were both recorded on good ground. Debece has been a late scratch from two subsequent engagements after a strong second at Sandown last March, but he has had a wind operation in the interim and Skelton is well-versed in getting them ready first time up. Cheltenham 1.55: There are question marks against most of the principals here relating to either the trip (Magic Saint), the good ground (Farinet) or a sub-par recent run. On balance, it could pay to forgive Coole Cody’s disappointing effort on New Year’s Day and hope for a return to his familiar front-running exuberance over this track and trip. Doncaster 2.10: Anna Bunina could offer some value getting 6lb from a likely odds-on shot in Miranda. John McConnell’s mare should improve for her comeback run at Musselburgh earlier this month and her five-length eighth on good ground in the County Hurdle last March suggests she should be a point or two shorter in the betting today. Cheltenham 2.30: Chantry House did not travel a yard when favourite for the King George at Kempton on Boxing Day and makes no appeal at short odds. Simply The Betts, on the other hand, arrives on the back of a career-best at this track last time – his first start with Harry Cobden in the plate – and he has often shaped as though this trip will be within reach. Doncaster 2.45: Coolbane Boy showed significant improvement on his second start for Sandy Thomson earlier this month and looks overpriced at around 5-1 for this step up to Graded company. Cheltenham 3.05: Klassical Dream’s defeat earlier in the week led to Champ being promoted to the top of the market for the Stayers’ Hurdle in March and it will be a big disappointment if he fails to follow up his Long Walk success in December here. Cheltenham 3.40: Hillcrest faces his toughest assignment yet to defend an unbeaten record over hurdles, giving weight to several very promising opponents. He won with something to spare over course and distance earlier this month, however, and a strong time suggests he could well be up to the task.A billionaire Republican donor and Trump supporter donated the maximum allowed amount to Joe Manchin after the West Virginia Democrat sank Joe Biden’s signature domestic spending plan. The Build Back Better plan sought to boost health and social care, and to help combat the climate crisis, at a price tag of $1.75tn. Manchin, one of two key swing votes in the 50-50 Senate, used a Fox News Sunday interview in December to say he was finally a “no” on the legislation. The move appeared to surprise Biden, and enraged progressives, but Ken Langone was presumably delighted. The co-founder of Home Depot and author of a 2018 book called I Love Capitalism! had signaled his support for Manchin before the senator made his move on Build Back Better. “I don’t see leadership any place in this country. Thank God for Joe Manchin,” Langone told CNBC in November. “I’m going to have one of the biggest fundraisers I’ve ever had for him. He’s special. He’s precious. He’s a great American.” Manchin voted for Biden’s earlier Covid relief and stimulus package, as well as for a bipartisan infrastructure bill, but helped to water down both. In December, shortly after Manchin torpedoed Biden’s flagship legislation, Langone and his wife each gave $5,000 to Manchin’s Country Roads political action committee, CNBC reported. The amount is the most any individual can give in a year. CNBC also listed donations from major corporations that helped Country Roads raise more than $150,000 more in December than it did in November. Manchin is next up for re-election in 2024. As the only Democrat in a high office in West Virginia, he holds outsized power in the evenly divided Senate – a position that would change if Republicans take back the chamber in November. Langone has contributed to Democrats but predominantly supports Republicans. He backed Trump in 2016, and continued to support him throughout Trump’s tenure in the White House, though he chided him over the Capitol riot. CNBC reported that Langone has recently made much larger donations than to Manchin, including $1m to a fund that works to defeat Democratic senators and half a million dollars to Americans for Prosperity Action, a group backed by the hard-right Koch family. In his book I Love Capitalism!, Langone writes of his fear of socialism in the US, a fear stoked by the Vermont senator Bernie Sanders’s run for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016. Some young Americans, Langone says, think the US “should be headed toward something that, in my mind, resembles socialism: guaranteed income. Free college tuition. Single-payer healthcare. “I disagree. Strongly.” He also writes that he disagrees “not (as you might believe) because I’m a rich guy trying to hold on to my money. I disagree because socialism is based on the false notion that we should all be exactly equal in every single way.” Neither Langone nor Manchin immediately responded to requests for comment.Through my father, Kenneth Oakley, a palaeontologist most famous for helping expose the Piltdown skull hoax, I met all manner of distinguished scientists and other significant figures, but none made as much impression as Richard Leakey, and that was when he was just a kid. Leakey’s parents, Louis and Mary, had been invited to lunch at our home in Amersham, Buckinghamshire, and a somewhat resistant Richard had been brought along in tow. A couple of years older than me, he ignored me completely, but I could see even then that he had charisma and would go far. But what really impressed me was his snake. At first no one noticed the slithery creature adorning his neck until it suddenly reared up alarmingly, flicking out its forked little tongue. It was mesmerising as it peered round, before disappearing back inside Richard’s shirt, much to everyone’s entertainment, ours being an animal-loving household.The death of an 85-year-old man who reportedly succumbed to hypothermia after falling and spending nine hours sprawled and ignored on a bitterly cold street in central Paris has prompted grief, anger and incredulity in France and beyond. René Robert, a Swiss photographer known for his shots of some of Spain’s most famous flamenco stars, died last week after slipping while on one of his nightly walks around the busy Paris neighbourhood where he lived. According to his friend the journalist Michel Mompontet, Robert fell over on Rue de Turbigo, between the Place de la République and Les Halles. “He suffered a dizzy spell and fell,” Mompontet said in a series of tweets. “Unable to get up, he lay rooted to the spot in the cold for nine hours until a homeless person called the emergency services. Too late. He had hypothermia and couldn’t cling on to life. Over the course of those nine hours no passerby stopped to check why this man was lying on the pavement. Not one.” Mompontet, who also recounted the circumstances of his friend’s death on France TV Info, said Robert had been “killed by indifference”, adding: “If this awful death could serve some purpose, it would be this: when a human is lying on the pavement, we should check on them – no matter how busy we may be. Let’s just stop for a second.” Mompontet pointed out that many people – himself included – often looked the other way when it came to people on the street. “Before giving any lessons or accusing anyone, I need to deal with a little question that makes me feel uneasy,” the journalist told France TV Info. “Am I 100% sure that I would have stopped had I been confronted with that scene – a man on the ground? Have I never turned away from a homeless person lying in a doorway?” The death, which occurred in an area of Paris where many homeless people sleep rough, has sparked a debate about civic responsibility and basic human decency. A headline in Le Figaro read: “The photographer René Robert, dead in the indifference of the middle of the street.” The Spanish embassy in the Netherlands tweeted: “The death of René Robert, who immortalised with his camera all the great artists of flamenco, challenges our collective conscience.” Robert, who photographed flamenco legends including Camarón de la Isla and Paco de Lucía, was remembered by another of his more recent subjects. “Very sad at the loss of René Robert, who I was lucky enough to meet and be photographed by,” said the Grammy-winning flamenco singer Arcángel. “I can’t understand why no one helped him; I don’t want to think that we live in a society with so few values.” The Olivar Association, which has worked with young homeless people in Madrid for more than 30 years, said it was saddened but not surprised. “A lot of people are talking about the awful story of René Robert,” it said in a tweet. “But the reality is that this is the cruel, day-to-day experience of those who live and die on the street. What is happening to us as a society that something like this can happen?” According to homeless associations, 600 people die on the streets of France every year.A US federal judge has blocked a highly controversial sale of oil and gas drilling leases across 80m acres of the Gulf of Mexico, ruling that Joe Biden’s administration did not properly consider the leases’ impact upon the climate crisis. The decision, handed down by the DC court late on Thursday, represents a landmark victory for environmental groups that had sued the government to prevent what was the largest ever auction of oil and gas leases in the gulf’s history. “I’m thrilled the court saw through the Biden administration’s horribly reckless decision to hold the largest oil lease sale in US history without carefully studying the risks,” said Kristen Monsell, oceans legal director at the Center for Biological Diversity. “New oil leases are fundamentally incompatible with addressing the climate emergency, and they’ll cause more oil spills and harm to wildlife and people in the Gulf.” Rudolph Contreras, a US district court judge for the District of Columbia, was critical of federal government agencies for their environmental analyses that led to the lease sale, writing that they were guilty of a “serious failing” and a “grave error”. He ordered that the new leases be vacated and for the Department of Interior to conduct a new analysis that accounts for the planet-heating gases that would result if the drilling went ahead. The lease sale was held in November, just days after UN climate talks in Scotland in which the president vowed the US would “lead by example” in tackling the climate crisis. Biden had previously promised to shut down all new oil and gas drilling to curb emissions of planet-heating gases. The administration had claimed that it was compelled to hold the sale due to a successful legal challenge by a dozen states to lift a blanket pause Biden had placed on new drilling projects on federal land and waters. The Gulf of Mexico auction eventually resulted in 1.7m acres sold off to oil firms including Exxon, Chevron and BP, the company responsible for the Deepwater Horizon disaster in 2010. A previous Department of Justice memo, however, showed that the federal government did not believe it was obligated to hold the sale and climate activists have said the episode shows Biden is not sufficiently committed to averting the climate crisis. The International Energy Agency has said that there can be no new major fossil fuel projects if the world is to avoid disastrous global heating. Even some of Biden’s allies have been sharply critical of the lease sale, with three congressional Democrats filing a court brief in support of the environment groups. “These leases were a climate disaster waiting to happen,” said Raúl Grijalva, one of the three lawmakers and chair of the House natural resources committee. “This decision is a welcome chance to reset our federal fossil fuel leasing policies and limit carbon emissions while there is still time to prevent the most disastrous outcomes of climate change.” A spokeswoman for the interior department said the government will review the judge’s decision, adding that “long-overdue programmatic reforms” needed to be made in the management of oil and gas drilling across public lands and waters. The American Petroleum Institute, an industry lobby group, said the decision was “disappointing” and that it will review its legal options. Contreras’s ruling found that the government had relied upon an outdated and flawed environmental assessment from the Trump administration that claimed that greenhouse gases would actually increase if the lease sale did not go ahead, due to a reliance on foreign oil and gas supplies. The interior department had “acted arbitrarily and capriciously in excluding foreign consumption from their greenhouse gas emissions” contrary to requirements under the 1970 National Environmental Policy Act, Contreras wrote. Environmental groups involved in the case called on Biden to now halt all future drilling. “The Biden administration’s failure to adequately evaluate the climate impacts of this massive lease sale wasn’t just out of step with their stated commitment to climate action, it was also illegal,” said Devorah Ancel, senior attorney at the Sierra Club. “We are glad that the court has held them accountable for this reckless action, and we will continue to fight to protect Gulf coast communities from the dangers of offshore drilling and climate chaos.”In its nearly 500-year history, Ye Olde Mitre in Holborn has served beer under 21 monarchs, survived the English civil war and emerged unscathed from the Great Fire of London. But few events have affected the pubs trade quite so profoundly as the Covid-19 pandemic. Lockdowns choked off trade for months at a time. Even once venues reopened, social distancing restrictions and work-from-home guidance left city centres deserted and ruined the key Christmas period. “We’re a real ale house so people come from far and wide for our beers: regulars, office workers and tourists,” said Judith Norman, the historic pub’s landlady. “Our regulars tried to support us through the pandemic but with working from home we were a lot quieter than normal.” At Fuller’s, the pub chain that owns Ye Olde Mitre, trade was down by as much as 70% at some of the city centre venues that rely heavily on after-work drinkers. Some had to shut their doors temporarily. Now though, as plan B restrictions in England are eased, hope is returning at Ye Olde Mitre and elsewhere. Familiar faces are gradually resurfacing, dropping in for a pint after the odd office day here and there. “They’re easing themselves back in and we’re hoping they’ll return full time next week,” Norman said. The Fuller’s chief executive, Simon Emeny, thinks this weekend is building to a Monday “trigger point” for revival, with easing of plan B coinciding with the period just after payday and the end of Dry January, which came at the worst possible time. “I detect a growing desire for people to put Covid behind them and start behaving as they used to,” he said. “You’ll see an escalation next week and I suspect that normality will build back faster and stronger than it did in the autumn.” Bookings have been strong, he said, echoing a recent statement from the nationwide bar chain Revolution, which said events and parties booked for December are being rescheduled. “I feel really excited about February and beyond,” Emeny said. “The first step is to get back to where we were in October, then 2019 levels and we’ll see where it goes from there.” The early signs are encouraging. n December, with Omicron concern at its peak, pub sales were 12% lower than pre-pandemic levels, according to industry analysts CGA. The decline was an even more sobering 23% within the M25, with London particularly hard hit by work-from-home guidance. But by the third week of January, the deficit had eased to 11%. Diageo, which makes Guinness and Johnnie Walker, has seen the same patterns in the more than 180 countries where it stocks the bar. “What we see around the world is that as restrictions ease consumers are really waiting to get outside the home to socialise,” the Diageo chief executive, Ivan Menezes, said. The company is expecting trade to reach up to 90% of pre-Covid levels imminently. Help is also at hand from Wales, where nightclubs have been allowed to reopen from Friday and social distancing rules have been relaxed. But most leading lights of the hospitality industry are cautious, particularly given how much debt many are nursing as a lasting legacy of the pandemic. Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of the trade body UKHospitality, warned the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, not to be complacent about the health of the sector. “The hope is that the return to eating and drinking out will happen quicker than in previous lockdowns, when it took six to eight weeks for recovery to come through. “But that shows it’s going to be a long haul, not an immediate bounce back.” The best thing the government could do, she says, is to defer plans, scheduled for March, to bring the rate of VAT on hospitality from its temporary rate of 12.5% back to 20%. The rise, she said, would “make a bad situation worse”.Jair Bolsonaro has sparked disbelief and outrage by insisting he will go ahead with a trip to meet Vladimir Putin in Russia despite the escalating military crisis along the Ukrainian border. Foreign policy experts and rivals questioned the Brazilian presidents’s planned visit after he told supporters he would fly to Moscow in late February to improve trade ties. “He’s a conservative,”the far-right populist told his supporters of Putin on Thursday. “Oh yeah?” one replied. Bolsonaro’s move, which analysts believe is designed to project the idea that Brazil’s internationally isolated leader still boasts powerful foreign friends, baffled many pundits. “Has Bolsonaro gone mad?” the editor of the political newsletter Meio, Pedro Doria, asked of the “utterly reckless” enterprise. Ricardo Rangel, a columnist for the conservative magazine Veja, urged ministers to resign over “the most insane trip of all”. “Showing support for Putin just as he threatens to wage a war of conquest is unforgivable from the point of view of the US or Europe, our main partners along with China,” he wrote, predicting “a diplomatic nightmare” if an invasion was launched during Bolsonaro’s visit. The conservative politician Heni Ozi Cukier voiced bewilderment over the trip and Bolsonaro’s claim Putin was a man of the right. “Our president hasn’t the slightest clue what’s going on in the world. He hasn’t the slightest clue who Putin is, much less what it means to be a conservative,” he tweeted. Experts say the trip underlines how Bolsonaro, having alienated allies including China, the US and EU, is desperate to find an international partner with clout. “He has progressively isolated himself from Brazil’s key partners. He supported Trump’s candidacy, fell out with Biden … antagonised China. So he starts 2022 with very limited assortment of partnerships,” said Guilherme Casarões, a political scientist from the Getulio Vargas Foundation. Before accepting Putin’s invitation, the only trips in Bolsonaro’s diary were to Poland and Hungary. “It’s almost a joke. The fact that after three years in office Bolsonaro has only managed to hang on to Hungary and Poland as allies, as well as a few Gulf countries, suggests he really hasn’t managed to make much progress with his diplomatic agenda,” Casarões said. The former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who looks likely to defeat Bolsonaro in the October elections, has upstaged his rival with a series of high-profile overseas trips designed to repair Brazil’s reputation after three years of foreign policy chaos. Casarões suspects the US and EU will largely ignore Bolsonaro’s Russia trip and are more focused on Lula’s movements, having concluded “that probably Bolsonaro won’t be in the presidency much longer”.Trevor Noah Late-night hosts unpacked the official retirement announcement by supreme court justice Stephen Breyer on Thursday, opening up speculation for the 83-year old’s replacement. Joe Biden promised during the 2020 campaign to nominate the first black woman to the court if the opportunity arose, “because he cares deeply about representation and winning Georgia,” said Trevor Noah on The Daily Show. “Now that’s what it looks like he’s planning to do, but not everyone is happy about that,” he continued, queueing up several clips of furious Fox News hosts, including Sean Hannity and Tucker Carlson. “There’s a lot to unpack here, but most importantly: being a black woman isn’t the qualification,” Noah said. “Joe Biden is going to pick a black woman is who also qualified. These people act like Biden is just going to show up at the mall and be like, ‘Yo, Shaniqua, come with me!’ “No, she’s going to be qualified,” he added. “And why is that a bad thing? Why not try to make the supreme court a little more representative of the country it represents? I mean, their rulings impact the lives of every person in the country. So it would be nice to have at least once justice on there who’s had to ask the Walgreens guy to unlock the shampoo shelf.” Stephen Colbert On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert mocked ridiculous speculation by Fox News hosts over Biden’s nominee; Laura Ingraham even suggested that the White House might nominate Vice-President Kamala Harris. “It’s a possibility, I think she’s at least on the shortlist. I think it’s a theory that could be credible,” said the former Trump press secretary turned Fox contributor Kayleigh McEnany. “Yes, according to theoretical sources, the name they yanked out of their keister could be credible,” Colbert riffed. “Let me clue you in, Fox News. Joe Biden is not nominating Kamala Harris. It’s a 50-50 Senate and she can’t vote for herself! “And I know what you’re saying: anything is possible,” he continued. “No, it isn’t. There is no possible universe in which this happens. Thanos can snap that glove all he wants, but even the Infinity Stones could not put her on the court. “Dr Stephen Strange is like, ‘the multiverse contains an infinite number of timelines, but in all of them, you’re an idiot.’” Samantha Bee On Full Frontal, Samantha Bee tore into Senator Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, whose refusal to end the filibuster along with Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia has cost Democrats the ability to pass crucial voting rights legislation. “Yes, America’s favorite centrist Democrat fun couple Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema heroically protected the filibuster,” Bee deadpanned. “We sort of understand this bullshit from Joe Manchin, a red state senator who calls himself a Democrat the same way Mormon teens call themselves virgins, but Arizona senator Kyrsten Sinema is more a mystery.” Sinema was elected as a Democrat in 2018 in a state that is trending blue, but has continually hobbled her own party – she voted against the Build Back Better bill, has worked to uphold the filibuster. “Sinema has basically been a pain in the butt for years,” Bee explained, “like an itchy lace thong you only wear when dating someone new.” In a speech defending her refusal to overturn the filibuster, thus allowing Republicans to block the voting rights bill, Sinema said she would “not support separate actions that worsen the underlying disease of division infecting our country”. “Lady, you are the disease of division infecting our country!” Bee retorted. “By blocking voting rights, Kyrsten Sinema has done irreparable damage to this country,” Bee concluded, “and Kyrsten, I am talking to you now: in two years, you’re going to lose anyway. Why block progress? Be a one-term senator who fucking saves democracy instead of someone who craps on Americans while cashing checks from big pharma.” Seth Meyers And on Late Night, Seth Meyers touched on Biden’s tight-lipped dance in naming a successor to Breyer. “In our dumb system, there was nothing stopping Breyer from just changing his mind and sticking around, and we all just have to nod and pretend that having a forever job this important isn’t totally fucking crazy,” he noted. “I mean, what about an employee review every decade, is that too much to ask? Whoever came up with the idea of lifetime appointments must’ve been,” to quote Biden on a hot mic, a “stupid son of a bitch.” As for GOP opposition to any Biden nominee, citing whatever historical precedent, “there’s no reason to ever take seriously anything these guys say ever again,” said Meyers. “They blocked President Obama’s supreme court nominee eight months before an election, and then rushed to confirm Amy Coney Barrett eight days before an election. “Now they’re saying even when it’s not an election year, they won’t confirm a Democratic nominee. Next, McConnell’s going to claim the constitution says ‘the Senate can’t confirm a nominee when a Democrat is president in a month ending in Y when it’s alternate side parking before or after Labor Day in a year when Tom Brady isn’t in the Super Bowl.’”Tens of thousands of donated books have started to arrive at the new location of a Gaza bookshop that was destroyed by Israeli air strikes last year, and owner Samir Mansour now plans to reopen its doors next month. The two-storey Samir Mansour bookshop, which was reduced to rubble last May, had been founded by the Palestinian Mansour 22 years ago and was a beloved part of the local community. Its destruction during the 11-day conflict, which killed more than 250 people in Gaza and 13 in Israel, prompted a campaign that raised $250,000 (£187,000) to help rebuild it, plus donations of 150,000 books. The Israeli military has said that the store was not its target, claiming that the building that housed it also contained a Hamas facility for producing weapons and intelligence-gathering. Mansour is now preparing to reopen as both a bookshop and library, in a new location less than 100 metres from the original site. The new building, which cost $340,000, needed to be gutted and remodelled, and Mansour spent $70,000 of his personal savings building wooden shelves, tiling and installing electrical supplies. All funds generated by the campaign, which was launched by human rights lawyers Mahvish Rukhsana and Clive Stafford Smith, have gone towards the project, with the blockade imposed on Gaza sending costs spiralling. Rukhsana, an American human rights lawyer working at 3DC in London, said that book donations had flooded in from around the UK, as well as from abroad, with the first cargo container of 50,000 books arriving in the Gaza Strip last week. Shipping of the remainingbooks will follow. “I was so happy when I saw the first shipment had arrived … I felt like a reborn phoenix,” said Mansour. “I did not expect all this support. But it was something beyond imagination and something more than wonderful.” “He lost approximately 90,000 books in the bombing and our goal was to collect 100,000,” said Rukhsana. “We were immediately flooded with books and volunteers who wanted to donate time, vans, cargo trucks, money, and lots of books.” A volunteer from Peterborough, Rabea Zia, helped Rukhsana manage 70 regional book drives across the UK; there were 20 book drop-off locations in London alone. “It started in volunteers’ homes. This became a challenge because garages, kitchens and living rooms were fast flooded with books. Some people held drives in restaurants and coffee shops, which also were flooded quickly and had to be cleared regularly,” said Rukhsana. “We made an appeal for vans. Volunteers borrowed cargo vans and began clearing homes. Central storage units were rented to accommodate the growing number of books. Our garage in Ascot was fast filled with about 30,000 books. Another 20,000 came in from Scotland. Another 20,000 from Leicester, Manchester, Croydon. And small publishing houses donated new books.” The lawyer said that any time it started to feel like too much for the volunteers, they would find a solution. “A cargo company approached us via social media and volunteered to put the books on pallets and stack them with forklifts in a warehouse. From there, another wonderful company called Awesome Books volunteered trucks to pick up from storage locations around the country. They sorted by genre and packed into storage containers,” she said. “It was challenging because of the Brexit-related trucking shortage, but everyone worked together patiently. It was amazing to see how a global community came together and wanted to support this project. Over 4,800 donors gave money from around the world to support his fund.” Rukhsana also explained how donors were encouraged to write messages inside the books, leaving their email addresses so that the books’ new owners can get in contact should they wish. The only request Mansour made was for Harry Potter books, because they are so popular with children in Gaza. Many people bought new Harry Potter box sets for the drive, said Rukhsana, with one volunteer selling cupcakes and baked goods for a month to raise money to buy JK Rowling and Roald Dahl book sets. One man from Santa Barbara spent over $300 shipping three boxes of books to the drive, and more books were shipped in from Greece, France, Italy, UAE, various US cities and Singapore. “There were multiple requests to hold book drives internationally. We had to decline drives because we exceeded our target fast,” said Rukhsana. “Volunteers worked until 1am driving and collecting books and then thanked us for the opportunity to be involved in a tangible way.” The name of the store, when it opens on 12 February, will remain the same, Samir Mansour Bookshop. “I think the community will support the idea of the new bookstore, especially as it is close to the same place that was destroyed,” said Mansour. “We are in a very bad economic situation. So we are hoping for the best and we will see what happens in the future.” Rukhsana said that she and the other volunteers were “really proud to see the books now arriving in Gaza to people who are truly in need of literature and escape. “When Israeli war planes bombed this bookshop it was a further attack on the community’s access to knowledge. This campaign was a gesture of solidarity, an attempt to restore dignity and the fundamental right to books,” she said. “The large-scale global outpouring of support was unexpected. Also unexpected was the intense desire so many had to be tangibly involved in making this right.”Midway through an acting career she abandoned early, out of frustrations with her casting, Yvette Mimieux, who has died aged 80, said the parts she was offered were usually “sex objects or vanilla pudding”. Her pale beauty was striking, but ethereal rather than fragile; qualities that led to the early roles that foreshadowed her entire career. “I suppose I have a soulful quality,” she said. “I was often cast as a wounded person, the sensitive soul.” She was only 15 when the talent agent Jim Byron supposedly spotted her from his helicopter while she walked a horse in the Hollywood Hills; he landed and gave her his card. The other version of the story was more mundane: he spotted her auditioning for a bit part in Elvis Presley’s Jailhouse Rock. He generated publicity for her through beauty contests and modelling. By the time she was 17 she had landed an uncredited bit part in the film of Françoise Sagan’s A Certain Smile (1958), and appeared in the popular TV shows Yancy Derringer, Mr Lucky and One Step Beyond. MGM put her under contract, and gave her a small, bikini-clad role in Platinum High School (1960). But she caught the public eye opposite Rod Taylor in George Pal’s adaptation of HG Wells’s The Time Machine (1960), playing Weena, the beautiful Eloi blissfully unaware that she and her fellows are raised in idyllic peace as cattle to be eaten by the underground Morlocks. In the erstwhile hit comedy Where the Boys Are, she proved the “spring break” movie’s darkness as a student who is a victim of date rape and gets hit by a car as she staggers down the highway in her torn dress. She made the cover of Life magazine in 1961, described as a “warmly wistful starlet”, but Modern Romances scooped Life by using an earlier, anonymous modelling photo of her on their cover the same week. A week later, the press reported that the teenage star had been married in 1959, to a student, Evan Engber, who was now doing his military service. She reprised the charmingly innocent and unaware Weena in Light in the Piazza (1962), as Olivia de Havilland’s adult daughter rendered permanently a pre-teen girl by a childhood fall from a horse that halted her mental development. On holiday she falls in love with a wealthy Italian, played by George Hamilton, who had acted with her in Where the Boys Are. He was totally unconvincing in the role, but had lobbied as an MGM contract player to replace the Cuban-Italian actor Tomas Milian, who might have provided a better contrast to Mimieux’s American child. Her celebrity was cemented by Tyger, Tyger, a two-part episode broadcast in early 1964 of the TV hit Dr Kildare, starring Richard Chamberlain. She guest-starred as a surfing-mad teenager who suffers epileptic seizures. Her scenes in a bikini, including one where she balances on her parents’ coffee table to demonstrate her love for surfing to Kildare, are thought to be the first appearance of a navel on US TV. She had, officially, just turned 22 (her birth date is sometimes given as 1939), and had made eight movies, but stardom continued to elude her. Mimieux was born in Los Angeles. Her father, René, was French, and worked as a film extra and electrician; her mother, Maria (nee Montemayor) was Mexican. Some of her publicity claimed she had studied archaeology at the University of California, Los Angeles, and that she had met Engber there. As one of the last wave of MGM contract players she was doubly typecast, first by studio executives there, and then by other studios who sought her on loan to play those types of roles. She showed some talent in the adaptation of Lillian Hellman’s Toys in the Attic (1963), but she was back playing a young married woman too innocent for sex in Joy in the Morning (1965), and standard love interests in various action films. In The Desperate Hours (1967), an early TV movie remake of the Humphrey Bogart thriller, she was literally a vulnerable hostage. Her best part came while she was loaned to American International for the black comedy Three in the Attic (1968), as one of three women holding their womanising boyfriend prisoner. She moved to starring in a TV detective series, The Most Deadly Game (1970-71), alongside Ralph Bellamy and George Maharis; she got the part following the death of Inger Stevens. She featured in another TV movie remake, of Death Takes a Holiday, opposite Monte Markham, and the growing market for TV movies meant that between 1971 and 1984 she made 13 of them, mostly forgettable, but including a remake of Bell, Book and Candle (1976) in which she took the role played by Kim Novak in the 1958 film. In 1972 she married the director of musicals Stanley Donen. He moved back to the US from the UK in 1975, but his career was waning, and they never worked together. Growing more frustrated, Mimieux wrote the TV movie Hit Lady (1974), to give herself a meatier role. But her career’s apotheosis came in Jackson County Jail (1976), a Roger Corman B-movie, which cast her as a California teacher – falsely accused in the deep south of a crime – who kills her jailer when he tries to rape her. It was as if Mimieux, teamed with Tommy Lee Jones, was fighting back against years of being cast as victims. She co-wrote and produced the TV movie Obsessive Love (1984), in which she played a John Hinckley-inspired role as an over-the-top fan of a soap star. In 1985 she was cast in a TV series, Berrenger’s, a Dallas-like drama set in a New York department store. That year she and Donen divorced; she retired from acting and married the entrepreneur Howard Ruby. She began painting, pursued her interests in archaeology and Haitian art, and together they took up the cause of protecting Arctic wildlife from exploitation. She came out of retirement briefly in 1992 to play an Ivana Trump-like character in the TV series Lady Boss. Mimieux is survived by her husband and five stepchildren. • Yvette Carmen Mimieux, actor, born 8 January 1942; died 17 January 2022 • This article was amended on 30 January 2022. Humphrey Bogart starred in the 1955 film The Desperate Hours, rather than Frank Sinatra as an earlier version stated.Home pressure is a concept of legendary status at the Australian Open. Just ask Sam Stosur. Or Lleyton Hewitt. Or Pat Rafter. Each and every year a new number is added to the same statistic. As long as 1978 gets a mention the picture is painted, the inglorious drought of Australia’s players at their home grand slam once again wrenched from the history books and hoisted about as high as that trophy might be had anyone actually won the thing recently. Being 2022, it is now 44 years since Christine O’Neil did, on grass, at Kooyong. Ash Barty, of course, knows all of this. Her results of the past three years here read: quarter-final, semi-final, quarter-final. She too would have felt the infamous squeeze in her chest of an expectant country behind her. Not that Barty would speak publicly about it – or at all, for all we know. She is a self-described “creature of habit”. She keeps her powder dry. Nice and predictable. And, predictably, having now sat atop the world rankings for more than two and a half years, the 25-year-old is quite some distance above the rest of the women’s singles field. Similarly, as anticipated, she is playing it cool and channelling Billie Jean “pressure is a privilege” King. “Absolutely embrace it,” Barty said. “You have to. It’s fun. It’s brilliant to be playing in the business end of your home slam. I’m not gonna lie about that. It’s amazing. “Being able to experience it multiple times has been incredible, but Saturday’s going to be a new experience for me. So I go out there and embrace it, smile, try and do the best that I can and whatever happens, happens.” Few would bet against her beating Danielle Collins in the final. The American has been a feelgood story this tournament, and she too is making a point of embracing her first experience of a major final after making a semi-final statement against the Polish seventh seed Iga Swiatek. “She’s an exceptional ball-striker,” Barty said of Collins. “She’s someone who stands on the baseline and can hit all spots of the court from any position. I think the challenge is going to be trying to get her off-balance.” One might imagine Barty might get her off-balance in much the same way as she ended the run of Collins’s compatriot, Madison Keys, in one hour and two minutes in her own semi-final on Thursday. Add that the Queenslander has won 20 straight sets and 81 of her last 82 service games. She has, according to Lindsay Davenport, champion here in 2000, “Serena-esque” service numbers. Tennis, however, is more than a numbers game, and Barty is more than a toolbox of statistics. She is a person full of quiet confidence, with a small but tight-knit team around her. She is also a Ngarigo woman, and the first Indigenous player to contest an Australian Open final since Evonne Goolagong Cawley won it over four consecutive years between 1974 and 1977. Last year, when Barty won Wimbledon – her second slam crown – exactly 50 years after Goolagong Cawley’s first Wimbledon title, she hoped she had “made Evonne proud”. The very next day Goolagong Cawley, a Wiradjuri woman, offered her own tribute to her “little sister”, having sensed it was “her time”. Her time was then, and it is also now. That triumph at the All England Club was felt on the other side of the world, in a country still reckoning with racial inequality. It was a high-profile nod to the 500 different First Nations peoples who make up what is officially called Australia. To repeat the achievement at home may, it is hoped, further assist a reshaping of the public discourse. Goolagong Cawley, who is a mentor to Barty, will not be present at centre court. But O’Neil is a confirmed Rod Laver Arena attendee, and joked with media this week she has “enjoyed being a good trivia question”. “But I’d be happy to hand it over to her,” she said, “because she is so deserving of it.” She may even get to meet her. Barty herself is also well-versed in history. Unlike Wendy Turnbull, the last Australian woman to reach the final in 1980, it is highly unlikely that she will play her decider in front of Elton John. It is less likely still that a ball boy will hand-deliver her a note reading “you can do it, love Elton”. Tennis was a different game back then, and Kooyong was nothing like today’s slick facility that is Melbourne Park. But while Barty is the quintessential modern-day champion, she is firmly connected with her past. “I love Kooyong, I’m a Kooyong girl,” she said. “That’s my club down here in Melbourne. I love the grass there. I’m yet to be able to really enjoy a full grass-court season at the Kooyong courts. “I can just imagine what it would have been like, the way that the stadium is set up. I’ve said a couple of times I wish I was maybe born in a different era and I got to experience playing on grass courts all year long. It would have been incredible. “But the development that has come with moving to Melbourne Park has been incredible to encourage fans to come and enjoy it with us. Obviously the courts, the way the game has changed over the last 20, 30 years has been incredible as well.” Or 44 years.Scientists have developed a highly sensitive Covid test that relies only on low-tech kit and a smartphone, which could be used as a quicker, cheaper alternative to PCR testing. The team behind the 25-minute saliva test say it provides a highly reliable platform for testing in the workplace or at home. It requires a basic lab kit that includes a cardboard box, a small hot plate and LED light that can be produced for less than £75. The cost of running a test, including the reagents, is about a 10th of a PCR test and is also cheaper than a lateral flow test. The team’s findings are published in the journal JAMA Network Open. “As new Covid variants emerge globally, testing and detection remain essential to pandemic control efforts,” said Dr Michael Mahan, of the University of California, Santa Barbara and lead author. “Nearly half the world’s population has a smartphone, and we believe that this holds exciting potential to provide fair and equal access to precision diagnostic medicine.” The test uses a process called Loop-mediated Isothermal Amplification (Lamp) to amplify viral RNA in the saliva and detect specific target genes. The app, which is freely available, uses a smartphone’s camera to measure colour changes indicating a chemical reaction and determines a diagnosis in 25 minutes. When tested in 50 patients with Covid, it matched PCR testing for sensitivity. The same technique was also applied successfully to diagnosing flu infections. Alexander Edwards, of the University of Reading, said the work demonstrates it is possible to move testing out of the laboratory. “This interesting report is important in showing the accuracy of a relatively simple test for virus in swabs from clinical samples,” he said. “However, many other research groups have already shown that this type of technology and test simplification can work. The challenge remains how to deliver large-scale products based on this type of technology, and to make simple, accessible products that people can make use of.”Downing Street has insisted Boris Johnson is “fully committed” to introducing a national insurance rise in the spring, despite reports he is “wobbling” on the issue. The manifesto-breaking rise of 1.25 percentage points in national insurance contributions (NICs) was presented by Johnson as a way of tackling the NHS backlog and reforming social care. Rightwing Conservatives who are opposed to rising taxes are seeking to exploit the prime minister’s current weakness by urging him to scrap it or delay its introduction. A government source told the Times that Johnson was “wobbling” over the rise, adding that he “would do anything to survive” his current difficulties over Downing Street parties. And sources told the Guardian that the Treasury was becoming increasingly alarmed that Johnson might be preparing to scrap the rise, scuppering public finances. But, pressed on those reports on Friday, a No 10 spokesperson said: “The prime minister and chancellor are fully committed to introducing the health and social care levy in April. We’ve spoken before about why we are doing that – in order to give the NHS the funds it needs to tackle the backlog that has built up, as well as tackling the long-term issue of social care.” Speculation about the planned NICs rise was fuelled this week when Johnson refused to offer a cast-iron guarantee that it would go ahead amid growing concerns about cost-of-living pressures. The defence minister James Heappey told the BBC’s Question Time on Thursday that the government was “in listening mode” when it came to assessing the policy. On Friday, however, both No 10 and the technology minister, Chris Philp, offered a stern defence of the tax rise, insisting it would be enacted as planned. Philp denied any delay was being considered, telling LBC the “plan is to proceed as intended”. He said the rise, and subsequent introduction of the health and social care levy from 2023, would provide £36bn over three years to fund the NHS and social care. Opposition to the change has come from all sides of the Commons, as MPs fear the impact that increasing financial demands could have on stretched household budgets at a time of high inflation and soaring energy costs. The former minister Robert Halfon said the government should look at different ways to support struggling families, including further possible cuts to overseas aid, rather than ploughing ahead with the NICs rise. Labour is also opposed to the rise. Speaking to reporters on a visit to Glasgow, its leader, Keir Starmer, said: “The prime minister needs to act on this. We’ve got a very serious issue here, with everybody facing prices going up, whether that’s fuel, energy bills at home, inflation going up to something like 6%, the worst it’s been since the John Major years. “And at that very moment, Boris Johnson and his government want to impose a tax hike on people in April.” The proposed 1.25 percentage point rise for workers and employers is due to begin in April after it was agreed by cabinet and voted on by MPs, with only five Tory MPs voting against, and 37 not voting. From 2023, the contribution is due to drop back to its current rate, with a 1.25% health and social care levy then applied to raise funds for improvements to care services. In the 2019 Tory election manifesto the party had ruled out increasing national insurance if returned to power. • This article was amended on 29 January 2022. National insurance contributions are set to increase by 1.25 percentage points in April, not 1.25% as an earlier version said.Liverpool are trying to beat Tottenham to the signing of the Porto winger Luis Díaz and have made an initial offer of about £37.5m. Their bid includes easily achievable add-ons of about another £15m and a further £4m or so in bonuses less likely to be paid. Díaz, a Colombia international with 31 caps, is one of the most exciting talents in Europe and has scored 14 goals in 18 league games this season. Porto rejected a £37.6m offer from Spurs this week for a player who has a £66m release clause. On Thursday Tottenham suffered a transfer setback when Adama Traoré, one of Antonio Conte’s priority targets, agreed a move to Barcelona. It would be a further blow to their manager, who has repeatedly stressed the need for reinforcements, were Díaz to end up at Liverpool. Spurs have opened an alternative avenue with a move to sign the attacking midfielder Dejan Kulusevski on loan from Juventus – the club at which their managing director of football, Fabio Paratici, worked for 11 years. Kulusevski, 21, who can play on the wing or as a No 10, has been more in than out of the starting XI this season. The Sweden international cost Juventus €35m from Atalanta in January 2020. He was promptly loaned to Parma, where he had also spent the first half of that season, starring to the extent he was named as the best young player in Serie A. Juventus, who have Kulusevski under contract until 2025, are expected to move players out after paying €75m for the Fiorentina striker Dusan Vlahovic, whose transfer was confirmed on Friday. They have turned down a €25m bid from Aston Villa for the midfielder Rodrigo Bentancur and rebuffed Tottenham’s approach to take him on loan. The Spurs midfielder Giovani Lo Celso is of interest to Lyon as they seek to replace the Newcastle-bound Bruno Guimarães. Tottenham would want Lo Celso’s full salary paid and a loan fee to consider a deal. The 25-year-old Díaz has twice played against Liverpool this season in the Champions League and is with Colombia for their World Cup qualifiers at home to Peru on Friday and away to Argentina on Tuesday. Liverpool are sending staff to South America so they are ready to do a medical before Monday’s transfer deadline if they get the go-ahead. With Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané turning 30 before the start of next season, Díaz is regarded by Liverpool as key to preparing for a future in which they will have to regenerate their forward line. Liverpool have tracked Díaz for a long time and were preparing to move for him at the end of the season but Porto’s openness to selling this month, and competition from elsewhere, prompted them to accelerate their pursuit.Netflix will face a $5m defamation lawsuit by a Georgian chess master who alleges she was defamed in the hit series The Queen’s Gambit, after a judge refused to toss the suit on Thursday. Nona Gaprindashvili, the first woman to be named a chess grandmaster, sued the streaming company in federal court in September. Gaprindashvili alleges that a line from The Queen’s Gambit, where a character incorrectly states that she had “never faced men”, is “grossly sexist and belittling”. Gaprindashvili had played against 59 male competitors by 1968, the year the show is set. Damages are sought for what the suit claims is a “devastating falsehood, undermining and degrading her accomplishments before an audience of many millions”. Netflix had previously asked for the defamation suit to be dismissed, arguing that the series is a piece of fiction and that show’s creators should have artistic license protected under the first amendment. Netflix further argued that the show used two chess experts to certify details in the series, noting that the reference to Gaprindashvili was meant to “recognize her, not disparage her”, according to the streamer’s lawyers. But on Thursday’s ruling in California, first reported by Variety, US District Judge Virginia A Phillips found that Gaprindashvili’s argument was reasonable, noting that works of fiction were not immune from defamation if real people were slandered. “Netflix does not cite, and the Court is not aware, of any cases precluding defamation claims for the portrayal of real persons in otherwise fictional works,” wrote Phillips. “The fact that the Series was a fictional work does not insulate Netflix from liability for defamation if all the elements of defamation are otherwise present.” The Queen’s Gambit, which won 11 Emmy awards in 2021, is based on the 1983 novel by Walter Tevis. The fictional limited series follows the character of Beth Harmon, an American played by Anya Taylor-Joy, as she rises through the ranks of competitive chess in the 1960s. Gaprindashvili is now 80 and lives in Tbilisi, Georgia. “They were trying to do this fictional character who was blazing the trail for other women, when in reality I had already blazed the trail and inspired generations,” Gaprindashvili said in an interview with the New York Times. “That’s the irony.” The suit also noted that the film portrayed her as Russian, although she is Georgian.Hewlett-Packard has won its six-year civil fraud case against Mike Lynch, the man once hailed as Britain’s answer to Bill Gates, after a high court judge ruled that he duped the US firm into paying £8.2bn for his software firm Autonomy. Lynch, who was on Friday waiting to find out if he could be extradited to the US to face a separate criminal trial, was found to have defrauded HP by manipulating Autonomy’s accounts to inflate the value of the company. He has always denied the accusation and said on Friday that he would appeal. “Claimants have substantially succeeded in their claims in this proceeding,” said Mr Justice Hildyard, after a 93-day trial during which 28,000 documents were considered as evidence.. He said the damages were likely to be significantly less than the $5bn claimed by Hewlett-Packard (HP) and successor companies, while he also cast doubt on the reliability of some of the US firm’s witnesses. However, he ruled that HP had been induced into overpaying for the takeover, due to fraud perpetrated by Lynch and Autonomy’s former finance director, Sushovan Hussain, who is in jail in the US after being found guilty of fraud relating to the same deal . On Friday evening, Lynch was still awaiting a ruling from the Home Office on whether he can be extradited to the US to face trial over claims that he defrauded investors in HP. The US company bought Autonomy for $11bn in 2011, targeting its software that helps firms store and search “unstructured data” such as voicemail and email. Lynch made £500m from the sale and was hailed as one of Britain’s few global tech champions. Within a year, HP had written down its own value by $9bn (£6.7bn), blaming “serious accounting improprieties” related to the deal. Lynch and his team, HP claimed, had falsely boosted the attractiveness of the company through accounting trickery. In a lengthy summary of his conclusions, Hildyard found that Lynch and Hussain had been “dishonest”, deploying several strategies that had the effect of artificially inflating and bringing forward revenues. This included using hardware sales to “disguise” shortfalls in software income, hiding costs, and entering into arrangements with “friendly” companies to bring forward revenue from sales, some of which never materialised, to meet market expectations. However, he said that HP would most likely still have bought Autonomy, even if its financial performance had not been artificially enhanced, due to the quality of its data-structuring product IDOL, described by the former HP boss Meg Whitman as “almost magical”. He also found that the scale of damages, which will be determined at a later date, was likely to be “considerably less” than the $5bn claimed by HP. He said that while determining damages would take some time, he had not wanted to delay his verdict on Lynch’s liability, because it might have an impact on whether he is extradited. A London court ruled last July that Lynch, who denies any wrongdoing, should be extradited but the final decision rests with the home secretary, Priti Patel, with a deadline of midnight on Friday, the day of the high court verdict. A US trial would cover much of the same ground as the London civil case. Speaking after the high court verdict, a spokeperson for Hewlett-Packard Enterprise (HPE) said: “Dr Lynch and Mr Hussain defrauded and deliberately misled the market and Hewlett Packard. HPE is pleased that the judge has held them accountable.” Kelwin Nicholls of Clifford Chance, the lawyer for Lynch, said: “Today’s outcome is disappointing and Dr Lynch intends to appeal. We will study the full judgment over the coming weeks. “We note the judge’s concerns over the reliability of some of HP’s witnesses. We also note the judge’s expectation that any loss suffered by HP will be substantially less than the $5bn claimed.”Aquatic safety instructor Clayton Wikaira is leaning against a small inflatable boat, his hair wet from the sea, speaking to a group of six university students who have just learned how to safely dive for kaimoana (seafood). The students’ attention is waning in the hot midday sun – they are tired from an early morning start, a hike around the rocks of Auckland’s Whangaparaoa peninsula, and hours spent diving in the open ocean for kina (sea urchin). Some look at their phones, others chomp on pizza. But as he starts telling a story, their ears prick up. “I thought I could swim to Australia when I was young. I thought I was fit, strong,” he starts. “But when I got caught in big waves and they were dumping on me, and my goggles were getting ripped off and I was getting sucked out into the big ones, into an impact zone, I was not prepared for that.” Wikaira now has a captive audience. “There were stories going round in the community: ‘Who are these crazy fullers going out in these rugged conditions?’ That was me and my mate,” he says. “We thought there was nothing wrong with it because we had never had an experience of drowning. That lesson saved my life. After that, I had so much respect for the ocean, the elements and what could happen.” It is a story Wikaira, an aquatic educator at Drowning Prevention Auckland, has told to the thousands of students he trains every year. As a Māori man – a demographic that features highly in New Zealand’s drowning toll – it is also a story he tells to save his own people. Since 1 December, there have been 39 deaths from drowning in New Zealand, making it the worst summer in six years, with still a month to go. There were 15 drownings during the official holiday period (24 December to 5 January) – a 180% increase on the five-year average, according to Water Safety New Zealand data. There were 74 drownings, including 15 people aged under 24, last year – on par with 2020 – despite longer periods spent in Covid-19-related lockdowns. An alarming number of those perishing are Māori men. In 2021, 31% were Māori (23 deaths) and 96% of those were men, despite Māori comprising just 16.5% of the total population. Māori have a strong ancestral relationship to the sea, including expert ocean navigation, and hunting and fishing for kaimoana (seafood). But that can come at a cost, says Wikaira. “We have this feeling that water is us and we are part of water and we can handle it, but I’m sure our ancestors also had protocols in place.” There is also pressure to provide for the family, often through free-diving for kaimoana, or fishing. “Sometimes your mana [prestige] is on the line to provide for your whānau [family], and that is a demonstration of your aroha [love] to people. I’ve felt that, even if it was rough weather, I was going to go and get a feed, and it nearly cost me my own life. I’m trying to help people think of the bigger picture – we don’t want to lose anyone to drowning.” Wikaira is acutely aware of the relationship between Māori and the moana (ocean), and uses tikanga (Māori customs) in his training, regardless of whether the student is Māori or not. The session teaches respect for the ocean and its power, while retaining love for all that it provides: after instructing his students on how to minimise fatigue using buoys, he then plucks a kina from the sea floor, and shows how to break it open to scoop out the buttery, briny flesh inside. “The delicacy of the sea,” he tells them, before happily swallowing it down. “Education is still the key, but like anything, it still comes down to who is going be the one flying the flag for whānau, or being a leader within their own home, and within the community,” he says. That includes regional councils educating people about their local waterways and taking clues from Māori place names, says Rob Hewitt, the Māori spokesperson for Water Safety New Zealand. “Waikino means bad water; Waiparu, dirty water. As Māori we know those are not good places to swim.” The Waikato River, meaning flowing water, where there were four drownings in 2021, comes with a saying, Hewitt says. “He piko he taniwha, he piko he taniwha’ – there is a taniwha (a water spirit or monster) around every corner.” Drowning remains the leading cause of recreational death and the third-highest cause of accidental death in New Zealand. “It’s a national tragedy,” says Daniel Gerrard, Water Safe New Zealand’s chief executive. “Every preventable death is devastating to a whānau and the community. “This is a horrific loss of lives and is unprecedented. It cuts through every age range, water activity and ethnicity. A common theme in these drownings was people underestimating the conditions and overestimating their ability.” Not all drownings are related to gathering food. Water Safety New Zealand says there are a number of factors, including a lack of water skills education for children, people not staying up to date with weather and ocean conditions, population growth and new arrivals to the country being unfamiliar with New Zealand’s turbulent waters. An ageing population with income and leisure time and a growth in aquatic sports such as kayaking and boating, as well as risk-taking extreme sports, could also be contributing to the rise. But another reason could be hotter days, and the allure of a dip in the sea or a river to get respite from the heat, says Hewitt. New Zealand experienced its hottest year on record in 2021, with December becoming the fourth warmest on record, the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research confirmed this month. There were four drownings in the Manawatū River over summer. In the days following the deaths of two Karen refugees from Myanmar, a rāhui (customary restriction) was placed on the area, but people were still turning up to swim there, says Hewitt, who was involved in the rescue response. “Two days after I recovered an 11-year-old, there were 20 people on the riverside. They were told that there was a rāhui, and all of them said ‘it doesn’t affect me’ and ‘it’s way too hot’. The heat is pushing them to the water,” Hewitt says. “It’s only going to get hotter. Now is the time that we really have to push, to make sure making sure that people are safe in, and around, the water.”My friend Joan Capp, who has died aged 89, was a passionate advocate of peace and justice for the poor, who raised and personally delivered thousands of pounds’ worth of humanitarian aid to more than a dozen countries, from Bosnia and Romania to Pakistan and Uganda. I first spoke to her in 1996 when, having seen a TV report of mine about a devastated care home in the war-torn Chechen capital, Grozny, she contacted me to find out how she could help. Despite my advice that travelling there was highly dangerous, she filled a 40-tonne truck with blankets, bedding, food, heaters and other equipment, and set off in the passenger seat, with two drivers, to deliver it. After a hair-raising journey across Europe, sleeping at night in the cab, she made sure that she personally handed over the goods to the Chechen woman who was in charge of the home. It took my breath away to imagine this frail-looking, white-haired pensioner wagging her finger at Kalashnikov-wielding thugs at checkpoints, refusing to take no for an answer. I called her the Angel of Grozny. Joan was born in Prestwich in Greater Manchester, to Rosetta (nee Band) and her husband, Walter Bolton, a mechanical engineer. Joan’s schooling was limited, as she had to care for her ailing parents from the age of 12, after which she became a nurse at 17, first at Salford Royal hospital, then later as a district and surgery nurse in the village of Bootle in Cumbria. She worked there until she retired in 1987 and then immediately became involved in local charity work. But it was the televised wars of the 1990s, in former Yugoslavia and Chechnya, that sparked what became the defining mission of her later life. “I couldn’t bear to see people being evacuated from their homes,” she said. “I had to do something.” Untrusting of established charities, which she suspected of being inefficient and bureaucratic, she set herself up in effect as a one-woman humanitarian aid agency. With a friend she founded Bootle Refugee Aid Cumbria UK and made her first aid trips to Croatia in 1992. Her mission to help the needy became an obsession. Even in her later years, when she was blind and debilitated by illness, she would call me to tell me about her plans. In the darkness of her final months she wrote songs about peace, dedicated to the children of Mostar, Bosnia, whom she had met and helped 30 years before. Joan was appointed MBE in 2012. Her husband, Alan Capp, a Ministry of Defence employee, whom she married in 1952, died in 2005. She is survived by their two daughters, Deborah and Linda.Book now Take a walk and look around. Unless you live in the middle of nowhere, you’ll see that copywriting permeates every aspect of our lives. From billboards and buses, to adverts on a board in the local shop - people and brands are everywhere – which is why it can be difficult to get your voice heard. In this action-focused masterclass with Sally Ormond, founder of Briar Copywriting, you’ll receive expert insights into the fundamentals of copywriting and the skills you’ll need if you want to create content that gets noticed. Over three focused hours, you’ll learn how to personify your business or brand through your writing and understand how to communicate in a way that feels more natural and appealing to your audience. You’ll also be invited to take part in a short writing exercise, with the opportunity for feedback, putting your new skills into practice. This is an unmissable workshop for anyone looking to sharpen their copywriting skills and who wants to communicate well. Course content What is copywriting? Why is it necessary? Where is it found? The elements of great copywriting Grammar versus natural speech Copywriting in action: good versus bad Writing exercise: sell to Sally Q&amp;A This course is for … Beginners in copywriting or those considering entering the profession Professionals who want to learn how to write in a way that reflects the values of their business or brand Freelancers who want to understand how to write strong and compelling copy Tutor profile After a career in the banking industry and charity world, Sally Ormond began her copywriting business, Briar Copywriting, in 2007. Initially working as a sole trader, she incorporated in December 2011. She works with companies of all sizes (from start-ups to blue chips) to help them communicate more effectively with their customers. Her global clients include BT, Deloitte, Cisco, Thomson Reuters, Mambu, Goldman Sachs, Willis Towers Watson, Stage Technologies and many others. She writes everything from website copy to brochures, newsletters to reports, straplines to slogans and everything else in between. Her skills include a deep understanding of SEO, matching the tone of voice to the brand, creating dynamic content, refreshing and enhancing existing copy, editing, proofreading and interviewing. Sally has also written a children’s book, Tilly the Tractor and Freddie the Fire Engine, and a novel called Mackerel Skies. Details Book now Date: Thursday 7 April 2022 Times: 2pm-5pm (BST) Price: £129 (plus £6.08 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 2pm BST | 3pm CEST | 6am PDT | 9am EDT You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 2pm (GMT). Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.Time to wrap up. The eurozone’s two largest economies had a very different end to 2021, as the region’s recovery from the pandemic continued. France beat forecasts with 0.7% growth in the last quarter, helping it rack up its best annual growth since 1969. But Germany stumbled, with a 0.7% contraction in Q4 which puts it on the brink of recession, as the latest wave of Covid-19 and supply chain problems disrupted activity. That took the shine off otherwise-decent economic numbers from the eurozone, with Sweden and Spain also expanding solidly. US consumer confidence has been knocked by rising inflation, and worries about the economic outlook. European stock markets have closed in the red, with their fourth weekly fall in a row. Here are today’s other main stories: Goodnight, and have a lovely weekend. GW After a very challenging Christmas, UK pubs are hoping for a much-needed pick up in businesses as Plan B restrictions are lifted, and drinkers put Dry January behind them. and head back to the bar. My colleague Rob Davies reports: In its nearly 500-year history, Ye Olde Mitre in Holborn has served beer under 21 monarchs, survived the English civil war and emerged unscathed from the Great Fire of London. But few events have affected the pubs trade quite so profoundly as the Covid-19 pandemic. Lockdowns choked off trade for months at a time. Even once venues reopened, social distancing restrictions and work-from-home guidance left city centres deserted and ruined the key Christmas period. “We’re a real ale house so people come from far and wide for our beers: regulars, office workers and tourists,” said Judith Norman, the historic pub’s landlady. “Our regulars tried to support us through the pandemic but with working from home we were a lot quieter than normal.” At Fuller’s, the pub chain that owns Ye Olde Mitre, trade was down by as much as 70% at some of the city centre venues that rely heavily on after-work drinkers. Some had to shut their doors temporarily. Now though, as plan B restrictions in England are eased, hope is returning at Ye Olde Mitre and elsewhere. Familiar faces are gradually resurfacing, dropping in for a pint after the odd office day here and there. “They’re easing themselves back in and we’re hoping they’ll return full time next week,” Norman said. Here’s Rob’s full story: European stock markets also racked up fresh losses tonight. The Stoxx 600 fell around 1%, meaning the index of European stocks has now posted its fourth weekly loss in a row. German’s DAX lost around 1.3%, with the mood in Frankfurt not helped by this morning’s GDP report. France’s CAC fared better, down 0.8%. David Madden, analyst at Equiti Capital, says it was another painful day on the markets. Continued concerns about the possibility of several interest rate hikes from the Federal Reserve and the Russia-Ukraine standoff is weighing on the mood once again. On Wednesday, Jerome Powell, the Chair of the Federal Reserve didn’t rule out the possibility of raising interest rates seven times this year. That message has set the scene for next week’s updates from the Bank of England (BoE) and the European Central Bank (ECB). Last month, the BoE caught many off guard when it hiked interest rates, and there is chatter the bank will look to lift rates a few times this year. The ECB is unlikely to be raising rates anytime soon, but if the other major central banks are heading down that route, it could influence the language of the ECB. After a turbulent week, the UK’s stock market has racked up another day of losses. The FTSE 100 index has closed 88 points lower at 7466, down 1.2% today. Online grocery firm Ocado led the fallers, tumbling 7.5%, after its Norwegian rival AutoStore claimed a victory in one of their ongoing legal battles - something Ocado disputed. Mining companies also fell, suggesting concerns that global growth could weaken - especially if America hikes interest rates swiftly. Copper producer Antofagasta lost 3.9%, followed by Anglo American (3.7%), and Rio Tinto (-3.5%). Financila stocks also weakened, with Barclays down -3.3%. Sophie Lund-Yates, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says: Some of the UK’s biggest companies, including major financial firms, have seen their share prices rocked. Investors are likely being unnerved by a combination of rising Ukraine tensions, as well as further speculation about the extent and timing of interest rate increases. The ongoing PR disaster in Downing Street is likely to be doing little to prop UK sentiment up either. Archant, the publisher of dozens of titles including the Eastern Daily Press, London’s Ham &amp; High Express and the former owner of the anti-Brexit weekly the New European, is up for sale only 18 months after being sold to a private equity group. The Norwich-based newspaper group, one of Britain’s oldest publishers – co-founded in 1845 by the mustard magnates the Colman family – was sold to the investment group Rcapital in August 2020 in a deal that promised a “bright future” for the company as the pandemic accelerated the decline in its already strained finances. With the Ukraine crisis bubbling, US President Joe Biden and his European Union counterpart Ursula von der Leyen have pledged to cooperate on guaranteeing Europe’s energy security. In a joint statement, von der Leyen and Biden said they would work together to ensure Europe remained supplied with gas: “The United States and the EU are working jointly towards continued, sufficient, and timely supply of natural gas to the EU from diverse sources across the globe to avoid supply shocks, including those that could result from a further Russian invasion of Ukraine.” Russia is Europe’s largest supplier of gas, of which a third flows through Ukraine’s gas pipelines to countries across the continent. Analysts have warned that there isn’t much slack in the system. With demand increasing, there’s little spare gas to go around. Consumer morale across the US has dropped to its lowest level in over a decade, as the Omicron wave, and rising prices, weighed on the recovery. Sentiment soured this month, according to the University of Michigan’s healthcheck, as worries about inflation and the state of the economy rose. The index of consumer sentiment fell to 67.2, from 70.6 in December, with people less upbeat about current economic conditions and future prospects. Confidence in government economic policies also fell, which could worry the White House ahead of the mid-term elections this November. Surveys of Consumers chief economist, Richard Curtin warned that consumer sentiment has been slumping after a brief interlude of rising optimism last year: The Delta and Omicron variants were largely responsible, but other factors, some of which were initially triggered by covid, have become independent forces shaping sentiment. While supply chains and essential workers have sparked the initial increases in prices and wages, a wage-price spiral that has subsequently developed is no longer tied to those precipitating conditions. Household spending had been supported by an extraordinary pace of rising home and stock prices that is likely to turn negative in the year ahead. Overall confidence in government economic policies is at its lowest level since 2014, and the major geopolitical risks may add to the pandemic active confrontations with other countries. Here’s some reaction: Stocks are lower in New York, as the last session of a rather turbulent week gets underway. The Dow Jones industrial average has lost 275 points, or 0.8%, as most sectors drop in early trading. Construction equipment maker Caterpillar (-3.4%), oil major Chevron (-3.4%) , and conglomerate 3M (-3.3%) are leading the Dow fallers. Tech though, is holding up better, with Apple jumping 2.8%. It beat forecasts last night with record sales in the holiday quarter, partly thanks to high iPhone demand in China The Nasdaq composite has dipped by 0.4%. US wages and salaries rose by 1.1% in the last quarter of 2021, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports. That’s a slight slowdown from the summer, but still high by historic standards: So with prices also rising sharply, but spending weakening last month (as the PCE index shows) America’s central bankers face a conundrum. Paul Ashworth of Capital Economics explains: The employment cost index shows that overall compensation costs increased by 1.0% in the fourth quarter, which pushed the annual growth rate up to 4.0%, from 3.7%. We’re more interested in wages &amp; salaries for private workers, however, which increased by 1.2%, with the annual growth rate hitting a 40-year high of 5.0%, from 4.6%. Even with the unexpectedly strong fourth-quarter GDP gain indicating that productivity growth was a little stronger than we had anticipated, 5% wage growth is nowhere near consistent with a 2% price inflation target. Elsewhere, we also learned that the annual rate of PCE inflation increased to 5.8% in December, from 5.7%, with the core PCE rate rising to 4.9%, from 4.7%. The latter is also the highest rate since the early 1980s. With both wage and underlying price inflation spiraling out of control, no wonder the Fed is a lot less confident that this surge will be short-lived. A closely-watched index of the cost of living in the US has risen again, to its highest rate since the early 1980s. The PCE price index, which monitors changes to personal consumption prices, rose by 5.8% year-on-year in December, as the cost of goods and services kept rising. That’s up from 5.7%, and the highest since 1982. Energy prices surge by 29.9%, while food prices increased 5.7% -- as the inflationary squeeze continued. Excluding food and energy, core PCE price index increased by 4.9%, the higher core inflation rate since 1983. This highlighting the inflationary concerns that could spur the US Federal Reserve to raise interest rates in March. In December alone, PCE rose 0.4%. US personal incomes rose by 0.3% during the month, meaning that incomes are not keeping up with rising prices. Consumer spending dropped 0.6%, after stronger demand in November due to Black Friday and early Christmas shopping. Here’s our news story on HP’s court win over Mike Lynch: Germany faces an increased risk of falling back into recession, after its GDP contracted by 0.7% in the October-December quarter. The fourth wave of the pandemic, new restrictions and high energy prices were a harder hit to the economy than expected, says Carsten Brzeski of ING: The German economy went into hibernation at the turn of the year. New restrictions to tackle the fourth wave of the pandemic and the Omicron wave as well as higher energy prices dented private consumption. With this weak fourth quarter, the likelihood of Germany being in an outright recession at the turn of the year has increased. High energy prices will continue weighing on private consumption, even if social restrictions are lifted in the coming weeks. Also, even with some temporary relief from exports and industrial activity, the Omicron wave in Asia and the Chinese New Year clearly argue against a steep short-term improvement in supply chains. Maybe the German economy gets away with only one black eye and there won’t be a part two to the winter recession story, but in any case, the short-term outlook doesn’t look too good. For a technical recession, Germany’s GDP would have to shrink in the current quarter (January-March). Mihir Kapadia, the CEO of Sun Global Investments, says Germany was hit hard by Omicron, so could recover if we avoid further variants: The ongoing supply chain bottlenecks are also a symptom of the Q4 lockdowns, and barring any fresh new waves or variants, Q1 2022 should be marked down for recovery. Hopefully, investor angst of Q4 21 will be replaced with optimism for Q1 22, as France, Sweden and Spain have demonstrated a stellar rebound. With Germany being a manufacturing heavyweight, the supply chain bottlenecks have had a higher impact. The real focus should be on controlling inflation both in Europe and the US. The contrast between Germany and France is a dilemma for policymakers, says Raffi Boyadjian of XM: The euro has plunged below $1.12, brushing fresh 20-month lows on Friday. Upbeat GDP numbers out of France today contrasted sharply with a bigger-than-expected contraction of the German economy in Q4. This poses a possible dilemma for the European Central Bank when it meets next week as it tries to strike a policy balance for all Eurozone members amid soaring price pressures. Wall Street is heading for further losses, with the benchmark S&amp;P 500 index down 1% in pre-market trading. Back on UK inflation... Jack Leslie, senior economist at the Resolution Foundation, says this morning’s more detailed data shows the importance of addressing the cost of living crisis: “While the new ONS figures confirm that the average inflation rates experienced by different income groups are currently similar, they also highlight again how low income families experience inflation in a different way. “On average the lowest income families spend twice as much on food and housing bills as the richest families. So increasing food price inflation and the looming energy price cap rise in April will disproportionately affect families already struggling to get by. These families should be the priority for the Government’s cost of living crisis response.” European stock markets are on track for their fourth weekly drop in a row, as part of a global rout this month. Reuters explains: The pan-European STOXX 600 tumbled 1.5% in morning trading, on course for its fourth straight weekly drop, while U.S. futures were pointing to more crimson screens on Wall Street later too. MSCI’s 50-country main world index is now down over 8.1% for the month, which will be its worst January since the 2008 global financial crisis year. Just in: Hewlett-Packard has won the majority of its civil case against British tech tycoon Mike Lynch over its acquisition of Autonomy in 2011, my colleague Rob Davies reports. London judge Mr Justice Hildyard has announced his ruling, and says that damages are likely to be considerably less than the $5bn which HP claimed. The decision follows years of bitter dispute between HP and Lynch. Autonomy developed technologies to help firms sort through unstructured data to find meaning and value, such as information contained in web pages, corporate presentations, videos clips, e-mails and instant messages. HP bought Autonomy for $11bn in 2011, as it looked to expand its software operations. But in 2012, it took an $8.8bn (£5.5bn) writedown, saying that it had discovered “serious accounting improprieties” at Autonomy. Separately, Priti Patel, UK home secretary, must decide today whether to approve Lynch’s extradition from Britain to the US to stand trial in the US on criminal fraud charges, over the sale of Autonomy to HP. Britain’s poorer and richer households are facing similar rates of inflation, the Office for National Statistics reports.... but there’s more to the story than that. ONS experimental data released this morning shows that, despite different spending patterns, the cost of living rose broadly across income brackets. The ONS estimates that low-income households in December experienced annual consumer price inflation of 5.3%, while high-income households saw inflation of 5.5%. However.... the ONS is still working on broadening its inflation work, to give a much clearer view of how prices are rising. Due in May, it will use supermarket scanning data to show price moves in granular details, after campaigners warned that CPI data isn’t capturing the cost-of-living squeeze for the poorest. The ONS says today: High-income and low-income households have experienced similar annual inflation rates since 2014. High-income households’ experience of inflation is being driven by rising transport costs, on which they spend a larger proportion of their expenditure when compared with low-income households, while for low-income households housing-related costs are more of a factor. Retired and non-retired households have experienced similar levels of inflation rates since April 2021. But, it doesn’t mean that inflation causes equal pain across society. If you don’t have savings, and are already struggling, then an increase in food or energy bills is a bigger problem. And more affluent families can cut back on discretionary purchases which aren’t even an option for others. As Andy Bruce of Reuters points out in this Twitter thread: Stian Westlake, chief executive of the Royal Statistical Society, has welcomed today’s data from the ONS, but agrees that the current data doesn’t show the personal impact of inflation: “Today’s release of CPI data for different household groups by the ONS is a useful and welcome interim step but is not the long term answer . Apart from the hugely important question of whether inflation is hitting poorer households more than rich ones, Jack Monroe has done a great service in reminding everyone that a key point of consumer price indices is to measure inflation as actually experienced by households. While these changes will go some way to better capture household costs, the issue remains that CPI was never intended for this precise purpose. “The Household Cost Indices (HCIs), currently being developed by the ONS and due for release in May, are designed to reflect household experience. They include items such as mortgage and other interest payments, student loan repayments and unlike most consumer price indices including CPI, are not skewed towards higher spending, richer households. Much more attention needs to be paid to and resources devoted to, their development as they can provide the long term answer to what Jack Monroe and others are rightly asking for.” Jack Monroe, who has warned that supermarkets have been eliminating their cheapest ranges, reports: Denise Coates, head of gambling empire Bet365, was Britain’s biggest taxpayer last year, according to the Sunday Times Tax List released this morning. The Coates family paid an estimated £481.7m, topping the annual ranking of billionaires’ tax payments for the third consecutive year. While the family’s tax payment was down from £573m in 2020, it was still almost £200m more that paid by hedge fund manager Chris Rokos in second-place with a £300m payment to the exchequer. The total tax paid by the top 50 taxpayers rose by £510m to £3.7bn up from £3.2bn the previous year. The minimum amount of tax paid needed to make the top 50 rose to £15.2m, up 16% on the previous year. British firms have been urged to bolster their digital security over concerns of possible Russian cyber-attacks linked to the growing political crisis over the conflict in Ukraine. The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC), a part of the GCHQ intelligence agency, has updated its guidance telling firms to “build resilience and stay ahead of potential threats”. The NCSC said: “UK organisations are being urged to bolster their cybersecurity resilience in response to malicious cyber-incidents in and around Ukraine.” The NCSC said that although it was investigating malicious cyber-incidents in Ukraine, “which are similar to a pattern of Russian behaviour seen before in previous situations”, it was not aware of any “specific threats” to UK organisations. European stock markets have fallen deeper into the red, as market volatility continues. The FTSE 100 index is now down 1.2%, or 93 points, at 7462 points. Germany’s DAX has fallen 1.7%, after its economy shank more than expected in Q4, while France’s CAC is 1.4% lower despite better-than-expected GDP data this morning. Auto shares are weaker, after Swedish truck maker Volvo (-3.5%) reported lower fourth-quarter core earnings this morning, and proposed a smaller-than-expected dividend. Tech stocks are being hit again, on concerns that America’s central bank will tighten monetary policy sharply this year. It’s been a very choppy week, dominated by the Federal Reserve’s meeting earlier this week, as Jim Reid of Deutsche Bank says: Yesterday saw another market whipsaw as markets continued to try to digest the aftermath of Chair Powell’s press conference. In particular, there was growing speculation that the Fed would embark on back-to-back hikes in order to get inflation under control, with Fed funds futures now pricing 2 full hikes over the next two meetings in March and May, in line with our US econ team’s updated call. Assuming this is realised, then this would be a much faster pace of hikes than anything seen over the last cycle, when the initial hike in December 2015 wasn’t followed by another for an entire year, and the fastest things got was a consistent quarterly pace when the Fed hiked 4 times in 2018. This time, we almost have 4 hikes priced between March and September alone. Euro zone economic sentiment has deteriorated, pulled down by a more downbeat sentiment in the two key sectors of industry and services. The European Commission’s monthly economic sentiment index has dropped to 112.7 points this month, down from 113.8 in December. That takes economic confidence away from the highs seen in 2021, before the Omicron wave hit the economy. Confidence dropped among industrial companies, with managers reporting a small drop in order books. Service sector confidence decreased strongly again, dragged down by managers’ less positive views on the past business situation and past demand Consumer confidence also fell, due to rising pessimism about people’s future financial situation, and especially the general economic situation. Germany’s statistics body has also reported that goods exports to the UK fell last year. German companies sold €65.4bn of goods to the United Kingdom during 2021, Destatis says. That’s a drop of 2.5%, on top of the 15.3% tumble in 2020 when global trade was ruptured by the pandemic. It says: One year after the United Kingdom left the European Union, German exports to the UK continued to decline. Based on first provisional results, the Federal Statistical Office (Destatis) reports that Germany exported goods to the value of 65.4 billion euros to the United Kingdom in 2021. Compared with 2020, exports to the United Kingdom decreased further by 2.5% in 2021 as a result of the Brexit, following a year-on-year decline of 15.3% in 2020, the year dominated by the Covid-19 pandemic. The data for the entire year 2021 are based on a first release of the export figures available for December 2021. Destatis doesn’t say how trade with other countries fared in December. But earlier data shows that in the first 11 months of the year, German exports to all other countries had jumped 13.8%. Exports to EU members were 17% higher in January-November than a year ago, with exports to non-EU members up 10.1%, while UK exports were down 2%. Some snap reaction to the German GDP report: Germany’s economy shrank in the last quarter, as restrictions to slow the pandemic hit its recovery. German GDP contracted by 0.7% in Oct0ber-December, a sharper downturn than the 0.3% fall expected, new government figures show. Germany was hit by a wave of Covid-19 cases in the last quarter, which led to a lockdown of unvaccinated citizens in early December, followed by wider limits on social contacts. Also, its factories have been suffering from the ongoing supply chain crisis, which has hit supplies of key components such as computer chips. Investors are on “high alert” this morning after another blustery session yesterday which saw stocks oscillate, says Richard Hunter, head of markets at interactive investor: Geopolitical tensions remain on simmer, with some discussion between the US and Russia offering hope amid the build up of Russian troops along the Ukrainian border. Given the fragility of sentiment already in evidence in most global markets at present, any developments are likely to cause a sharp reaction across markets as investors digest the implications of the latest moves. Despite the general investment gloom, the FTSE 100 has continued to carry the torch for progress. The index has begun to emerge as something of a haven asset in the first few weeks of the year, after being shunned by international investors for some considerable time as greater growth prospects were seen elsewhere. The UK is not immune from the volatility being seen elsewhere and growth is currently pedestrian. So far this year, the UK’s FTSE 100 index is up around 1.6%, while Germany’s DAX is down 3.5% and the US S&amp;P 500 has tumbled by 9%. European stock markets have dropped at the start of trading, despite the better-than-expected growth data this morning. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index has slipped by 0.4%, as anxiety over looming US interest rate rises continue to weigh on markets. The UK’s FTSE 100 has dropped by 45 points, or 0.6%, with financials, real estate firms, and consumer non-cyclicals lower. The CAC index of France’s leading companies is holding up slightly better, down 0.13%. Luxury goods maker LVMH has jumped 3.8% in Paris, after yesterday reporting fresh sales and profit records last year driven by booming demand in the US and China. Spain’s economy has also beaten expectations. Spanish GDP grew by 2% in the last quarter of 2021, rather better than the 1.4% growth which was expected. That follows a 2.6% expansion in Q3, as Spain continued to recover from the pandemic in the face of supply chain problems and surging energy prices. Reuters adds: Over the course of 2021, output expanded by 5% after a historic 10.8% slump the previous year, the National Statistics Institute (INE) data showed, marking the fastest growth since 2000 but undershooting the government’s 6.5% target. Claus Vistesen, macroeconomist for Pantheon Macroeconomics, tweets: Over to Sweden.... and its economy has grown strongly in the last three months of 2021. Swedish GDP grew by 0.3% in December, and by 1.4% during the fourth quarter, faster than expected. That left the economy 7% higher in December than in the same month a year ago. For the fourth quarter as a whole, GDP grew by 6.2% compared with the same quarter a year ago. Melker Loberg, economist at Statistics Sweden, says: “The year ended with continued growth in December following a quarter with steady development throughout the period.” Analysts in a Reuters poll had forecast growth of 1.0% and 5.4% respectively. The data doesn’t capture the full impact of Omicron, though, which hit Europe at the end of last year. Earlier this week Sweden’s health minister, Lena Hallengren, extended pandemic curbs by another two weeks because of “an extremely high level of spread”, meaning bars and restaurants must continue to close at 11pm. French finance minister Bruno Le Maire has hailed the growth figures. Le Maire told France 2 television (via Reuters): The French economy has rebounded spectacularly and that’s erased the economic crisis. “There are still some sectors that are still having trouble, like tourism and hotels, but most are recovering very strongly and that’s creating jobs.” Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. France has posted its strongest growth in over 50 years, as the economy recovered from the economic shock of the pandemic. French GDP expanded by 7% last year, data just released shows - the strongest annual expansion since 1969, as the economy showed resilience in the face of supply chain disruption. It follows an 8% contraction in 2020 as lockdowns and restrictions to fight Covid-19 drove the economy into deep recession. The strongest boom in a generation is a boost to Emmanuel Macron’s economic credentials, ahead of April’s presidential election in which he is widely expected to run for a second term. France’s economy grew by 0.7% in the last quarter, faster than expected, but slower than the 3.1% growth in July-September as the latest wave of infections hit Europe last autumn. Consumers helped the recovery, with household spending rising by 0.4% in the quarter following the relaxation of restrictions earlier in 2021. Business investment, or gross fixed capital formation (GFCF), expanded by 0.5%, mainly lifted by spending on IT services Statistics body INSEE says France’s economy has now expanded ‘significantly’ past its pre-crisis levels, having returned to its pre-pandemic level of gross domestic product in Q3. After returning to its pre-crisis level in the previous quarter (+0.2% compared to Q4 2019), GDP exceeded it significantly in Q4 (+0.9% compared to Q4 2019). Growth data from Spain and Germany are also due this morning, showing how some of Europe’s largest countries fared in Q4. We already know the US finished last year strongly. Data yesterday showed America’s economy expanded by 1.7% during the last quarter (or 6.9% annualised). US GDP expanded by 5.7% during 2021 -- the best growth annual growth since 1984, lifted by government and central bank stimulus and vaccine rollouts. The agenda 6.30am GMT: French Q4 GDP report 7am GMT: Swedish Q4 GDP report 8am GMT: Spain’s Q4 GDP report 9am GMT: Germany’s Q4 GDP report 10am GMT: Eurozone consumer and economic sentiment report 1.30pm GMT: US PCE index of personal consumption price rises 3pm GMT: University of Michigan’s index of US consumer confidenceHere’s a roundup of what has happened in UK politics today: Scotland Yard has said it has asked for references to matters it is now investigating to be removed from Sue Gray’s report on parties held in breach of lockdown restrictions at Downing Street. “For the events the Met is investigating, we asked for minimal reference to be made in the Cabinet Office report,” the Metropolitan police said in a statement on Friday morning. Key parts of the long-awaited report into allegations of parties in No 10 that broke Covid rules could be pared back, after Scotland Yard’s statement. Theresa May has broken her silence on partygate and said she is “angry” at the allegations of parties held in Downing Street during lockdowns. The former prime minister, who has so far not publicly commented on the saga engulfing No 10, told constituents that “nobody is above the law”, in a letter seen by her local newspaper. Downing Street said it was not the case that No 10 had asked Gray’s team to go back to the Metropolitan police to ensure her report did not interfere with police investigations. A spokesperson for Boris Johnson said: “We haven’t been privy to the details of that investigation or any of its content.” Senior lawyers were today split over whether the Met was justified in asking Gray to only make minimal references to events under investigation. Nazir Afzal, the former chief prosecutor, wrote: “This is absolute nonsense from the Met police.” The Liberal Democrats have warned against giving the appearance of an “establishment stitch-up” between Scotland Yard and the Gray inquiry as the report publication plan was thrown into disarray. The Treasury is becoming increasingly alarmed that Boris Johnson may be preparing to scrap the national insurance rise in a desperate attempt to placate rightwing Tory MPs, as he fights to save his job. The Guardian understands Rishi Sunak has privately stressed to MPs that the tax rise must go ahead as planned. The veteran Tory MP Sir Roger Gale has accused Boris Johnson of being a “lame duck” prime minister as Downing Street is investigated by police over allegations of lockdown-breaking parties in No 10. Gale told BBC Radio 4’s The World at One programme that the cost of living crisis and Russian aggression towards Ukraine required the “full and undivided attention” of the UK prime minister. The Conservative MP Peter Bone said he could not follow the logic of the Commons leader, Jacob Rees-Mogg, who in comments made to BBC Newsnight earlier this week insisted Britain’s parliament has moved to “an essentially presidential system”. A senior official at the Foreign Office has apologised for misleading MPs over whether Boris Johnson’s views had been sought over the evacuation of animals from Kabul during the chaotic retreat from Afghanistan last August. A proposal to give British Sign Language (BSL) legal recognition and enhance its use in public services has been backed in the Commons. The measures are included in a private member’s bill which has the backing of the Strictly Come Dancing champion and EastEnders actor Rose Ayling-Ellis. Thanks so much for joining me today and for all the comments, emails and tweets. We are closing this liveblog now. You can still follow our international coronavirus liveblog here: Society Syndrome, a transparency thinktank, has put in a complaint to the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) relating to the apparent delay in Sue Gray being able to release her report on Downing Street parties. The complaint is as follows: We have been extremely concerned that the Metropolitan Police have seemingly delayed publication of Sue Gray’s important report into breaches of lockdown in and around Downing Street, by requesting that any potential criminal events be excluded. As a report from a senior civil servant, it should contribute to any evidence required by the police, not adversely affect enquiries in any way. Nazir Afzal, a former chief Crown prosecutor for the North West, said: “This is absolute nonsense from the Met Police. A purely factual report by Sue Gray cannot possibly prejudice a police investigation. They just have to follow the evidence, of which the report will be a part.” Whilst the Met is very welcome to conduct any investigation, the public needs to have swift information - as will be provided by an un-redacted report from Ms Gray - in order to form an opinion in a democracy - as do Members of Parliament. There is no reasonable likelihood of any trial by jury arising from the police investigation, it could either lead to fixed penalty fines or a magistrates hearing, there is therefore no rational reason for the report not to be published in full as soon as it has been completed. If publication is being obstructed by the Metropolitan Police, we wish the IOPC to investigate and recommend appropriate action to enable the report to be published. The IOPC has been contacted by The Guardian for comment. Leader of the House Jacob Rees-Mogg said the Chancellor faced a “difficult choice” with the decision to raise National Insurance. Rees-Mogg, who was previously reported to have urged Rishi Sunak to ditch the increase, told the BBC’s Political Thinking podcast: It is a difficult choice for the Chancellor, but we do need to raise funds to pay for the extra nine million scans to get rid of the backlog in the NHS and all those sorts of things. I think governments have to have a set purpose and a clear course, and we can’t be buffeted by every wind. So, I think it is important to recognise the need to raise the money that we are determined to spend. Earlier this month, The Daily Telegraph reported that Mr Rees-Mogg had told Sunak at a Cabinet meeting that the increase must be scrapped to stem the rising cost-of-living crisis engulfing the government. Rees-Mogg did not deny calling for the increase to be scrapped when appearing in the Commons for business questions on January 6. A proposal to give British Sign Language (BSL) legal recognition and enhance its use in public services has been backed in the commons. The measures are included in a private member’s bill which has the backing of Strictly Come Dancing champion and EastEnders actress Rose Ayling-Ellis, PA News reports. The British Sign Language Bill was given an unopposed second reading in the commons after securing government support. Although BSL was recognised as a language in its own right by the Government in 2003, it has no legal protection. Labour MP Rosie Cooper, who put forward the bill, said making BSL a legally-recognised language will send a clear message to every deaf person that “their language is equal and should be treated as equal”. In an emotional speech in the commons, Cooper recalled her own experiences of growing up as the hearing child of deaf parents. The MP for West Lancashire said: Growing up, I saw first-hand the difficulties deaf people face every day. The huge challenges my parents had to overcome, to be heard, to be listened to. More importantly, to be understood. Now, I’m told I booked my first family holiday when I was four years old. I don’t remember but I did. Explaining the objectives of her bill, Cooper said: I want to finally recognise BSL in statute, not just a gesture, but a law which requires positive action from the government, with real progress putting deaf people on an equal footing with those of us who hear. For every deaf person like my parents, who’ve been ignored, misunderstood or even treated as unintelligent for simply relying on BSL, this recognition will be clear and will be a message that their language is equal and should be treated as equal. The MP thanked Strictly winner Ayling-Ellis, saying: Clearly, much of the awareness is due to Rose Ayling-Ellis in Strictly, she proved what my dad always says ‘deaf people can do anything, even the impossible’, such as winning Strictly when you can’t hear the music. That 10-second glimpse she gave the hearing world into deafness when the music stopped was truly momentous. People became aware and interested in BSL like never before. I know we have much support across the House, so let me say this Bill isn’t about politics. After more than 230 years, this Bill is about doing the right thing.” Using BSL at the same time, Cooper said: “So, in closing, I’d like to say to the minister, thank you for supporting this Bill. Thank you.” Conservative former cabinet minister Robert Buckland thanked Labour MP Ms Cooper “from the bottom of my heart” for bringing the suggested change forward. He said: Let’s not forget the thousands of people with learning difficulties, who use BSL, including members of my family. On her behalf, may I thank her? Thank you from the bottom of my heart. Speaking in support of the Bill before its second reading, Ayling-Ellis told The Big Issue: If it becomes an official language, which we’ve been fighting for all these years, it will be so emotional for us. Because of the massive interest in BSL recently, a lot of people don’t realise how much of a fight the deaf community have had. The bill will now now undergo further parliamentary scrutiny at a later date. A senior official at the Foreign Office has apologised for misleading MPs over whether Boris Johnson’s views had been sought over the evacuation of animals from Kabul during the chaotic retreat from Afghanistan last August. Sir Philip Barton, the Foreign Office’s permanent undersecretary, had told the foreign affairs committee that Nigel Casey, the prime minister’s special representative for Afghanistan, had not received any correspondence referring to an intervention by Boris Johnson in the evacuation of animals from the Nowzad charity. But emails revealed by Newsnight, showed Casey did “seek clear guidance for us from No 10 asap on what they would like us to do” in the case. Barton has now written to the committee’s chairman, the Tory MP Tom Tugendhat, to apologise for giving “inadvertently inaccurate answers”. He said that “on the day the email was sent, Nigel was almost entirely focused, in his role as Gold in our crisis response, on the terrorist threat to the evacuation”. Read more here: “The Metropolitan police is usurping its position by seeking to interfere in the affairs of state,” the Conservative MP Sir Christopher Chope has said. Raising a point of order in the Commons, the MP for Christchurch asked the deputy speaker if she had “been able to express your views about the issues which are currently confronting the government which relate directly to the separation of powers.” I thought that it was this house which held the government to account for its policies, and not the Metropolitan Police. He added: There is no reason for the Metropolitan police to be able to require Sue Gray not to issue her report in an unamended way for the benefit of the Prime Minister who ordered that report, and for this House, which is eager to see that report. It seems that the Metropolitan police is usurping its position by seeking to interfere in the affairs of state without there being any criminal offences or any grounds for them carrying out such interference. Deputy Commons Speaker Dame Rosie Winterton said: “It is not a matter for the chair.” The Conservative MP Peter Bone said he could not follow the logic of commons leader Jacob Rees-Mogg, who in comments made to BBC Newsnight earlier this week insisted Britain’s parliament has moved to “an essentially presidential system” Opening the second reading debate of his business of the house commission bill, which would regulate the timetabling of business in the house of commons, the MP for Wellingborough said: Did the leader of the house suggest earlier on this week that we have got a presidential system? That there might have to be a general election if they change the prime minister? We are not a presidential system and, by the way, I do happen to know if the president is removed, there is always someone to replace him. There is never an election. I didn’t follow that logic. Making an intervention during Bone’s speech, Conservative MP Sir Christopher Chope argued the Metropolitan police stance, that the report by senior civil servant Sue Gray into possible No 10 lockdown breaches should omit details that “could avoid any prejudice”, was a “specious justification”. He said: We have got the spectacle today of the Metropolitan police seeking to interfere with the content of Sue Gray’s report on the specious justification that it wishes to prevent prejudice to a criminal investigation. Yet the only law on the statute book in relation to prejudicing a criminal investigation is relating to proceeds of crime legislation, which is certainly not what we are talking about at the moment. A former director of public prosecutions has suggested the Metropolitan police stance, that the report by senior civil servant Sue Gray into possible No 10 lockdown breaches should omit details that “could avoid any prejudice”, was “disproportionate”. Lord Macdonald told BBC Radio 4’s World at One programme: “The risk of the police intervention this morning is that this leaves things hanging in the air for weeks and months, and that seems obviously not to be in the public interest. If we’re talking about fixed penalty notices - like parking tickets, essentially - if we’re talking about that kind of resolution, then to take the rather grave step to delay a report that is going to shed public light on the subject matter of what may be a major public scandal, I think that is undesirable and I think it may be a misjudgment. But only police know what it is that is really at play here. It is really to say that if we are simply talking about lockdown breaches and fixed penalty notices, this move by the police this morning seems to be disproportionate. The crossbench peer said that what was not known was whether Gray had uncovered “slightly more complex behaviour that the police believes needs more sense of investigation”, offering the example of “the co-ordinated deletion of emails or text messages” that had possibly “raised the stakes and brought forward the consideration of more serious offending into play”. Veteran Tory MP Sir Roger Gale has accused Boris Johnson of being a “lame duck” prime minister as Downing Street is investigated by police over allegations of lockdown-breaking parties in No 10. Gale told BBC Radio 4’s The World at One programme that the cost of living crisis and Russian aggression towards Ukraine require “full and undivided attention” of the UK prime minister. At the moment what we’ve got, not entirely now of his own making, is a lame duck prime minister that is soldiering on while all this indecision is surrounding him and frankly if I was Vladimir Putin I would be laughing all the way to the Lubyanka. I don’t think his position is sustainable, under most circumstances a prime minister who has misled the House from the despatch box would have resigned. He could soldier on but I don’t think it’s in the interest of the United Kingdom, and that’s what really matters.” My colleague Matthew Weaver has been looking at Theresa May’s first intervention in the row over Downing Street parties, saying she was angry to hear about them. You can read his report here: Speaking during a visit to Glasgow, Keir Starmer said he wants a general election as soon as possible and he does not care who leads the Conservatives into it. Conservative ministers including Jacob Rees-Mogg have argued that if the Tories oust Boris Johnson over the partygate scandal, the new leader should call a general election. Asked whether any new prime minister should seek a mandate from the country, Starmer said he is keen for an election even if Johnson remains in charge. PA Media reports he told broadcasters: I don’t mind who leads the Conservative party or who is the prime minister, we’ll go up against them and make the powerful case against them. And the sooner they call a general election the better, as far as I’m concerned. Commons Leader Rees-Mogg said on Tuesday that the modern precedent is for a new incumbent in Downing Street to go to the polls to seek a fresh mandate. Labour leader Keir Starmer reiterates his call for Boris Johnson to resign. Here’s Nicola Sturgeon’s take on the latest Gray report developments. Scotland’s first minister tweeted: Senior lawyers were today split over whether the Met was justified in asking Sue Gray to only make minimal references to events under investigation. Nazir Afzal, the former chief prosecutor, who has been critical of the police for not investigating parties in Downing Street, wrote: This is absolute nonsense from the Met police. A purely factual report by Sue Gray cannot possibly prejudice a police investigation. They just have to follow the evidence, of which the report will be a part. Andrew Keogh, the barrister who runs the criminal law resource CrimeLine, wrote that there is a possibility that proceedings are already active – so an arrest, warrant, or proceedings issues could be imminent – and the Met’s request “seems sensible”. He wrote: The report may well contain detail that could potentially advantage a suspect. One of the great advantages that police enjoy is control of disclosure during a police investigation. I can see why they would not wish to lose that. The Secret Barrister, the bestselling author and criminal barrister, wrote that the Met had “handled his whole affair catastrophically” but added: “I can see why restricting information affords a tactical advantage in the investigation.” He said: Whatever the reason, it is an unedifying look for the Met to refuse to investigate despite clear evidence of criminality, then to subcontract the function to a civil servant, and then to frantically try to stem the flow of information when they change their minds. Matthew Scott, the criminal barrister and legal blogger, has warned that the criminal inquiry announced by the Met would be used as “the fig leaf” behind which Boris Johnson would be able to hide. But he wrote today that the statement from the Met was about protecting the police evidence-gathering operation. He said: Police should never want witnesses to be told what other witnesses have said, or certainly not in detail. A long-awaited report on the extent of Covid rule-breaking at parties in Downing Street and across government was expected to be published this week. Boris Johnson’s premiership could hang on its findings; Tory MPs have said they want to see what evidence of wrongdoing is dug up by Sue Gray – a senior civil servant known as a ruthless Whitehall enforcer – before deciding whether to call for him to quit. But despite speculation reaching fever pitch on Tuesday that the report would be released imminently, its contents remain shrouded in mystery. Read the answers to your questions about the report here: The Conservative MP Roger Gale has made his feelings clear about the Met police asking for “minimal references” in the Gray report to matters under police investigation. No 10 said it could not comment on whether or not there was cake at a birthday celebration for the prime minister until investigations into the partygate saga had concluded. The Tory MP Conor Burns previously said the prime minister had been “ambushed with a cake” at a surprise birthday bash in the Cabinet room on 19 June 2020 when social events indoors were banned. But Burns later told the Telegraph’s political podcast: I’m told under some authority, indeed from him, that there actually wasn’t a cake. However an article from the Times from 20 June 2020, has since resurfaced where it was reported the group “tucked into a union jack cake” at the gathering. A spokesperson for Boris Johnson said: So you will know what we said earlier this week on the matter, that a small number of staff briefly came into the cabinet room on the PM’s birthday. Beyond that I can’t comment further ahead of any conclusion of the investigation. He said: As you’re aware there’s an independent investigation ongoing by Sue Gray in the Cabinet Office. I can only point you back to what we said earlier this week. Downing Street said it was not the case that No 10 had asked Sue Gray’s team to go back to the Metropolitan Police to ensure her report did not interfere with police investigations. A spokesman for Boris Johnson said: No, you’ll be aware that the terms of reference clearly set out that the Cabinet Office would keep in contact with the police and again it’s an independent investigation. we haven’t been privy to the details of that investigation or any of its content. So that would be a matter for the investigations team and the Met. Asked if No 10 had any conversations with the Met about the Gray report and what could be published, the spokesman said: Not that I’m aware of, no. Asked if it was correct that the announcement from the Met - that they asked for the Gray report to make minimal reference to alleged events they are investigating - had no involvement from No 10, the spokesman said: I believe that’s correct. Downing Street insisted the rise in national insurance contributions in April would still go ahead. A spokesman for Boris Johnson denied the prime minister was getting “wobbly” about the increase. He said: The prime minister and chancellor are fully committed to introducing the health and social care levy in April. We’ve spoken before about why we are doing that, in order to give the NHS the funds it needs to tackle the backlog that has built up, as well as tackling the long-term issue of social care. So as I say, we are committed to introducing that in April. The spokesman said: I would point back to the fact that this is something that we’ve legislated for to come in April, and again, we’ve been clear with the rationale for it. Asked if he could guarantee no U-turns on the policy, he added: “As I say, we are introducing it in April.” The spokesman said ultimately the public would support the aims of the national insurance rise, PA news reports. He said: Of course we understand that people may not want to pay more in tax. But we’ve set out the rationale for this and I think it’s clear that one of the public’s number one priorities is to support the NHS and to help the NHS. Asked if the rise was therefore coming in “no ifs, no buts”, the spokesman said: “Yeah.” He added: I think the chancellor set out at the time when we announced this policy why it is the right and best way to raise this money. Again, the prime minister and the chancellor both said at that point, obviously, they would like to lower taxes in the future also, but it is important that we do what we need to do now to tackle the backlog that’s grown in the NHS. Key parts of a long-awaited report into allegations of parties in No 10 that broke Covid rules could be pared back, after Scotland Yard revealed it had asked for references to matters it is now investigating to be removed from Sue Gray’s report. After days of anticipation that the findings could imminently be made public, government sources admitted the prospect of a “meaningful” report that laid bare the extent of social gatherings during lockdown being published soon had shrunk. The Metropolitan police announced on Tuesday it was launching its own investigation, prompting wrangling with the Cabinet Office about what needed to be censored in the findings handed to No 10 to avoid prejudicing officers’ inquiries. Scotland Yard initially denied holding up Gray’s report, but in a statement on Friday, it admitted that for events it was looking into, “we asked for minimal reference to be made in the Cabinet Office report”. The Met said it “did not ask for any limitations on other events in the report, or for the report to be delayed, but we have had ongoing contact with the Cabinet Office, including on the content of the report, to avoid any prejudice to our investigation”. The admission led the Liberal Democrats to warn it would be “profoundly damaging” for there to be a hint of “establishment stitch-up” between the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, and the government. Read more from my colleagues Ben Quinn and Aubrey Allegretti: Government minister Chris Philp said he was “completely confident” that the Whitehall and police investigations into Downing Street parties would provide “all of the information” MPs and the public need about the allegations. Speaking to BBC News following the development that the Metropolitan Police have asked senior civil servant Sue Gray to make “minimal reference” to events they are investigating in her report, the technology minister said: Clearly, the government can’t get involved in interfering in any way with the way Sue Gray conducts her report or the way the Metropolitan Police conduct their investigation. They are completely independent and completely separate from government, which is as it should be. I think what is clear is that, between Sue Gray’s report and the police investigation, everything will be fully covered and that will give Parliament, and indeed the public, all of the information they need about these incidents. Asked how confident he was that the published Gray findings would give Conservative MPs “closure” following the party claims, Philp added: I’m completely confident that between the Sue Gray and the police investigation everything will be covered. It is important that we move on and draw a line under this because there are very important things the government is working on. Keir Starmer said the conservatives have “disdain” for Scotland and that the longer Boris Johnson is prime minister “the more danger there is to the union”. Speaking on a visit to Glasgow, the Labour leader said: It goes to a deeper point, I think, which is the demonstration that you can’t rely on the Conservatives to hold together the Union, only the Labour Party can support and hold together the Union. I think the longer Boris Johnson is in office, the more danger there is to the Union. Keir Starmer said the government had been “paralysed” by the Sue Gray investigation and the subsequent police inquiry into partygate. The Labour leader told broadcasters he wanted to “see Sue Gray’s report in full and the investigation finished as quickly as possible, because we’re in this situation where the whole of government is paralysed because the police are looking at what the Prime Minister was getting up to in Downing Street”. Starmer added: We’ve got a criminal investigation into the behaviour of the prime minister and what went on in Downing Street. There are bound to be process issues along the way, but this is caused by one thing, and that’s the behaviour of the prime minister. Asked whether, with his legal background, he saw any issues of prejudice, Starmer said: Any issues of prejudice have got to be worked through but this whole mess, this whole of paralysing of politics, is being caused by the Prime Minister and his wrongdoing. Theresa May’s reported comments mark her first intervention over the partygate scandal. The former prime minister, who has so far not publicly commented on the saga engulfing No 10, told constituents that “nobody is above the law”, in a letter seen by her local newspaper. The Maidenhead Advertiser reported that May wrote: I have said previously that it is vital that those who set the rules, follow the rules. Nobody is above the law. This is important for ensuring the necessary degree of trust between the public and government. Like so many, I was angry to hear stories of those in Number 10, who are responsible for setting the coronavirus rules, not properly following the rules. The letter – sent before the Metropolitan Police launched an inquiry into the alleged parties – referred to senior official Sue Gray’s investigation, which has now been delayed due to the criminal probe. May said that “if there is evidence of deliberate or premeditated wrongdoing, I expect full accountability to follow”. She added: All those working at the heart of government should conduct themselves with the highest of standards which befits the work they do, and this applies as much to those working in Number 10 as to other parts of government. May has been a critic of Boris Johnson’s policies in the Commons. Johnson’s resignation from May’s Cabinet was seen as one of the blows to her authority that led to her leaving No 10 in 2019. Theresa May has broken her silence on partygate and said she is “angry” at the allegations of parties held in Downing Street during lockdowns. If wrongdoing is found, she expects full accountability from those responsible, she told the Maidenhead Advertiser, her local paper. She added: “Nobody is above the law.” Read the full article here and here is an excerpt: The Liberal Democrats have warned against giving the appearance of an “establishment stitch-up” between Scotland Yard and the Sue Gray inquiry as the report publication plan was thrown into disarray. The party’s home affairs spokesman Alistair Carmichael said: So first the police were waiting for Sue Gray, now Sue Gray has to wait for the police? Any appearance of an establishment stitch-up between the Met Commissioner and the Government is profoundly damaging. Police officers need the trust and confidence of the public to do their jobs and keep our communities safe. The Sue Gray report must be published in full, including all photos, text messages and other evidence. If it is redacted now, a full, unredacted version must be published as soon as the police investigation is complete. SNP Westminster Leader Ian Blackford MP said: The Sue Gray report must be published in full and undoctored without further delay. This UK government farce has gone on long enough. People are understandably concerned that this increasingly looks like a cover up. It is a fact that Boris Johnson broke the rules, lied about it, and misled parliament. This is an extremely serious resignation matter - and he must be held to account. The prime minister cannot be allowed to wriggle off the hook by using the Metropolitan Police investigation as an excuse to further delay or doctor the report. This cannot be another Whitewall whitewash. There must be maximum transparency. Any attempt to cover this up or delay the inevitable would be completely unacceptable - and would erode any last remnants of public trust in the Westminster government. Shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves has said there is a question of integrity surrounding the leadership of prime minster Boris Johnson. Speaking as the nation awaits Sue Gray’s report, the Labour MP told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: I think there is a question of integrity, honesty and decency. You have got the prime minister on the one hand, who is in this sort of lies and scandal and parties, and then you have got Keir Starmer on the other hand, who is a man of integrity and honesty, who you can put your trust in. Reeves said “the Sue Gray report needs to be published in full as the prime minister has said it will be”, but that there should be a focus on tackling major issues facing the country. What really frustrates me (is) we have these massive challenges as a country - the cost-of-living crisis, how to properly fund our National Health Service, how to get to net zero - all these big challenges, and where is the government? Labour has set out its plans, the government has no plans. It is incredibly frustrating and letting down the country. Mike Bird of the Economist has pointed out that Boris Johnson’s birthday party was reported at the time by the Times. Contrary to denials of the presence of a cake, the report says Johnson and those attending ate slices of a union jack cake. The report also says Rishi Sunak was at the gathering. It recently emerged that Sunak had “wandered into” the event. What details are contained in Sue Gray’s report is for the senior civil servant and the police to “work out between them”, a government minister has said. It came after Scotland Yard asked for the Whitehall inquiry into allegations of lockdown-breaking parties in Downing Street to make only “minimal reference” to the events being investigated by police. Technology minister Chris Philp, asked on ITV’s Good Morning Britain programme about the development, said: I saw that report just a few minutes ago. The way that the Sue Gray report gets put together is something that is a matter entirely for Sue Gray. It is up to her and the police how to handle that. Clearly, between Sue Gray and the police, this will get fully investigated – as it should. But the important thing to say is that the government have no influence and no involvement in how Sue Gray and the police conduct their respective reports and investigations, which is right - it is right they are fully independent. So, between the two of them, they will cover all of the incidents that need investigating so the public and parliament have a full and proper account. But that is up to Sue Gray and the police to work that out between them - it is not something the government should or would interfere with. No 10 has given no indication that it has received the Sue Gray report into possible rule-breaking parties in Downing Street, Chris Philp said. The technology minister, asked on Sky News whether the civil servant’s inquiry findings have been handed in, said: I spoke to someone in Downing Street about half an hour ago, and they certainly didn’t indicate that it had been received. So, I don’t know a lot more than you do but I’ve certainly got no information as of right now that it has been received. Here’s more on the national insurance rise from my colleagues Heather Stewart, Jessica Elgot and Denis Campbell: The Treasury is becoming increasingly alarmed that Boris Johnson may be preparing to scrap the national insurance rise in a desperate attempt to placate rightwing Tory MPs as he fights to save his job. The Guardian understands Rishi Sunak has privately stressed to MPs that the tax rise must go ahead as planned – with one frontbencher who has met him in recent days speculating the chancellor’s position could become untenable if Johnson seeks to overrule him. Treasury aides claim the embattled prime minister has not yet raised the prospect of cancelling or delaying the £12bn tax rise, with Johnson saying “there’s been no discussion at any level”. Yet speaking in Wales on Thursday, the prime minister again refused to commit to pressing ahead with the 1.25 percentage point rise in national insurance contributions (NICs), which will be badged a “health and social care levy”. Johnson said it was “absolutely vital” to find the money, saying: “We have to fund the Covid backlogs, we have to fix social care. Every penny will go to that end.” But when asked to confirm explicitly that the increase would go ahead as planned, he declined to do so. One person with knowledge of the thinking in No 10 said there were no firm plans yet to change course on NICs – but predicted that Johnson would do so if he faced a vote of no confidence. Read more here: The proposed increase in National Insurance is “the wrong tax at the wrong time”, shadow chancellor Rachel Reeves has said. Asked whether credibility means you have to raise tax if you want to spend, she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: I think you have to explain where every pound is going to come from, and that is why I think it is right to ask those who can pay a bit more and to ask those with the broadest shoulders to make the contribution. This is the wrong tax at the wrong time. It is a tax on ordinary working people and on jobs. There are people who could afford to pay a bit more tax. I think that is the right approach. The national insurance hike is not popular with all Tories. One of them has spoken out this morning against the rise this Spring and said the government should look at different ways to support struggling families. Robert Halfon told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: We are going to have a cost-of-living crisis next year. It is not just going to suddenly magic away. People are struggling at the moment because of everything that has happened ... with Covid, because of energy bills. If we borrow, we are just deferring taxation. What I think the government should do is look at it again and look at how to raise that £12bn, and whether or not it is possible to have windfall taxes on businesses, possibly to increase capital gains tax, to raise the funds that are needed, but we need a cost-of-living package in general. I would like to see the £4bn they have saved from cutting overseas aid... to use that to cut taxes for the lower paid as well, and also to do something on the green levies which we know amount to roughly 25% of our energy bills. If they introduced a green escalator going downwards because the international energy price is so high, it could make a huge significant difference to people’s energy bills as they go up by many hundreds of pounds from April onwards. Partygate isn’t the only topic of conversation this morning. The hike in national insurance is also on politician’s minds as constituents struggle with the rise in the cost of living. Technology minister Chris Philp said it was still “going ahead”, following reports the prime minister is “wobbling” over the planned April tax rise to boost health funding. He told Sky News: Yes, it is going ahead. It was approved by the whole Cabinet, it was passed by parliament with a significant majority, and the money is needed to fund the NHS, which I think is something that is a national priority. It is 36 billion over three years to fund the NHS and social care. We need to put that money in to make sure the NHS has the resources it needs to recover after the pandemic, and this is a proportionate way of finding that money. Boris Johnson has been told it is “time for the truth to be released” as he faced more calls to publish a long-awaited report into “partygate” in full and not “suppress crucial details”. Sources said on Thursday night that the senior civil servant’s findings had still not been sent to No 10, with government lawyers studying the document amid concerns that publishing some information could prejudice the new investigation. Gray is said to want to send it in a state that can then be published by Downing Street in full, without the need for any further redactions. Some Tories believe the report will not be released until early next week, given they think Gray will be mindful of criticism it is being sneaked out if publication came on Friday or the weekend, when most MPs will be back in their constituencies. Government insiders have rejected accusations they are responsible for the delay, and suggested instead it is because of the Metropolitan police’s discussions with the Cabinet Office. But Scotland Yard has not formally objected to full publication of the Gray report, sources said. Gray’s findings were sufficiently clear cut in their detailing of rule breaches to trigger a criminal investigation, according to the explanation about why police were acting, from the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick. Read more from my colleagues Aubrey Allegretti and Vikram Dodd here: Technology minister Chris Philp was on LBC this morning. He was asked why the Gray report hand-in had been delayed. He said: You will have to ask Sue Gray that, because the timing of the report is up to her. You will have seen, as I have seen, press speculation is it is because she’s discussing with lawyers and police exactly what can and can’t go in it. But the bottom line is, I don’t know because it is a report she’s compiling independently and I have no visibility of what may or may not be in it, or what her thought process is. Asked what he could offer in terms of a defence of the prime minister, Philp said he would not “speculate” on what happened in No 10 amid claims there were parties held at the top of Government during lockdown, PA news reports. He added: Like everybody else, I’m just going to wait until it is published, I’ll read it very carefully when it comes out and I’m not going to speculate... about what the report may or may not contain and what that may or may not mean. Let’s just wait until it comes out. Hopefully it will be soon because I think all of us want to be able to draw a line under this. Scotland Yard has said it has asked for references to matters it is now investigating to be removed from Sue Gray’s report into parties held in breach of lockdown restrictions at Downing Street. “For the events the Met is investigating, we asked for minimal reference to be made in the Cabinet Office report,” the Metropolitan police said in a statement on Friday morning. “The Met did not ask for any limitations on other events in the report, or for the report to be delayed, but we have had ongoing contact with the Cabinet Office, including on the content of the report, to avoid any prejudice to our investigation.” The force issued the statement in response to questions from journalists about any role it had played in seeking to delay the report. Boris Johnson has been told it is “time for the truth to be released” as he faced more calls to publish the long-awaited report into “partygate” in full and not “suppress crucial details”. Officials in the Cabinet Office are still wrangling over the final version of Sue Gray’s findings on a string of alleged Covid rule-breaking parties in Downing Street and other parts of government. Despite anticipation reaching fever pitch earlier this week that the report on which the prime minister’s premiership could hang was close to completion, its publication was delayed when Scotland Yard opened its own investigation. Read the full story from my colleague Ben Quinn here: My name is Nicola Slawson and I’ll be taking you through today’s events. Do get in touch with any questions or if you think I’m missing anything. My email is nicola.slawson@theguardian.com or you can find me on Twitter: @Nicola_Slawson. You can also follow our international coronavirus blog here:Channel 4 will have to explain why it failed to provide subtitles to viewers for several weeks last year, after key parts of its output were knocked off air in September following a fire alarm that inadvertently destroyed its computer equipment. The media regulator Ofcom has launched an investigation into the incident at the London offices of the media company Red Bee, which provides many leading broadcasters with the equipment that gets television broadcasts on air. The activation of a fire suppression system inadvertently destroyed many of the hard drives in the servers housed in the building and required two months of round-the-clock work to rebuild Channel 4’s systems. Although other broadcasters also use Red Bee’s services, Channel 4 was particularly badly affected because its back-up broadcast system also failed. In addition to breaking the subtitling system, the incident knocked out many audio description and signing services, took some of Channel 4’s channels off air completely, and – in a move that infuriated fans of the programme – led to Channel 4 accidentally replacing the finale of Married at First Sight Australia with an old episode. Although Channel 4 still met its statutory requirement to have 90% of programming on all services with subtitles, Ofcom said it would investigate why the broadcaster was unable to provide service used “by millions, including deaf, hard-of-hearing, blind and partially sighted people, to watch and listen to television”. Subtitles are increasingly popular among viewers, not just for the hard of hearing but also for general audiences who find it easier to follow programmes with them on screen. Ofcom will also undertake a review of the transmission arrangements and backup facilities that all of the affected broadcasters had in place at the time of the outage.The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, is to travel to Russia in the next two weeks for talks with her Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, the Russian embassy in London has announced. The Foreign Office did not confirm the visit but it is likely to go ahead and will be the first of its kind for five years. Russia claims the visit was requested by the UK. Truss was already due to visit Kyiv next week where she will meet the Ukrainian prime minister, Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Britain has been among the Nato countries advocating tough measures to deter a Russian invasion of Ukraine, and has provided 2,000 anti-tank weapons to Kyiv. Last June the Royal Navy’s HMS Defender sailed close to Crimea to underline the UK government’s view that the peninsula remains Ukrainian territory. The UK has also provided £1.8bn in loans to help Ukraine strengthen its navy, actions that British diplomats say have led to the closest relations ever between the two countries. Ukraine is eager to expand that alliance into a trilateral alliance by including Poland, bringing together the three powers most hostile to Russia in Europe. Over the weekend Truss, the formal political head of the intelligence services, accused Russia of being behind a plot to topple the Ukrainian president and replace him with a Russian puppet leader. She has repeatedly said Russia will be making a massive strategic mistake if it invades Ukraine and will face severe consequences. Russia, believing the UK is in decline post-Brexit, accused her of reading too many spy novels. The last British foreign secretary to travel to Moscow was Boris Johnson, in December 2017. Theresa May met Vladimir Putin on the margins of the G20 in 2019, the first time the two sides had met at that level since the poisoning of a UK double agent by Russia led to a full-scale diplomatic collapse. One purpose of the Truss meeting will be to try to spell out to Russia that any economic sanctions imposed in the event of an invasion of Ukraine will affect not just the Russian economy but the personal wealth of some of Putin’s closest personal allies. Much of that money is invested in the London property market. There has been pressure from the Biden administration to force the UK to take a tougher stance about Russian oligarchs. A report on the UK’s Russia strategy published by Chatham House on Friday echoed the US state department’s concerns that the UK has not done enough to show it will rein in some of the Russian oligarchs that invest in UK property. The Chatham House report says: “The City of London’s role as a global financial services hub gives the UK more leverage than many of Russia’s other commercial partners – if the government is prepared to tolerate the hit to specific (and politically well connected) sectors of the UK economy that would result from more stringent sanctions.” UK officials continue to insist they have strong anti-corruption legislation, but there is a head of steam developing in the US at what is regard as the Conservative party’s reluctance to challenge some of its prominent donors. The Foreign Office said Truss would continue to travel by chartered planes. She landed herself in hot water recently when it was revealed the taxpayer had been left with a £500,000 bill after she charted a private jet to fly to Australia for a three-day visit. The Foreign Office said it was a plane hired by the UK government, and if she travelled commercially she would in effect be out of action for 24 hours in each direction since she had to access top-secret information every day, which would not be possible on a normal commercial flight.My father, Tony Heath, who has died aged 96, was a journalist, local politician and campaigner for justice. Over more than 30 years he wrote for newspapers and journals including the Guardian, Independent, Observer, New Statesman, New Society and Private Eye. Writing for Tribune magazine in August 1973 as its education correspondent, he was the first person to use the term “Thatcherism”, signposting its shortcomings as a political philosophy. He wrote: “It will be argued that teachers are members of a profession which must not be influenced by political considerations. With the blight of Thatcherism spreading across the land that is a luxury that only the complacent can afford.” One of two sons of Jimmy Heath, a pit foreman at the Tredegar colliery, and Kathleen (nee Harding), Tony was born in Tredegar, south Wales, and went to the local school. He was called up for second world war service, and took part in the D-day landings. On 25 April 1945, he was serving with the 13th/18th Royal Hussars Armoured Corps on the outskirts of Bremen when the Sherman tank he was in took a direct hit from a German tank. Tony managed to bail out but saw his best mate, Eddie Moulding, trapped and burned to death. Tony’s hearing was permanently damaged and for the rest of his life he suffered nightmares about what he had witnessed. After the war Tony took part in the clearing-up process, including escorting trains from one sector in Berlin to another to exchange supplies. On his return to Britain he worked for PR companies in London. His last PR job was for the American-owned advertising agency Foote, Cone and Belding in Baker Street. His departure followed his decision to take a day’s leave and hand out leaflets at the FCB entrance calling for the withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam. In London he met Dorothea Smither (nee Hill), a widow with two sons, who was then working as a fashion model. They married in 1954 and settled in Reigate, Surrey. In the 1960s Tony was elected a member of Surrey county council for the Labour party. He gave vociferous support to staff from the Guildford School of Art who in 1968 were sacked by the council for having supported a student sit-in. In 1974 my parents upped sticks to Blaenau Ffestiniog, north Wales, where Tony resumed his career as a journalist. In the 1980s, reporting for the Guardian on the second homes bombing campaign and the Sons of Glendower nationalist movement, he was tipped off that a cache of arms from Ireland would be landed at Black Rock sands in Gwynedd in the small hours. As he hid in the dunes and waited for the boat, his watch was interrupted by armed Security Service personnel who wanted to know what he was doing there. Possibly alerted by their bright lights, the boat never arrived. My father never formally retired and his byline continued to appear in various publications when he was into his 80s. Dorothea died in 2012, and Tony spent the last nine years of his life in a residential home in Hay-on-Wye. Tony’s brother, Peter, predeceased him. He is survived by me.China’s ambassador to the US has said the two countries could face a “military conflict” over the future of Taiwan, in an unusually explicit reference to the prospect of war. “The Taiwan issue is the biggest tinderbox between China and the United States,” Qin Gang told the US public broadcaster National Public Radio (NPR), on Friday. “If the Taiwanese authorities, emboldened by the United States, keep going down the road for independence, it most likely will involve China and the United States, the two big countries, in the military conflict.” Tensions over the island’s place in the world continue to grow. Beijing considers Taiwan to be a breakaway province of China. In November the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, told Joe Biden that any support for Taiwanese independence from the US would be “like playing with fire” and that “those who play with fire will get burned”. Beijing has been ratcheting up its pressure on the democratically ruled island in recent years. In October Xi vowed to realise “reunification” with Taiwan by peaceful means. But on Sunday China’s air force flew 39 warplanes into Taiwan’s air defence identification zone – the largest daily number since October. The US and some of its allies have in the past few months advocated for Taiwan’s “meaningful participation in the UN system”, a move that angered China. The UK parliament’s foreign affairs committee reportedly plans to visit Taiwan next month. Qin blamed the current state of affairs on the Taiwanese administration. He accused it of “seek[ing] its independence agenda by borrowing the support and the encouragement of the United States”. He added: “And the United States is playing the Taiwan card to contain China.” Analysts say that although Qin’s warning to Washington is unusual, he also pointed out in the NPR interview that the bilateral ties constituted China’s “most important relationship”. “Such a confrontation would risk a permanent rupture in the bilateral relationship,” said Ali Wyne, a senior analyst on US-China relations at Eurasia Group in Washington. “While China often avows that its ‘great rejuvenation’ is predicated upon Taiwan’s reunification with the mainland, there are probably few other steps Beijing could take that would undermine its long-term strategic prospects as greatly as attacking Taipei.”Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has talked down the threat of an imminent Russian invasion and said the UK and US are wrong to pull out non-essential diplomatic staff from Kyiv, adding: “We don’t have a Titanic here.” Zelenskiy said on Friday he was acutely aware of the dangers posed by the 100,000 Russian troops gathered on Ukraine’s border. But he appeared to disagree with the Biden administration’s bleak assessment that a Russian attack next month was “distinctly possible”. In a briefing to foreign media organisations including the Guardian, Zelenskiy shrugged off claims his government was in denial, with an attitude that commentators on social media had compared to the Netflix drama Don’t Look Up. “We are looking up. We do understand what is happening. But we have been in the situation for eight years. We should not only be looking up but also at the ground,” he said. “The threat is constant.” He added: “We can’t say the war will happen tomorrow or by the end of February. Yes, it may happen, unfortunately. But you have to feel the pulse on a day-to-day basis.” Asked if Boris Johnson’s government had made a mistake in withdrawing some diplomats, Zelenskiy said: “Yes. In these circumstances everyone is essential.” He noted that the Greeks had kept open their consulate in the city of Mariupol, next to the frontline with Russian-backed separatists. “You can hear cannons firing. The Greeks didn’t pull anyone out. The captains should not leave the ship. I don’t think we have a Titanic here.” Zelenskiy said the recent buildup of Kremlin forces was “no more intense” than in spring 2021. “If you look at the satellite you will see the increase of troops. You can’t assess if it’s a threat, an attack or simple rotation,” he said, adding that some of the tents for Russian soldiers appeared to be empty. Moscow moved in additional troops before major diplomatic negotiations, he said. “It’s psychological. They want to make believe they are there. They are trying to build up psychological pressure.” Zelenskiy denied differences with the US administration, after a phone call on Thursday night with Joe Biden. “We don’t have any misunderstandings with President Biden. I just deeply understand what’s happening in my country, just as he does with the US,” he said. “Do we have tanks on the streets? No,” he said. Hyped media reports were causing panic in the financial sector, damaging the “purse” of Ukrainians, and depleting Ukraine’s gold reserves and currency, he said. Zelenskiy was speaking at his official residence in Kyiv, the Mariinski palace, a neo-classical building overlooking the River Dnipro and next to the Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine’s lower house of parliament. The US believes the threat of a Russian invasion of Ukraine next month remains real. The US ambassador in Moscow, John Sullivan, has said a Kremlin operation could be imminent, citing the extraordinary buildup of Russian troops at the border. The deployment, which includes joint military exercises with Belarus, was destabilising and threatening to Ukraine, Sullivan said. On Thursday the US national security council spokesperson Emily Horne quoted Biden as saying a February invasion was “distinctly possible”. Zelenskiy, however, has pushed back against the idea that a Russian attack is inevitable. Instead his government has told Ukrainians to keep calm, saying they should carry on as normal and “take it easy”, in the words of one minister. Zelenskiy has previously pointed out that Ukraine has been at war for nearly eight years, since Vladimir Putin annexed Crimea in 2014 and started a separatist conflict in the Donbas region in the east. Despite apparent differences, Zelenskiy has been keen to emphasise unity with the US, his country’s key international partner. He has disavowed an apparent briefing made to CNN that suggested Kyiv wanted Washington to dial down talk of imminent conflict. During a phone call on Thursday, Biden told Zelenskiy the White House was considering economic support to Ukraine, after $650m (£484m) in military assistance over the past year. Biden “reaffirmed the readiness of the United States along with its allies and partners to respond decisively if Russia further invades Ukraine”, a White House statement said. Zelenskiy said he had discussed with Biden international attempts to find a peaceful way out of the crisis. “Discussed recent diplomatic efforts on de-escalation and agreed on joint actions for the future,” Zelenskiy said on Twitter on Thursday evening. He thanked Biden for the ongoing military assistance in the form of weapons. Russia has denied it will invade but has said the US’s written response, delivered on Wednesday, did not meet its security demands. On Friday Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said Moscow did not want war but was prepared to take its own tough measures if necessary. Russia wants the US to veto Ukraine’s future membership of Nato, and for Nato to remove its troops from eastern Europe, including from Romania and Bulgaria. The US has rejected the demand, which in effect seeks to re-establish a cold war-style zone of Russian influence in former Warsaw Pact countries. Western experts and Ukrainian analysts believe the Kremlin has not yet assembled a sufficient force needed for a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. They believe a more likely scenario is a “hybrid” attack, featuring cyber and infrastructure shutdowns, with an intensification of military activity across the “line of contact” between the Ukrainian military and Russian-armed separatists. On Friday Ukraine’s defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, said 112,000 Russian servicemen were on the border, with the number increasing to about 130,000, including navy and aviation personnel. Reznikov said the deployment was no bigger than last April, when Russia dispatched 126,000 troops. The reaction from the international community was “disproportionate”, he told the Rada.It’s beginning to look a lot like a cover-up. Is that too cynical? Maybe we should just congratulate Boris Johnson on a wonderful piece of luck, a convenient turn of events just in the nick of time. Having seen nothing to investigate in the partygate affair until this week, the Metropolitan police swooped down at the very moment Sue Gray was ready to press print on her long-awaited report – one that threatened to terminate Johnson’s premiership – and stayed her hand. The Met told Gray she can say what she likes about parties in Downing Street, so long as she says nothing about parties in Downing Street. Or as it put it: “For the events the Met is investigating, we asked for minimal reference to be made in the Cabinet Office report.” It stresses that it “did not ask for any limitations on other events in the report”, which is a bit like saying: “On all the stuff that no one cares about, go ahead: knock yourself out.” Indeed, with this move, the Met have all but ensured that whatever remains of Gray’s report will, if ever published, be waved away by Johnson and his defenders: if Gray was allowed to publish it, they’ll say, it can’t be that serious. That is not where the bar should be set. The issue is not only whether Johnson was guilty of criminal violations of Covid regulations, but whether he broke a lockdown that he imposed on everyone else and whether he misled parliament. Those judgments cannot be outsourced to a police force, especially one led by a commissioner who has good reason to feel she only remains in her post thanks to the mercy of the prime minister. Those are decisions that should be made by politicians and voters, with access to all the facts. That prospect is receding. Gray now faces a choice: either publish a gutted version of her report, which Downing Street will falsely spin as having cleared the prime minister, or delay it until the police have completed their work. It’s all too plausible to imagine a Met statement, weeks or months from now, announcing that, having conducted its investigation, it has concluded that no further action need be taken. Team Johnson will spin that too as exoneration. And whatever facts Gray discovered will remain in the drafts folder of her laptop. What would be the effect of that? I don’t mean in narrow political terms, though it would clearly boost Johnson’s prospects of retaining his job. I mean the consequences for our public and collective life. What does it do to a country to be led by a documented liar? That’s a question we can ask with or without the Gray report. We can put aside the entire partygate affair and the question still stands. Even Johnson’s admirers concede his proven record of mendacity. They know that he was sacked twice for lying, once by the Times, once by Michael Howard, then his party leader. They remember the fictional £350m on the side of the bus. They have seen more evidence of his dishonesty this week, when documents emerged saying Johnson intervened personally to help Pen Farthing get his animals out of Kabul – ahead of desperate Afghans whose help for Britain had put a Taliban target on their backs – despite the prime minister’s insistence that he had done no such thing. The pattern is so clear, it cannot be denied. What is that doing to us? We can see the effect in two countries that are or were led by practised liars. Vladimir Putin is what the moral philosopher Quassim Cassam calls “a strategic liar”: his lies are part of a worked-out strategy, aimed less at convincing the Russian public than confusing it, making it dependent on the strongman in the Kremlin who can present himself as the only source of clarity in a fog of doubt. Donald Trump’s lies, meanwhile, fall into the “pathological” category, a function of a sociopathic personality. The effect in the US is obvious enough: Trump, in office and out of it, has entrenched a situation in which a large chunk of the American population inhabits a realm heedless of truth, evidence and science. The strongest predictor of whether or not an American has taken the Covid vaccine is whether or not they voted for Donald Trump. Johnson is his own case. The £350m was a strategic lie, advanced to great effect, but many of his lies are casual and opportunistic, the kind of lie someone offers to get themselves out of a tight spot, “the kind of lie”, says Cassam, “that people who have affairs have to tell”. It is a habit Johnson cannot break. He could, for example, have defended his role in the Kabul pet airlift. Instead he denied it. It was his first reflex. Even casual lies have their effect. The first could be a shift in democratic norms, which change more than you might think. It was once taboo for a chancellor to reveal any of his budget until he had delivered it: in 1947, Hugh Dalton had to resign for breaking that unwritten rule. Now it’s routine for chancellors to give the papers multiple sneak previews of their budgets. The old norm faded. We may well be witnessing another, much more significant shift right now, upending the convention that a minister proven to have misled parliament must resign. If Johnson stays, that norm will come to look as archaic as the one that felled Dalton. Will the Johnson effect spread beyond Westminster, so that even among regular people the taboo on lying erodes? It’s tempting to laugh that off, to insist that few Britons base their day-to-day behaviour on the conduct of politicians. Besides, the insistence on truth is one norm that society cannot afford to let slip. As Cassam notes: “Human beings are social beings, who need to be able to rely on each other. That requires trust, and trust requires truth-telling.” But there is a third zone, between parliament and day-to-day life: namely, our public institutions. It’s naive to think that they are not affected, or contaminated, by the actions of the man at the top. If Johnson’s lies go unpunished, that will surely alter the norms that currently govern, say, senior civil servants. Which prompts a much sharper worry. If the public decides it can no longer trust those in authority, then when the chief medical officer stands up to warn of a new threat to public health, there is no guarantee that anybody will listen. In the US, they’re halfway there. The death threats against Dr Anthony Fauci are so frequent and severe, he now has 24-hour armed security. As trust has declined, it’s been replaced by “raw anger and hatred, conspiracy theories to explain the world, the belief that facts and evidence do not matter”, says Peter Pomerantsev, a keen student of politicians’ lies and author of This Is Not Propaganda. That’s what can happen when a liar runs the country. In November 2020, Americans got rid of theirs. Ours clings on – and now, it seems, his friends in the Met have helped him live to fight another day. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistAt least nine police officers shot a man who was walking on an interstate highway in Nashville on Thursday, a use of deadly force that left the man’s family “in shock”. Landon Eastep, 37, was agitated and carrying a box cutter in his left hand, said Don Aaron, a Metropolitan Nashville police spokesman. Aaron said police tried for about half an hour to de-escalate the situation but nine officers from three agencies fired when Eastep quickly pulled an unknown “silver, shiny cylindrical object” from his right pocket. Aaron said he did not know what the object was but said it was not a firearm. “I wasn’t aware there was anything wrong,” Samantha McGill-Barge, Eastep’s sister-in-law, told the Daily Beast. “He loved my sister and my kids very much and, to my knowledge, was a good guy. It’s a very unfortunate situation. I’m in shock.” In an online fundraiser for Eastep’s widow titled Help get Justice for Landon Eastep, McGill-Barge alleged he had been “murdered by several officers”. “This man had only a box cutter and had already shown it to officers before they killed him in cold blood,” she said. “He was shot for no good reason at all and he did not deserve to die.” The Nashville district attorney, Glenn Funk, promised to take “any appropriate action” once the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation had finished its investigation. He also promised to release the TBI report in full. The mayor of Nashville, John Cooper, said he was “disturbed”, adding: “We will learn from this awful event and continue to do everything we can to prevent similar incidents in the future.” Video of the encounter obtained by WKRN-TV showed officers surrounding Eastep, who had his back to the berm between the northbound and southbound lanes. The footage showed officers opening fire after Eastep removed his right hand from his pocket. Eastep was hit multiple times, Aaron said. No officers were injured. Interstate 65 was closed in both directions for a time during the encounter and afterward as agencies remained on the scene including the TBI. The agency said a highway patrol trooper first spotted Eastep at about 2pm on the northbound shoulder of the interstate at mile marker 76. An off-duty officer from another jurisdiction, then others, soon arrived. “The trooper attempted to negotiate with Eastep and soon an off-duty Mount Juliet police department officer also stopped, along with back-up officers from the Metropolitan Nashville police department” and more highway patrol troopers, the statement said. It said negotiations continued for about 30 minutes before at least nine officers fired. Eastep died at the scene. Associated Press contributed to this reportBook now In a world that can be overloaded with upsetting or relentless information, puzzles have long provided a haven for those wishing to escape for a few months. They are also excellent tools for challenging ourselves, and they have been associated with healthier long-term memory. So, put aside your inhibitions and join in with this fun workshop with Alex Bellos, the Guardian’s puzzle setter of 7 years. During the class you will participate in a series of challenges - some that last about 30 seconds and others that can take up to 10 minutes - and while you do, watch as your understanding of logical thinking, spatial understanding, psychology, probability and languages grows. Prepare to be pleasantly perplexed and consistently surprised! This course is for … Anyone who enjoys puzzles and keeping their brains active Anyone looking to better understand how puzzles work Course content Maths and logic puzzles Word and languages puzzles Q&amp;A You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6.30pm (BST). For a little entertainment ahead of Alex’s class, you may enjoy his recent video post asking Google Assistant what’s the factorial of 100? Tutor profile Alex Bellos has had many jobs at the Guardian over the last three decades: originally a staff reporter, he later became the South America correspondent based in Rio de Janeiro. Since 2015 he has written a fortnightly puzzle column for the Guardian, which receives almost 3m views a year. He is the author of several bestselling maths and puzzle books, including Alex’s Adventures in Numberland, Can You Save My Problems? and the Language Lover’s Puzzle Book. He has a degree in maths and philosophy from Oxford and is the inventor of elliptical pool. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6.30pm (BST). Details Book now Date: Thursday 21 April 2022 Times: 6.30pm-8.30pm (BST) Price: £49 (plus £2.66 booking fee) This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. 6.30pm BST | 7.30pm CEST | 10.30am PDT | 1.30pm EDT Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.Saracens’ director of rugby Mark McCall is to take “a short break” from his role for medical reasons, the club has announced. No further details have been disclosed, with the club requesting that McCall’s privacy be respected. The former Ireland international has been in charge at Saracens for over a decade, guiding the club to five league titles and three European Champions Cups. They currently sit second in the Premiership, eight points behind leaders Leicester ahead of Sunday’s visit to Wasps, and could yet qualify for the knockout stage of the European Challenge Cup. The 54-year-old also steered Saracens through their season in the Championship in 2020-21 following their relegation for breaching salary cap regulations. Under his stewardship the club clinched the European and domestic double in both 2015-16 and 2018-19. McCall is understood to have been at Saracens’ training ground this week but, for now, overall control of first-team affairs will pass to head coach Joe Shaw and assistants Dan Vickers, Kevin Sorrell, Ian Peel and Adam Powell. “People will always come first at our club and Mark will be given all of the support and time he needs,” read the Saracens’ statement. “Mark is obviously more than confident in the coaching team he has worked with for many years to temporarily take the reins.” McCall has repeatedly made clear that Saracens believe in collective leadership. “We were very determined when this began years ago that the club would never be reliant on one person,” he said last year. “It would be a very poor organisation, a very average organisation, which does that.” Saracens also have the benefit of being able to select Mako and Billy Vunipola this weekend alongside fellow England internationals Ben Earl, Alex Lozowski and Alex Goode. None of the quintet have been included in Eddie Jones’s squad for the forthcoming Six Nations.The BBC is to use disinformation specialists to vet potential Question Time audience members after the programme called for unvaccinated members of the public to take part. Next week’s episode of the current affairs discussion show will feature unvaccinated individuals in the audience after an appeal from the presenter, Fiona Bruce, broadcast earlier this month. Question Time’s decision to seek out vaccine refuseniks follows concern at the BBC that the show has failed to represent the views of the 10% of the adult British population who have not had a jab. But one of the main social media channels used to organise an attempt by anti-vaxx activists to storm the offices of Britain’s medical regulator has also been used to encourage people to apply to the BBC programme, according to now deleted messages. “Applied,” said one user on a popular anti-vaccine activist Telegram channel, who posted a reply they had received from the BBC confirming that their application to appear in the audience had been received. Others on the channel, used to organise anti-lockdown campaigns and oppose vaccines, said they would apply. Since Question Time returned with live audiences last year it has asked about people’s vaccination status when they apply online to go in the audience. This appears to have put off those who have declined to be injected from applying to go on the show – meaning there have rarely been any questions from people who are unvaccinated. “There are still substantial numbers of the British public who are not vaccinated, especially in particular areas and communities,” said a BBC spokesperson. “We think this is an interesting part of the debate which is worthy of discussion. Question Time always strives to discuss each side of every argument. This is about listening to, and understanding, our audience members. The BBC has always made the scientific consensus on vaccination very clear.” The issue facing the BBC is how to find “ordinary” unvaccinated members of the public, rather than obsessive anti-vaxx activists, and whether it is possible to distinguish between the two groups. The BBC also runs the risk of broadcasting dangerous medical disinformation to millions of viewers. In an attempt to weed out the more obsessive campaigners, the BBC has decided to employ its in-house disinformation specialists to help with vetting potential audience members, although it is unclear what criteria will be used. Next week’s episode is being filmed at a location in London, which has some of the lowest vaccination rates in the country, and medical experts will sit on the panel to answer questions about vaccine take-up. Rather than dedicate an entire programme to the topic of vaccination, as Question Time has done in the past on certain key topics, discussions of vaccines will be dealt with as part of a wider range of issues. Asked about the health concerns of inviting unvaccinated individuals into the audience at a time when there are still 100,000 new confirmed Covid cases every day, a BBC spokesperson said they would still have to show evidence of a recent negative test to gain access. The decision to seek out the unvaccinated comes amid ongoing debate about what BBC impartiality really means – and whether every viewpoint should be given a hearing on the public broadcaster. This month the BBC’s editorial standards chief, David Jordan, attempted to define which views should be given airtime on the BBC during a parliamentary hearing, saying he opposed “cancel culture” and remained “committed to ensuring that viewpoints are heard from all different sorts of perspectives”. Jordan said everyone should expect their views to be appropriately represented by the national broadcaster – even if they believed the Earth is flat. “It’s critical to the BBC that we represent all points of view and give them due weight. Flat-Earthers are not going to get as much space as people who believe the Earth is round, but very occasionally it might be appropriate to interview a flat-Earther. And if a lot of people believed in flat Earth we’d need to address it more.”Faced with the fight of his political life, Boris Johnson now risks being held hostage by assertive Tory backbenchers making demands on a range of fronts including national insurance and vaccine mandates. Other policies are also now stuck in paralysis while the shadow of the Sue Gray report – and a Scotland Yard investigation – hangs over the government, with senior Tory backbencher Roger Gale describing Johnson as a “lame duck” prime minister on Friday. Here are the policies at the mercy of the political storm. National insurance contributions (NICs) The Treasury became increasingly alarmed at signs Johnson may be preparing to scrap the national insurance rise in the face of pressure from rightwing Tories. The Guardian reported on Thursday Rishi Sunak had been privately stressing to MPs that the tax rise must go ahead as planned. On Friday No 10 insisted there was no policy change. Obesity strategy Faced with a potential rebellion, Johnson signalled this week that he was prepared to drop plans to tighten regulations on the promotion of unhealthy food and drinks. The plans were part of an anti-obesity strategy that the prime minister himself had promoted in 2020 to prevent supermarkets from displaying unhealthy food and drinks at checkouts or using them in buy one, get one free offers. Animal welfare There was no noise from the prime minister when the chief whip, Mark Spencer, suggested the animal sentience legislation should be watered down to avoid rows with his backbenches. Senior Tory sources have confirmed to the Guardian that a series of policies including a ban on trophy hunting imports, stricter sentences for puppy thieves and a ban on live exports of livestock have been put on pause after a campaign led by Spencer, a farmer. Cost of living crisis Johnson and Sunak had reportedly been due to meet this week to consider options including council tax rebates and a bonus universal credit payment. Measures to soften energy bill hikes are also caught in the logjam, amid a standoff with the Treasury on how to fund measures to ease the cost of living crisis. The clock is ticking, however, with the energy regulator Ofgem due to announce the latest increase to the price cap on 7 February, which, as it stands, will increase the average annual gas and electricity bill by about 50% to more than £2,000 when it kicks in from April. Vaccine mandates Johnson has come under sustained pressure from Tory backbenchers to do a U-turn on rules obliging NHS England staff to have a first jab by 3 February to allow time to be fully vaccinated by 1 April. The prime minister resisted concerted calls by Tory MPs in the House of Commons for the mandate to be dropped, but at one point told Mark Harper that the government would “reflect”. Levelling up The levelling up white paper was expected to be launched this week but has been pushed back due to the political turmoil. It is the latest delay for the flagship policy designed to spread prosperity outside London and the south-east, after the Omicron wave forced ministers to push back a planned publication before Christmas. It is widely expected to see the light of day next week, however, as Boris Johnson seeks to relaunch his government and repair his public image, while the Met continues its work. Education A logjam of bills and policies inherited by Nadhim Zahawi has not been improved by the torpor at Downing Street, as white papers and legislation form a tailback. A bill about freedom of speech in England’s universities ended its committee stages in September but there is no word when it will move on. A skills and post-16 education bill is also waiting for a date to continue. Other overdue policies include the long-awaited review of special education needs and disabilities, now being folded into a white paper on schools to be finished later this year. Gambling Proposals for a once-in-generation review of gambling laws were initially scheduled for the end of 2021 but were delayed until this year, as Johnson reshuffled his Cabinet. The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, headed by Nadine Dorries, is now expected to publish a white paper in March. However, sources familiar with the review process say that even that date could now slip, given the chaos in Westminster.An intensive care doctor who challenged the health secretary, Sajid Javid, over compulsory Covid vaccines for NHS staff has launched a legal bid against the government to end the policy. Dr Steve James, who is unvaccinated and works as an anaesthetist at King’s College hospital, is seeking a judicial review with seven other medical professionals. It would look at the lawfulness of the decision to require health professionals to be jabbed. The government directive requires all NHS staff in England who have direct contact with patients to get two Covid-19 vaccinations by 1 April or risk losing their jobs. However, critics have argued that imposing a deadline could lead to staff shortages. James and other NHS staff, represented by the legal firm Jackson Osborne, have submitted a document to the high court calling for a review. The document argues the decision to impose the mandate “is itself unlawful, irrational, and disproportionate”. James became known to the public after he confronted Javid as the minister visited King’s College hospital in south London. In an encounter captured by Sky News, Javid had asked doctors and nurses what they thought about government plans to require vaccination for all NHS staff. After a brief silence, the consultant anaesthetist, who has been working throughout the pandemic, said: “I’m not happy about that.” James told Javid: “I’ve had Covid at some point, I’ve got antibodies, and I’ve been working on Covid ITUs since the beginning; I have not had a vaccination, I do not want to have a vaccination. The vaccine is reducing transmission only for about eight weeks with Delta. With Omicron it’s probably less. And for that I would be dismissed if I don’t have a vaccine? The science isn’t strong enough.” “That’s your view,” Javid replied. Turning to a group of nurses, he asked: “And your views?” However, they did not respond. Turning back to James, Javid continued: “I respect that but there are also many different views.” Javid added: “I understand that but obviously we have to weigh all that up for both health and social care, and there will always be a debate about it.” James replied: “Maybe there is an opportunity to reconsider with Omicron and the changing picture, or at least the nuance that will allow doctors who have had antibody exposure, who’ve got antibodies, who haven’t had the vaccination, to not have it, because the protection I’ve got is probably equivalent to someone who is vaccinated.”Scotland Yard’s statement that it has asked for “minimal references” to certain events covered in Sue Gray’s report provoked confusion and anger. The effect of Friday’s intervention was to diminish the chances of Gray’s report being published in full any time soon. It also heightened speculation about what the force is actually investigating. Scotland Yard said it did not want Gray’s report to “prejudice” its own inquiries – which had only begun when the civil servant shared her findings with the Met last weekend. Scotland Yard’s request has no legal force So, has Gray been snookered by talking to the police? Experts say this isn’t the case. The Met’s request is just that – it has no legal force. “They have no legal power to cause a redaction or the report being published in some shorter version,” said Nazir Afzal, former chief crown prosecutor for north-west England. With respect to the prejudice the Met are trying to avoid, some lawyers suggested it may refer to the risk of unfairly influencing any court case. However, contempt of court only applies when proceedings are “active”, usually when someone has been arrested. “I am sure that there would have been an announcement if someone had been summonsed or charged, and so I think that can be discounted,” said Kate Bex QC, a criminal barrister at Red Lion chambers. “There is an active police investigation, but that is different to proceedings being ongoing.” Also, none of the crimes committed by individuals under the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) Regulations, which covers social gatherings during lockdowns, can be tried by jury. At the lowest level are fixed penalty notices, which are issued by police, with the only alternative being a magistrates court hearing or a case dealt with under the single justice procedure, where rulings are made by a single magistrate sitting with a legal adviser. So, could the police be investigating more serious offences? Given this, some raised the prospect that the Met’s statement indicated it was investigating offences that could be tried before a jury. The Green party peer, Jenny Jones, has called on the police to investigate misconduct in public office – where a public officer wilfully neglects his or her duty and which carries a maximum sentence of life imprisonment – in respect to the alleged breaches. Similarly, there have been suggestions that officers could be investigating perverting the court of justice, which also carries a maximum sentence of life, over possible attempts to cover up wrongdoing. This was fuelled by a report in the Independent that No 10 advised staff to “clean up” their phones amid allegations about lockdown parties. But the Met seemed to scotch this idea on Friday when it clarified it was looking only at possible breaches of Covid rules – equivalent to a parking fine. Andrew Keogh, a barrister who runs the CrimeLine website, said the police were likely to be attempting to protect their hand when carrying out their own interviews. “If there’s any level of detail in the report about the alleged events, naming people and accounts of what went on and who might have initiated this, that and the other, then it seems to me from a policing points of view you wouldn’t want that in the public domain. “You want to put things to people so they’re sort of blinded by it, so: ‘Were you in the basement of number 10 on this date?’, they say no, and then you say: ‘Well, we’ve just spoken to John Doe and John Doe says: “You were dancing on the photocopier etc.’ “This is quite powerful, playing off lots of people against each other and holding the cards to your chest as to whatever evidence you do have and, as importantly, what evidence you don’t have.” ‘It makes no sense’ Afzal agreed that a fear of “contaminating evidence” might be behind the Met’s move but said it was misguided given that witnesses would already have had plenty of time to confer, as well as the wider public interest in the case. “This is not a subject that has been in the shadows,” he said. “People have been talking about this for weeks and months. I have little doubt that witnesses have discussed this, so the idea that something will be said in this report that might contaminate the case, I think, is an exaggerated risk. Anyway, they’ve got to balance that with public confidence and the court of public opinion. “They want this report in full because they’ve been promised it in full. As recently as three days ago the Met said they had no objections to it being published in full and so it makes no sense. All it is doing is feeding a perception that there is some kind of collusion going on between government and policing.”The comedian Joe Lycett, who apparently caused chaos and “mass panic” in government when he tweeted a fake version of Sue Gray’s “partygate” report, has said his social media stunt was motivated by anger after the death of a close friend during the first lockdown. Lycett tweeted a parody Gray report with a fake Cabinet Office letterhead, titled: “A summary of my main findings”, captioning his tweet: “BREAKING: Leaked Sue Gray report reveals shocking abuse of rules. Hard to see how the PM can cling on after this.” He later shared a message that he said came “from someone who works for a cabinet minister. Source verified.” The message, purportedly from someone who works in parliament, read: “Your tweet this morning was read as an actual serious leak from Sue Gray’s report. U had MP staff literally running around panicking from what it said. Panic dialling MPs like we need to discuss this right now.” Among the “findings” on his faked document, Lycett stated that at one party a “senior minister” insisted all cabinet ministers get on to a table and perform Pure &amp; Simple by Hear’Say, that one of Johnson’s staff was referred to as “Twateral Flow”, and that a video of Johnson’s wife, Carrie, confirmed her attendance and she was overheard saying “it could be as few as four and as many as 60 kids”. Games were played called “Slow Dance” and “Pass the Arsehole”, the fake findings said. He finished the fake report with: “Please forward any queries to my email ItsAllSueGravyBaby@aol.com.” Explaining his motivation, Lycett tweeted on Friday: “I wrote some jokes on Twitter, some dumb people (some in our government) found them plausible rather than funny and now I’m in most of the newspapers. I write comedy sometimes as a way of using anger.” He said he was “angry right now probably for the same reason many other people are angry”. He explained that his best friend died from cancer in 2020 but he was unable to be there for him “because I was following the rules”. “So I suppose like thousands of others with their own stories, I’m angry about that.”My friend Jan Dungey, who has died aged 68, was a founder of Cunning Stunts, an all-female theatre company that performed at festivals, village halls and clubs around the UK – as well as in women’s prisons and psychiatric units – between 1977 and 1982. Jan was also a performer with the company as it created a spontaneous form of theatre that was socially aware and non-elitist, highlighting “the absurdity of male behaviour” and flouting the prevailing glamorous image of women as entertainers. A force to be reckoned with and standing at 6ft 2in, she was a memorable presence wherever she went, a beautiful and fearless woman who carried a bright flame of inspiration that was fanned by her determination, intelligence and infectious humour. Jan had a powerful singing voice, and also performed blues and country songs at some of the countercultural Albion Fairs that took place around East Anglia in the early 1980s. After the demise of Cunning Stunts she decamped to Bungay in Suffolk, which became home for the rest of her life. There she conceived and set up the Company of Imagination (1986-91), a multidisciplinary group that created site-specific outdoor promenade performances, known as “animated trails”, in rural and urban settings. Many of the company’s projects were created with schoolchildren, enabling them to explore, understand and respond to their local environment. Jan was instrumental in making sure that most of the projects were funded by an unusual mix of environmental, built-heritage and arts bodies. She was born in Maidstone in Kent, to Grace (nee Murdoch), a secretary, and her husband, James Dungey, an architect and surveyor. After attending Maidstone girls’ grammar school, she took a degree in English literature at Bristol University from 1971 to 1974 and then did performance studies for a year at Bretton Hall College of Education in West Yorkshire. When the Company of Imagination folded in the early 90s, Jan had stints as a council arts officer in Maidstone and then Great Yarmouth in Norfolk. Local authorities were not her natural home, and although she managed to be of great help to the creative sectors in both towns, including through setting up SeaChange Arts (now Out There Arts), an independent arts development charity in Great Yarmouth, she frequently ran up against the system that employed her. In 2000 she returned to freelance and self-directed projects. Despite having been diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in the late 90s she continued to initiate many creative projects, and in 2010 was a co-founder of Waveney &amp; Blyth Arts on the Norfolk-Suffolk border. After 20 years of the creeping paralysis of MS, Jan was undone by Covid-19. She is survived by her long-term partner, Steve Cooke, whom she met when he was an electrician helping to set up the Albion Fairs.