That’s it from us today. Here’s what happened: The White House warned Russia is preparing a false flag operation to justify an invasion of Ukraine. “We are concerned that the Russian government is preparing for an invasion in Ukraine that may result in widespread human rights violations and war crimes, should diplomacy fail to meet their objectives,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. Joe Biden announced the federal government will pay 100% of the costs to repair small bridges in communities with limited funds to do so. The policy is part of the implementation of the bipartisan infrastructure law, which Biden signed in November. The law includes $27.5bn to repair the nation’s bridges. Biden acknowledged this has been a disappointing few weeks for Democrats, after the party suffered defeats on a voting rights bill and the Build Back Better Act. “There’s a lot of talk about disappointments on things we haven’t gotten done,” Biden said. “We’re going to get a lot of them done, I might add.” His comments came one day after Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin indicated they would not support changing the filibuster to pass a voting rights bill, killing any hope of a swift passage for the legislation. The Biden administration will start shipping free at-home Covid tests next week. Biden announced last month that his administration would order 500 m at-home tests to be given free of charge to Americans, and the president has since announced the purchase of an additional 500m tests. The Ohio supreme court struck down the congressional map drawn by Republican legislators, which would have given the party a significant advantage in the midterm elections. Writing for the majority in his ruling, Justice Michael Donnelly, a Democrat, argued the proposed map had violated the Ohio state constitution, which forbids district lines that unfairly favor one party or its incumbents. Stewart Rhodes, the founder of far-right militia group the Oathkeepers pleaded not guilty to seditious conspiracy this afternoon after being arrested in Plano, TX on Thursday. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg and Google CEO Sundar Pichai were allegedly aware of and approved a deal to collaborate on the potential manipulation of advertising sales, according to newly unredacted documents that were filed as part of a state attorneys general-led lawsuit against Google. More than 40 states have appealed a decision to throw out an antitrust lawsuit against Facebook, arguing it’s in the public interest for the attorneys general to pursue the case. Judge James E Boasberg dismissed the lawsuit last June because it was filed too long after Facebook made the acquisitions that are in question in the complaint. See you again next week! Joe Biden has appointed actress Star Jones to serve on the US Commission for the Preservation of America’s Heritage Abroad. The agency is in charge of identifying monuments, cemeteries, and historic buildings in Eastern and Central Europe that are associated with US heritage. From Deadline’s story on the appointment: “Biden also appointed six others to the commission, including G Jonathan Greenwald, Nicole Mavis Isaac, Nancy Kaufman, Michael Marquardt, Maureen Pikarski and Bill Shaheen. The commission was set up to ensure that such sites – historically important for populations impacted by Nazism and communism – are preserved.” Jones is also scheduled to replace Faith Jenkins as the judge on the television show Divorce Court this fall. More than 40 states have appealed a judge’s decision to throw out an antitrust lawsuit against Facebook, The New York Times is reporting. Last June, Judge James E Boasberg dismissed the lawsuit because it was filed too long after Facebook made the acquisitions that are in question in the complaint. In their appeal, the states attorneys generals, led by New York’s Letitia James, argue that they should have more latitude than private individuals when it comes to limitations on filing lawsuits. They also said it was in the public interest to pursue the case against the social media giant. The lawsuit scrutinizes Facebook’s acquisition of photo-sharing app Instagram and messaging service WhatsApp in 2012 and 2014, respectively. The lawsuit alleges the acquisitions were predatory and were done in order to crush competition and that Facebook further worked to harm competitors, including video-sharing platform Vine, by cutting off their access to data and tools on Facebook’s platform. Read more here. DirecTV is dropping conservative news channel, One America News Network, according to Bloomberg News. The network is known for spreading misinformation and was one of Trump’s favorite channels during his presidency. DirecTV notified OANN owner Herring Networks Inc. that it would not carry the channel once the contract is up in early April, according to the Bloomberg report. It’s a major blow to OANN, oh which DirecTV is the largest distributor. From the story: “The channel is still carried on Verizon FiOS and smaller pay-TV providers, according to its website. The broadcast can also be streamed via an online-TV service called KlowdTV. OANN has never been carried by Comcast Corp., Charter Communications Inc. or Dish Network Corp., three other major providers. DirecTV, which is owned by AT&amp;T Inc. and TPG via a joint venture, has offered OANN to customers since April 2017 after Herring Networks won a lawsuit that forced the satellite-TV provider to carry the channels.” You can read more here. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg and Google CEO Sundar Pichai were allegedly aware of and approved a deal to collaborate on the potential manipulation of advertising sales, according to newly unredacted documents that were filed as part of a state attorneys general-led lawsuit against Google. The lawsuit was first filed in December 2020 and claimed Google misled publishers and advertisers alike about the price and process of advertising auctions. At that time, many documents and parts of the lawsuit were redacted but have since become accessible to the public as a result of multiple court rulings. While the lawsuit is not new, details about how much both companies’ C-Suite was aware of and whether they approved the coordination between Facebook and Google had not been known previously. According to the AP, the lawsuit indicates that in a 2018 email thread Facebook’s chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, called the collaboration between the companies “ a big deal strategically”. Zuckerberg was included on that and other threads discussing the deal, the lawsuit says. Both Google and Facebook have seen increased scrutiny over potentially monopolistic practices from both regulators and other players in the market. In this case, the lawsuit alleges Google maintained control over the advertising sales market - a market that it dominates - by inflating the price of advertisements for brands and suppressing competition from other advertising exchanges. According to the Wall Street Journal, the complaint alleges “Google pocketed the difference between what it told publishers and advertisers that an ad cost and used the pool of money to manipulate future auctions to expand its digital monopoly.” The documents further cite internal messages in which Google employees said it was like they were using “insider information” to grow the business. If Pichai is found to have personally approved the deal, he may be found to be complicit in the expansion of Google’s monopoly over the advertising market through manipulation. A Google spokesperson told the AP that while the deal was not a secret, it was inaccurate Pichai approved it. “We sign hundreds of agreements every year that don’t require CEO approval, and this was no different,” the spokesperson said. A Republican bill to ban the teaching of “divisive concepts” in schools in Virginia ran into ridicule when among historical events deemed suitable for study, it described a nonexistent debate between Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass. Lincoln did engage in a series of historic debates hinged on the issue of slavery, in the Illinois Senate campaign of 1858. But he did so against Stephen Douglas, a senator who had ties to slavery, and not against Douglass, the great campaigner for the abolition of slavery who was once enslaved himself. The Virginia bill was sponsored by Wren Williams, a freshman Republican sent to Richmond in a tumultuous November election. History has become a divisive concept in states across the US, as rightwingers spread alarm about the teaching of race issues. In November, the winning candidate for governor in Virginia, the Republican Glenn Youngkin, made history a wedge issue in his win over the Democrat, Terry McAuliffe. Youngkin seized upon critical race theory, an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society – but which is not taught in Virginia schools. The elementary error in Williams’s bill attracted national attention, including from the Washington Post. However, reports that the bill had been withdrawn were in error, a spokesperson for the politician said on Friday. The spokesperson also provided to the Guardian a statement from the Virginia division of legislative services, which said the error “was inserted at the drafting level, following receipt of a historically accurate request from the office of Delegate Wren Williams”. Williams told Townhall.com he was “frustrated” but realised “mistakes happen”. Nonetheless, many were happy to point out the error. “New rule,” wrote Steve Vladeck, a University of Texas law professor. “If you don’t know the difference between Frederick Douglass and Stephen Douglas, you don’t get to tell anyone else what to teach.” Sidney Blumenthal, a Guardian contributor and Lincoln biographer, pointed out that Lincoln and Douglass did meet three times when Lincoln was president, from 1861 to 1865 and through a civil war that ended with slavery abolished. Blumenthal also offered a way in which students in Virginia and elsewhere might use Douglass’s life and work to examine divisive concepts today. Speaking after two centrist Democrats sank Joe Biden’s push for voting rights reform, Blumenthal said: “Frederick Douglass’s great cause became that of voting rights. “If there is any debate that is going on now, it is not between Lincoln and Frederick Douglass. It is between Frederick Douglass and all the Republican senators who refuse to support voting rights – and Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema too.” For further reading, here’s Ibram X Kendi on why Frederick Douglass matters: An anti-abortion group that had an advertisement signed and endorsed by Amy Coney Barrett before she became a supreme court justice has been accused of encouraging the harassment of doctors, according to my colleague Stephanie Kirchgaessner. Here’s more from her story: An Indiana group whose anti-abortion campaign was endorsed in a signed advertisement by Amy Coney Barrett before she became a supreme court justice, keeps a published list of abortion providers and their place of work on its website, in what some experts say is an invitation to harass and intimidate the doctors and their staff. In one case, court records show, a doctor whose name was published by the group, which is called Right to Life Michiana, was warned by the FBI of a kidnapping threat that had been made online against her daughter. The threat prompted the doctor to temporarily stop providing abortion services at the Whole Woman’s Health Care clinic in South Bend, which is also named on the Michiana group’s website. The doctor said in the court document that the clinic regularly attracts large gatherings of protesters, who she feared could identify her. Barrett signed a two-page advertisement in 2006, while she was working as a professor at Notre Dame, that stated that those who signed “oppose abortion on demand and defend the right to life from fertilization to natural death”. The second page of the ad called Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 decision that legalized abortion, “barbaric”. The advertisement, which was published in the South Bend Tribune and signed by hundreds of people, was sponsored by a group called St Joseph County Right to Life, which merged with another anti-abortion group in 2020 and is now called Right to Life Michiana. The supreme court is expected to rule this year on challenges to Roe v Wade that many court experts expect will gut the rights of women in the US to obtain legal abortions. In arguments before the court, Barrett – who has said her personal views do not affect her legal judgment – argued that passage of safe haven laws, which allow parents to relinquish their newborns at hospitals or other designated centers without the threat of legal consequences, had in effect given women options outside of abortion for those who did not want to become parents. During her 2020 confirmation hearing, Barrett said she had signed the advertisement as a private citizen, while she was making her way out of church, and had not recalled signing it until it became public following a report in the Guardian. “It was consistent with the views of my church,” she said, in response to senators’ questions about the statement. She later added: “I do see as distinct my personal, moral, religious views and my task of applying the law as a judge.” Johana here, reporting in from San Francisco. The founder of far-right militia group the Oathkeepers pleaded not guilty to seditious conspiracy this afternoon. Elmer Stewart Rhodes was arrested on Thursday in Texas and charged with conspiring with 10 others to oppose the transfer of presidential power by force. As my colleague Sergio Olmos reported, unsealed court documents have revealed evidence of an armed plot as well as detailed tactical pre-planning that included “the creation of rapid-response teams of armed militia members, the deployment of tactical gear and the stockpiling of weapons”. More from Sergio’s reporting: The Oath Keepers even discussed a naval operation to ferry in guns to the militia. One Oath Keeper, Thomas Caldwell, asked fellow members if anyone had a boat that could handle crossing the Potomac River. “If we had someone standing by at a dock ramp (one near the Pentagon for sure) we could have our Quick Response Team with the heavy weapons standing by, quickly load them and ferry them across the river to our waiting arms,” the documents quoted him as saying. Rhodes went on a buying spree in the days leading up to the attack, spending more than $20,000 on guns and equipment for the attack. In December, Rhodes bought two pairs of night-vision goggles and a weapons sight for about $7,000 and shipped them to Virginia. In January he spent another $5,000 on a shotgun, scope, magazine, sights, optics, a bipod, a mount, a case of ammunition and gun cleaning supplies. Two days later he spent $6,000 more, and then about $4,500 the next day. In group chats, the Oath Keepers discussed how their quick reaction force (QRF) teams would set up at the Comfort Inn in Ballston Arlington, Virginia, to “use as its base of operations for January 6, 2021”. They reserved three rooms; one was occupied by the so-called North Carolina “QRF” team while Arizona and Florida “QRF teams” stayed in the two others. They used the hotel rooms to store firearms and ammunition. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Johana Bhuiyan, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The White House warned Russia is preparing a false flag operation to justify an invasion of Ukraine. “We are concerned that the Russian government is preparing for an invasion in Ukraine that may result in widespread human rights violations and war crimes, should diplomacy fail to meet their objectives,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. Joe Biden announced the federal government will pay 100% of the costs to repair small bridges in communities with limited funds to do so. The policy is part of the implementation of the bipartisan infrastructure law, which Biden signed in November. The law includes $27.5bn to repair the nation’s bridges. Biden acknowledged this has been a disappointing few weeks for Democrats, after the party suffered defeats on a voting rights bill and the Build Back Better Act. “There’s a lot of talk about disappointments on things we haven’t gotten done,” Biden said. “We’re going to get a lot of them done, I might add.” His comments came one day after Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin indicated they would not support changing the filibuster to pass a voting rights bill, killing any hope of a swift passage for the legislation. The Biden administration will start shipping free at-home Covid tests next week. Biden announced last month that his administration would order 500 m at-home tests to be given free of charge to Americans, and the president has since announced the purchase of an additional 500m tests. The Ohio supreme court struck down the congressional map drawn by Republican legislators, which would have given the party a significant advantage in the midterm elections. Writing for the majority in his ruling, justice Michael Donnelly, a Democrat, argued the proposed map had violated the Ohio state constitution, which forbids district lines that unfairly favor one party or its incumbents. Johana will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Mike Pence has penned a Washington Post op-ed attacking Democrats’ voting rights bill as a “federal power grab over our state elections”. The former vice-president opened the op-ed by reflecting on the January 6 insurrection, which he witnessed firsthand. Pence was at the Capitol that day to preside over the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 election. “Now that the anniversary of Jan. 6 has come and gone, some of us who lived through that tragic day in 2021 are getting a clearer picture of what was and is at stake,” Pence writes. “On Jan. 6, an angry mob ransacked the Capitol, largely to try to get Congress and me, as the president of the Senate, to use federal authority to overturn results of the presidential election that had been certified by all 50 states.” But Pence then makes an argument that is certain to outrage Democrats; the Republican asserts that the dozens of voting restrictions recently approved by state legislatures are an effort to “restore confidence in the integrity of our elections while ensuring access to voting”. “Despite this steady progress of state-based reforms, now come President Biden and Senate Democrats with plans to use the memory of Jan. 6 to attempt another federal power grab over our state elections and drive a wedge further into our divided nation,” Pence writes. In 2021, 19 states passed 34 laws restricting access to voting, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. Voting rights advocates warn that the restrictions disproportionately impact people of color, and experts say the laws threaten to inject partisan bias into election systems. The Biden administration’s announcement on delivering free at-home Covid tests starting 19 January underscores the current difficulty of finding affordable at-home Covid-19 tests. The Guardian’s Carly Olsen wrote about price gouging happening across the country for rapid at-home Covid tests: With at-home Covid tests running scarce during the Omicron surge, the price gouging has begun, and everyone from restaurants to pet food stores appear to be trying to cash in. Recent reporting by Vice found a Manhattan deli advertised an Abbott BinaxNOW rapid test (retail: $24) on the Seamless delivery app for $80. Meanwhile, an online-only pet store, Pet Foods by Village Farm, offered to deliver the same type of test for $50, and a liquor store was selling a “Covid fighter pack”, including rapid tests and hand sanitizer, for more than $100. There have been reports across the country of vendors charging double or triple the normal costs of at-home Covid tests. One New York restaurant worker paid $180 for four test kits, the Los Angeles Times reported. And a Covid testing site in San Francisco’s Mission district is reportedly charging between $99 and $250 for rapid tests. Authorities have warned that this is a growing problem. In a December statement, the New York attorney general, Letitia James, encouraged people to report price hikes. “Fraudsters are on notice that if they attempt to price gouge during this new surge, we will not hesitate to take action,” she said, adding that her office had already seen reports of test kits “being unlawfully sold for more than $40 and up to $70 per package”. Read the full article here. The Biden administration will begin shipping free at-home Covid tests starting next week, following an announcement earlier last week that the tests would become more widely available amid the Omicron surge. The tests will be available through a government website starting on 19 January, though receiving the tests could take longer. Shipping for the at-home tests typically takes “seven to 12 days” according to senior official in the Biden administration. Additionally, households will only able to order four tests at a time. Here’s more background on at-home test availability according to a piece from Politco: A senior administration official told reporters the government has 420 million tests under contract and tens of millions already in its possession. Officials are finalizing contracts for the 80 million tests remaining out of an initial order of 500 million. The effort to procure and distribute the tests will have a total cost of about $4 billion. Asked if the government can meet demand as soon as the website goes live, the senior administration official said the Biden administration is confident “that we can meet all of our timelines and get these to all Americans that want them.” Read the full piece here. Following the Ohio Supreme Court’s decision to strike the state’s new congressional districts on Friday, questions remain about what the next steps are for the legislative maps. Here’s an article from Jessie Balmert of the Columbus Dispatch that breaks down the next steps following the court’s decision: Now, the commission has 10 days to get back together, craft new maps and approve them. If the maps receive bipartisan support from two Democrats and at least two Republicans, they could last for 10 years. If they are passed along party lines again, they would last for four years. The Ohio Supreme Court, in its 4-3 decision, made clear that the commission must follow all of the voter-approved changes to the Ohio Constitution to curb gerrymandering. That includes Section 6, which required the commission to attempt to match the statewide voting preferences of Ohioans. Justice Melody Stewart, writing for the majority, defined Ohio’s statewide preferences as about 54% of voters preferring GOP candidates and about 46% preferring Democratic candidates over the past decade. “The commission is required to attempt to draw a plan in which the statewide proportion of Republican-leaning districts to Democratic-leaning districts closely corresponds to those percentages,” she wrote. Senate President Matt Huffman, R-Lima, said he hasn’t yet read the decision himself. “Our lawyers are trying to figure out what it will take for us to comply with whatever it is that the court ordered.” Read the full article here. The Ohio supreme court ordered the state’s general assembly to redraw more maps that complied with the partisan fairness requirements in the Ohio constitution. It also denounced the consequences of gerrymandering. “Gerrymandering is the antithetical perversion of representative democracy. It is an abuse of power,” Justice Michael Donnelly, a Democrat. “Its singular allure is that it locks in the controlling party’s political power while locking out any other party or executive office from serving as a check and balance to power.” “When the dealer stacks the deck in advance, the house usually wins,” he also wrote. “That perhaps explains how a party that generally musters no more than 55 percent of the statewide popular vote is positioned to reliably win anywhere from 75 percent to 80 percent of the seats in the Ohio congressional delegation. By any rational measure, that skewed result just does not add up.” Ohio Republicans had insisted that the districts they drew were competitive, but the majority of justices said that requirement appears nowhere in the constitution. The Ohio supreme court struck down the state’s new congressional districts on Friday, saying they were so egregiously distorted to benefit Republicans that they violated the state’s constitution. The 4-3 ruling marked the first time during the 2021 redistricting cycle where new congressional districts have been blocked. Republicans had been poised to win 12 of the state’s 15 congressional districts, in a state where Republicans usually win a little more than half of the statewide vote. Writing for the majority, Justice Michael Donnelly, a Democrat, wrote that the map violated a provision of the state’s constitution that says districts can’t be drawn in a way that “unduly favorsor disfavors a political party or its incumbents.” The districts also violated a provision that says districts can’t “unduly” split counties. Voters amended the state constitution to add those provisions in 2018 along with a new procedure meant to foster bipartisanship in redistricting. This is the first redistricting cycle that they are in effect. Republicans made little attempt to abide by them. The decision comes days after the court struck down new GOP-drawn state legislative districts for similar reasons. The Republican senator who Anthony Fauci called a “moron” in a congressional hearing wants to introduce a bill both targeting and named after Joe Biden’s chief White House adviser. Roger Marshall of Kansas will introduce the “Financial Accountability for Uniquely Compensated Individuals [Fauci – geddit] Act”, after claiming Fauci’s financial records were not readily accessible to the public. The senator attacked Fauci on Tuesday. “I don’t understand why you’re asking me that question,” said Fauci, 81. “My financial disclosure is public knowledge and has been so for the last 37 years or so.” He also said: “All you have to do is ask for it. You’re so misinformed, it’s extraordinary.” Fauci was then heard on a “hot mic” to say: “What a moron. Jesus Christ.” In a statement, Marshall repeated attack lines pursued by Rand Paul of Kentucky – producing another confrontation with Fauci, and said: “Calling me a moron during a Senate hearing may have alleviated the stress of the least trusted bureaucrat in America, but it didn’t take away from the facts.” The Center for Public Integrity subsequently said Marshall was wrong, but that Fauci’s records were not easy to obtain. Another House Republican who voted to impeach Donald Trump will retire at the next election. John Katko of New York follows Adam Kinzinger of Illinois and Anthony Gonzalez of Ohio in deciding to step down rather than take on a Trump-endorsed challenger for his seat. Seven other House Republicans voted to impeach Trump for inciting the insurrection at the Capitol on 6 January, around which five people died and over which more than 725 people have been charged, 11 of them, yesterday, with sedition. That made it the most bipartisan impeachment. Trump escaped conviction, however, when only seven Republican senators could be convinced to vote for his guilt. The most prominent among the 10 members of the House who voted for impeachment is Liz Cheney, like Kinzinger a member of the select committee investigating 6 January, thereby confronting and infuriating pro-Trump party leaders. Cheney faces a Trump-backed primary challenger in Wyoming. In a statement, Katko said he was retiring so he could “enjoy my family and life in a fuller and more present way”. Here’s where the day stands so far: The White House warned Russia is preparing a false flag operation to justify an invasion of Ukraine. “We are concerned that the Russian government is preparing for an invasion in Ukraine that may result in widespread human rights violations and war crimes, should diplomacy fail to meet their objectives,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. Joe Biden announced the federal government will pay 100% of the costs to repair small bridges in communities with limited funds to do so. The policy is part of the implementation of the bipartisan infrastructure law, which Biden signed in November. The law includes $27.5bn to repair the nation’s bridges. Biden acknowledged this has been a disappointing few weeks for Democrats, after the party suffered defeats on a voting rights bill and the Build Back Better Act. “There’s a lot of talk about disappointments on things we haven’t gotten done,” Biden said. “We’re going to get a lot of them done.” His comments came one day after Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin indicated they would not support changing the filibuster to pass a voting rights bill, killing any hope of a swift passage for the legislation. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Joe Biden touted that the bipartisan infrastructure law includes funding for the largest investment in the country’s bridges since the creation of the interstate highway system. The president noted there are currently 45,000 bridges in the US that are in poor condition and need repairs, resulting in longer commutes for millions of Americans. As part of the infrastructure law, the federal government will spend $27.5bn to repair those bridges. Biden also announced that the federal government will pay 100% of the costs to repair small bridges in communities with limited funds to do so. “With this investment, we’re sending a message to those communities and to the people who call them home: you matter,” Biden said. “These investments are consequential, and we’re just getting started.” The president then concluded his prepared remarks, and he walked away from the podium without taking any questions from reporters. Joe Biden emphasized that the bipartisan infrastructure law will help to create good-paying jobs for Americans, in addition to improving roads and bridges. “When we invest in infrastructure, we’re really investing in opportunity,” the president said. “These are investments that will build a better America. It sounds like hyperbole, but it’s real.” Biden noted that many Americans have written to him explaining how the country’s failing infrastructure has personally impacted them. “I hear you,” Biden said. “You do matter to me, and we are going to get it done.” Joe Biden is now delivering remarks on the implementation of the bipartisan infrastructure law, which he signed in November. “There’s a lot of talk about disappointments on things we haven’t gotten done. We’re going to get a lot of them done, I might add,” Biden said at the top of his remarks. “But this is something we did get done, and it’s of enormous consequence to the country,” he said of the infrastructure law. Biden’s speech comes one day after he acknowledged Democrats may not be able to pass a voting rights bill, after Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin said they would not support changing the filibuster to do so. During her White House briefing today, Jen Psaki also addressed the situation in Ukraine, as fears intensify over a potential Russian invasion. US officials have now accused the Kremlin of planning a false flag operation to justify an invasion, despite recent efforts to deescalate tensions in the region. “We are concerned that the Russian government is preparing for an invasion in Ukraine that may result in widespread human rights violations and war crimes, should diplomacy fail to meet their objectives,” Psaki said. Joe Biden will soon deliver remarks at the White House on the bipartisan infrastructure law, which the president signed in November. The White House said Biden would be joined by Mitch Landrieu, the former New Orleans mayor who is overseeing implementation of the infrastructure law. According to Biden’s official schedule, his remarks will focus on “how the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law will rebuild America’s bridges, which are critical for getting to school and work, moving commerce, and connecting communities”. Stay tuned. Jen Psaki was asked for the White House’s message to Joe Biden’s supporters who are disappointed that they have not seen significant progress made on voting rights, climate change and student debt, among other issues. “Our message to them is that we’re still fighting for absolutely every component of what you just listed,” the White House press secretary said. “Right now we’re dealing with the realities of the fact that we have a very slim majority in the Senate and in the House. That makes things more challenging than they have been in the past.” Psaki argued the administration had seen major successes on a variety of other fronts, including boosting coronavirus vaccination rates and helping schools reopen safely. “So the message from the president to them is, he is committed to continuing to fight,” Psaki said. “He’s going to stay at it.” Biden will likely reiterate that message next Wednesday, when he holds a formal press conference to mark one year since he took office. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing with reporters, and she opened her remarks with an important announcement about Joe Biden’s schedule. The president will hold a formal press conference next Wednesday at 4pm, as he marks one year in office. Biden will likely face an array of difficult questions about his failures to pass the Build Back Better Act or a voting rights bill, which are two of his top legislative priorities. In comparison to his recent predecessors, the president has held relatively few press conferences over his first year in office, although the Psaki often emphasizes that Biden frequently takes questions from reporters in more informal settings. The US allegations of Russia planning a false flag operation to justify invading Ukraine come just as Ukraine is reeling from a massive cyber-attack that affected the websites of several government departments. The Guardian’s Luke Harding reports: Officials said it was too early to draw any conclusions but they pointed to a ‘long record’ of Russian cyber assaults against Ukraine, with the attack coming after security talks between Moscow and the US and its allies this week ended in stalemate. Suspected Russian hackers left a message on the foreign ministry website, according to reports. It said: ‘Ukrainians! … All information about you has become public. Be afraid and expect worse. It’s your past, present and future.”’ The message reproduced the Ukrainian flag and map crossed out. It mentioned the Ukrainian insurgent army, or UPA, which fought against the Soviet Union during the second world war. There was also a reference to ‘historical land’. Speaking at the White House briefing yesterday, national security adviser Jake Sullivan said the US has been “very clear with Russia on the costs and consequences of further military action or destabilization in Ukraine”. Sullivan also sent the message that the Biden administration is prepared for all possible outcomes, whether Russia chooses to invade Ukraine or not. “We’re ready either way,” Sullivan said. “We’re ready to make progress at the negotiating table – serious, tangible progress on important issues of concern to us, to Europe, and to Russia in an environment of de-escalation. “And we’re ready to take the necessary and proper steps to defend our allies, support our partners, and respond robustly to any naked aggression that might occur.” Sullivan said the White House has made its case that diplomacy, rather than increased aggression, is “the more sensible path” for Russia. “The Russians will have to make their own assessment,” he concluded. The Guardian’s Julian Borger and Luke Harding report: The US has alleged Russia has already positioned saboteurs in Ukraine to carry out a false flag operation to use as a pretext for a Russian attack which Washington says could begin in the coming month. The allegations, following similar claims by the government in Kyiv, come after the failure of a week of diplomacy to defuse the crisis provoked by Russia’s massing of over 100,000 troops near Ukraine’s borders. Moscow has persistently portrayed the crisis as a military threat from Ukraine against Russia, without providing any evidence. “Russia is laying the groundwork to have the option of fabricating a pretext for invasion, including through sabotage activities and information operations, by accusing Ukraine of preparing an imminent attack against Russian forces in eastern Ukraine,” a US official said. “We have information that indicates Russia has already prepositioned a group of operatives to conduct a false-flag operation in eastern Ukraine.” “Russian influence actors already starting to fabricate Ukrainian provocations in state and social media,” the official said, noting that Russia used similar tactics ahead of the annexation of Crimea in 2014. Congresswoman Suzan DelBene, chair of the centrist New Democrat Coalition, called on her colleagues to recommit themselves to extending the expanded child tax credit program as families missed out on payments today. “Today is the first time in six months that 36 million families will not receive their monthly Child Tax Credit payments after the Senate failed to act at the end of last year,” DelBene said in a statement. “While parents will not be receiving this critical lifeline this month, bills are still coming in, food still needs to be put on the table, and the other costs of raising a family still need to be paid.” DelBene said the expanded program had “provided a historic tax cut to middle-class families and lifted 3.8 million children out of poverty,” underscoring the need to renew the policy. “I’m committed to continuing the discussion about how we continue to deliver for American families and show that governance can work for them,” DelBene said. “There is significant energy from Democrats in both chambers and the White House to get this over the finish line. American families cannot afford further inaction or delay.” The monthly checks from the expanded child tax credit program would have gone out today – if congressional Democrats had been able to pass their Build Back Better bill to extend the program. Instead, millions of American families will have to go without the money this month because Democrats were unable to pass the $1.75tn spending package due to objections from Senator Joe Manchin, a Democrat of West Virginia. Announcing his opposition last month, Manchin expressed concern about the cost of the legislation, saying, “I cannot take that risk with a staggering debt of more than $29 trillion and inflation taxes that are real and harmful to every hard-working American at the gasoline pumps, grocery stores and utility bills with no end in sight.” But for the thousands of families in West Virginia who had come to rely on the checks, Manchin’s stance means they will have to find another way to balance their budgets this month. According to the West Virginia Center for Budget and Policy, 50,000 children in the state are at risk of falling into poverty now that the checks have come to an end. Read Zack Harold’s story about the impact that the checks have had on West Virginia families: Politico has some details on what happened behind closed doors yesterday, as Joe Biden met with Senate Democrats to discuss filibuster reform and voting rights. Politico reports: Even as Democrats filed into their caucus meeting with Biden about changing Senate rules to reform federal elections, a response to GOP-backed state laws designed to restrict ballot access, a good portion of them were unaware they had already lost. Just minutes before the group’s meeting with Biden, [Kyrsten Sinema] slammed the door on weakening the filibuster during a speech on the Senate floor Biden once called home. ‘People were just surprised when we went in there. Because no one knew she was on the floor speaking’ in defense of the filibuster, said a Democratic senator who missed Sinema’s remarks. ‘There were probably 20 people in there that didn’t even know that she had said anything.’ Biden had prepared remarks for the meeting but instead opted to speak off-the-cuff, recalling that he got the late Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) to support the Voting Rights Act while they were both in Congress and arguing that a majority of today’s Republicans today wouldn’t support that landmark bill. Biden told senators he couldn’t remember a time in U.S. history where a party had been so enthralled to one person as the GOP is to former President Donald Trump. Joe Biden held a meeting with Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema at the White House last night for another discussion on filibuster reform and voting rights. The White House described the three Democrats’ conversation as “a candid and respectful exchange of views about voting rights”. Both Biden and Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer will likely still try to sway Manchin and Sinema on changing the filibuster, in the hopes of getting a voting rights bill passed before the midterms. But Manchin and Sinema have sounded quite adamant that they will not support rule changes to get a voting rights bill passed, so Biden and Schumer will have their work cut out for them. Kyrsten Sinema took to the Senate floor yesterday opposing any changes to the filibuster, the Senate rule that requires 60 votes to advance legislation, while Democrats currently hold a bare majority in the 100-seat chamber and two voting rights bills are stalled. “While I continue to support these [voting rights] bills, I will not support separate actions that worsen the underlying disease of division infecting our country,” she said. She added: “We must address the disease itself, the disease of division, to protect our democracy, and it cannot be achieved by one party alone. It cannot be achieved solely by the federal government. The response requires something greater and, yes, more difficult than what the Senate is discussing today.” Sinema’s speech came at an extremely perilous moment for US democracy. Republican lawmakers in 19 states have enacted 34 new laws, according to the Brennan Center for Justice, that impose new voting restrictions. They have also passed a slew of bills that seek to inject more partisan control into election administration and the counting of votes, an unprecedented trend experts are deeply concerned about and call election subversion. Many of those measures have been passed in state legislatures on simple majority, party-line votes. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden is scheduled to deliver a speech this afternoon on the bipartisan infrastructure law, which he signed in November. The remarks will focus on how the law “will rebuild America’s bridges, which are critical for getting to school and work, moving commerce, and connecting communities,” according to the White House. The speech comes one day after Biden was dealt a major defeat by two members of his own party in the debate over voting rights and filibuster reform. Senators Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin made it clear yesterday that they will not support changing the filibuster, leaving Democrats with no path for passing a voting rights bill. Simultaneously, Biden’s Build Back Better bill has also stalled in the Senate due to Manchin’s objections to the $1.75tn spending package. So, as Biden touts the infrastructure law today, keep in mind that it may be his last significant legislative accomplishment for the time being. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.The health minister, Greg Hunt, says Australia has reached a 95% first-dose vaccination rate for Australians aged 16 and older, while there are hopes the Omicron outbreaks in New South Wales, Victoria and the ACT are approaching their peak. Victoria recorded 23 Covid deaths and 25,526 new cases on Saturday and NSW reported 20 deaths and another 48,768 new infections. There were 2,576 people in hospital in NSW with Covid, 193 in intensive care. Victoria had 1,054 in hospital with the disease, 115 in ICU. Queensland, where domestic travellers were no longer required to show proof of a negative Covid test as of 1am on Saturday, reported six Covid deaths, including a person in their 20s, and 19,709 new cases. The Northern Territory recorded its second death of the pandemic, a 40-year-old woman from the Bagot Aboriginal community in Darwin. The territory recorded 412 new cases and there are 32 people in hospital, none in intensive care. The ACT recorded 1,320 new Covid cases, with 30 people hospitalised and three in intensive care. Tasmania reported 1,139 new coronavirus cases with 22 people with Covid in hospital, including one in intensive care. The chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, said there were signs the Omicron outbreaks in NSW, Victoria and the ACT were approaching their peak. “All predictions and now the actual forecasting based on actual numbers of cases, particularly in NSW but also in Victoria and ACT, leads me to believe that we are close to the peak of this wave in terms of cases,” he said. However, he noted that the true number of cases was likely higher than what was being reported due to pressures on the testing system. He said Western Australia, due to its border closures, was “another story”. “When they do start to get cases it will be later on,” he said. “But for most of the rest of Australia, we are still on that upward curve, we may be plateauing and then there is a downswing of cases after that.” Hunt said the 95% first-dose vaccination rate was “often referred to as a full vaccination level but we want to go further”. The double-dose vaccination rate in Australians aged 16 and over is 92.5% and 255,000 children aged five to 11 have received their first dose since becoming eligible on Monday. Hunt said 4.86 million Australians had received a booster dose of a vaccine and the pace of uptake had been faster than for the first and second doses. Hunt said a decision on the Novavax Covid vaccine – which is not yet available in Australia – was expected by the Therapeutic Goods Administration “in the coming 10 days”. Asked whether Australia would roll out a second booster shot at some stage, Hunt said the government would follow medical advice and was monitoring booster programs in other countries. Kelly said the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) would deliberate on fourth and subsequent doses and he had spoken to Israel’s ministry of health this week about its rollout of a second booster shot. He said Israel’s latest booster program was currently targeting groups with a higher risk of severe illness – including people over 60 and people with chronic illness – and healthcare workers. “They have started with that, they are still evaluating that program and they have promised in the coming weeks to share that evaluation with us,” he said. “It will be very helpful.” There was a high police presence outside Canberra’s Old Parliament House on Saturday after “sovereign citizen” protesters said they would “take Old Parliament House”. A video on social media showed people preparing for protests at a park in Canberra’s city centre, with speeches being given to an audience of dozens. “Did you notice how it was rainy ... and then the sun came out? It is because we are on the right side of history and doing God’s work,” one speaker told the crowd. Police largely cleared the protesters’ camp from the park opposite the now-museum on Friday, saying the group was illegally camping on commonwealth land. The Palmer United leader, Craig Kelly, who has been criticised for spreading “misleading” vaccine information, was seen at a “Voices 4 the Kids” protest against vaccination policies at Prince Alfred Park in Sydney.John Sainsbury, the former chairman of the supermarket chain, has died at the age of 94. Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover was the president of Sainsbury’s and also sat in the House of Lords as a Conservative. The supermarket’s current chairman, Martin Scicluna, announced the death on Friday evening, saying he had lived a “remarkable life”. “We are all deeply saddened to learn of the death of our life president, Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover. He was 94 and lived a remarkable life. “During his 40-year career with the company, Lord Sainsbury led the business through a period of great change and had a major impact on retail in the UK in the 20th century.” John Sainsbury began working in his family’s business in 1950, initially taking on a role in the grocery department before becoming a director in 1958, followed by deputy chairman in 1967 – a role which he took over from his father. Then in 1969, he was appointed chairman and chief executive which he held until his retirement in 1992. Scicluna said: “Under his stewardship we modernised our stores, developed our food ranges and floated Sainsbury’s on the London Stock Exchange in what was, at the time, the UK’s largest-ever initial public offering. “He was knighted by Her Majesty the Queen in 1980 for services to the food retailing industry, made a life peer in 1989 and in 1992 was appointed as one of only 24 Knights of the Garter. “In recent years he hosted a visit by Her Majesty the Queen to celebrate the 150th anniversary of our business. He will be greatly missed by the board and all his friends and colleagues at Sainsbury’s. “We send our condolences to Lord Sainsbury’s wife, Lady Sainsbury, and the rest of the Sainsbury family.” Scicluna added that Lord Sainsbury was a shopkeeper “to his core and one of the great retailers of his time”. “He was ambitious for the company and led Sainsbury’s through an unprecedented period of growth; he was a truly inspirational man. “While he will be missed by many, his huge contribution to Sainsbury’s and the values he cared about and believed in so much will remain alive at the heart of our business.” • This article was amended on 16 January 2022. Martin Scicluna is the chairman of Sainsbury’s, but not also its chief executive, as an earlier version said. Simon Roberts is the current chief executive.Tennis champion Novak Djokovic, who has been described as a risk to “civil unrest” and a “talisman of anti-vaccination sentiment”, may never get the chance to defend his Australian Open title, facing a three-year ban from the country ahead of a last-ditch court challenge to stay. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, personally cancelled the unvaccinated world No 1’s visa, arguing his presence in Australia could incite “civil unrest” and encourage others to eschew vaccination against Covid-19. Djokovic faces a federal court hearing Sunday morning, Australia time, which will determine whether the minister acted unreasonably in rescinding his visa. Documents filed in the court reveal the minister’s reasons sent to Djokovic as justification for cancelling his visa. Hawke said he accepted Djokovic’s recent Covid-19 infection meant he was a “negligible risk to those around him”, but that he was “perceived by some as a talisman of a community of anti-vaccine sentiment”. “I consider that Mr Djokovic’s ongoing presence in Australia may lead to an increase in anti-vaccination sentiment generated in the Australian community, potentially leading to an increase in civil unrest of the kind previously experienced in Australia with rallies and protests which may themselves be a source of community transmission. “Mr Djokovic is … a person of influence and status. “Having regard to … Mr Djokovic’s conduct after receiving a positive Covid-19 result, his publicly stated views, as well as his unvaccinated status, I consider that his ongoing presence in Australia may encourage other people to disregard or act inconsistently with public health advice and policies in Australia.” Djokovic’s visa was cancelled under the extraordinary and broad powers vested in the Australian immigration minister under section 133C(3) of Australia’s Migration Act, introduced in 2014 when Scott Morrison, the current prime minister, was immigration minister. Having had a visa cancelled under that section, a person is barred from returning to Australia for three years, except in extraordinary circumstances “that affect the interests of Australia or compassionate or compelling circumstances affecting the interests of an Australian citizen”. Hawke said the consequences of Djokovic’s visa cancellation were “significant”. “Mr Djokovic regularly travels to Australia to compete in tennis tournaments … this visa cancellation … may affect his ability to be granted a visa to enter Australia in the future.” If the three-year ban is upheld against Djokovic, he would be 37 or 38 years old before being allowed back into Australia, to compete in a tournament he has won a record nine times. Djokovic’s legal team argued the minister failed to consider that the government’s detention of Djokovic and his potential forced removal from Australia might also incite anti-vaccination sentiment. In documents submitted to the court, lawyers for Djokovic argued the minister took an “illogical, irrational, [and] unreasonable approach to… the question of public interest” and his own exercise of ministerial discretion. “The minister cited no evidence that supported his finding that Mr Djokovic’s presence in Australia may ‘foster anti-vaccination sentiment’, and it was not open to the minister to make that finding.” Djokovic’s lawyers argued the minister’s characterisation that Djokovic held anti-vaccination views was unjustified, based on selectively edited historical comments in the media, and which had been repudiated by subsequent public statements that he was “not against vaccination”. Djokovic confirmed in his airport interview that he was not vaccinated against Covid-19. Migration law experts have questioned why, if the Australian government held concerns Djokovic would inspire anti-vaccination sentiment in Australia, this was not considered in the original decision to grant him a visa on 18 November, or when his visa was first cancelled at the airport. Djokovic’s treatment has drawn fierce reaction in Serbia, where the Belgrade-born player is a national hero. Serbia’s president, Aleksandar Vučić, went on social media to denounce “harassment” and a “political witch-hunt” targeting “the best tennis player in the world”, while the foreign ministry said he had been “lured to Australia to be humiliated”. The Djokovic visa saga has now run 10 days, a distraction from surging Omicron variant case numbers across Australia, a lack of tests, shortages of food and other essentials, and a public health system under acute strain. Djokovic arrived in Australia on the evening of 5 January. He believed that a visa granted on 18 November and an exemption approved by Tennis Australia’s chief medical officer and a Victorian government independent expert panel would be sufficient to enter Australia After late-night questioning at Melbourne airport, Djokovic’s visa was initially cancelled by a delegate of the home affairs minister last Thursday, on the basis a recent Covid infection by itself was not sufficient for an exemption from Australia’s strict vaccination requirements. The delegate concluded that, since he was unvaccinated, Djokovic posed a risk to public health. But on Monday, a federal circuit court judge restored Djokovic’s visa, concluding it was unreasonable for the Australian Border Force to renege on a deal to give him more time at the airport to contact his legal team and to address the exemption. Government lawyers immediately put the Australian Open No 1 seed on notice that the immigration minister would consider exercising his personal power to again cancel the visa. Djokovic faced a nervous wait, with questions about his travel in the fortnight before arriving in Australia and attendance at events after his positive Covid diagnosis on 16 December. On Wednesday, Djokovic conceded his agent made an “administrative mistake” when declaring he had not travelled in the two weeks before his flight to Australia and acknowledged an “error of judgment” by not isolating after he tested positive for Covid. Hawke said these were not significant factors in his decision to cancel Djokovic’s visa, and he accepted Djokovic’s explanations. Djokovic has been returned to immigration detention at the Park Hotel in Melbourne. The hotel, which has been commandeered by the government, also currently holds more than 30 refugees, some of whom have been held in Australian detention centres for nine years. The hotel has been the epicentre of repeated Covid-19 outbreaks. Several hundred self-proclaimed “freedom” protesters, opposed to vaccine mandates, rallied in support of Djokovic in Melbourne on Saturday, demanding he be allowed to play. The group says it will protest outside the federal court on Sunday. Djokovic’s case will be heard before the full bench of the court on Sunday morning, Australia time. If he loses, he faces removal from Australia. The Australian Open begins on Monday.Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, who at the height of unrest last week said he had ordered troops to shoot to kill without warning, has spent this week taking a softer line and promising genuine reform. However, with thousands of people still in detention and a behind-the-scenes power struggle still not fully resolved, many have expressed scepticism. “People who have carried out serious crimes will be punished in accordance with the law,” Tokayev wrote on Twitter on Friday. “For others, I order the prosecutor to determine their level of guilt, and if there are no aggravating circumstances, to soften their punishment.” More than 10,000 people have been detained during the past two weeks. At the height of the protests, Tokayev said “20,000 terrorists” had attacked Kazakhstan’s largest city, Almaty, but these numbers seem to have been quietly revised. On Thursday, the prosecutor’s office said 494 criminal cases had been opened, including 44 for terrorism. Most of those detained instead faced administrative charges with a maximum of 15 days in jail. Journalists and rights activists say there is little transparency about the criminal charges and still no reliable figure for the number of people who died in the violence. An earlier figure of 164, published by a government-linked source, was later retracted. Even in the west of the country, where the protests began over a sharp increase in fuel prices, and where events remained largely peaceful, police rounded up hundreds of people involved in the demonstrations. Max Bokay, a longstanding rights activist in the western city of Atyrau, said by telephone that about 500 people had been detained in the region, often by police who came to their homes after Tokayev implemented a state of emergency last week. He only knew of one case where criminal charges had been launched, but said people detained on administrative charges had spoken of intimidation and beatings. Bokay, who was arrested at a 2016 protest and spent five years in jail before being released last year, said this time he had not been detained, although he had been “roughed up” by a group of men on the street during the days of protest. “And just today, a few hours ago, there were people kicking my apartment door, probably because today I had a one-person protest against torture in jails, I guess it’s an intimidation tactic,” he said on Friday. The protests, over economic and political demands, were apparently hijacked by an intra-elite battle between Tokayev and figures close to Nursultan Nazarbayev, the country’s president from its founding in 1991 until 2019, when he handpicked Tokayev as his successor. Karim Masimov, head of the KNB security services and a former prime minister under Nazarbayev, has been arrested on treason charges and accused of trying to seize power, along with two of his deputies. He has not been seen or heard from since the protests began. Yermukhamet Yertysbayev, a former minister and Nazarbayev adviser, blamed “reactionary and conservative forces from the Nazarbayev clan” for stoking the unrest. “I think negotiations are ongoing, and there is a search for a compromise,” he said. At the height of the protests, when Tokayev’s grip on Kazakhstan appeared shaky, he called on a Russia-led military alliance, the Collective Security Treaty Organisation, to intervene. More than 2,000 mostly Russian troops arrived, which helped shore up Tokayev’s position, and have already begun their departure. Observers say the mission, while brief, has put Tokayev in Vladimir Putin’s debt and placed Kazakhstan more firmly in Moscow’s orbit. Putin has described the unrest as a “coloured revolution” backed by nefarious forces in the west, leading many people to fear a crackdown on what remains of Kazakh civil society. Echoing Putin, Tokayev accused the independent media of helping fan the protests. “We were very disappointed to hear those words,” said Vyacheslav Abramov, the editor-in-chief of the news portal Vlast.kz. “It’s very clear that it’s not media, it’s not civil society, who are responsible for the crisis – it’s the people in power.” So far, Tokayev has not acted against media outlets, and has announced a series of measures aimed at winning popular support, including setting up a new fund for public good to which oligarchs and wealthy businessman will be forced to contribute. Abramov said there were now three possible scenarios: “The first is that we have a massive crackdown, like in Belarus; the second is that we go back to where we were before the crisis; and the third one we are going towards real reforms.” The third option seemed the least likely, he added.After being in bed with Covid for nearly two weeks, it feels good to be out and about again. I drive down to Low Park Farm – the abandoned farm we own – with my dog in the Gator, a small four-wheel-drive vehicle. Crucially this vehicle has both a roof and a heater, which has made winter work significantly more comfortable than travelling by quad bike. I park by the derelict buildings and turn off the engine. I can hear the distant hum of the motorway that cut off the access to this farm in the 1970s, effectively closing it down after 300 years. My family has kept the land in use, though, and right now there is a huge amount of work to do. While I have been ill, 1,800 trees have arrived from a Yorkshire nursery to be planted – mainly blackthorn, alder, rowan and larch (oaks were not part of the delivery because they attract grey squirrels and this project is to expand habitat for reds). There are four relic hedges to restore and one kilometre of fencing to put up to remove livestock from an area of ancient woodland so that it can regenerate. There is a new pond to dig for the snipe that have nested here for the first time this year after some field drains blocked. Instead of unblocking the drains, we will let nature take priority and make the area of wet ground a permanent feature. Today, I load up the back of the Gator with wood that has been trimmed from the edges of the area to be fenced. This will be stored for a year and then used as firewood. It is our only means of heating and hot water in the farmhouse that we live in. Our main task tomorrow will be to stack the wood so that it can season before being burned. I still feel exhausted, but while there is work to do I need to get outside and work as much as I can. Hibernation is not an option – there are habitats to restore and new ones to create. Hill farming has many different facets in the 21st century. Looking after livestock is just a part of it. As the Gator returns to the farmyard, I can hear the cows calling me for their afternoon feed. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryWhile digging through the compost bins at our restaurant, Poco, in Bristol, spent lemon rinds were one of the first food-waste products that we identified as a potential new ingredient. Later, at Slow Food’s Terra Madre conference in Italy, I came across a delicious lemon marmalade in which the rinds were cut into small shards, and that inspired this recipe. Stock leftover lemon rinds in the fridge or freezer, ready to use on demand. Fry slices to add to salads, preserve them in salt, or make them into an oh-so-tasty spent lemon rind marmalade, to spread on toast or to upcycle into a tart, from my book Eating for Pleasure, People &amp; Planet. To make it, cut 300g spent lemon rinds (unwaxed and organic, for preference) into rough pieces, then pulse-blend into 3-5mm pieces. Put these in a pan with a litre and a half of water, bring to a boil, then turn down the heat and simmer for about 35 minutes, until the peel is soft. Add 600g sugar, boil for a further 20 minutes, stirring regularly, until it thickens, then store in a 500ml sterilised jar. Spent lemon rind marmalade tart This tart encapsulates the idea of root-to-fruit eating, taking an ingredient that would have otherwise gone to waste and elevating it to a scrumptious dessert. It’s a bit like a vegan version of the River Cafe’s famous lemon tart, but feel free to use non-vegan shortcrust if you have some to hand. The pastry, which is super-nutty, nutritious and flavourful, is crumbly but very forgiving, and can be moulded into place. Makes 1 x 20cm tart or 3 x 8cm tarts, or enough to serve 6 For the pastry 120g mixed nuts and seeds, toasted in a dry pan, then ground to a flour in a food processor 80g wholemeal flour (eg khorasan, spelt, wheat) 80g buckwheat flour (or an extra 80g wholemeal flour) 40g ground flax or linseeds 60g unrefined sugar (optional) 60ml extra-virgin olive oil, plus extra for greasing For the filling 400g silken tofu, drained (organic or biodynamic, for preference) 250g lemon marmalade (see above) 1½ tbsp cornflour ¼ tsp dried turmeric 4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil Yoghurt of your choice, to serve Pulse-blend all the pastry ingredients and 80ml cold water until they come together into a dough. Turn out into a bowl, knead lightly and shape into a ball. Cover and put in the fridge to rest for half an hour (or keep in the fridge for up to two weeks). Using your fingertips, gently press the pastry into a 20cm tart case (or three 8cm ones) until it is an even thickness of about 3–5mm. Cut off any excess pastry overhang and save or bake into biscuits, then prick the base of the tart all over with a fork, so the pastry won’t puff up in the oven. Bake for 15 minutes in a 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 oven, then set aside to cool in the tin(s). Meanwhile, make the filling. Drain the tofu, wrap it in a clean tea towel and press out any excess moisture. Next, blend the tofu with the marmalade, cornflour, turmeric and oil until very smooth. Pour the filling into tart case(s) and bake in a 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5 oven for 15 minutes. Remove from the oven, then scorch the top slightly with a blowtorch or under a very hot grill, taking care not to burn the pastry. Serve with a spoonful of your favourite yoghurt and a dollop of extra lemon marmalade.Going Out: Cinema Scream Out now New year, new Scream. Back after a gap of 11 years (if you don’t count the so-so TV show), this sequel/reboot combines a nostalgia fix – in the form of re-appearances from surviving original Scream characters – with modern anxieties such as: what if Ghostface hacked into the smart home apps linked to your mobile? Memoria Out now An arthouse essential, Memoria follows Tilda Swinton’s Jessica Holland as she attempts to trace the source of a mysterious noise in the jungles of Colombia. Fans of Apichatpong Weerasethakul will thrill to this unique director’s typically confident and singular approach, but this is also a great starting point for those new to his work. Cow Out now Director Andrea Arnold is probably better known for fiction than documentary (see: American Honey, Red Road, Fish Tank …) but her fiction always has a bracing, documentary feel. It makes sense then, that her new documentary about the life of a dairy cow has lyrical, fictive qualities. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs Yazz Ahmed Ronnie Scott’s, London, 17 January Yazz Ahmed (above) lists performing with Radiohead and Lee “Scratch” Perry on her CV, but the British-Bahraini trumpeter-composer’s blossoming as a global-jazz bandleader – splicing electronics, dancefloor grooves, Miles Davis, Kenny Wheeler, Arabic music, and much more – broadens the creative music-making of an already eclectic career. John Fordham Kazuki Yamada Symphony Hall, Birmingham, 19 &amp; 20 January The City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra’s principal conductor designate returns to the orchestra for the first time since his appointment was announced last September. Kazuki Yamada conducts Strauss, Mozart and Mahler, with Fatma Said as the soprano soloist in concert arias by Mozart, and Mahler’s Fourth Symphony. Andrew Clements Emeli Sandé 15 January to 19 January; tour starts Sunderland With work continuing on her fourth album, the ubiquitous-in-2013 Emeli Sandé heads out on a short UK tour in support of recent single Look What You’ve Done. The 19 Jan London date at the Roundhouse is part of In the Round festival, which also features the likes of Goat Girl and Richard Dawson. Godspeed You! Black Emperor 18 to 22 January; tour starts London Why not ease yourself into 2022 with a blast of post-punk noise from Canada’s 10-piece sonic experimentalists? Last year’s seventh album, G_d’s Pee at State’s End! – their fourth since regrouping in 2012 – continues their love affair with epic song suites saturated in oppressive bleakness, but there are hints of light, too. Michael Cragg * * * Going Out: Stage Dr Semmelweis Bristol Old Vic, 20 January to 12 February Tom Morris directs Mark Rylance (above) in an oh-so-welcome return to the stage. Rylance plays the maverick Doctor Semmelweis, who is haunted by the ghosts of dead mothers – and determined to introduce radical change. But will the medical establishment back him? London international mime festival Various London venues, to 6 February Following an online-only outing last year, London’s annual festival of visual theatre – including dance, mime, circus and farce – returns. Featuring Sean Gandini’s contemporary juggling and Barely Methodical Troupe’s spellbinding circus-theatre show Kin. Miriam Gillinson Wild Card: Akeim Toussaint Buck Sadler’s Wells: Lilian Baylis Studio, 20 January &amp; 21 February Jamaican-born dance artist Akeim Toussaint Buck takes over Sadler’s Wells’ studio theatre to curate an evening of dance, live music and spoken word by artists all concerned with social change. London duo Fubunation, dancer Alethia Antonia and Toussaint Buck himself will examine race, identity, oppression, trauma and joy. Lyndsey Winship Live at the Empire With Guz Khan Hackney Empire, London, 21 January The Coventry comic and Man Like Mobeen star helms a high-calibre east London night featuring Dane Baptiste, Suzi Ruffell, Maisie Adam and Brett Goldstein, who has recently enjoyed a vertiginous rise to comedy stardom thanks to his Emmy-winning turn as fiery footballer Roy Kent in Ted Lasso. Rachel Aroesti * * * Going Out: Art Danielle Dean Tate Britain, 5 February to 8 May Research at the Ford Motor Company in Detroit and information from a network of online collaborators inspired this California-based artist’s new multi-channel video installation that investigates capitalism, consumerism and the 21st-century workplace – not exactly escapist stuff. The labour practices and marketing techniques of Amazon take centre stage. Testament Goldsmiths CCA, London, 21 January to 3 April The art of the memorial has never been more contested. In a time of impasssioned arguments about statues and how to remember the pandemic’s victims, this exhibition invites some of the most radical artists around to rethink the monument. Monster Chetwynd, Mark Wallinger and Jeremy Deller are among the iconoclasts. Astronomy Photographer of the Year National Maritime Museum, London, to 7 August This is the time of year when clear winter skies make for perfect views of the stars and many people wonder if it’s worth braving the cold to dust down that old telescope. This exhibition celebrates truly dedicated enthusiasts of all ages and their mesmerising photos of nebulae and other wonders. Wang Gongxin White Cube Mason’s Yard, London, 19 January to 19 February One of the great themes of painting is explored here without using a paintbrush. Wang Gongxin ponders the subtleties of light and shadow in art - and their contrasting use in European and Chinese painting traditions - through video, kinetic installations and marble sculpture. Swaying lightbulbs and troughs of dyed water create luminous nuance. Jonathan Jones * * * Staying In: Streaming Ozark Out 21 January, Netflix An unlikely life of crime plus domestic strife usually equals binge-worthy Netflix drama– and this nail-biting Missouri-set show starring Jason Bateman and Laura Linney alongside Julia Garner (above), is no exception.Returning for the first half of a fourth and final series, closure and potentially even comeuppance are on the horizon. Queens Out 19 January, Disney+ Fictional 90s girl bands: your time is now. Hot on the platform heels of Tina Fey’s Girls5Eva, comes another comedy drama about four middle-aged women rebooting their careers – in this case, once-respected rap group the Nasty Bitches. Promisingly, real-life music biz veterans Eve and Brandy both star. Servant Out 21 January, Apple TV+ With a premise involving the death of a baby, an uncanny nanny and what is known as a “reborn doll”, this inordinately creepy series from M Night Shyamalan counts Stephen King and Guillermo del Toro as fans. Expect more intricate plot twists and bone-chilling horror as it returns for a third series. As We See It Out 21 January, Amazon Prime Video Based on a hit Israeli series, this new comedy drama from Friday Night Lights creator Jason Katims revolves around three housemates with autism. Katims’s son has Asperger’s and the three lead actors all identify as being on the spectrum: signs the show should be full of valuable insight. Rachel Aroesti * * * Staying In: Games Tom Clancy’s Rainbow Six: Extraction Out 20 January, PC, PS4, PS5, Amazon Luna, Google Stadia and Xbox The phenomenal series of tactical military shooters goes off-piste here, pitting you and your teammates against alien parasites rather than terrorists Expeditions: Rome Out 20 January, PC A historical strategy game that’s a bit more up close and personal than the zoomed-out war games of, say, Age of Empires. Directly command a squad of Praetorians, and choose a path through a dramatic story. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Orlando Weeks – Hop Up Out now While 2020’s A Quickening, the former Maccabees frontman’s debut solo album, was suffused with jittering tension, this streamlined, sunlit follow-up is being billed as “joyful, loveful, playful, blue-sky music”. It’s there on the soft electronic pulse of Look Who’s Talking Now and 80s synth workout Bigger. Earl Sweatshirt – Sick! Out now The 27-year-old rapper, producer and Odd Future acolyte was working on a project called The People Could Fly when the pandemic hit. Acclimatising to the new global situation, he switched to Sick!, a 10-track album that offers up more of his inscrutable, freewheeling style, but with tinges of hope on the nostalgic single 201. Cat Power – Covers Out now For her 11th album, indie troubadour Chan Marshall returns to her love of interpretation, completing a trilogy of covers albums following 2000’s The Covers Record and 2008’s Jukebox. Here she tackles everything from Frank Ocean to Nick Cave to Billie Holiday, plus her own 2006 classic Hate, now reworked as Unhate. Bonobo – Fragments Out now Used to creating his records, including 2017’s critical and commercial breakthrough Migration, on the move, Sussex-born producer and DJ Simon Green, AKA Bonobo, had to contend with sudden stasis on its follow-up. Inspired by nature and old UK bass records, he slowly found his groove, with bucolic moments rubbing up against rave anthems. MC * * * Staying In : Brain food Roadrunner: A Film About Anthony Bourdain Amazon Prime Video In the three-and-a-half years since chef and broadcaster Anthony Bourdain’s tragic death, none have managed to replicate his uniquely emotive and intuitive reporting of food cultures. This film from director Morgan Neville examines the man’s genius. Finding Humanity findinghumanitypodcast.com Harvard fellow Hazami Barmada hosts the fourth season of this podcast examining humanitarian causes and interviewing the activists who have devoted their lives to them. Episodes look at tackling food insecurity, colourism, undocumented statuses and more. #SlowShakespeare caths.cam.ac.uk/KingedUnkinged; Twitter Cambridge University senior lecturer Hester Lees-Jeffries leads this bite-sized and interactive close-reading group for Shakespeare’s texts via daily blog posts on her faculty website and Twitter. Currently tackling Macbeth, take a deep dive into the Bard’s ingenious plotting. Ammar KaliaIn fashion, the demise of skinny jeans is now old news. The style to replace them in 2022? That early 00s favourite: low rise jeans. Now, as then, it’s a case of the lower the waistband the better. Models Emily Ratajkowski and Bella Hadid and singer Dua Lipa have been wearing baggy low rise styles since last summer, often with a yard of exposed midriff. And that other styling trick last seen in the 00s – the ‘whale tail’, or wearing low jeans with the strap of a G-string visible – is back too. Lizzo and Kim Kardashian West have experimented with this look. Ratajkowski, and fellow models Kendall Jenner and Emily Fox have all been seen trying out ‘thong jeans’. Rather than jeans worn low to show the wearer’s underwear, these have the straps pre-sewn into the waistband. It’s not just celebrities. Searches for low rise jeans are up 58% year on year on global fashion shopping platform Lyst. On resale app Depop, searches are up 36% in the last three weeks. Asos, which sells thong jeans, predicts low rise jeans sales to increase this year. The trend is part of a wider interest in Y2K style from Gen Z. Alexander McQueen debuted his so-called bumsters in 1996 – trousers worn so low that the top of the wearer’s bum cheeks were exposed – while Tom Ford’s Gucci had visible thong straps, and sometimes just thongs, on the catwalk around the same time. By the early 00s, low rise jeans were worn by celebrities including Keira Knightley, Jennifer Lopez and Destiny’s Child, and the whale tail was on the red carpet, worn by Christina Milian and Pamela Anderson. Asal Tehrani, the woman behind Bella Hadid’s favourite Depop shop @susamusa, credits this influence of this era. “Low rise jeans are proving popular because of the resurgence of the early 00s,” she says. “I think of Paris Hilton and The Simple Life, Jennifer Lopez and Keira Knightley’s red carpet moment.” Morgane Le Caer, content lead at Lyst, agrees. “From tube tops to velour tracksuits, trends from the 00s have been making a noteworthy comeback among Gen Z shoppers and TikTok users,” she says “so it was only a matter of time before low-rise jeans made it into their wardrobes.” To get the look, Tehrani recommends searching for brands Miss Sixty, Von Dutch and True Religion on vintage apps and sites. New brands are also involved in the trend. Miaou, a label launched by Alexia Elkaim in 2016 and now known for its corsets, began selling thong pants in 2021. She was directly inspired by “the girls I looked up to in the early 00s representing the whale tails.” She says the thong pants were an instant hit: “our customer base was excited and we sold far more than expected”. While Elkaim wasn’t surprised, she does acknowledge this is a more extreme end of a trend. “It appeals to the girl that is daring enough to show her thong,” she says. “It’s definitely a statement.” Whether or not low rise jeans will continue to grow as a trend, and eclipse other denim styles, is still unclear. “The question is – will low-rise jeans take over high-rise jeans in 2022?” says La Caer. Tehrani thinks not – because they do not have the same mass appeal. “As much as low rise jeans are iconic, they are definitely a statement piece,” she says. “They are more daring to wear and harder to pull off compared to a classic high waisted fit. I don’t think low rise jeans will become the dominant denim style because they are not made for all body shapes.”The word “snowmageddon” emerged a few years ago to describe unusually disruptive snowstorms. Now authorities in Alaska have coined the term “icemageddon” for problems caused by wildly fluctuating weather conditions. In December, Alaska experienced record-breaking temperatures, up to an unprecedented 19.4C (66.9F) followed by the heaviest rainfall in decades. Fairbanks, Alaska, had its wettest December day ever. Both occurred because a mass of warm, moist air arrived from the direction of Hawaii, at a time of year that is usually cool and dry. Temperatures plummeted to the seasonal norm below freezing shortly afterwards, leaving roads covered with sheets of ice. Fresh snow can be cleared relatively easily, but ice frozen on to a road surface is more difficult to remove. Alaska’s Department of Transportation and Public Facilities used the hashtag #icemageddon2021 in tweets related to the developing situation, which brought flight cancellations and other travel disruptions. Rick Thoman of the Alaska Center for Climate Assessment and Policy suggested the unusual conditions could be the result of climate breakdown. Dramatic terms such as icemageddon might seem excessive; unlike the biblical Armageddon, it is not the end of the world. But such language may help alert people to the fact these are serious conditions, sometimes unlike anything seen in their lifetime, and which require special attention.Whether it’s to jazz up a simple outfit – or add substance to an evening one once we start socialising again – a blazer means business, and can be paired with trousers or skirts, jumpers, blouses, even camisole tops. Gingham adds an extra layer of fun to a blazer – and purple is one of the colours of the season, too. Coloured cord is also sought after, and Boden’s jacket in baby pink brings a slice of classic Americana to any outfit. Opting for a leather blazer requires a bit of thought. Think about the trousers, shoes and top you’re going to pair it with. In terms of the blazer itself, go with a classic, base colour from which you can grow your outfit. Finally, if in doubt, black is always the answer. Lauren Cochrane * * * Buy it Gingham, £40, onki.com Combine this summer-style print with a polo neck for winter. Pink cord, £100, boden.co.uk Worn with a white shirt, colourful corduroy is anything but stuffy. Black leather, £290, arket.com An oversized style looks edgy with cropped trousers. * * * Rent it Burgundy silk by Dolce &amp; Gabbana, £78 for 4 days’ rental from mywardrobe.com Try styling silk with wide-leg trousers and a camisole top. Silver, by Anouki, £25 for 4 days’ rental from rotaro.com Pair a simple black dress with a statement-style print. Peach linen, by Theory, from £49.86 from selfridgesrental.com Perfect for daywear, yet casual enough for the evening. * * * Thrift Striped, by River Island, £15 from thrift.plus Back to school is a strong look – wear over a preppy V-neck jumper. Green silk, £38, allaboutaudrey.co.uk Double-breasted works well over a slip dress. Suede, £65, rokit.co.uk Channel the 1970s and wear this over a jumpsuit.Hidden Assets 9pm, BBC Four Here’s a gritty Irish crime drama to get stuck into over the next few weekends, starting with tonight’s double bill. Angeline Ball plays Irish Criminal Assets Bureau detective Emer Berry, who discovers that a bag of diamonds found during a local drugs bust is linked to a number of bombings. Cue an international investigation that leads the team to Belgium – specifically Antwerp, the diamond capital of the world. Hollie Richardson The Wall Versus Celebrities 6.55pm, BBC One Television’s most underappreciated gameshow host, Danny Dyer, returns with a couple of celebrities ready to take on The Wall. Married comedians Sarah Millican and Gary Delaney answer questions and navigate the new Superdrop feature to try to win money for their chosen charity. HR The Masked Singer 7pm, ITV Following the departure of Lionfish/Will “I think I’d better leave right now” Young, Mushroom, Firework, Robobunny and Doughnuts are back for the fourth elimination in the bonkers singing contest. Jonathan Ross, Davina McCall, Rita Ora and Mo Gilligan will again try to guess the celebrities in the costumes. HR Pointless Celebrities 7.45pm, BBC One Sitcom stars submit themselves to a poll-based trivia test: lining up to face Alexander Armstrong’s questions are wise old heads Robert Llewellyn and Nigel Planer, Steven Woodcock (Jevon from Only Fools and Horses), Helen Monks, Isy Suttie, Martin Trenaman and Derry Girls Jamie-Lee O’Donnell and Saoirse-Monica Jackson. Jack Seale Ant &amp; Dec’s Limitless Win 8.30pm, ITV If you watched last week’s opening episode of TV’s next big gameshow, hopefully you’ll have grasped how it works. Tonight, Zee and his dad Tony return to take on the Limitless money ladder – but will they climb high or fall off it? HR The John Bishop Show 9.30pm, ITV Bishop continues amiably to combine his own topical standup – the programme is recorded a few hours before transmission – with routines by other comics and some chat with fellow celebrities. Talking with him tonight is the paparazzi magnet and Brassic/Our Girl star Michelle Keegan. JS Live sport Premier League Football: Man City v Chelsea 11.30am, BT Sport 1. The top two in the table face each other at the Etihad Stadium. Champions Cup Rugby Union: Wasps v Toulouse 12.30pm, Channel 4. French scrum-half Antoine Dupont (pictured) and team visit the Coventry Building Society Arena. Snooker: The Masters 1.15pm, BBC One. The first semi-final, with the final on BBC Two from 1pm tomorrow. Premier League Football: Aston Villa v Man United 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The teams meet again following Villa’s FA Cup defeat last Monday.It is the season of things coming off in your hands: drawer knobs, door latches, cupboard handles. Everywhere is disintegration and fatigue, down to the very metal. Reach out, turn it, pull it towards you, and it’s yours. On Monday evening the youngest one snaps off the brass latch handle while trying to open the front door. He shows me the piece, shorn away by the force of his grip. “It’s not like I even pulled that hard,” he says. “How do we get out?” I say. We jam a screwdriver into the gap and find that with practice we can lever ourselves free. On Wednesday the cylindrical chrome wand that turns the kitchen tap from hot to cold comes loose from its socket while I’m washing up, screw threads somehow stripped. Nothing I do will make it stay, so I leave it in a saucer on a nearby shelf. The next day the youngest one pulls the handle off the back door, for good measure. “I guess I don’t know my own strength,” he says, presenting me with the remains. “Did you get bitten by a spider or something?” I say. I lift my glasses to examine in detail the grainy peaks and valleys of the fracture, a microscopic landscape contoured along unpredictable lines of tensile stress. “I was just trying to let the cat out,” he says. “The thing is, the back door was our emergency exit in the event we lost the front door screwdriver,” I say, holding the handle to the light. “What is this, zinc?” I fall asleep thinking about the impossibility of each of the repairs I am facing. Some things, once sundered, cannot be rejoined. There is no such glue. Later I am woken by a loud, tearing crack. I run downstairs to the kitchen to find the dog in a state of distress, wearing the cat flap like a skirt. The front door lock mechanism is, it transpires, under warranty. A repairman arrives after the weekend and fixes it in a matter of minutes. By the time I get there to watch him work, he is gone. Everything else is my problem. These are questions, I realise, not of practical skill but of very precise online ordering. Measure twice and cut once, say DIY experts. I say: order the exact same handle and use all the old screw holes. Unfortunately there is rather more to know about door handles than I imagined. They come sprung and unsprung, for regular or multipoint locking systems, and there is no such thing as a standard size. The manufacturers are also curiously resistant to branding: nowhere on my handle can I find a mark to say who made it, even after taking it to bits. I spend two days educating myself, plus a further afternoon taking precise measurements, before I’m confident I’ve tracked down a suitable replacement. With a tremendous rush of satisfaction, I press Confirm Order. That evening I find my wife looking at new cat flaps online. “Don’t do that without me,” I say. “Why not?” she says. “Did you want to choose the colour?” “We need one that’s big enough for the dog, but small enough for the existing hole,” I say. “We need, in short, the exact same one.” “This one looks the same,” she says. “We do not go by looks,” I say. “I’ll get a tape measure.” On Friday afternoon my handles arrive. It feels like my birthday. I shred the packaging in excitement, pull out a handle and examine it closely: anodised silver, double sprung, multipoint compatible. Then I look down into the box. When my wife next passes through the room I have my head in my hands. “Wrong, all wrong,” I say. “Looks OK to me,” she says, poking the handle. “You have no idea,” I say. “Please don’t tell me,” she says. I call the number on the invoice. After many minutes, a voice answers. “Shelley speaking. How may I help?” it says. I tell Shelley my name and reference number. “The ProLinea, was it?” she says. “Yes,” I say. “But I ordered the model with the 240mm backing plate. This is the 220.” There is a long silence at the other end. “Oh no,” says Shelley. “That’s not good.” Shelley, I realise, is the only person in the world who understands what I’m going through. She knows exactly how misaligned my screw holes are. “I’m sorry,” I say. “It’s not your fault,” she says. “I’ll get the right one out to you, but it won’t get processed now til Monday.” “That’s fine, Shelley,” I say. But I know that she knows I am crushed.Carlos on Tom What were you hoping for? Someone fun, ambitious and interesting. First impressions? Well dressed. Great smile. Tall. What did you talk about? Careers. We talked about our travel stories – he is very well travelled and talked about his time in South America. Gay pride. Any awkward moments? Our mutual lactose-intolerance status. It made for a great topic of conversation when we were browsing the dessert menu. I don’t think the waiter fully understood when Tom said he couldn’t have dairy – he was presented with scoops of ice-cream. Good table manners? He holds his wine glass by the stem and shared his food, so it’s a yes from me. I wouldn’t say the same for myself – I dropped my steak knife in my lap after almost stabbing myself with it. Best thing about Tom? He’s ambitious and knows what he wants out of life. And Tegwen, his dog. Would you introduce him to your friends? I’m not too sure they’d have much in common, but why not? Describe Tom in three words? Ambitious, chilled and a traveller. What do you think he made of you? I’d like to think that I was funny. Did you go on somewhere? The restaurant asked if we wanted to go to the sky bar, but it was already 11 – I was on call the next day and he had a PT session in the morning. And … did you kiss? The date wasn’t going that way. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? The dairy-based cheese menu. Marks out of 10? 7/10. We have stuff in common but want different things out of life. Would you meet again? Yeah, for sure, as friends. Tom on Carlos What were you hoping for? Someone kind, open and passionate. First impressions? Tall, handsome and a little nervous. What did you talk about? Learning languages, our travels, my dog, Tegwen, Carlos’s passion for plants and the quirky gigs he goes to. Any awkward moments? The dessert menu was not very lactose-intolerant friendly. My only choice was sorbet – and they still put in balls of ice-cream! Good table manners? Impeccable. We talked a lot, so our food went cold, but it was worth it. Best thing about Carlos? Very unassuming, but accomplished. His mum must be proud. Would you introduce him to your friends? Sure! But he’s the type of person I’d prefer to spend time with in a more chilled setting. Describe Carlos in three words? Kind, caring and modest. What do you think he made of you? That I didn’t shut up! This was my first night out in a while due to illness, and I was glad to engage with someone new. Did you go on somewhere? We spent three hours in the restaurant, so it was already quite late, and he was working early the next day. So, no. And … did you kiss? Just a friendly hug. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? More dessert options for the lactose-intolerant community. Marks out of 10? 10, a perfect gentleman. Would you meet again? As friends, yes. He’s already promised to take me to a gig sometime. Carlos and Tom ate at Gino D’Acampo’s My Restaurant, Liverpool. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comI don’t know if you remember, but a few years ago, when YouTube figured out its algorithm and vloggers suddenly went stratospheric, there were a number of failed attempts to port internet-famous people over to actual TV. So, like, Zoella would turn up at some point. A boyish-faced YouTuber would chuckle through an entire ITV panel show without saying anything. Someone with a gossip channel would clunkily work the red carpet before a low-level awards show. This was all fine, but the experiments were doomed – YouTubers thrive when they are in complete control of their jump cuts, how often they are allowed to make a squealing noise, and whether everything they’ve said can turn out to be a prank all along. None of those tropes sat comfortably on actual television, for people with fully developed prefrontal cortexes. There’s an uneasy parlay between TV and internet video now – KSI is always doing Bake Off or something, Saffron Barker did Strictly – but fundamentally they are two opposed worlds. YouTube is always going to be for people who get excited to see how much a balloon can be inflated before it explodes. Television can’t compete with that. But there’s a chance BBC Three have just cracked it. Zen School of Motoring (available from 16 January) is a directly internet-inspired new show. It started life as a quietly revered YouTube series, and takes cues from the emerging forms and shapes the internet throws up – such as ASMR whispering and the sort of visual essays of Instagram Reels or TikTok – but makes them square-shaped in a way that feels just as TV as it does iPlayer. I don’t want to overhype it but Zen School of Motoring might be so transcendentally good that it bridges the ravine between the internet and TV for ever. First, the format: it’s a camera strapped to the front of a car as it drives through London. That is it. If you are thinking this is going to be like race-through-Paris short film It Was a Date, no: Zen … is far more pondering and meditative than that, mostly because, due to the density of traffic around Stamford Hill, our host Ogmios is forced to take a slower, more deliberate route. Every pause is narrated. Every sight is absorbed and appreciated. We stop in a cul-de-sac to watch an Amazon delivery robot struggle up a high kerb. We slow to allow a pigeon to cross the road. We congratulate ourselves for noticing a pedestrian about to cross from behind a parked van. We give appreciative waves to those who let us out of exits. We stop when a parked car has balloons tied to it for a birthday. We get caught between two garbage trucks and realise it is bin day. This is slice-of-life stuff that you could notice every day if you paid attention, but being smoothly talked through it by someone who knows the veins of the city so well elevates them to something profound. There are recurring themes – potholes, waving, a corner where there’s always a man in a white coat doing something horrifying involving butchered meat – and, over time, it all starts to add up. Ogmios is a careful, empathetic driver – perfect signalling, patient lingering behind vans struggling to make simple turns – and what happens as we drive with him is curiously calming and life-affirming. It makes me want to be a more considerate user of roads; it makes me realise just how many people I interact with every single day. “I appreciate the ‘thank you’ lights,” Ogmios whispers, as a taxi undertakes him through Angel, “but I think you gotta drive a bit better in future.” It feels like getting a massage while watching a driver’s education video after a speeding offence. It feels like being reprogrammed in how to treat people around us in a vast world. To an unabsorbed watcher, Zen … is just dashcam footage with a narrative track over the top (I’m pretty sure ITV used to do the same show during the early hours of Saturday evening before You’ve Been Framed came on). But that’s like saying comedic advice series How to With John Wilson is just footage of litter narrated by a nerd. Pay attention to Zen … – put your phone down and commit entirely for the ride – and it will cleanse your spirit like a meditation app. We’ve finally figured out how the internet works on TV. All it needs is a GoPro attached to a car trying to get out from between these buses.Newly released photos and videos showing train tracks littered with discarded boxes have cast fresh attention on the theft of packages from cargo containers crossing through Los Angeles in recent months. On tracks near downtown Los Angeles, a team from Agence-France Presse on Friday found packages with labels of most major US mail order and courier companies. Reporters from CBSLA on Thursday found boxes from retailers including Amazon, REI and others. CBSLA reported that Union Pacific, the railroad company operating the cargo trains, had cleaned up the area of tracks where the boxes were found three months ago and again about 30 days ago. In a December letter to Los Angeles county district attorney George Gascon, Union Pacific said it had experienced an over 160% increase in criminal rail theft in Los Angeles county since December 2020 and that on average, more than 90 containers were compromised each day. In several months during that period, the increase from the previous year surpassed 200%, according to the company. For the month of October 2021, it estimated the increase to be over 356% compared to the year before. In the letter, Union Pacific said it has stepped up the number of Union Pacific special agents on patrol, and was exploring the use of tools like drones, specialized fencing and trespass detection systems. Luis Rosas, who makes about $20 an hour working for a company subcontracted by Union Pacific to salvage items from the tracks in the Los Angeles area, said thieves use bolt cutters to break the locks on the containers and load up vans or trucks with the stolen merchandise. Los Angeles has been the site of major shipping woes in recent months as the global supply chain crisis hit the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach. The ports, which together form America’s busiest shipping complex and serve as a key gateway for imported goods from Asia, have struggled with a significant backlog that’s left dockyards crowded with towering containers and dozens of ships at anchor waiting to unload. Thousands of workers have been laboring around the clock for months to move goods into trucks – long lines of which stretch into nearby residential neighborhoods – and trains. The surging volume of merchandise at the ports, which process 40% of container imports in the US, shows no signs of slowing, placing pressure on workers and the residents who live nearby.The southern Chinese city of Zhuhai has suspended public bus routes after announcing it had detected at least seven cases of the highly transmissible Omicron coronavirus variant there and warning residents not to leave the city. The coastal city, which borders the gambling hub Macau, said late on Friday that Omicron had been detected in one mildly ill and six asymptomatic patients, after mass testing due to a case in a neighbouring city. China is battling a spate of coronavirus outbreaks, including several from the Omicron variant, as it steps up vigilance against the virus ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics in February. Millions of people across the country have been ordered to stay home in recent weeks, with scores of domestic flights cancelled and factories shut down. Zhuhai officials have asked that residents avoid leaving the city “unless necessary”, with those who do required to show negative Covid test results within the past 24 hours. The city had launched mass testing for its population of 2.4 million people on Friday after a Covid case was detected in neighbouring Zhongshan earlier in the week. China reported 165 new cases on Saturday, down from 201 a day earlier. Meanwhile, in the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has revised its guidance for Americans on masks, recommending wearing “the most protective mask you can” while stopping short of advocating nationwide usage of the N95 type. The CDC clarified on its website “that people can choose respirators such as N95s and KN95s, including removing concerns related to supply shortages for N95s”. Americans should “wear the most protective mask you can that fits well and that you will wear consistently”, the CDC added. It said it wanted to encourage Americans to wear masks – “it is important to remember that any mask is better than no mask” – rather than push them only to wear the highest-grade face protection, but also explicitly said that respirators are best while “loosely woven cloth products provide the least protection”. It said the revised recommendations “reflect the science on masking, including what we have learned in the past two years” since the start of the pandemic. The US is tallying about 1,800 Covid-19 deaths and 780,000 new infections daily – the most in the world – as well as record levels of hospitalised patients. The Omicron-related surge appears to be slowing in areas that were hit first, including states in the north-east and south, according to a Reuters analysis. In western states, the number of new cases climbed 89% in the past week compared with the previous week. Australia has likely neared the peak of its Omicron wave, authorities said on Saturday, while warning daily infections would linger near record levels for the next few weeks after more than 100,000 cases were reported for a fourth straight day. Having limited the spread of the coronavirus through tough restrictions earlier in the pandemic, Australia is suffering record caseloads from Omicron. Most parts of the country have shifted to a strategy of living with the virus after they reached high vaccination rates. Modelling from some states “leads me to believe that we are close to the peak of this wave in terms of cases”, said Paul Kelly, the chief health officer. Infections have dipped over the last three days while the rise in hospitalisations in worst-hit New South Wales, Australia’s most populous state, has slowed slightly, official data showed. Most states are dealing with record hospitalisations from the Omicron wave, with authorities saying unvaccinated younger people form a “significant number” of admissions in Australia. Brazil’s health ministry reported 112,286 new cases in the past 24 hours and 251 Covid-19 deaths. Brazil has had 22,927,203 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 620,796 according to ministry data. With Reuters, AP and AFPCarl Bernstein is crying. He slips an index finger behind his spectacles to push away a tear. He repeats the action to wipe his other eye. Nearly six decades have passed since Bernstein, a young newsman in a hurry, was told by a colleague that President John F Kennedy was dead. But the gut punch of that moment surfaces as if it were yesterday. “I still have trouble with it,” Bernstein admits, quickly regaining his composure. “It’s very strange.” Now a silver-haired 77, Bernstein is one half of the world’s most famous journalistic double act. His reporting with Washington Post colleague Bob Woodward on the Watergate break-in and cover-up helped bring down Richard Nixon (still the only US president to resign). Their 1974 book about it, All the President’s Men, was turned into a film starring Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman that remains probably the most accurate Hollywood depiction of the reporting process. Bernstein’s latest work, Chasing History, is a prequel to all that, a vivid memoir of his apprenticeship, a love letter to the trade and an elegy for the vanishing world of local newspapers. It is Bernstein without Woodward. The book maintains a tight focus on his time at Washington’s Evening Star newspaper from 1960 to 1965, covering the Kennedy era, civil rights movement and various grisly crimes. But in a Zoom interview from his New York apartment, he proves willing to expand and expound on everything from the decline of meritocracy to former president Donald Trump to America’s cold civil war. “I’m going all over the place, as I’m known for doing,” he cheerfully acknowledges at one point during a discursive conversation that will last an hour and three-quarters, punctuated by his wife Christine arriving home (“Hello!”) and a delivery of flowers from his publisher. “I tell stories circumlocutiously.” Chasing History evokes a journalistic Camelot: the newsroom as humming word factory with gunmetal desks, stacks of newspapers, clattering and chinging typewriters, carbon copies of old stories impaled on spikes, men yelling “Copy!” and racing against deadline, and printing presses rumbling under the floor. It is an era of hats, pay phones and cigarette smoke reminiscent of the 1940 film His Girl Friday, based on the play The Front Page, in which Hildy Johnson (Rosalind Russell) remarks: “A journalist? Now, what does that mean? Peeking through keyholes, chasing after fire engines, waking people up in the middle of the night and ask them if Hitler’s gonna start another war, stealing pictures off old ladies?” There are also echoes of the Fleet Street in which Nick Tomalin identified the qualities required for success in journalism as “ratlike cunning, a plausible manner, and a little literary ability”. The teenage Bernstein had another asset: he could type nearly 90 words a minute after joining his school’s otherwise all-female typing class. This, combined with an assist from his father, landed him a job at the Star as a copyboy running errands when he was just 16. With printer’s ink in his veins and a nose for secrets, Bernstein describes walking into the newsroom for the first time as the most singular moment of all his days. He is like Dorothy stepping out of monochrome into Technicolor Oz. “In my whole life I had never heard such glorious chaos or seen such purposeful commotion as I now beheld in that newsroom,” he writes. “By the time I had walked from one end to the other, I knew that I wanted to be a newspaperman.” He was like a puppy on a leash that day, he recalls, and was handed a late-afternoon edition that had just come off the presses, its pages still warm. He says in the interview: “I was 16 years old. I got the best seat in the country … I think the thrill never left me.” There were great wordsmiths at the Star. One would go out on his boat on the Chesapeake Bay and encounter oystermen from remote communities who still spoke with an Elizabethan accent. A rewrite man could “make the words jump like trout”. Others could hardly write at all but were devoted to “truth in all its complexity”. The team “became like family” in what was “probably the most joyous period of my life”. Washington was a Black-majority city but when Bernstein joined the paper it had no African American reporters (though that changed before he left) and few women in senior ranks. The media was far from immune to the racism and sexism of the period. Looking back now, does Bernstein’s infectious nostalgia therefore come with ambivalence? “Yes,” he says, describing the Star as “a sea of white faces”, one of whom liked to boast that his family had owned four slaves. “The Washington Post was infinitely better about hiring Black reporters. It had done it going back to the late 50s. We were very late at the Star.” Recalling several women who were leading lights at the paper, including columnist Mary McGrory, Bernstein adds: “It was not quite the sexist wasteland that you might conjure. Were there a few single women who were very beautiful and the object of a certain amount of lust? Yeah. The sexism of the day was the sexism of the day. “But was it some kind of pit of offensive sexism? No, and the regard for the women reporters that I’m talking about was huge as colleagues very much as capable as the men. Harriet Griffiths had come on during the war: she could write a story on deadline as well as any rewrite man.” The Star was a reflection of what was still Jim Crow Washington. In Bernstein’s account the capital sometimes sounds closer to the civl war period, then just a hundred years past, than the vibrant city it is today. “A pall cast by the civil war hung over us,” he says, recalling how the local cinema and ice cream parlour of his childhood were racially segregated. “People in this country have no idea. I went to legally segregated public schools in the capital of the United States until 1954. “My parents took me with them to sit-ins when I was eight or nine years old to desegregate the restaurants and the lunch counters downtown. The swimming pools were drained by the recreation department when I was a kid rather than allow integration. Imagine, the recreation department in the capital! It’s unthinkable today.” Washington was also a place of “double vision” where politicians were both ordinary neighbours and historic figures at the same time. Bernstein had only been at the Star for about six weeks when he first saw a president in the flesh: Dwight Eisenhower sinking a putt on a golf course, his hands mottled brown. On a bitterly cold day he was sent to cover the crowd’s reaction to Kennedy’s inauguration. He chuckles now: “It is amazing that this kid got to do this stuff. Jesus.” Nothing could compete. He writes in the book: “Now that I had covered the inauguration of the president of the United States, Mr Adelman’s chemistry class interested me even less.” (He just about graduated from school but dropped out of college.) On the day of Kennedy’s assassination in 1963, it fell to the quick-fingered Bernstein to type the story dictated over the phone by political reporter David Broder in Dallas, Texas (this being before mobile phones or laptops). Broder began: “Two priests announced outside Dallas Parkland Memorial Hospital at 1.32pm today Central Standard Time, comma, quote, The president is dead. Period. End quote. Paragraph.” Bernstein recalls: “My hands shook so much that I misspelt hospital ‘ol’.” Chasing History moves on to the presidency of Lyndon Johnson with its landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965. Both passed with Republican support. America, it seemed, was finally reckoning with its tortured history of slavery and segregation. Yet half a century on, Bernstein is appalled by the Trump-infused Republican party’s efforts to reverse those gains through state-level voter restriction laws. “Now we have one of the two major political parties that in the 21st century is committed to disenfranchising particularly people of colour, but also trying to disenfranchise people who might vote against them. It has become the party of voter suppression. “That’s an astonishing turn of events. When we were kids in school, we would do get out the vote drives for our parents and it didn’t matter if you were a Republican or a Democrat. The idea was this was a right of citizenship and so it had been extended to Black people with the Voting Rights Act of 1965. “When Black Lives Matter comes along, it’s because of not continuing to fulfil the promise that began in that civil rights revolution. In addition, there is a political party that is committed to stopping that movement.” During Trump’s four-year presidency, which he covered as political analyst for CNN, Bernstein was often asked if the scandal of the day was worse than Watergate. His answer is unequivocally yes. But whereas Republicans then forced Nixon from office, Republicans now have capitulated to Trump, his “big lie” about a stolen election and his attempted coup. “Today one of two political parties is an authoritarian party,” Bernstein comments. “You’d have to go back to the civil war to think of anything like the insurrection at the Capitol on January 6. You’d have to go back to [Confederate leader] Jefferson Davis, who was a Democrat, if you’re looking for a seditious leader of a faction of the country. Never has there been a seditious president of the United States until Donald Trump.” The current president, Joe Biden, recently marked the first anniversary of the insurrection by remarking that the rioters “held a dagger at the throat of America and American democracy”. With Trump and his radicalised base still looming, the threat is arguably greater than ever. America is now as polarised as it was in the 1960s, perhaps even the 1860s. Bernstein says: “Our democracy, before Trump, had ceased to be working well and for 25, 30, 35 years we were in what I’ve called ‘a cold civil war’ in this country. Trump ignited it and we’re not going to go back from this place unless there’s some great event that somehow unites this country. “But we make mistakes as reporters to look at the country just in terms of politics and of media. This is a cultural shift of huge dimension. Whatever you say about Trump, 45, damn near 50% of the people who vote voted for him and – you look at the surveys – some 35% of people who voted for Trump believe Christianity is being taken away from them.” He continues: “The idea that the Trump base is some narrow group of white men with guns? Bullshit. This is a huge movement including misogynistic women, including racists of every kind, but also including all kinds of educated people in cities and suburbs. “It’s also a movement against liberalism, against what the Democratic party in their view has come to represent. It’s about race, all kinds of forces, people’s idea of what the United States ought to be. This movement embraces autocracy, authoritarianism, a peculiarly American neo-fascism which Trump represents.” One cultural change is the demise of the American dream, the somewhat optimistic conviction that anyone could rise to the top if they worked hard enough. Bernstein reflects: “I went to work at the Washington Star in the age of the greatest meritocracy in the history of the world. That meritocracy doesn’t exist any more. Kids are having to live in their basements with their parents because of student loans.” To come full circle to Bernstein’s memoir, another proof of decay is the fate of local news. Almost a quarter of the 9,000 US newspapers that were published 15 years ago have been snuffed out of existence by asset-stripping companies and hedge funds as well as competition from the internet. They leave behind “news deserts” that are an open invitation for online disinformation to thrive. “You had a kind of civic cohesion. You had great debate in cities and communities and there was an openness to truth. Now I would bet that increasingly most people look for information to provide more ammunition for their already held beliefs and prejudices, aspirations, whatever it is. That’s very different and a lot of that does have to do with the collapse of institutional news.” Bernstein, who has written biographies of Hillary Clinton and Pope John Paul II, worries that today’s reporters spend too much time Googling at their desks and not enough pounding the streets or knocking on doors. But he is also certain that great investigative reporting is being done, including by non-profit organisations such as ProPublica, and that the media rose to the unique challenge of Trump. “The reporting on the Trump presidency is probably the greatest White House reporting done by numerous news organisations.” This year marks the 50th anniversary of the Watergate break-in so Woodward , who is still at the Post, and Bernstein are likely to be in high demand. Bernstein hasn’t fully rewatched All the President’s Men for a long time. And it was not his only big-screen portrayal. Jack Nicholson played a character based on him in Heartburn, adapted from writer and film-maker Nora Ephron’s novel that fictionalised the painful breakup of her marriage to Bernstein. “It was a tough period of my life and not a period of my life I necessarily handled well,” he says. The short marriage produced two children: Jacob, now a reporter for the New York Times, and Max, a musician who plays guitar for Taylor Swift and Miley Cyrus. “I got him a guitar when he was three and that’s all he ever wanted to do,” Bernstein says, “Like me, he dropped out of school.” Family has more than one definition. A few hours after the interview, the indefatigable Bernstein is talking into a computer again and retelling some of the same stories, this time at a virtual event hosted by the venerable Washington bookshop Politics &amp; Prose. The interviewer is Woodward, who compliments him: “You really had and have a writing skill that I’ve never acquired, let’s be honest.” Someone asks if they might team up again. Woodward says, “We sure are old.” Bernstein laughs and chimes in, “We have matching tracksuits on tonight.” For a time after Watergate, the pair drifted apart: Woodward patrician and serious, Bernstein more flamboyant, seen out on the town with glamorous women such as Bianca Jagger, Shirley MacLaine and Elizabeth Taylor. But both are now septuagenarians on their third marriages. Both are watching American politics with alarm. The bond between them is clear. “After all this time, we’re like siblings,” Bernstein observes during his Guardian interview. “Fifty years is a long time. It’s a great friendship. Over the years there’ve been ins and outs but it’s been pretty amazing. Great love between the two of us.” Chasing History is out nowWe’re going to wrap things up for another day. Here are the main events: Novak Djokovic returned to detention at the Park Hotel in Carlton ahead of a federal court hearing on Sunday morning that will determine whether the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, acted unreasonably in rescinding his visa. In a submission in the case, Hawke said Djokovic’s ongoing presence in Australia could lead to an increase in anti-vaccination sentiment and an “increase in civil unrest”. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said Australia’s first-dose vaccination rate for in people over the age of 16 has reached 95%. The chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, said the Omicron outbreaks in NSW, Victoria and the ACT could be approaching their peak. Victoria recorded 23 Covid deaths and 25,526 new cases on Saturday and NSW reported 20 deaths and another 48,768 new infections. The Northern Territory recorded its second death of the pandemic, a fully-vaccinated woman in her 40s with underlying health conditions from the Bagot Aboriginal community in Darwin. The search for a missing nine-year-old girl in the NSW Blue Mountains entered its second day. Take care and we will see you back here tomorrow with all of the developments from the Djokovic court hearing. Western Australia has recorded two new local Covid-19 cases and seven travel-related cases. Both of the local cases are linked to previously reported cases. One is believed to have been infectious in the community and exposure sites are being identified. In case you missed it earlier today, this is an interesting read by my colleague Calla Wahlquist who interviewed people who have rethought their approach to work as a result of the pandemic: Christmas Island residents are using leaf blowers to help keep millions of baby red crabs safe from road traffic during the annual migration. AAP reports: Millions of baby red crabs have scurried ashore on Christmas Island, with locals using leaf blowers to save the heaving mass from the traffic. The bumper breeding season is more good news for the island’s most famous residents and will further swell a population that has exploded in recent years. Of late, scientist Tanya Detto has spent about five hours a day with a blower strapped to her back, airbrushing baby crabs off the road as people head to work or the shops. Some locals even break out their own blowers and give her a hand with the hot, exhausting task. It’s a bit like trying to part the Red Sea, Detto says. “They are very light and they just fly for a bit. They aren’t injured and when they land they just keep walking. “But they move so fast that by the time you’ve blown one little section, the ones coming along behind have already filled the gap, so you have to stay just in front of the cars.” In addition to her traffic management duties, Detto is in charge of trying to work out how many red crabs now call Christmas Island home. It is no easy task given millions are added to the mix in good years – and there have been plenty of those recently. She estimates the population has exploded from about 40 to 50 million in 2015 to about 190 million, based on surveys she carried out late last year. Indigenous vaccination rates are falling behind because of poor government planning, researchers say. AAP reports: Indigenous Covid-19 vaccination rates lag behind those for other Australians due to poor federal and state government planning, researchers say. Coupled with a revolving-door approach to vaccine advice, it has led to a shortage of trained workers to put jabs in arms and vaccine hesitancy in vulnerable communities, according to the University of NSW team. “This substantial policy oversight reflects a failure of moral human rights responsibility for Australian First Nations people,” say the authors of the paper published in Jama Health Forum. It has also undermined planning, strategy and prevention work undertaken by the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation and Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations. The researchers say existing inequalities including poor healthcare access, overcrowded living conditions and chronic health issues should have led to a more targeted and prioritised response. Instead, it has increased the risk of the virus spreading, chronic illness and death in hundreds of communities across the country where Aboriginal and Torres Strait islander double dose rates languish about 20 per cent lower than the national average. “It is evident governments have not been listening or properly consulting with First Nation peoples,” says the Indigenous health expert Prof Mick Adams. Two men are dead following separate stabbings in NSW, AAP reports: A 24-year-old man died at the scene after being stabbed at a house in Lismore in the state’s north shortly after 11pm on Friday. Two other people were injured during the incident. Officers were called to a house on McKenzie Street in the northern rivers city, where they found all three people suffering stab wounds. A man aged 60 and a woman in her 30s were taken to Lismore base hospital, he with a laceration to his neck and she with a cut to her arm. Both were in a stable condition on Saturday morning. The trio were known to each other. Meanwhile, an investigation is under way after a man in his 40s was fatally stabbed in the neck at Blackett in Sydney’s west about 6am on Saturday. Paramedics treated him at the scene after finding him in the middle of the road. The man was taken to Westmead hospital but died soon after. He is still to be formally identified. Refugee protesters are still picketing the Park Hotel in Carlton, drawing the comparison with Novak Djokovic’s handful of days in immigration with the plight of refugees held there, some of whom have been held by Australia, in offshore and onshore detention, for nine years. Novak Djokovic is reportedly back in detention at Carlton’s Park Hotel. Nine newspapers reported a silver four-wheel drive and a white van departed the Melbourne CBD offices of Djokovic’s lawyers under police watch. Victoria police officers closed off a section of Flinders Lane about 2.45pm before the two vehicles exited the building in front of a pack of photographers and journalists. A man speaking on his mobile and covering his face with a cap could be spotted in the back seat of the four-wheel-drive which drove off towards William Street. Terribly sad news from one of the most prominent expert voices throughout the pandemic. Mary-Louise McLaws is a professor of epidemiology at the University of NSW and a World Health Organization Covid-19 adviser. More than 1,000 people have taken to the streets of Sydney’s CBD as part of an anti-vaccination rally. The ABC reported the peaceful demonstration caused traffic disruption as protesters made their way through the city to Hyde Park, some carrying Serbian flags, in a reference to the treatment of the world No 1 tennis player, Novak Djokovic. Others chanted slogans against children receiving Covid-19 vaccinations. A large-scale search is continuing for a nine-year-old girl who has been missing in the New South Wales Blue Mountains since Thursday, AAP reports. Police were alerted to Charlise Mutten’s absence on Friday morning. They say she was last seen by her parents at a property at Mount Wilson, 60km north-west of Richmond. More than a hundred police and emergency personnel are involved in the search. My colleague Ben Doherty’s story about this morning’s developments in the Novak Djokovic case is now live. Djokovic faces a federal court hearing Sunday morning, Australia time, which will determine whether the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, minister acted unreasonably in rescinding his visa. Documents filed in the court reveal the minister’s reasons sent to Djokovic as justification for cancelling his visa. Hawke said he accepted Djokovic’s recent Covid-19 infection meant he was a “negligible risk to those around him”, but that he was “perceived by some as a talisman of a community of anti-vaccine sentiment”. You can read the full story here: The Northern Territory has recorded its second death of the pandemic, a 40-year-old woman from the Bagot Aboriginal community in Darwin. The NT’s deputy chief minister, Nicole Manison, said the woman was fully vaccinated and had underlying health issues. The territory recorded 412 new cases and there are 32 people in hospital, none in intensive care. And with that, I’m off! Lisa Cox is going to see you through the afternoon – come what may. Here’s a little sneak peek at the piece Ben Doherty is about to publish on the whole Novak Djokovic palaver. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, has said that Djokovic was “perceived by some as a talisman of a community of anti-vaccine sentiment”. Quite neatly put, really. Oh. Australia has hit a 95% vaccination rate – only for first doses, and only in those over 16, Lisa Cox reports. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, today also said a decision on the Novavax Covid vaccine – which is not yet available in Australia – was expected by the Therapeutic Goods Administration “in the coming 10 days”. (That’s the one termed “Never-vax”, which was due last year). Australia’s top male tennis player, Alex de Minaur, is done with Novak Djokovic. AAP reports he said: When you’re coming in, as well as every other tennis player, if you wanted to come into the country, you had to be double vaccinated. It was up to him, his choices, his judgment. According to Austrac, “as legitimate use of cryptocurrency increases, we’re seeing a sort of comparable increase in abuse”. Ben Butler reports: Four people have died with Covid in South Australia and 4,349 new cases were recorded in the 24 hours to midnight last night. The South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, said 3,107 of those results were from PCR tests. There are 236 people in hospital, and 26 in intensive care. There’s a lot to be said for shopping local, if you can. To another protest. The United Australia Party MP, Craig Kelly, who’s been criticised for spreading “misleading” vaccine information, is out and about in Sydney. Pictured here maskless with some fans, one of whom is wearing a chin protector. An update from Canberra, where police are bracing for that “sovereign citizen” protest – so far, protestors have failed to show up, after they threatened to “take Old Parliament House”. AAP reports there is a video on social media of people planning to turn up at a park. One speaker said: Did you notice how it was rainy ... and then the sun came out? It is because we are on the right side of history and doing God’s work. There’s an interesting line in immigration minister Alex Hawke’s reasons for cancelling Novak Djokovic’s visa: I consider that Mr Djokovic’s ongoing presence in Australia may lead to an increase in anti-vaccination sentiment generated in the Australian community, potentially leading to an increase in civil unrest of the kind previously experienced in Australia with rallies and protests which may themselves be a source of community transmission. We are seeing an outline of the arguments in the Novak Djokovic case in the originating application from Djokovic. The argument from immigration minister Alex Hawke accepts that Djokovic’s recent Covid-19 infection is genuine (there were questions raised about its veracity in media reports) and that he presents a negligible health risk. But, the minister said, if allowed to stay, Djokovic could excite anti-vaccination sentiment: Despite my acceptance above that Mr Djokovic’s recent infection with Covid-19 means that he is at a negligible risk of infection and therefore presents a negligible risk to those around him, I am concerned that his presence in Australia, given his well-known stance on vaccination, creates a risk of strengthening the anti-vaccination sentiment of a minority of the Australian community. Djokovic’s case argues the minister took an “illogical/irrational/unreasonable approach to … the question of public interest” and his own exercise of ministerial discretion: The Minister cited no evidence that supported his finding that Mr Djokovic’s presence in Australia may ‘foster anti-vaccination sentiment’, and it was not open to the Minister to make that finding. For enthusiasts of tennis and federal courts – the latest documents in the Djokovic case are being placed on the public record here. Watch the serve and volley unfold. The Australian Capital Territory recorded 1,320 new Covid cases in the 24 hours to 8pm last night, with almost even numbers of rapid antigen tests and PCR tests. There are 30 people in hospital, including three in intensive care. Get your kids vaccinated, Covid commander Jeroen Weimar says. It’s not always that easy, as Rafqa Touma reports: Let’s go to Queensland now, where chief health officer John Gerrard is giving an update. There have been six deaths there, and 19,709 new cases recorded. Gerrard said that if you have any symptoms you should assume you have Covid and isolate: We now have a total of 649 people in hospital requiring treatment for Covid-19, that includes a 46 patients in hospital and in intensive care, of whom 14 were ventilated. You may know that this is an increase of 10% across the board in the last 24 hours leading up to 7pm last night. He said it was likely the numbers would keep increasing: This is what we have been projecting and it is likely to that there is a good chance this is the beginning of the final surge before we reach a peak sometime over the next few weeks ... this is predicted as we head into the peak in the next two to three weeks. What I would like to talk about is how we will approach Covid from a personal point of view, now as we are approaching the peak, if you have any of the symptoms suggestive of Covid, if you have flu-like symptoms, then it’s likely that you have Covid. It is likely that you have Covid. If you have headaches, runny nose, muscle aches, perhaps a cough, perhaps chills ... it is very likely that you have Covid-19. Covid commander Jeroen Weimar has been speaking in Melbourne, urging people to get their children vaccinated. He said: In terms of vaccination, it is good to see of the 25,000 people vaccinated in state clinics yesterday, actually under 24,000, over 5,000 were aged five to 11. We continue to see healthy numbers of children coming in to get their vaccinations done. 28,000 kids booked in for the next seven days and (that) includes the children being done right here, right now. Some wonderful images at the Ford factory in Geelong with a busy vaccination clinic. We encourage parents to book ahead. We had 28,000 booked but we have 32,000 apartments available over the next couple of weeks and we are keen to see parents and children take up the opportunity to get vaccinated before the start of the school year. Our GPs and pharmacies are also very busy so if you want to go to one of the of those, please make your booking and get our children vaccinated as quickly as we can instantly before school starts. As it stands, Novak Djokovic does not have a visa to stay in Australia. He is, in the language of the Migration Act, “unlawful” and must be detained. The court has ordered he be allowed to stay in his lawyers’ offices between 10am and 2pm today under the supervision of two Australian Border Force officers. After that, he is to be returned to detention. And we are done. The hearing for today is finished. We are waiting to see the application and submissions from Novak Djokovic’s legal team – due by midday, and the government’s submissions – by 10pm tonight. There, we will see the arguments that are going to be put forward for Djokovic staying in the country (why the minister’s decision to cancel his visa was unreasonable), and the government’s case for removing him. We know some of what the government will argue – that Djokovic’s continued presence in the country has the potential to “excite anti-vaccination sentiment” in Australia. It was argued in court on Friday that kicking him out of the country would do much the same. The judge is going to consider ordering the matter before the full bench of the federal court (three judges) and will advise today on that. Tasmania has recorded 1,139 new Covid cases. Twenty-two people are in hospital and one person is in intensive care. Most of those positives came from rapid antigen tests, and just 255 from PCR tests. Chief health officer Paul Kelly has been talking about the potential for a fourth booster shot at a press conference: At the moment the only country that I’m aware of that has an actual program of this is Israel. I spoke to the Israeli ministry of health on Monday. We have had regular meetings throughout the pandemic, it’s been very useful to swap things. We teach them some things, they teach us some things and [it’s] been very valuable. I asked about the fourth dose. They are keeping that ... to people with a higher risk of severity. So older people, I believe it’s over 60, there are people with chronic diseases particularly those that lead to [compromised immunity]. And healthcare workers. They have started with that, they are still evaluating that program and they have promised in the coming weeks to share that evaluation with us. It will be very helpful. Health minister Greg Hunt was also there. He said: I particularly want to acknowledge the work of our pathologists and our healthcare workers. Our pathologists have been working for two years literally around the clock, our general healthcare sector, GPs, our pharmacists, and all of those nurses, doctors, carers, cleaners right across the system. Everybody involved, they kept Australia safe and there are real signs of hope today. We have cross the 95% threshold for 16 plus vaccinations. We have had over 1 million doses delivered in a three day period. The highest not just through the pandemic but on record in Australian history. And as Prof Kelly has said, there are very clear signs of stabilisation and operating within the system capacity in our hospitals. And so it’s challenging times but what we know is that it’s challenging times for the whole world with over 4 million cases a day and Australians are rising to the occasion and I want to thank everybody, take care, we will continue to encourage people to be vaccinated but they are doing an incredible job. Thanks very much. We will get through this. We have done it before. We will do it again. The Novak Djokovic “debacle” is an embarrassment that could have been avoided, Labor leader Anthony Albanese said this morning. He said it was “characteristic” of the Morrison government: First they said somehow it wasn’t their responsibility the fact that the Australian government issued a visa. And this could have all been avoided. This government says it takes borders seriously and the issue of visas seriously. There are people in this community who know that they have tried to get a visa for their mum or dad or aunty or uncle or child ... to come to Australia. There are Australian citizens who are threatened with jail terms, you might recall, if they returned to Australia from India at one stage. But somehow the issuing of the visa for Novak Djokovic that occurred by the Australian government, that’s a surprise to the Morrison government that this was controversial. This has been the lead sporting story ... in the world for months. For months. On every back page of every newspaper in the world. Novak Djokovic is the No 1 male tennis player in the world. A great Queenslander, Ash Barty, is the No 1 female tennis player. And Novak Djokovic has been shooting for his 10th Australian Open trying to be the greatest grand slam champion of all time by winning his 21st title. And the idea, the idea that it was unknown that this was coming, and the idea that only late on a Friday afternoon on the weekend before the tournament begins, after the draw has taken place we finally have a decision from the federal government says it all. There has been a great embarrassment for Australia, (and) it’s one that could have been avoided. The rules are clear, you need to be double vaccinated in order to enter Australia. And we still don’t have an explanation for how it is that the Australian government under Scott Morrison issued the visa in the first place. The right decision was to stop the visa being issued in the first place and the rules are very clear. What’s [happened] here is a debacle which has been dragged out for day after day after day. We’re underway. Justice David O’Callaghan has raised the possibility of Djokovic’s hearing tomorrow coming before a full court of three judges in the federal court, rather than being heard by a single judge. “A full court can be convened commencing tomorrow morning,” the judge said. Djokovic’s legal team is happy for the matter to come before a full court, three judges. The immigration minister opposes a full court hearing. We are about to get underway in the federal court. Novak Djokovic’s attempt to stay in the country has been brought before a new judge, Justice David O’Callaghan, this morning. A final outcome is not expected today (though nothing would surprise in this case). Today’s hearing will deal with Djokovic’s transfers between meetings with border force officials, his lawyers and detention, and any procedural matters concerning the hearing, which will take place tomorrow. But we are expecting submissions from Djokovic’s lawyers today, which will outline his case to stay in the country. Essentially, he has to argue why the immigration minister’s decision to exclude him from the country on public health grounds is unreasonable. For those playing along at home: Strap in, folks. Novak Djokovic v minister for immigration, citizenship, migrant services and multicultural affairs is about to get underway in the federal court of Australia in Melbourne. Ben Doherty is going to be keeping you updated. Ahead of Novak Djokovic’s last-ditch legal bid to stay in Australia to defend his Australian Open title, his homeland Serbia has swung behind him in vociferous support. A court hearing in the Federal Court begins in less than half an hour. We are expecting to see submissions from Djokovic’s legal team on why he should be allowed to stay in the country before lunchtime. On Instagram, Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić said the world number one was being harassed by the Australian government for its own political advantage: If you wanted to forbid Novak Djokovic to win the trophy for the 10th time, why didn’t you return him immediately, why didn’t you tell him that it was impossible to get a visa? Why do you mistreat him, why do you harass him, as well as his family and a nation that is free and proud? Is all this necessary to win some elections and please your public? In nationalistic overtones, Vucic said Serbia would continue to defend Djokovic: We will fight for Novak Djokovic and the fact that you will harass him for a day, two or five more or less will not change the sentiments of our people towards the people of Australia that we highly respect and appreciate, but also our opinion of Novak Djokovic. You can write hundreds of thousands of the worst articles about him, he will remain the greatest tennis player of all time, and he will always be in our hearts. Serbia’s royal family also spoke out in defence of their “brave brother”. Prince Filip and Princess Danica Karađorđević, are the son and daughter-in-law of Aleksandar Karadordjevic, the Belgrade-based Crown Prince of Yugoslavia: When tyranny shows its ugly face then it is our duty to speak out. Many will not recognise we are heading down this dangerous path since tyranny has a cunning way of disguising itself as an act of good, therefore, those who speak out are often met with disapproval and outrage, as is the case of our brave brother Novak Djokovic. (Yugoslavia’s royal family was deposed from power in 1945. The Karađorđević dynasty maintains a prominent role in Serbia.) Michael McGowan has taken a look at New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet’s hectic start: After 100 days in office and with skyrocketing Omicron cases, the NSW premier’s bullish approach has not always gone to plan. And here are the Victorian Covid case numbers: 23 people have died, and there are 115 people in intensive care. There were 25,526 positive cases, 12,857 of those results are from rapid antigen tests. “Although Angus Taylor’s interest in Jam Land is through an indirect shareholding, it puts him in the unusual position of being connected to a case challenging the decision of one of his government’s own ministers,” Lisa Cox and Anne Davies write: Shared without comment. Here are today’s Covid numbers from New South Wales. Twenty lives lost, those poor families. There were 48,768 cases, 21,748 of them from rapid antigen tests. NSW Health says almost 16,000 of those rapid test results are from the past week. They also say there may be some doubling up of numbers, where people have had a rapid test and a PCR test. It’s getting harder to understand the meaning of these numbers. Hillsong church says the singing and dancing at their youth summer camp bears no resemblance to a music festival. This is Sian Cain’s piece from yesterday – somehow I’d missed seeing the video footage. Oh yeah, totally doesn’t look anything like a music festival: Have any of you ditched your car? I’m thinking about it. Shelley Hepworth has written about her experiences with a car-sharing app – it sounds more complicated than I thought: Immigration officials are interviewing Novak Djokovic now in Melbourne, ahead of that 10.15am hearing. Serbia’s foreign ministry earlier said Djokovic had been “lured to Australia to be humiliated”. It said: “Novak Djokovic is not a criminal, terrorist or illegal migrant, but he was treated that way by the Australian authorities, which is causing understandable indignation of his fans and citizens of Serbia.” Meanwhile, in Belgrade ... Novak Djokovic’s very enthusiastic fans have reacted to his second visa cancellation. To some of them, Djokovic is a “symbol of the free world”, and the situation is “shameful”. But while Serbia’s president, Aleksandar Vučić, denounced it as a “political witch-hunt”, there are signs the government is starting to distance itself from the player, Jon Henley writes: “Double-dose vaccination rates among people with disability may be as low as 50% in some regional and remote local government areas,” Luke Henriques-Gomes writes: While close contacts around the country have been allowed to go back to work after the federal government pushed for more relaxed isolation rules, a South Australian meatworks went further. People who were Covid positive were allowed to go back to work. Peter Hannam writes: Workers who tested positive to Covid were forced to wear yellow hairnets to identify themselves. Extraordinary. Read all about it here: Police are preparing for “intense protests” at Old Parliament House today, AAP reports. The so-called sovereign citizens movement has been encroaching on the Aboriginal Tent Embassy in Canberra and causing trouble ever since that fire was lit against the doors of Old Parliament House in December. I’ll keep an eye on it and let you know what happens. The legendary Malcolm Farr has cast an eagle eye over the Novak Djokovic saga, and prime minister Scott Morrison’s role in it. The damage to Australian tourism and Australian sport caused by a single, stubborn tennis player and a hesitant federal government could require a formal inquiry to sort out. Some more details on this morning’s court hearing for Novak Djokovic – we’ll be bringing it to you as it happens: Good morning, and welcome to your weekend. On the news front, it’s sure to be a relaxing ride. There’s not much going on, is there? Oh, wait. Late yesterday we heard tennis star Novak Djokovic’s visa was cancelled – again. After a week of tortuous twists and turns, the immigration minister, Alex Hawke, cancelled it “on health and good order grounds, on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so”. The world’s No 1 player is expected to be interviewed by immigration officials in Melbourne at 8am. He is then expected to be returned to immigration detention. A hearing on the matter is listed in the federal court at 10.15am. A final result is expected on Sunday afternoon. The Serbian president, Aleksandar Vucic, has accused the Australian government of “harassing” and “maltreating” Djokovic. Djokovic’s former coach and mentor, Niki Pilic, described the situation as “shameful” and said Djokovic was being treated like a “criminal.” In the meantime, here’s Paul Karp’s take. We’ll bring you the latest Covid figures, even if the case numbers have somewhat lost their connection to reality, and we’re keeping an eye on shortages of ... frankly, everything, including common sense on some fronts. And as always, I’ll try to find some nuggets of joy (or weirdness) to sprinkle through the news.• Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereLacey Haynes is a women’s “intuitive healer”, and guides couples in yoga-informed “elevated sex”. When she opens her front door, the first thing I notice about the Canadian podcaster is her fashionable faux fur slippers and chic blunt fringe. Where is the western wellness guru uniform of linen tunic, elephant-print trousers and culturally inappropriate head jewellery, I wonder? Inside the living room, I spot the hot-pink sofa that Haynes’ Australian husband, Flynn Talbot, a men’s life coach and fellow elevated sex practitioner, calls “love island”. Fans of their podcast – Lacey and Flynn Have Sex – will know it as one of many locations around their house where they take the title literally, recording themselves having sex in the bedroom, on the kitchen barstool, and beyond. But it’s not the sex that’s the main event – it’s the talk. In each episode Haynes, 37, and Talbot, 40, discuss techniques and topics around sex and relationships, covering everything from overcoming rejection to the joys of cunnilingus; from rethinking orgasm as the ultimate goal to navigating intimacy with common conditions such as UTIs and premature ejaculation. Their mission is to help coupled-up listeners have more fulfilling sex – and to transform nonexistent or perfunctory sexual experiences into something physically pleasurable, emotionally empowering and spiritually uplifting. From there, they believe, the sky is the limit: “elevated” sex can lead to better mental and physical health, and even a better career. After all, it’s what happened to them. As they tell their listeners, their relationship started out “hot and heavy”, before “the sex died”, says Haynes. But rather than “living out the rest of our days like that”, they decided to invest in their sex life. It became a project that they worked on together, drawing influences from yoga and books on everything from diet and anatomy to politics and memoir. The project eventually transformed their relationship and led them to start their own business, which offers private coaching, online courses and even retreats. Haynes focuses on women – and extends their relationship work to include pregnancy – while Talbot takes care of the men. They do it all from their idyllic home in Sussex, while juggling the parenting of their two home-schooled children. Their work couldn’t have come at a better time. Despite living in an age of hypersexualisation, with more Britons tuning in to Pornhub than BBC News, people across all demographics are having less sex than 10 years earlier, according to a 2019 survey published in the British Medical Journal, which also found that couples and over-25s are seeing the biggest decline. According to Relate, 29% of couples regard their relationships as “sexless” – and half of women and nearly two-thirds of men in the BMJ survey said they wanted to have more. Throw into that a pandemic in which 78% of cohabiting couples saw a change in their sexual activity (and not for the better), and it’s perhaps no wonder that Haynes and Talbot have found a listenership. But with devotees come detractors, and, as I’ll find out, some of the pair’s more controversial views have attracted criticism. Over tea in the kitchen, I listen to them lovingly bicker over how to heat pastries and I enjoy Haynes’ impressions of her kids pleading to stay up late. There is nothing about this conversation that suggests sex, but I don’t doubt it could go that way. That is, after all, one of their key messages: that too many couples wait for the vague and mysterious “mood” to show up, when it is always within their power to have sex, be it before work, once the kids are in bed, or just after a mid-morning croissant on an unseasonably warm autumn Thursday. *** Haynes and Talbot didn’t mean to record themselves having sex; it just sort of happened. “We intended to have sex off the podcast, and then come and talk about it,” says Talbot. But that first recording in April 2021 – dreamed up just a few months earlier – “developed its own momentum”, says Haynes, as the talk about sex turned easily to foreplay and then the act itself. Their approach to the podcast’s sex segments is to talk through what they’re doing and how it feels in unflinching detail. Their choice of words ranges from the ethereal (“I see your light shining,” one of them might say as they revel in each other’s “energy” and “aura”), to terms ordinarily censored: “Lacey is tugging on my cock,” Talbot might say; or from Haynes: “He’s licking my side pussy.” It is not a podcast to be listened to in public. The listener hears them pant, moan and direct each other to orgasm. In many ways we are living in the age of the overshare, where giving too much information turns ordinary people into viral stars. Indeed, a quick look at the podcast charts makes clear that subjects that were once highly personal (psychotherapy, pregnancy and sex) are driving serious engagement. But even by today’s standard, Lacey and Flynn Have Sex shocks. Not every episode ends in ecstasy, however. The listener also hears Haynes in distress when sex triggers difficult memories; flashes of annoyance if one does something the other doesn’t like; and the sound of shuffling around when there’s physical discomfort. All of it is discussed in detail: a real-life, authentic example of how to talk about (and throughout) sex. The couple met in Berlin more than 10 years ago, when Talbot, then working as a light artist, kept failing to show up for classes at Haynes’ yoga studio. “Then she had a Christmas party and I went to that,” recalls Talbot. Was it love at first sight? “No. My first thought was, ‘Wow, she is super Canadian. And loud. Imagine living with her,’” he laughs. Nonetheless, there was an instant connection. “I was actually in a relationship,” says Haynes. “And I could have kept going in it and just ignored the 15% of the relationship I wasn’t happy in, like so many people do. But then I met Flynn. I was just so fascinated by him. He recognised my entrepreneurial spirit and I his. And he was tall. As Melissa McCarthy says in Bridesmaids, I wanted to climb him like a tree.” For the next few years, they were sexually insatiable and madly in love, maintaining the passion through moves from Berlin to Australia via South Africa, before marrying in Nova Scotia and settling in the UK in 2014. It was around this time that their sex life slowed down, worsening after they had their first child in 2017. The issue? Talbot wanted more sex than Haynes. One person wanting more sex than the other is a common problem for couples in long-term relationships. “I was just like, everything I want is with Lacey,” says Talbot, recalling his frustration. “So why can’t we cultivate that?” “I felt resentment,” says Haynes. “I’d satisfy him and be like, ‘Phew, I’m off the hook for two weeks.’ It put Flynn in something we call the rejection loop, where he’d come near me and get rejected.” The transformation was not an easy process. “Lacey was full-on crying, having emotional meltdowns,” recalls Talbot. But every Sunday they made an appointment for sex and pancakes. This was the first step. “Credit to Lacey, she showed up,” he says. The pair say they have learned that sex is not just a pleasurable experience, but a place to work through emotions and traumas. In an episode on “rage fucking”, they talk about the opportunity to release feelings of anger through sex and masturbation. They even talk about sex as a place where they have some of their brightest business ideas. (Haynes even used to offer “pussy-powered” business coaching, which used their practice to help women unlock career goals.) Listeners will note their vernacular: an amalgam of new-age language, pop culture references and most of all the sort of “therapy speak” that dominates online self-care content. Did they try therapy? Would they have considered marriage counselling? “Honestly, no,” says Haynes. “I didn’t think someone would have had the depth of understanding that I wanted, to take me on an intuitive journey that would fulfil my healing. That was something I needed to do myself, and with Flynn.” Talbot says that a key job for men in sexual relationships is providing emotional safety. “I didn’t have an emotional barrier that was stopping me from performing and enjoying sex, though I have learned I have other areas I can work on,” he says. “But I wanted to make Lacey feel safe to explore, because I’m a leader – I’m an all-or-nothing guy. I’m married and I want to have amazing sex with Lacey. I was willing to do whatever it took.” Did they ever worry that the other one would leave if it got too much? No, they reply confidently. “We know some couples don’t have that level of security,” says Haynes. “And we never advise people to do what we did if they’re not in a safe situation.” In the end, it paid off. While they were trying to get back to that great sex, they discovered something even better. Haynes says that when she looks back on their early sex life, she sees that pain during intercourse was normalised. But now, she says, having learned to fully de-stress and release any tension in the mind, body and spirit, penetrative sex is pain-free. In her “pussy-gazing” class, which is currently offered as an online workshop, Haynes teaches women to put a mirror between their legs and work through any feelings of shame over their vulva. The class originally took her to festivals around the UK, as the pair became tuned into the unmet demand for coaching in intimate subjects. “We were like: if we were brave, what would really help people?” says Talbot. The podcast was born. Since then, their listenership has been steadily growing, finding listeners in 50 countries to the tune of 40,000 downloads. While they haven’t told their pensioner neighbour what they’re up to at home (“I think he’d have a heart attack,” says Talbot), their friends and family have been resoundingly supportive, even in their small, close-knit village. And both Haynes and Talbot say working on their business has strengthened their relationship. “We have conversations that we might not ordinarily have space for through this podcast,” says Haynes. *** “Love island” is just one of several locations in which Haynes and Talbot record themselves. In the recording studio that occupies their spare room, I wonder if the single mattress on the floor with the cheeky boob print duvet cover is another. It turns out that’s where Talbot sleeps when he works late or if Haynes is in the main bed with their children. For the recording today, the kids are with their nanny, and the plan is to make a talk-only episode. Haynes and Talbot take their seats opposite each other, almost knee to knee. I can tell that my presence, typing notes while they talk, is slightly disruptive (they say so on their podcast, kindly referring to me by my chosen fake name, Esmeralda), but they shake it off, and within minutes their eyes are only for each other. Watching them give each other edits, it’s clear not only how seriously they take their work but also how energised they are by one another. Is there something sexy about recording? “No, we don’t have a weird fetish where we want to expose ourselves, but only via sound,” laughs Talbot. They seem at ease, much more so than the nervous yet excited presenters I heard in episode one. But even back then they were wary of performing for the audience. (“It felt authentic and true, and now it feels performative,” says Talbot in the middle of the first episode’s sex, before getting the session back on track.) Haynes says that the performance of sex is something she’s been “unpicking” for a while. “There is playing into voyeurism – wanting to be seen and wearing a mask, often to satisfy another’s gaze. And that’s different from just being witnessed in your vulnerability and truth. I never want to be masked in my relationship, in my life or in this podcast,” says Haynes. This is my biggest takeaway from listening to their podcast: how much work and self-awareness is required to push performance away from sexual encounters, even between partners, even in private. It gives rise to the questions: what roles are we performing and where did we learn them? I’m reminded of a conversation I had with feminist scholar Gail Dines some years ago. She argued that sex is like eating, in that we have a biological urge for it. But how we eat – whether it’s with chopsticks or cutlery, sitting on the floor or at a table – is down to cultural influences. So what has culture shown us about how to have sex? Have we learned from Hollywood movies? The unrealistic and often degrading world of online porn? Clinical sex education classes focused on avoiding pregnancy? Tall tales from high school boys or the mumbled bumps heard through a university bedroom wall? Lacey and Flynn Have Sex may not be for everyone, but at the very least its offer of a different source is helpful. Undoubtedly, some will be put off by their grandiose terms – they refer to themselves as visionaries – or uncensored language. Their response on the podcast has been to ask listeners not to overlook their whole message because of a few disagreeable words. Personally, I’d say the same logic applies to other parts of their work, where it gets too new age, or simply too much. For example, I can appreciate the anatomical similarities between the vocal cords and the vagina. But when they mention this on the podcast in relation to women being vocally expressive during sex, my alarm bells ring. I ask Haynes and Talbot why they talk about the masculine and the feminine as archetypes. “I’m really talking about energies,” says Haynes, moving her index and middle finger against each other, to convey connected yet different halves. “So like day and night, sun and moon. If you relate more to the feminine or masculine, you have different styles of communication, and problem-solving.” But, she explains, that doesn’t mean you need to look a certain way to relate to that energy, or even be biologically ascribed to it. As for inclusivity, the pair say they have resigned themselves to not being able to fully deliver on that, and are coming to terms with their work being limited to – or at least most suitable for – heterosexual couples. They recall a non-binary person attending one of their in-person workshops, and as the group separated into masculine and feminine spaces to work with Haynes and Talbot separately, this person wasn’t sure where to go. “I spoke to the person after they said they didn’t always feel safe at the course,” says Haynes. “It really helped us understand that there’s a limit to how inclusive we can be,” Talbot says. “I get messages from people who tell me I’m a Terf [trans-exclusionary radical feminist] because I talk about ‘power’ and ‘feminine’, and then I’ll get a message from a trans woman saying my pussy-gazing workshop completely helped her connect after getting her new vagina,” says Haynes, sounding exasperated. “I want to live in a world where I can say, ‘This class will help these sorts of people, and if that’s not you, we love you, but this class won’t help.’ It doesn’t mean I’m trying to take away from other people and that I love them any less. I don’t think that their experience and who they are is any less valid.” Of the two, it’s clear that Haynes has borne the brunt of criticism. She certainly has unconventional views: after she gave an interview to the Guardian about free birthing, commenters argued that it was dangerous, irresponsible and smacked of middle-class privilege to refuse the help that women around the world are desperate for. More recently, Haynes announced on social media that she hasn’t had a Covid vaccination. I didn’t know this when we met, but when I follow up with the pair to discuss it over video chat, they’re uneasy, concerned that all their work will be reduced to this one position. Later they send me an email: “The same characteristic that makes us able to have sex on a podcast and freebirth both our children is the one that has us challenging the status quo in other realms. This might make our decisions unpopular or challenging for others to understand, but ultimately, we’re most concerned with being true to ourselves and what we feel is right. Our podcast is about governing your own body and living your own life. And we take that stance across every facet of life.” I want to ask the pair about money. I have, for many years, been concerned about the self-help and wellness space, and whether it is morally right to suggest individuals can transform their lives if they just do this, eat that, or think such and such. Isn’t it charging people for a false promise? And doesn’t it imply that the problems and traumas people experience – which are so frequently related to societal unfairness and injustice – are somehow the individual’s fault for not making the right choices, leaning in enough or harnessing their “power”? Wouldn’t it be more honest to say: self-help is a sticking plaster that may help you cope with a messed-up world, but it cannot cure the sickness? I expect defensiveness, but instead they listen thoughtfully before Talbot muses aloud: “In that regard maybe our work is a sticking plaster … ” “No,” Haynes interjects. “We’re a chisel. We’re giving you a little hammer and a nail to start picking it all apart. I don’t want people to cover it up. I want them to dig deeper.” I’m curious about the troubles straight men face with sex. “The majority of men are lost in the bedroom. They know how to penetrate but they don’t know how to connect,” says Talbot. “Men have, for generations, been conditioned to suppress their emotions. And yet truly expressed emotions and vulnerability are the route to a deep connection with women. “Not knowing how to harness the power of expression puts men at a great disadvantage, in and out of the bedroom. It’s why many men live with deep frustration and anger that’s close to the surface every day.” What about pornography? Surely that is a factor? In a recent episode, Talbot describes having been free of his semi-regular cam girl habit for six months. Is giving up porn something he’d recommend to others? “Yes, because it’s just perpetuating the cycle of needing visual stimulation when you should be creating a deeper understanding of your own pleasure. And then when you come to have pleasure with someone else, it’s going to be much greater.” As we wrap up, Talbot tells me a story about one of his clients. “I often give people homework to explore themselves – not just masturbating, but feeling yourself, rubbing your body, learning your own pleasure.” As part of this work, the client learned techniques on how not to climax, but hover near. He was enjoying having his control and the sensation. “And two weeks ago he told me he had an orgasm, and it was the greatest one of his life. Ever since, he’d cut off porn.” Without thinking, I let out a high-pitched “Yay!” “Good for him!” I cry, clapping. It is odd to feel so genuinely happy for the sex life of a man I have never met. “Isn’t it nice to change the narrative about men enjoying themselves?” asks Haynes. On the drive home, I feel strangely light. I don’t agree with everything Haynes and Talbot have to say, but it is hard to deny their bravery in putting themselves out there week after week, and the value of offering up a different model of fulfilling sex. And it’s a model that is, at its heart, fighting for something quite traditional: committed monogamy, happy families, love. “How very normie,” I think, surprised by just how sexy being a normie can be. Tips for great sex 1. Communication is key Before achieving soulful and carefree sex that involves communicating with nonverbal cues, you need to get comfortable with saying if something is a turn-on, a turn-off, triggering or painful. 2. Don’t take it personally … … if you’re playing with your partner and they don’t enjoy it, say, “Sorry, someone else found that enjoyable. What do you find enjoyable?” Haynes says. Talbot says men need to know that “talking about sex doesn’t make you a bad lover”. 3. Discuss your sexual past Often, current sexual issues are a result of past experiences, traumas or narratives. 4. Use more of your body Rather than just jackhammering away, with all movement coming from the hips, Talbot suggests connecting torsos and hearts. “Be like two serpents writhing together.” Use controlled breathing to slow the rushes of feeling and prolong the experience, moving focus to other parts of your body. 5. Rewrite your power script Haynes says that the narrative where the man holds all the power may contribute to women’s dissatisfaction with penetrative sex. But there is power in letting go and allowing someone in, emotionally and physically. That’s what soulful sex is all about. • Listen to Lacey and Flynn’s podcast hereTesco’s banking arm has launched a prepaid debit card with a linked savings account that is available to the 20 million customers who hold one of the retailer’s Clubcards. The new offering, called Tesco Clubcard Pay+, is designed to help people to budget and save, the company said. You can top up the debit card from any UK bank account. Clubcard Pay+ is not designed to be used as your main bank account, and it should not be confused with a fully fledged current account. It does not have an overdraft, you cannot set up direct debits, and there are fees to be aware of. Customers get a payment account with a debit card that can be used anywhere Visa is accepted, plus a savings account called Round Up. Shoppers can add money to their Clubcard Pay+ account – allowing them to ringfence their grocery spend if they wish – by linking it to any UK bank account, using the Tesco Bank app. Customers can also opt to “save while they shop” by rounding up their purchases to the nearest pound, with the difference being paid into the Round Up account. This account pays a variable 0.25% interest, and shoppers can manage it via the app. Your Round Up balance can be transferred out of your account at any time. Several other UK banks, including Lloyds, Halifax and the new digital player Chase, offer similar features that let people turn their spare change into savings. Interest rates on these vary: some of the eligible accounts at Lloyds Bank pay as little as 0.01%, while Chase is currently offering 5%. The launch of this new way to pay comes only weeks after Tesco Bank shut down all its current accounts. Pay+ was initially offered to a limited number of customers last March and is now available to all Clubcard members living in the UK and aged 18 or over. The debit card acts as your Clubcard. As an extra perk, for the first 100 days after an account is opened, customers receive one extra Clubcard point for every £1 spent in Tesco with Clubcard Pay+. In addition to the points collected in Tesco, you also get one Clubcard point for every £8 spent outside Tesco (there are some exclusions). There are a number of things that Clubcard Pay+ does not allow, including direct debits and standing orders. Also watch out for the fact that if your account balance goes below zero – for example, if a shop accepts a payment without checking there is enough money in your account – you will need to top it up immediately. If you don’t, Tesco Bank says: “We may take steps to suspend and ultimately close your Clubcard Pay+ and Round Up accounts.” However, the bank will not hit you with fees for refusing or allowing payments linked to a lack of funds. At the moment, the bank is not offering joint accounts or allowing other people to be added to the account but that could change later. This is not a great card to use abroad: a 2.75% foreign exchange fee applies to all Clubcard Pay+ debit card transactions made outside the UK. If you make an overseas ATM cash withdrawal in a foreign currency (excluding the euro), you will need to pay an additional 1% cash withdrawal fee. Money held in the accounts is protected up to a total of £85,000 by the official Financial Services Compensation Scheme. This move represents an expansion of Tesco Bank’s financial services ambitions after it closed down all its current accounts in November last year, seven years after launching into that market. The MoneySavingExpert.com website says that while Clubcard Pay+ could be an easy way to pick up some extra points in the short-term, “in the long-term it’s possible to earn much more in points or cashback using a rewards credit card, provided you only use this for normal spending and pay it off in full each month”.Taxpayers are being warned to beware of online agents that offer to help them claim rebates from HMRC, then pocket up to half of any payments. Claims firms appear to be taking advantage of tax relief payments owed to millions of people who were forced to work from home during the pandemic. Some of the websites suggest applicants could receive hundreds of pounds in government rebates if they submit a claim via the agent. However, people may be unwittingly signing over the rights to up to 50% of any refunds due to them from the last tax year, plus any backdated claims for the previous four years. A tax rebate is a repayment of overpaid tax by HMRC. HMRC automatically identifies any anomalies in tax payments between June and November after the tax year ends and sends affected taxpayers a P800 form that asks them to check their records. HMRC has an online calculator to help work out what they should have paid. Claims for tax credits for working from home or uniforms can be made direct via HMRC’s online portal and backdated by up to four years. The Low Incomes Tax Reform Group (LITRG) is urging the government to crack down on traders who exploit unwitting claimants. “For many years now we have received queries from the public affected by unscrupulous companies, some of whom were misled into thinking they were dealing with HMRC,” said Joanne Walker, an LITRG technical officer. “Recently we have seen an increasing number of people who have signed a deed or letter assigning all their tax refunds to the company – which then deducts its fee even though it has not done any work to claim the money. In some cases, the taxpayer is not aware they signed a deed.” Andrea Jackson received a letter from HMRC last month advising her that she was due a refund of £973 for the tax year 2019-20. However, the letter stated that the payment would made to a company called Tax Returned. “When I telephoned HMRC, they informed me they had acted upon my letter of authority instructions,” she said. “I cannot recall giving anyone authority.” Jackson later received her money minus £327, which Tax Returned had deducted in fees. She discovered that she had signed a deed of assignment in June 2020, which stated in small print that it unconditionally allowed the company to receive all rebates payable for the previous four tax years. Tax Returned’s homepage boasts that claimants can apply online in three minutes by clicking a claim button and that it secured a refund of £8,614 for one applicant. The fees of 28% plus VAT and the requirement to sign a deed of assignment are mentioned on a separate webpage. The company receives five stars from 83% of reviewers on Trustpilot but Guardian Money found that many of those reviewers had been sent targeted invitations as soon as they had filled out a claim. Tax Returned did not respond to a request for a comment. Trustpilot confirmed that it had issued a warning to the company last year after evidence suggested it was “cherrypicking” reviews. It told Guardian Money that Tax Returned had since stopped inviting selected customers for feedback. A lack of regulation means that anyone can set up a tax refund firm, and while there are many qualified businesses that provide tailored tax advice, others are merely a web presence run from a PO Box address. The company names tend to be variations on the words tax rebates or tax refunds so that they appear at the top of a Google search, and some generate positive reviews by incentivising customers to post feedback as soon as they have completed the application form. One firm promised a charitable donation for every review. The websites typically offer a free estimate and advertise eye-catching sums allegedly won for previous customers. Visitors are then encouraged to make an online claim by submitting details they can send for free via the HMRC portal. In the sites tested by Guardian Money, the hefty fees and onerous contract terms were only visible after clicking through to the terms and conditions. Customers who want an agent to claim a specific rebate on their behalf can submit a letter to HMRC directing them to make a one-off payment to the company. Some claims firms, however, ask customers to sign a legally binding deed of assignment, which entitles the agent to receive any rebates due for the past four tax years, even those that the customer has claimed without the firm’s help. The deed cannot be revoked without the company’s agreement. According to LITRG, some customers who made a past PPI claim through a third party have found their signature and national insurance number transposed on to a deed so that a company can cash in on any pending tax refunds. Others report submitting what they thought was an inquiry form and finding they had been signed up to an irrevocable contract. Not only does the claimant forfeit a chunk of their payments, they could face large penalties. The percentage pricing structure used by claims firms is an incentive for agents to inflate tax claims. If HMRC discovers foul play, it is the taxpayer, not the agent, who is held liable. LITRG says it has urged HMRC to check that deeds of assignments meet its own guidance before accepting them. The guidance includes the requirement that the wording and scope of the assignment must be clearly stated above the signature box. HMRC told the Guardian Money it takes “firm action” against companies that breach the law. A spokesperson said: “We recognise some customers feel they’ve been misled by tax refund companies. We have listened to customers and stakeholders and we will be running a consultation this year on tackling the high costs of claiming tax refunds through some of these companies. We encourage customers to come to HMRC directly to make their claims. It takes only a few minutes to complete the online application, and eligible claims receive 100% of their entitlement.” HMRC ‘leglly obliged’ to pay rebate firm When Heather Russell chased a £1,330 rebate promised by HMRC she discovered the cheque had been sent to a company called Tax Credits Ltd. HMRC explained that it was legally required to pay the firm because of a deed of assignment in her name. Tax Credits notified her that it would remit the sum, minus a 48% service fee, provided she send copies of ID and her bank details. Russell’s husband, Alan, says that she applied for the rebate herself and has no memory of engaging the company. “She was advised by Trading Standards not to send personal documents to this company, so she hasn’t received any of it,” he said. “Tax Credits has since told her that she reached its website via a Google or Facebook search and signed up on 16 April last year but the form they say she signed is dated 6 April. I wrote to their registered address asking for evidence but my letter was returned with a ‘not known at this address’ message.” Guardian Money asked Tax Credits for a copy of the contract. It provided a signed application form headed “Tax Rebate Application” and addressed to HMRC. Small print at the bottom says that the signatory “unconditionally” assigns the tax repayment to Tax Credits at its registered Cardiff address, which is in the same building as the Welsh division of HMRC. There is no company name or logo at the top of the form, which looks, at first glance, as though it is an official tax document. Many of the customers who have denounced the firm on Trustpilot say they had thought they were dealing with HMRC. Asked about the discrepancy in dates, a spokesperson stated: “The system had simply printed a date on the form of 6 April.” The firm did not comment on why its paperwork does not have a company header and claimed that its registered address is still valid. When questioned about the unanimously negative online reviews, it stated that it does not contact happy customers to leave feedback. “Any potential claimants that engage though our website are sent paperwork to sign before we begin,” a spokesperson said. “This paperwork clearly details that repayments are issued at 52p in the pound.”In this year’s Guardian and Observer charity appeal we have supported communities and individuals hit hardest by the climate emergency, people who have seen their lives upended and livelihoods lost by extreme weather. It’s a topical issue, and not going away – and there is still time to donate: so far we have raised over £800,000. Our appeal is shaped by vivid stories of climate emergency: floods, drought and wildfires; from reindeer killed by unnatural arctic heat to chronic crop failure by the shores of Lake Victoria. At its heart, however, lies inequality and poverty: the stark truth is the countries least responsible for global emissions have by far suffered worst from climate-induced disasters. Thousands of readers have so far given generously to the appeal – and hundreds of you have emailed us to tell us why. You told us the climate crisis is the most urgent issue facing the planet, and that world’s wealthiest economies – as many delegates at the recent Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow made clear – have a moral responsibility to help the poorest cope with increasingly grave climate challenges. Giving to the appeal felt for many readers like a way of registering support for wider change. As one said: “My donation is a tiny contribution to the efforts of all those working to preserve this precious world we live in.” It was also, many of you said, an acknowledgment that even a relatively small charitable investment in local expertise, resilience and innovation can deliver social dividends. Other donors said they were inspired by reading about our partner charities. Some described the alarming impact of extreme weather on family and friends who lived on the front lines of climate change. Giving was for some donors a small but important protest against government climate policy, or aid budget cuts, or the excesses of western consumption and material exploitation. Whatever your reasons, the money we raise together will be shared among our four fantastic charities: Practical Action, Global Greengrants Fund UK, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, and Environmental Justice Foundation. All do brilliant work to help tackle the climate emergency, and offer important hope and optimism for the future. Thanks to your generous donations, Practical Action will continue to invest in local communities with innovative tools and adaptations, from agricultural technology to flood warning systems. Environmental Justice Foundation will continue to provide powerful testimony of the human impact of climate change and fight for the rights of climate refugees. Global Greengrants Fund UK will distribute its share of donations to grassroots climate projects in the global south, reminding us that “small farmers cool the planet”. Royal Botanic Gardens Kew will pursue its vital work to preserve biodiversity and revitalise denuded land on the island of Madagascar. As ever, I’d like to appeal to those of who have not yet given to consider doing so – and to thank the more than 7,000 of you who have already done so. We appreciate your generosity, spirit, and your commitment to a fairer, greener and more just world. Your donations are inspiring – and they will make a difference. The appeal is scheduled to close at midnight on Sunday. You can donate online here.The questions 1 Which Norfolk woman wrote the earliest autobiography in English? 2 Which world leader has the most Twitter followers? 3 The Blackwood convention is used in what game? 4 Who said: “We didn’t land on Plymouth Rock; the rock was landed on us”? 5 50kg is the minimum weight to do what? 6 Which 60s group was named for its members’ lack of height? 7 Which sport is played by the Nottingham Hellfire Harlots? 8 Whose death precipitated the Wars of the Diadochi? What links: 9 Philip Glass; Robert De Niro; Vladimir Putin; Fred Housego? 10 Ash; battleship; fossil; slate (46 to go)? 11 Fundus; body; antrum; pylorus? 12 Jim Laker; Anil Kumble; Ajaz Patel? 13 Kate Winslet and Judi Dench; Kate Winslet and Gloria Stuart? 14 Singel; Herengracht; Keizersgracht; Prinsengracht? 15 Sarah Amherst; George Montagu; Thomas Bewick; Francesco Cetti? The answers 1 Margery Kempe. 2 Narendra Modi (Indian PM, 73.5m). 3 Bridge. 4 Malcolm X. 5 Donate blood. 6 Small Faces. 7 Roller derby. 8 Alexander the Great. 9 One-time taxi drivers. 10 Fifty shades of grey. 11 Regions of the human stomach. 12 Cricketers who took all 10 wickets in a Test innings. 13 Played younger and older version of same character: Iris Murdoch in Iris; Rose in Titanic. 14 Main canals of Amsterdam. 15 Gave names to birds: Lady Amherst’s pheasant; Montagu’s harrier; Bewick’s swan; Cetti’s warbler.Even for a White House familiar with roadblocks and frustration, Thursday’s setbacks on vaccine mandates and voting rights came as hammer blows. Aside from the immediate derailing of two key policy tenets of Joe Biden’s administration, the vaccine ruling by the supreme court, which quickly followed Democratic senator Kyrsten Sinema’s public assassination of his voting reform efforts, prompted a new round of questions over whether his presidency was doomed. Crucially, serious agonizing is now going on about what Biden’s woes might mean for the Democratic party’s fortunes in midterm elections later this year, when Republicans are tipped to seize back control of both chambers of Congress. With Biden’s public popularity sinking – in one poll this week to a new low of 33% – and with another centrist Democratic senator, Joe Manchin of West Virginia, having already capsized the president’s flagship $1.75tn Build Back Better domestic spending plan, some analysts say time is running short to impress voters ahead of the November polls. “The whole first year is gone. And in the end, nothing,” said Larry Sabato, founder and director of the University of Virginia’ Center for Politics, referring to the lengthy but fruitless discussions with Manchin over the make-up of the plan. “Manchin led him down the rosy path then threw him into the briar patch. ‘Would you change that? You changed that, well, I don’t like this thing over here. Oh, you changed that, well, there’s these two things …’” Sabato added: “But the voting rights debacle is the worst of all because why was Biden elected other than that people wanted to get rid of Trump? It was because he was seen as experienced and competent. What’s the experience gotten us exactly? I just don’t understand how we got here.” Several of Biden’s misfortunes, Sabato said, are not directly of his own making. He has made repeated efforts to change the minds of both Manchin and Sinema, most recently in seemingly unsuccessful late-night talks at the White House on Thursday in an attempt to salvage his agenda. But Sabato also believes that the president’s handling of various situations, and poor direction from advisers, particularly over the Covid-19 pandemic, runaway inflation, and last year’s chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan, have combined to leave Biden exposed. About inflation, Sabato says: “Biden’s team simply missed it badly, they got it very, very wrong, and they’re continuing probably to get it wrong. They’re downplaying it and they’re going to tame it by mid-year. Maybe, but I’ll be surprised.” On Afghanistan, Sabato said, Biden “threw it away again”. “It could have been a big plus had it been handled correctly because just about everybody – Democrat, Republican – was more than willing to get out of Afghanistan. It was a very bad performance by his team. They couldn’t know what was gonna happen? He’s responsible for his advisers, so he can be blamed for it.” On Friday, the White House press secretary Jen Psaki announced that the president would hold a rare, formal press conference next Wednesday to mark his first year in office. As well as answering difficult questions about the administration’s failures, Biden will talk up its successes, namely the $1tn infrastructure bill he signed in November, and the $1.9tn Covid relief plan from last spring. Having appeared fatigued by Thursday’s rejections, a more buoyant Biden followed up with his own briefing on Friday afternoon, accompanied by Mitch Landrieu, the former New Orleans mayor he appointed to oversee the implementation of the infrastructure act. “There’s a lot of talk about disappointments and things we haven’t gotten done. We’re going to get a lot of them done, I might add,” Biden said. “But this [infrastructure] is something we did get done, and it’s of enormous consequence to the country.” Some analysts suggest the touting of past glories displays a lack of confidence in what can still be achieved in the almost 10 months until the midterms, something Biden seemed to acknowledge on Thursday when he said: “I don’t know whether we can get this done,” after a Capitol Hill meeting with Democrats over voting rights. The obstacles ahead of Biden are certainly substantial. They range from Democrats’ internal divisions between progressives and moderates, stonewalling by Republicans in Congress and the Donald Trump-created conservative super-majority on the supreme court that has already delivered several blows, and appears poised this summer to overturn five decades of abortion rights. Yet Biden is committed to trying to salvage what he can from what promises to be a testing few months. “Like every other major civil rights bill that came along, if we miss the first time, we can come back and try it a second time,” he told reporters about voting rights efforts. Similarly, he is also likely to attempt to get through Congress individual elements of the Build Back Better plan that are acceptable to Senate moderates, including universal pre-kindergarten education, subsidized child care and a number of climate provisions. “They may try to get pieces of Build Back Better, or build back something as we now call it, but everyone’s going to describe it as crumbs from the table,” Sabato said. “If they’d started with that, people would say, ‘Wow, that’s incredible, pre-K for everybody’, or whatever piece they decided to pick, it didn’t really matter which one. But now it will appear to people as this tiny piece of what the president started out with, [and] tremendous disappointment in Democratic ranks. By the end of the story you won’t even know what passed.” In November last year, Biden, who will be 81 at the time of the 2024 presidential election, announced his intention to run for a second term. Publicly at least, he retains the support of his party, but the Washington Post reported in December rumblings of discontent in Democratic circles about his leadership. An opinion piece in the Wall Street Journal this week, citing the unpopularity of both Biden and Vice-president Kamala Harris, even floated the idea of a comeback for Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee beaten by Trump in 2016, to fill what its authors called a “leadership vacuum”. In the wake of this week’s disappointments, the possibility of an alternative Democratic ticket for 2024 emerged again, the Washington Post columnist and political analyst Perry Bacon Jr suggesting there were “plenty of strong candidates” if Biden or Harris do not run. “Biden hasn’t cracked some magic political code. Despite his white maleness and appeals to unity, Washington is gridlocked, Republican voters hate the president and his party is poised to do poorly in the midterms,” Bacon wrote on Friday. “It seems entirely possible that Biden runs in 2024 and loses to a Republican challenger. Democrats simply might be better off with someone new.”At 92, Edward Sorel is the grand old man of New York magazines. For 60 years, his blistering caricatures have lit up the pages of Harper’s, the Atlantic, Esquire, Time, Rolling Stone and the Nation. He is especially revered for his work in Clay Felker’s New York in the late 60s and for work in the New Yorker under Tina Brown and David Remnick. He has also worked for slightly less august titles, like Penthouse, Screw and Ramparts. He is one of the foundational New Yorkers. Like Leonard Bernstein or E B White, Sorel absorbs the rhythms of the rambunctious city, using them to create an exaggerated, beguiling mirror of all he has experienced. A very abbreviated list of his memories includes the Great Depression, Hitler and Mussolini, the Red Scare, Joe McCarthy, Lee Harvey Oswald, both Bushes, Clinton, Obama and Trump. His memoir begins with a political frame. Like the unreconstructed lefty he is – he voted for Ralph Nader twice – he announces that he will show how the crimes of the previous 12 presidents made possible the catastrophe of Donald Trump. He gives the CIA and the military industrial complex all the shame they deserve for an unending parade of coups and wars – from Iran, Guatemala and Chile to Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan and Iraq. But he promises “these exposés will be brief”, so “it will only hurt for a few minutes”. On that he keeps his word. What gives Profusely Illustrated its charm and its power – besides 177 spectacular illustrations – are Sorel’s tales of New York, beginning with a childhood spent in a fifth-floor walk-up in the Bronx with a father he despised and a mother he adored. Sorel spares no one, especially his “stupid, insensitive, grouchy, mean-spirited, fault-finding, racist” father, who he dreamed of pushing in front of a subway train when he was only eight or nine. “When I grew older, I realized how wrong that would have been,” Sorel writes. “The motorman would have seen me.” The first riddle that tortured him was why his amazing mother married his revolting father. She explained that a few months after her arrival in New York from Romania, at 16, she started work in a factory that made women’s hats. When one of the hat blockers noticed on her first day that she hadn’t left for lunch, he loaned her the nickel she needed. Later, the same blocker told her he would kill himself if she didn’t marry him. So that was that. During a prolonged childhood illness that confined him to his bed, Ed started making drawings on cardboard that came back with shirts from a Chinese laundry. When he went back to school, the drawings were admired by his teacher at PS90, who told his mother young Ed had talent. She enrolled him in a Saturday art class at the other end of the city, the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn and then another at the Little Red School House, at the bottom of Manhattan. At Little Red, thanks to the generosity of one Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, all the students were given a wooden box containing oil paints, brushes, turpentine and an enamel palette. It was Ed’s “to keep so I could paint at home” – and it changed his life. He gained admission to the highly competitive High School of Music and Art, and then to tuition-free art school at Cooper Union. But his teachers did nothing but delay his success: the fashion for abstraction was so intense, he wasn’t allowed to do the realistic work he loved. The Bronx boy who had been Eddie Schwartz was transformed after he discovered Julien Sorel, hero of Stendhal’s novel The Red and the Black. Julien was “a sensitive young peasant who hated his father, was appalled by the corruption of the clergy in 19th-century France, and was catnip to every woman he encountered”. Five years later, Eddie changed his name to Sorel. With Seymour Chast he founded Push Pin Studios, which after Milton Glaser joined, became the hottest design studio in New York. Sorel didn’t last long but when Glaser founded New York magazine with Felker a few years later, Sorel got the perfect outlet for his increasingly powerful caricatures. His book’s pleasures include interactions with all the most important magazine editors of the second half of the last century, including George Lois, art director of Esquire in its heyday under Harold Hayes. Gay Talese had written what would become a very famous profile, Frank Sinatra Has a Cold. The crooner had refused to pose for the cover, after Lois told him he wanted a close up with a cigarette in his mouth and a gaggle of sycophants eagerly trying to light it. Lois asked Sorel for an illustration. It was an assignment that would give him “more visibility than I had ever had before”. He panicked and his first effort was a failure. But with only one night left, his “adrenalin somehow made my hand turn out a terrific drawing of Frank Sinatra”. It launched Sorel’s career. The original now hangs in the National Portrait Gallery. The Village Voice, New York’s original counterculture newspaper, gave him a weekly spot. Sorel inked a memorable portrait of the New York Times editor Abe Rosenthal as a tank shooting a too-liberal columnist, Sydney Schanberg, after Schanberg was fired for attacking the news department from the op-ed page. Tina Brown chose Sorel to do her first New Yorker cover. When Woody Allen and Mia Farrow split up, Sorel imagined a Woody &amp; Mia Analysts Convention. If you’re looking for a bird’s eye view of the glory days of magazine journalism, illustrated with drawings guaranteed to make you nostalgic for great battles of years gone by, Profusely Illustrated is perfect. When you’re done, you’ll be ready to rewatch Mad Men all over again. Profusely Illustrated is published in the US by KnopfWhat’s your favourite scary movie? If you came of age in the 90s there’s a strong chance it was Wes Craven’s 1996 slasher Scream, not just because it was (and still is) a genuine masterwork, but because it arrived during a decade when the quality of horror films was scarier than the content. Scream was a rare horror film that existed in a world where people actually watched horror films, so trying to avoid getting stabbed meant being hyper-aware of the rules that underpinned the genre, brutally instilled by two fanboy killers. The series proceeded with predictably diminishing returns but, for a slasher franchise, the sequels were still smarter than most, crafting a fairly detailed universe of interconnected bloodbaths and the inevitable films based off them (the knowingly wretched Stab franchise). A decade after the hugely underrated fourth chapter, Ghostface is back in Scream (the same title being a jokey reference to a theme in the film although really more of a way to lure in a broader audience outside of Scream completists), but is his or her return from creative necessity or just commercial inevitability? Here is a very spoiler-heavy discussion of Nu Scream: The cold open Ever since Drew Barrymore misremembered the specifics of Friday the 13th and found her insides on the outside as penalty, the quality of a Scream film has been judged within the first 15 minutes, a grisly opening kill that sets the tone for what comes after. Scream 4 outsmarted our expectations with a fun wrong-footing cold open within a cold open within a cold open, which led to speculation about how the new chapter might do something even wilder, stakes raised and rules rewritten. But while some had predicted that perhaps one of the OG pin cushions might be at risk, what’s most surprising about the start of Scream 22 is how straightforward it all is. The set-up is a back-to-basics callback to how it all started with You and Yes Day teen Jenna Ortega as Tara, the sacrificial Casey-shaped lamb, less recognisable this time perhaps but still fielding trivia questions from Ghostface. There are minor tweaks – the questions are about the Stab franchise rather than IRL slashers, she’s hounded by both landline and smartphone – but the most notable change is that, for the first time in the series, the first victim actually survives the attack … The backstory The reason being that Tara was in fact just bait to lure her sister Samantha (In the Heights’ Melissa Barrera) back to Woodsboro, along with boyfriend Richie (The Boys’ Jack Quaid) who’s mostly unaware of the trauma that’s haunted the town ever since the original killings. Samantha is a reformed wild child who left town after raising hell and never came back. The killer soon contacts her, teasing that he or she knows her secret, which we discover is an unfortunate familial tie: Samantha is the illegitimate daughter of Billy Loomis (Skeet Ulrich), one of the original killers. It’s a fun, goofy link, and one that’s very much in line with the franchise’s charmingly soapy mythology but, in a misjudged piece of fan service, Ulrich frequently appears to Samantha as a vision, urging her to lean into her murderous heritage. Samantha then becomes the new final girl but one with an edge – she might also be a killer – a not-too-dissimilar set-up to the fourth film’s positioning of Sidney’s niece Jill as fake-out heroine who turns out to be the villain. She’s not the only new cast member with a connection to the past. Tara’s group of friends includes the niece and nephew of Randy (Jamie Kennedy) who died in the second film and the son of Judy (Marley Shelton) who was introduced in the fourth. The links between old and new inevitably leads Samantha to … The legacy cast Walking wounded they may be, but it’s a miracle that three core Scream survivors are even walking at all, having faced off against various Ghostfaces in every one of the previous films. One of the smartest touches in 2011’s Scream 4 was to set up the structure of a reboot with a young cast primed to take over but then kill them all off either as victims or villains (“D0n’t fuck with the original,” Campbell quips at the end, echoing widespread reboot fatigue at the time). Here, there’s less cohesion between young and old, the latter particularly, at times criminally, wasted. We’re first reunited with Dewey (Arquette), now living in a trailer, retired from the force and seeing his ex-wife Gale (Cox) only on her morning show. He’s dragged back into the drama by Samantha, craving advice on how to survive which leads to an update of the “here are the rules” speech that advises her not to trust her boyfriend (more on that later) and that the motive is somehow connected to the past. We’re also reunited with Judy, a minor character from the last film, and Randy’s sister Martha, allowing for a small scene with Heather Matarazzo who appeared in the third (an Easter egg later showing a YouTube link to an interview with “survivor Kirby Reed” also confirms that the Scream 4 fan favourite, played by Hayden Panettiere, is also still alive). Dewey reluctantly calls Sidney to warn her, which allows us to learn that she now has kids and is married to Mark (who we can assume is Patrick Dempsey’s Mark from Scream 3) but urges her to stay away. After Scream 4 survivor Judy is killed along with her son Wes, we then see the return of Gale, eager for the story, who shares a poignant, if within the larger context of the series repetitive, scene with Dewey – added poignancy because of the off-screen history shared by Cox and Arquette. But any chance of a romantic reunion is curtailed when … The big death It had to happen some time. Every new Scream teases the death of one of the old guard (trailers for 4 suggested it was Gale’s turn) and after marketing for the latest featured only minimal scenes of the main trio, it was seen as a given that someone had to go. But as the only returning cast member to get even the slightest bit of character texture this time around, it’s a shame that Dewey is the one who finds himself on the chopping block. It’s an effectively nasty way to go; a hospital corridor slaying that sees the killer stab Dewey in both his front and back simultaneously, creepily bragging that “it’s an honour” to be the one who gets to murder someone so infamous (the violence throughout feels gnarlier than usual). But it does suck some of the energy from the film, leaving Gale and a returning Sidney to mope before being thrust into the climax … The killers In the final act, the characters are all drawn to the house owned by Billy’s partner-in-crime Stu, the location of the first film’s extended bloodbath finale. It’s where Tara’s best friend Amber (Better Things star Mikey Madison) lives, and where she’s hosting a boozy, ill-advised memorial for their friend Wes. The teens are partying through the grief while also starting to question who out of them might be the killer (it’s easily the most paranoid of the Screams so far). There are notable callbacks to the original – Amber goes to the garage to get beer a la Tatum while Randy’s niece Mindy (Yellowjackets’ Jasmin Savoy Brown) replicates her uncle’s drunk horror movie couch-watch – but they mostly serve to remind us how little we know or care about the undeveloped teens this time around, despite strong performances across the board. There’s too many of them and they have too little do do, which is why when killer #1 is revealed – Amber – it’s met with an “Oh … that one” shrug. Madison does well, recycling her manic shtick from Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, but the impact of her betrayal to BFF Tara is less a stab and more a light graze. Then in yet another callback, killer #2 is unmasked – Richie, the scream queen’s boyfriend turning evil once again. Quaid’s ranting is a little repetitive but in-between the guff, there are some decent half-ideas, all explaining the hows and whys … The requel So while previous Screams have satirised sequels, trilogies and reboots, this time it’s the “requel”, also know as the legacy sequel, when older characters return alongside the new blood, explained by Mindy earlier in the film. What’s driving the two killers this time is fury with the eighth Stab movie which pissed off fans by completely jumping the shark, giving Ghostface a metallic mask, a flamethrower and a sleeveless muscle tee. Stab super-fans Amber and Ritchie met on Reddit and concocted a plan to course-correct the series. If they enacted a more faithful set of killings, the next Stab film would be forced to tell that story instead, therefore saving the franchise. The real villains are therefore toxic fans (“How can fandom be toxic?” Ritchie asks), something anyone who’s spent at least five minutes on the internet will be on board with, and even if the writing is a little heavy-handed (Stab 8 directed by Rian Johnson after the whole Last Jedi brouhaha is a bit much), it’s still a smart-ish way to justify a return to Woodsboro. Yet despite being aware of the rules of a requel, the writers aren’t quite able to follow them very well. What made Force Awakens such a success was the well-calibrated mix of old and new but here, the original cast members are sidelined so much that they ultimately feel like reluctant cameos. Gale and Sidney are truly wasted and while Campbell and Cox manage to conjure some magic thanks to their long histories with the characters, they’re almost superfluous in the messy finale (shooting Gale as soon as she arrives is a thunderously bad idea). Their survival at the end seems to mean less to the makers than the survival of the newbies, all seemingly primed for the next chapter (essentially doing the very thing Scream 4 was ridiculing). A strong start at the box office suggests there’s more to come – but what next?Emotions are as messy as they are fascinating, not just personally but scientifically, too. Although we are sure we know them when we feel them, it’s hard to even say what counts as an emotion. Anger, sadness and disgust, sure. But determination? Lust? Awe? As Leonard Mlodinow shows in his new book, emotions are evolutionarily ancient, rooted in genes and brain structures we share with insects. And at the same time they are embedded in complex and sophisticated cultural scripts and schemas. Fago is a term the Ifaluk of Micronesia use to describe a mix of love, sadness, pity and an urge to feed someone. And how about ambivalence or schadenfreude? Key to Mlodinow’s understanding of emotions are our basic bodily sensations, what he calls “core affect”, as anyone who has diagnosed a “hangry” spouse will recognise. Parole officers are more likely to deny parole as they get nearer to lunchtime, and gut instincts really do seem to be connected to your gut. But both classic and more recent studies show that people interpret these sensations in different ways. In one experiment, one group got a shot of adrenaline that made them vaguely aroused, and another got a placebo. Then everyone sat next to a confederate who acted either happy or angry. The placebo group didn’t report any emotion, but the other group reported happiness or anger depending on their social context. Emotions play an important part in provoking actions. If cool reason allows us to appraise what will happen if we do something, it often takes hot emotion to get us to actually do it. As Mlodinow describes, emotions also often seem to act as a kind of quick summary of complex unconscious calculations about what to do. In artificial intelligence they talk about the frame problem: like Hamlet, an AI can get caught in an endless loop of rumination about what to do – and the philosopher Ronald de Sousa has suggested that emotions are evolution’s way of solving that problem. But at the same time emotions, particularly in humans, are social signals. Crying when you’re sad doesn’t make you feel better – it may even make you feel worse. But it does make other people want to protect and care for you. Yet another undeniable feature of emotions is that you are conscious of them, and indeed feel them more vividly than other mental states such as thoughts, or beliefs or even goals and desires. Many approaches to consciousness focus on sophisticated cognitive states like a sense of the self, or the ability to manipulate thoughts in working memory. But recent work in evolutionary biology, nicely encapsulated in Peter Godfrey-Smith’s book Metazoa, argues that consciousness may have arisen first in the Cambrian explosion. Suddenly creatures developed new ways of perceiving prey or predators, such as eyes and feelers, and new ways of acting on them, such as pincers and claws and legs. The foundational sentient feelings that go with those simple actions, pain or hunger, this is good, this is bad, seem much closer to emotions than to thoughts. Mlodinow chronicles many of the disparate neural, evolutionary, social, cultural, cognitive and phenomenological aspects of emotion within what has become something like the received form for popular science books – the equivalent of the sonnet rhyme scheme. Instead of A, B, C and D, Mlodinow alternates between study summaries, illustrative stories and self-help tips. The studies are mostly interesting and clearly described, and the stories, especially those about his Holocaust survivor parents, are well told and moving. The advice, as it generally does, boils down to: exercise, meditate, stay away from junk food and, as Sydney Smith wrote in 1820 in a letter of advice that is still the best self-help listicle ever: “Make no secret of low spirits to your friends, but talk of them freely – they are always worse for dignified concealment.” (Smith’s “Take short views of human life – not further than dinner or tea” is even more helpful.) What’s missing from the book, and the standard popular science form in general, are theories and explanations – the heart of science. This may reflect the subject matter as much as Mlodinow’s telling of it. There is often an inverse relationship between how much psychological phenomena lend themselves to stories – how compelling they are – and how much they lend themselves to scientific explanations. There are elegant theories of visual perception and fine motor control that combine experiments, computations, neuroscience and evolutionary theory but, unlike emotions, vision and motor control don’t lend themselves to personal stories or propulsive narratives and – not to put too fine a point on it – they can be kind of boring. I think most writers trying to convey science to a broad audience struggle with this tension between the enviable properties of narrative – the way a good story naturally captures and guides a reader’s attention, and the fact that narrative just isn’t the right medium for scientific theories. Although Mlodinow introduces the book by saying that there has been a revolution in our understanding of emotion, what emerges is not a clear new theory so much as a set of disparate bits and pieces, studies and stories collected over the past few years. His main theoretical point is that emotions are important and adaptive, not simply distractions and stumbling blocks to reason. That’s not a terribly new idea or one that depends on scientific studies – David Hume famously said reason is and ought only to be the slave of the passions, and even Plato thought the horses of reason and passion had to be ridden in tandem. But it is surely true. • Alison Gopnik is professor of psychology at the University of California, Berkeley. Emotional: The New Thinking About Feelings is published by Allen Lane (£20). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy of Emotional: The New Thinking About Feelings at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The climate crisis is damaging the health of foetuses, babies and infants across the world, six new studies have found. Scientists discovered increased heat was linked to fast weight gain in babies, which increases the risk of obesity in later life. Higher temperatures were also linked to premature birth, which can have lifelong health effects, and to increased hospital admissions of young children. Other studies found exposure to smoke from wildfires doubled the risk of a severe birth defects, while reduced fertility was linked to air pollution from fossil fuel burning, even at low levels. The studies, published in a special issue of the journal Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, spanned the globe from the US to Denmark, Israel and Australia. “From the very beginning, from preconception, through early childhood into adolescence, we’re starting to see important impacts of climate hazards on health,” said Prof Gregory Wellenius, who edited the issue with Amelia Wesselink, both at the Boston University school of public health, in the US. “This is a problem that affects everybody, everywhere. These extreme events are going to become even more likely and more severe with continued climate change [and this research shows] why they’re important to us, not in the future, but today.” The link between heat and rapid weight gain in the first year of life was found by scientists in Israel. They analysed 200,000 births and found that babies exposed to the highest 20% of night-time temperatures had a 5% higher risk of fast weight gain. The work has “important implications for both climate change and the obesity epidemic”, the researchers, from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, said, because infancy is critical in determining adult weight and because obese people may suffer more in extreme heat. “It’s an interesting hypothesis that’s very much worth following up,” Wellenius said. Globally, 18% of children are now overweight or obese. A possible mechanism for the rapid infant weight gain is that less fat is burned to maintain body temperature when the ambient temperature is higher. A California study found a mother’s exposure to wildfires in the month before conception doubled the risk of a birth defect called gastroschisis, where a baby’s intestines and sometimes other organs protrude out of the body through a small hole in the skin. The scientists examined two million births, 40% of them to mothers living within 15 miles of a wildfire and the resulting air pollution, which was already known to be harmful to pregnant women and their foetuses. They found a 28% rise in the risk of the birth defect in mothers living close to wildfires in the first trimester of pregnancy. Foetal gastroschisis is rare – there are about 2,000 cases a year in the US. But cases are rising worldwide. “Human exposure to wildfires is anticipated to increase in coming decades,” said Bo Young Park, at California State University. “Therefore, a thorough understanding of the negative health outcomes associated with wildfires is critical.” Two new studies examined the link between high temperatures and premature birth. The first assessed almost one million pregnant women in New South Wales, Australia, from 2005 to 2014, of whom 3% delivered their babies before 37 weeks. The researchers found that those in the hottest 5% of places in the state in the week before birth had a 16% higher risk of premature birth. Previous research had found a similar effect in the warmer sub-tropical city of Brisbane, but this was the first in a more temperate region of Australia. “The risk of [premature] birth is likely to increase with the expected increase in global temperatures and heatwaves – this is a potentially serious concern,” said the researchers, led by Edward Jegasothy at the University of Sydney. The second study analysed 200,000 births from 2007-2011 in Harris County, Texas – which includes Houston – where people are accustomed to heat. The period included Texas’s hottest summer on record in 2011. A quarter of the mothers were exposed to at least one very hot day while pregnant, days when temperature reached the top 1% of historic summer temperatures. The risk of any premature birth was 15% higher the day after these very hot days, the scientists found. But the risk was even higher for especially early births, tripling for babies born before 28 weeks, and was also higher for the most disadvantaged 20% of the mothers. “Public health warnings during heatwaves should include pregnant people, especially given our finding of stronger associations earlier in gestation when the consequences of preterm birth are more severe,” said the researchers, led by Lara Cushing, at the University of California, Los Angeles. How heat triggers premature births is not known but it may be because of the release of labour-inducing hormones. This new research adds weight to a 2020 review of 68 studies, comprising 34m births, that linked heat and air pollution to higher risks of premature birth, low birth weight and stillbirth. Bruce Bekkar, an author of the review and retired obstetrician, said: “We are already having generations weakened from birth.” Wellenius said: “Even moderate levels of heat can affect the developing foetus, pregnancy complications, and children and adolescents. Although the risk to an individual is modest, because so many people are exposed, the total number of excess events, whether they be premature births or deaths, is substantial.” Hotter temperatures also increased the number of admissions of young children to emergency departments in New York City, another new study found. The scientists looked at 2.5m admissions over eight years and found that a 7C rise in maximum temperature led to a 2.4% increase in admissions in under-fives. Young children lose proportionally more fluids than adults and their ability to regulate their body temperature is immature, the researchers said. The burning of fossil fuels drives the climate crisis but also causes air pollution and a new study in Denmark assessed the impact of dirty air on 10,000 couples trying to conceive naturally. It found that increases in particle pollution of a few units during a menstrual cycle led to a decrease in conception of about 8%. A recent study in China also found that air pollution significantly increased the risk of infertility, but the average pollution level was more than five times higher than in the Danish study. “Air pollution [in Denmark] was low and almost entirely at levels deemed safe by the European Union,” said Wesselink. “Current standards may be insufficient to protect against adverse reproductive health effects.” Wellenius said an important aspect of the studies was that they showed that vulnerable people often suffered the worst effects, for example people of colour and those on low incomes who did not have air conditioning or lived in areas with higher air pollution. “This is absolutely a health equity and justice issue,” he said.Vicky McClure has just made me a cup of tea and now we’re on to the important business of weighing up just how famous she has become. The Line of Duty and This Is England star reckons she’s a long way from being an A-lister, insisting her fame is “a bit more like a household-ey name? Maybe in the same vein as a soap?” It’s the kind of take you might expect from the grounded Midlander who, despite starring in the most-watched BBC drama since records began, keeps things very real. And she also makes a great cup of tea. We’re talking in the unflashy front room of her cosy house in Nottingham. An ordinary house on an ordinary suburban street; no thick electronic gate, no hovering publicist or personal assistant. Our only (unseen) company is McClure’s fiance, fellow actor Jonny Owen, who’s pottering around upstairs. Oh, and the builder who knocks on the front door – they’re having work done. But while McClure might not be quite sure about her level of fame, I am (and not just because she has the bone structure of a woman whose face belongs on billboards). We meet in December, after a year in which her career has entered the stratosphere, thanks to Line of Duty and its record-breaking sixth series. The one that the BBC says was streamed 137m times, and in which she stars as Kate Fleming, the unemotional, straight-as-a-die undercover specialist. “I mean, we didn’t quite expect it to do that,” she says of the show, as we sit, brews on our knees. “I don’t know how you describe it – those kinds of figures just don’t happen any more; we don’t watch telly in that way.” McClure shakes her head. But last year, we did. The show about corrupt coppers, created by Jed Mercurio, actually began life on BBC Two in 2012, with a respectable few million viewers, before being bumped up to BBC One for its fourth series in 2017, gaining a bigger audience as each series aired, thanks to a growing army of fans who had caught up on streaming. By last year, it was a rare type of cultural phenomenon: a weekly police procedural show on a linear TV channel that stood out in a landscape dominated by on-demand viewing. True event television that people made time to watch, without fail. Soon, its dialogue and character catchphrases – well, superintendent Ted Hastings’ catchphrases (“Mother of God!”, “Jesus, Mary and Joseph and the wee donkey!”) – became memes and merchandise. The anti-corruption unit was even referenced in the Houses of Commons (Keir Starmer said that “Ted Hastings and AC-12 are needed to get to the bottom of this one” over the David Cameron Greensill lobbying scandal). As the show’s profile grew, its lead actors’ profiles rocketed. For them it was a decidedly surreal experience that only the three of them – McClure, Martin Compston (DI Steve Arnott), Adrian Dunbar (Hastings) – as well as Mercurio, could truly understand. Every Friday night, during the weeks when the show was airing, they’d meet on Zoom, McClure says, “just to discuss how our weeks had been, because it was a lot”. Especially for an actor who prides herself on a normal existence, on keeping a tight hold on her privacy. “Yeah, it is getting weird,” she admits, concluding that “as long as I can live in this way” – in Nottingham – “I’m happy. I don’t know what’s coming next. You know, me and Jonny are just normal people with extraordinary jobs.” *** I’s been a life-changing time for McClure, who at an early stage in her career gave up on acting and got a job in retail. “I’ve never been so solid until last year,” she says. “It was the craziest year of my career.” It’s had an impact off-screen, of course. McClure lists on two fingers the times she went on a night out last year, most recently in Nottingham with her sister, something she hadn’t done in years. “We just said sod it,” she says, then takes a beat as she looks disappointed. “And it was hard work. We were home by 10 o’clock, and that was because people were approaching, taking pictures. And I don’t mind, I will give the selfie, I will chat. But I’m cautious at the moment: we’re in the middle of a shoot [for the ITV thriller Without Sin] and I don’t want to get Covid. So I don’t want to be hugging anyone. It got to the point where I was not enjoying myself as much as I would have done had nobody known me.” McClure’s authenticity has always been her superpower. She made her name in almost exclusively homegrown films and TV shows, and in her work with the visionary, working-class film-maker Shane Meadows, who first cast her when she was just 15. She’s never even been to Los Angeles (and it doesn’t sound as if she wants to: “I’m all right!”). And, apart from a brief stint in London a decade ago, she has always lived near where she grew up. She fiercely loves her home town and her life there. Of London, she says: “You’re all kind of living on top of each other and you don’t really get to know the community in the same way that you would in suburbia. I know everyone around here. I love my neighbours and everybody’s very normal to me, because I’m normal to them.” It’s a quality her collaborators love in her. Dominic Savage, who co-created I Am Nicola with McClure – an astonishing, largely improvised drama for Channel 4 about coercive control – tells me he loves her “remarkable instinct for truth, deep understanding and empathy for ordinary life and human nature. She just can’t fake it. She has to feel it, has to believe in it. She is immersed in honesty and saying things as they really are. Everything she does comes from being utterly grounded.” Essentially, he adds: “Working with Vicky was therefore a real joy because there’s no bullshit.” This year has the potential to make Vicky McClure’s life even weirder. For I’m actually here, on her settee, to talk about her new show, Trigger Point (which I accidentally keep calling Tipping Point, just like the makeup artist on Line of Duty who exclaimed to McClure of the quizshow, “I didn’t know you presented!”). McClure is starring in ITV’s big new primetime thriller as ex-military bomb disposal operative (otherwise known as an “expo”) Lana Washington. This time, she’s not sharing top billing three ways; while there’s a sterling cast (including Adrian Lester), this is McClure’s show – and has been all along. The part was written with her in mind, by first-time screenwriter Daniel Brierley who offered it to her without an audition. Mercurio is executive producer. It will provoke inevitable but wide of the mark comparisons with Line of Duty. And from the one episode I’ve seen, it’s clear that although they’re both women who work in law enforcement, they have very different backstories and lives. “Oh my God, Lana and Kate are worlds apart. But I’d imagine they’d have a great time in the pub,” McClure says. “In Line of Duty, I kind of dip my toe into my personal life, but we don’t tend to go down that road too much with Kate. So it was lovely: we really get to see Lana outside the expo world. And I’m always up for anything that’s emotionally challenging.” Mercurio’s involvement runs deep. He mentored Brierley as part of a TV bursary scheme when the show was simply an idea, and has been with him every step of the way since. The mentoring Mercurio isn’t perhaps the Mercurio the public are most familiar with, I suggest to McClure. He’s more commonly known as, well, a tough cookie (Mercurio has had public run-ins with journalists and Twitter users). “Jed’s my friend now, I’ve worked with him for over 10 years,” McClure says, with warmth but firmness. “I see Jed as a tough cookie in so much as he’s got real moral standards, and he’s not afraid to be heard. He’s an extremely intelligent man, so you can learn a lot from him. And I think he speaks on behalf of people in a really direct way, in a world in which people are a bit afraid to do that. So I’ve got the utmost respect for him. He’s willing to put himself out there and very generous with his time. He wants to share what he’s learned, and his passion for what he does. So fair play to him.” Steadfast loyalty is actually the least surprising thing about McClure, but one of the most revealing. She will defend those she cares about (politely). Her relationships are everything: whether with family, friends, her fiance or her colleagues, who seem to inevitably become mates. Mercurio tells me that McClure “was the absolute top of our wishlist to play the leading role in Trigger Point because she’s got an amazing gift for bringing authenticity and naturalism to any part. It’s been a privilege to witness Vicky grow as an actor over the past decade to the point where she was a real leader on set.” *** McClure has been a performer pretty much all her life. She joined a dance school on her third birthday and then the renowned Nottingham drama school, the Television Workshop, at the age of 11 (“I was very focused,” she says of her childhood). But, unlike many of her fellow actors, she’s from a working-class family – her dad was a joiner and butcher, her mother a hairdresser and stay-at-home mum – and had to rely on free drama training. She auditioned for the prestigious Italia Conti School in London aged 14, but the fees were beyond their reach, and pleas to local council and arts organisations (and even family and friends) were unsuccessful. “My mum and dad worked very hard to see me through lots of things,” McClure says. “It also meant that, financially, we couldn’t do certain things like Italia Conti and schools that require a large amount of money for people to be given a shot.” McClure got her shot anyway: she was able to stay at the TV Workshop, where “whether you were rich or poor or different, it was fully funded and you were all on a level playing field”. Within a year of the Conti disappointment, Meadows, then a young director, turned up at the workshop to audition students for his third feature, a coming-of-age story, set in a Nottinghamshire village, called A Room for Romeo Brass. McClure, after improvising with Paddy Considine, who’d already been cast, landed the role of Romeo’s sister, Ladine. She was just 15. McClure thought she’d made it, and waited for Hollywood to come calling – until she discovered the film had played in just six cinemas across the UK. And then: nothing. So, instead, she went to college and studied drama, leaving after just four months, skint and despondent. She worked in retail – H Samuel, Dorothy Perkins and a tanning shop – before taking office jobs. “I didn’t have this little pot of money that had been saved for me for years and all of a sudden you hit 18 and it’s like, you’ve hit the jackpot,” she says matter-of-factly. “So that didn’t happen and that’s fine. I just worked instead. I don’t remember having a bad time. I loved the Christmas parties. I loved my mates. I loved not having to bring my work home. I loved sick pay, holiday pay!” It taught her a valuable lesson. “I love my job, but I don’t put it on a pedestal like it’s the most important thing in my life.” In the early 2000s, McClure gave up her agent and did hardly any acting for six years – something she’s now grateful for. “It kept me grounded,” she says, “though if you’d asked me that when I was in that [situation], I’d have been, like, ‘Just give me the work!’” – until, once again, Meadows appeared, this time with the role of a lifetime on offer: Lol in This Is England. Those who now know Vicky McClure as Kate Fleming – by-the-book, middle-class, career-driven – may not recognise her as Lol, the young, big-hearted skinhead who, pre-Line of Duty, was McClure’s most famous role, one that won her a TV Bafta in 2010. She first played her in the 2006 award-winning film, then the three acclaimed series for Channel 4 that followed. McClure says Lol is “probably the only character I’ve played that I felt like was a real person. Because I immersed my head and heart into her.” McClure and Meadows summoned her together (he works largely with improvisation) as a three-dimensional, working-class woman who was also a child sexual abuse survivor. McClure’s acclaimed performance – taking in events of supreme darkness and hard-fought-for joy – was full of naturalism, believability and heart, and Lol arguably one of the greatest female characters in British film and TV history. Meadows changed McClure’s life – and is still a big part of it. “Shane lives down the road, his wife is my best friend and he’s my mate. We’ve known each other for so long, and the majority of time we spend together is as friends, rather than as director and actor. But [with This Is England] he trusted me with something. I didn’t know where that was gonna lead, none of us did, really.” Meadows knows how lucky he was to find McClure. “Working with Vicky is akin to working with Julie Walters, Alison Steadman and Twiggy at the same time,” he tells me over email. “She’s not only one of the greatest actors this country has produced, she works harder than most, hasn’t changed one iota and is annoyingly handsome to boot. From the first time I met her at an audition for Romeo Brass in 1998, up until the present day, I’ve never once seen her lay anything unauthentic down. Truth just seems to ooze out of every pore.” *** Meadows’ This Is England saga told the story of a group of working-class kids growing up together on a Midlands estate – and their messy, painful, joyful lives over almost a decade. It’s on the subject of class and opportunity that McClure lights up, though she’s insistent that she doesn’t “want to wave a flag that makes people think I’ve come from poverty. That’s disrespectful to people that have had a much harder start. Nobody needs to feel sorry for me. I don’t, I had a great upbringing.” Given the decimation of arts funding in this country over the last decade – public funding per person has dropped by 35% since 2008 – does she think the next Vicky McClure could actually make it today, when it’s harder than ever to be a working-class creative? She seems at a loss. “Yeah,” she sighs, running her hands through her hair. “Whenever anybody asks me for advice or says, ‘What tips can you give me because I don’t have much money and I need to get into the industry?’, I don’t know what the answers are. And I feel awful.” Many people from lower socioeconomic backgrounds have to be exceptional, I say: willing to work harder, be more ambitious, push harder, just to get a toe inside the same worlds that money provides an open door to. “I’m just always going to be one of those who feels like, why should anybody have to do any more than someone else just because of what they’ve got in their account?” she says. “There’s certain people that get to see the world or buy into an opportunity that can propel them somewhere, and that’s good for them. But if you don’t have that financial gain, you’re locked into what you’ve got. In the same breath, [those people] get a completely different experience of life, rooted in a different understanding of the world, and there’s a different authenticity there. I don’t want to bash people because of their beginnings. It’s not anybody’s fault. I’d rather people just own it.” These beliefs, this passion, inspired McClure’s next big move: one that she’s sharing with Owen (who she’s been engaged to since 2017), a fellow working-class kid from Merthyr Tydfil, an ex-mining community in Wales. In October last year, the couple launched BYO (Build Your Own) Films, a production company that will tell working-class stories and give jobs to those not traditionally offered opportunities in TV and film. They are already shooting their first project, Without Sin, in which McClure stars and executive produces (she was adamant that it was to film in Nottingham), and using plenty of talent from the TV Workshop. “I feel like it put me in very good stead,” McClure says of her decade at the Workshop. “It makes you ambitious, it gives you that kind of feeling of, just go for it. You know, nothing’s guaranteed, is it? You’ve just got to have a shot. I had a shot, I started with nothing. It’s not like anything’s been handed to me on a plate … I’m in a position now where I can share a bit of what I’ve learned – and giving people work is an amazing feeling.” That’s not to say that she’s no longer going to be in front of the camera. We’re discussing whether there’s a connecting thread in her career and her characters, and McClure lands on “relatability”: women she can share ground with. That’s why, she says, she will never play the Doctor in Doctor Who, despite the semi-regular Twitter campaigns calling for it (and, for the record, she would make an excellent Doctor). “It’s lovely,” she says of the social media love, while emphasising that she hasn’t been offered the role. “It’s a real compliment. It’s an iconic piece of telly that’s been going for ever and ever, and I’m sure will continue to, and I wish it well, but it’s not for me.” Well, yes, if relatability’s your kick, then playing an alien with two hearts will understandably be a stretch. “It’s not even something I watch,” she continues. “You know, the TV I make is usually the TV I will enjoy myself. So what I tend to do is go for parts I feel can stretch my imagination – like, even bomb disposal is so far from my world, but the understanding of fear, we all have. Once we start moving to sci-fi, that’s where I start to lose interest.” So if not Doctor Who, what’s ahead? There is, tantalisingly, the promise of a future Meadows collaboration, though exactly what still seems to be undecided. “We speak about working together a lot,” she smiles. “And we’ve had a few little things that have come our way where we’ve thought, oooh, there we go, maybe that’s it? And it will happen, that’s very much a dream of mine. Shane shares the same interests and likes, and [we] have a similar vision. So I think when we do get to do something again, it will be a major moment.” And, of course, there’s the other big thing the world wants to know … will there be a seventh series of Line of Duty? “I don’t know!” McClure insists. “I don’t know, there’s no word of it. I think we’ve all been really honest and said should that happen, we’re all game.” McClure says that she’ll be there with Mercurio, Compston and Dunbar, as long as they want in, too. “I’ll just stick with the guys. I think when it comes to a close, it will be a natural close for us all. And we’re very close with Jed, so it’s not a business transaction, do you know what I mean? This isn’t business, this is our lives and we’ve all created careers from it, and we’ve all got a lot out of it. Not only that, I can’t imagine my life without Adey [Adrian Dunbar] and Martin in that acting capacity where it’s like, well, at least I get to be with my mates for four months of the year.” But end it will, eventually, I say, as I hand over my drained mug and begin to head to the door. “And that will be a big blow,” she says. “But, you know, everything comes to an end, and everything’s got a shelf life. So when that natural end is, is when it is. I’m just loyal to that. I can’t see me going” – and she puts on a posh voice – “‘I’m done, I’ve got a better job, I’m off’, because what’s better than Line of Duty?” • Trigger Point airs this month on ITV.The White House doesn’t often provide interior design inspiration – remember Melania Trump’s 2018 Christmas decorations? – but Tyler Lory and Michael Rauschenberg’s grey-painted clapboard home in New York state’s Hudson Valley reflects 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue in one specific way. “As a kid I was always impressed by the rooms at the White House: the blue room, the red room, the green room,” says Lory. “I wanted our rooms to each have their own identity.” Here, the mono effect is achieved with a different mood and richly patterned wallpaper for each room. Papers are layered with atmospheric portraits and rooms are full of antiques gathered over a lifetime. The dining room features an intricate, lace-like pattern providing a delicate backdrop to the couple’s collection of silverware and crystal. Upstairs, four rooms were conceived as “jewel boxes”: a moody, study is papered with exotic blooms against a dark background; a blue bedroom has a menagerie of birds on a powder-blue background; a yellow room is more traditional, with pink florals against a buttery background; while the couple’s own black-and-white room is boldly monochrome throughout. The effect is cocooning and intimate. Lory’s friends call his decorating style romantic: “I think that’s a fair statement of what we’ve done. I want people to feel special – like somebody fussed over them.” Gilt, glass and silver accessories bounce light around the rooms, which are all immaculately dressed, pillows plumped ready for the next houseful of visitors. You can practically smell the polish and coffee. The house is also inspired by their friend Jim, a close friend who lived in a grand, convivial house in Chicago full of pattern, porcelain and portraiture. Jim died of Aids in 1989 at the age of 33, and the Red Hook home is, in part, a homage to their friendship. Lory and Rauschenberg’s 1920s kit house is on the crest of a hill in Red Hook, about two hours north of New York City. From the front porch you can see the Catskills. “That’s what helped me decide on the house,” Lory recalls. “It was a dump. But as soon as I walked outside and looked across the way, I saw the mountains and all the colours that come with them.” The couple have spent 17 years restoring what was a dilapidated, partially prefabricated house with four boxy rooms on each level. It was haphazardly extended 50 years later. “When we bought the house, it looked right out of 1973,” says Lory. “I can say that because I was born in 1956, so I was around in the early 70s.” Red Hook is in historic Dutchess County; for Lory – a barrister who spends the week in New York City – this was also part of the attraction. Franklin D Roosevelt’s family home is here; his Presidential Library is in nearby Hyde Park; Bard College – the private liberal arts college the couple’s adopted son attends – is 10 minutes away. Lory sourced all the wallpapers from Thibaut, America’s oldest wallpaper specialists. He recalls ordering more than 70 samples (large-scale sheets, rather than stingy swatches) before settling on a combination of colours and patterns. The decision-making process was instinctive – “so much of decorating is about emotions and feeling” – but his first and only rule for purchasing paper is simple: “You have to like it.” Try not to be swayed by the latest collections or colourways. Order samples of what you are naturally drawn to and edit them down until you are left with something you can live with. Lory grew up in a heavily wallpapered house, and recalls the pattern continuing on the inside of each built-in closet. He has replicated that here, which guests find intriguing. “It causes a reaction,” he says. “Aside from choosing something you like, I think it ought to be interesting – something to talk about.” This edict also applied to Lory’s choice of artwork, most of which was sourced from an estate sale in Palm Springs. In the living room, a portrait of a society woman in a cloche hat oversees proceedings. (The artist is Alexander James, nephew of novelist Henry James.) In the dining room, a man with a clipped moustache guards the silverware. “Of course these people aren’t our actual ancestors, but they watch over us,” says Lory. “We talk about them and create stories for them. They belong in our family, somehow.” The furniture here “has happened over time” and includes inherited pieces and things from local antique shops. Lory’s favourite is the mahogany dining table, which expands to seat up to 12 and is surrounded by reproduction Duncan Phyfe chairs that once belonged to his grandmother and have travelled with him since the mid-80s. For the pair’s own bedroom, Lory covered a tattered $200 chaise longue in monochrome toile. Set against the larger-scale florals of the wallpaper and anchored by a brooding portrait above, it creates a focal point in an otherwise underused space. This instinctive layering of patterns and paintings has been, Lory says, “a labour of love”. Imbued with memories of his friend Jim, and his own childhood home, Lory has created a home that is – above all – welcoming. “I want the place to be cosy for people,” he says. “I want it to be an inclusive place which, for gay men, has not always been the case … I wanted to create a space that felt really welcoming to all.”I can’t think of a single Dior product I would have included in a previous “best of the year” roundup. This time, I’ve struggled to shave my choices down to two. No longer coasting on Parisian heritage and luxury packaging, Dior is on a gold run of terrific launches. Having never much liked this company’s foundations, I found I wore the exceptionally good Dior Forever Natural Nude (17 shades, £39) more than any other base last year (and I may well do the same in 2022). Sheer and ungreasy, it succeeds where most other long-lasting foundations fail: by keeping my skin hydrated and looking like great skin – not like makeup. My preference is for a light-coverage foundation with a full-coverage concealer, and Dior’s Forever Skin Correct (27 shades, £27) became my constant companion last year. If you find concealer too dry, cakey or just ineffectual, this magic wand of lasting, creamy camouflage for dark circles, spots and discoloration is the answer to all your prayers. It is pure brilliance. I apply it daily using my favourite brush of last (and possibly any) year: Beauty Pie’s Pro-Angled Concealer Brush (£9.31). The new Beauty Pie Plus programme (which replaces the old buyers’ club subscription model with an annual membership fee of £59) makes signing up a much simpler and more cost-effective decision. To date, I have acquired five of these fat, perfectly contoured brushes, so I am never without a clean one to hand. They make a doss of under-eye cover-ups. Another 2021 beauty tool that I could no longer be without is GHD’s Unplugged cordless hair straightener. I readily admit that £299 is extremely steep for any hair gadget, especially one that I could hide in a pencil case, but if you can’t go anywhere without a hair iron, this will change your life. Approved for taking on flights, this tiny, ceramic-coated straightener is carried cordless and heats up in seconds to bring you shiny, swishy hair on the move. I was sceptical about its performance next to my at-home device, but can confirm that it does the job every bit as well (albeit only with regular charging, so I stick to my plug-in straightener at home). The tool comes in a heat-protective case, so I can pack it, still warm, having just done my hair, and know it won’t damage my bag. I never knew I needed it until I could no longer be without it.Virginia Giuffre was a teenager working as a locker-room assistant at Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida in 2000 when she says she was approached by Ghislaine Maxwell. Maxwell asked her if she wanted to become a massage therapist. Giuffre had been trying to get her life back on track, and this job was a key part of that plan. She has recounted how she had been sexually abused as a child, found herself moving in and out of foster care homes, and at 14 had been living on the streets suffering yet more abuse. She has recalled how she initially thought Maxwell and her close friend, Jeffrey Epstein, were “nice people” looking to help her earn some extra money. She had opened up to them about her past. “That was the worst thing I could have told them because now they knew how vulnerable I was,” Giuffre told the BBC in 2019. Soon, Giuffre says, she was being sexually abused by Epstein, and alleges she was “passed around like a platter of fruit” among his high-profile friends, including Prince Andrew. Now, after years of fighting to be heard, Giuffre is at the centre of one of the world’s most-watched legal battles, alleging that Andrew sexually abused her when she was 17. This week, a New York judge refused to throw out Giuffre’s civil case against the prince. The ruling could see Andrew, who strenuously denies the allegations, divulging aspects of his personal life in open court this autumn. While it may be possible for the duke to reach an out-of-court settlement with Giuffre, possibly costing him millions, there are suggestions she wants her day in court. Giuffre, who has become a prominent advocate for survivors of sexual misconduct, has said she wants her allegations against the Duke of York and other high-profile men in Epstein’s orbit to be heard. “It wasn’t just Jeffrey and Ghislaine who participated in this,” Giuffre claimed in an interview with New York magazine earlier this week, speaking from her home in Perth, Australia, where she is raising a family of three children with her husband Robert. “Justice to me looks like holding all of these people involved in the sex ring, those who greased its wheels, named and shamed.” Giuffre added that she was “sick of carrying around that shame. That shame doesn’t belong to me.” Giuffre has said she was somewhat relieved when 60-year-old Maxwell, daughter of late media mogul Robert Maxwell, was convicted of sex trafficking charges in December. “It’s a bittersweet emotion because I have been fighting for so long,” she told New York magazine. “It doesn’t stop with Maxwell. But it’s definitely a relief to know that she’s off the streets.” Epstein, a once wealthy and powerful financier, killed himself in a Manhattan jail cell in 2019 while awaiting trial on sex-trafficking charges. The next stage in Giuffre’s civil lawsuit against Andrew and other men, including Epstein’s lawyer Alan Dershowitz, who is accused of having sex with Giuffre when she was a teenager, may be discovery. Dershowitz denies the allegations. Andrew would be asked to provide information ahead of a possible deposition at which he is likely to be questioned about Giuffre and his associations with Epstein and Maxwell. The focus on his personal life could prove embarrassing for the prince. “Lawyers file cases because they know the other side will not want to answer questions and will pay a lot of money to avoid doing that,” says former sex crimes prosecutor Wendy Murphy. Murphy says she believes Andrew “will try to delay it for years, or he’ll offer a very large amount of money – far more than the case is worth – because he’ll want to prevent himself from answering any questions.” This week’s decision comes 21 years after Giuffre’s alleged encounter with Andrew at Tramp nightclub, in which she recalls the duke sweating profusely on the dancefloor. In an interview with Newsnight in 2019, Andrew memorably countered this claim, saying he is unable to sweat. Giuffre alleges she was sexually abused by Andrew later that night in Maxwell’s London townhouse. The prince denies the allegations, saying he was at home after a children’s party at Pizza Express in Woking. Giuffre, then Virginia Roberts, spent four years as Epstein’s personal masseuse, during which she alleges she was trafficked to the financier’s friends and clients. In a 2009 civil lawsuit against Epstein, under the pseudonym “Jane Doe 102”, she alleged that her duties included being “sexually exploited by Epstein’s adult male peers including royalty”. Giuffre reached a $500,000 settlement with Epstein in that case before it went to trial. She also sued and settled for an undisclosed sum with Maxwell in a 2015 defamation suit. Giuffre filed the current civil lawsuit against the duke for sexual abuse, battery and intentional infliction of emotional distress just five days short of the closing of a window in New York’s Child’s Sex Act that had been opened to clear a backlog of claims against religious institutions. In the civil case, the decision this week marked a first-round victory against the duke’s effort to have the case dismissed on the grounds that her agreement with Epstein covered all “potential defendants”. Kaplan ruled that the the case could proceed. There are still many legal steps in the process before a potential trial. The duke’s lawyers are likely to argue that Judge Lewis Kaplan’s court is the wrong venue to air Giuffre’s claims because neither party resides in the United States. If such a challenge came down in the duke’s favor, however, Giuffre is highly unlikely to end her pursuit. “I think it takes time to heal, and this justice is part of the process,” Giuffre told New York magazine before the decision this week. “Now I can start really working past Maxwell and thinking about the others who need to be held accountable.” She added: “No matter how rich or how connected you are.”Steven has lost more bitcoin than most people will ever own. Raised on the remote Shetland archipelago, he left school at 13 to become a trawlerman before moving into construction, eventually earning £85,000 a year digging tunnels for Crossrail. Despite his self-made success, compulsive cryptocurrency trading, alcohol and drug use took over his life. In the fog of multiple addictions, he lost the “addresses” of between five and 10 bitcoins, rendering his digital buried treasure – worth up to £300,000 today – impossible to retrieve. Steven spotted the potential of bitcoin early and he had a talent for trading. But even if he had that money now, his addiction means it would soon be squandered. “Trading is gambling, there’s no doubt about it,” he says. “I studied and studied. I taught myself how to be a good trader and tried really hard to manage my accounts and stick to a set of rules. “But my mind would twist and I’d go all in, like a poker player that thought he had the perfect hand. I was convinced I was going to be a bitcoin millionaire.” Now in recovery at the Castle Craig residential treatment clinic in Scotland, Steven fears that legions of young people are being lured into high-risk trading and potentially addiction, based on the same misguided quest for untold riches. “A whole generation think that with a little mobile phone they can win, that they can … beat the market,” he says. “It scares the bejesus out of me.” Steven’s fears are founded partly on crypto’s rapid emergence into the mainstream. When he started investing in 2015, digital currencies meant nothing to most people. Now, they are being touted as a more democratic alternative to a monopolistic and exploitative global financial system. As the Guardian revealed on Friday today, crypto firms launched a record-breaking promotional push in London last year, targeting millions of commuters with 40,000 adverts on billboards, at tube stations, in carriages and across the side of double decker buses. Advertisers included relatively obscure names such as Hex, Kraken and Puglife about whom consumers know little, if anything. Meanwhile, football clubs and players, not to mention globally recognised celebrities, tout crypto investments on a daily basis via social media. This week, reality TV star Kim Kardashian West and boxer Floyd Mayweather Jr were named in a lawsuit alleging that they helped promote crypto firm EthereumMax, as it made “false and misleading” statements that left investors nursing heavy losses. An Instagram post about EthereumMax, to Kardashian’s 250 million followers, may have been the most widely seen financial promotion of all time, according to the head of the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). Yet despite their ascendancy – and warnings that governments could suffer “limitless” losses – cryptoassets remain unregulated in the UK, pending a Treasury review. That means that the FCA, the UK’s financial regulator, is all but powerless to influence how the industry behaves. While some trading platforms that offer digital assets are regulated – because they also offer more traditional financial instruments – crypto coins and tokens are not. Cryptoasset executives do not have to prove that they are fit and proper people to take people’s money. The companies they run are not required to hold enough cash to repay investors if they go bust. Nor must they worry about the FCA’s stipulation that financial promotions, such as those splashed across public transport in London, are fair, clear and not misleading. Amid the marketing blitz, the Advertising Standards Authority is the only watchdog that has bared its teeth. It is investigating one advert by the cryptocurrency Floki Inu and has already banned one for Luno Money. “If you’re seeing bitcoin on a bus, it’s time to buy,” the Luno advert insisted, contrary to prevailing investment wisdom. Luno Money told the Guardian it would welcome an “effective regulatory framework”. But in the ongoing vacuum of oversight, experts fear that cautionary tales of addiction, such as the one told by Steven, are being drowned out by powerful, overwhelmingly positive messages. To monitor the type of messaging sent out by marketing teams, the Guardian created an experimental cryptocurrency portfolio – holding a mixture of bitcoin, ether and Shiba Inu. As bitcoin slumped towards the end of 2021 and into 2022, having reached all-time highs just weeks earlier, the Twitter account of smartphone trading app eToro remained doggedly optimistic. “Is bitcoin on its way to a new high?,” it asked, as the slide began. “We’ve seen bitcoin rally before. But could this be the one to take it to the MOON?” The answer, for the time being at least, was “No”. But holders of crypto portfolios were encouraged to stay positive. “Your account gained 1.87% yesterday,” one app notification read, as the slump abated. “You had a good day. Share the news with everyone.” No such invitation appeared on the far more frequent days when the value of the Guardian’s portfolio went down. “It’s a very strategic marketing ploy,” says Dr Anna Lembke, one of the world’s foremost addiction experts, professor of psychiatry at Stanford University School of Medicine and author of the book Dopamine Nation. “They’re encouraging you to amplify the wins and ignore the losses, creating a false impression there are more wins.” Asked about this, eToro says that it is “committed to helping retail investors engage with each other and foster an environment of learning and collaboration”, adding that its platform is not “gamified”. According to eToro’s UK managing director, Dan Moczulski, some users make their account public so that “all investments are visible to others, whether they are profitable or not”. The company said it also provides educational tools, performs know-your-customer checks and encourages long-term, diversified investing. But Dr Lembke is concerned by the potential for the social media element to fuel compulsive behaviour in crypto trading, an activity she says bears the hallmarks of addictive gambling products but without the acknowledged risk. “When you mix social media with financial platforms, you make a new drug that’s even more potent,” she says. Social media posts pushing crypto frequently refer to Fomo – the fear of missing out – fuelling an urge to participate. “You get this herd mentality where people talk to each other about what the market is doing, they have wins together, losses together, … an intense shared emotional experience.” “We get a little spike in dopamine, followed by a little deficit that has us looking to recreate that state.” This, she says, echoes characteristics of gambling but with a crucial difference. “It’s less stigmatised,” she says. “It has this socially sanctioned status as something that maverick smart people do.” Parallels with gambling are becoming harder to ignore. GamCare, which runs the National Gambling Helpline, said it fields about 20 calls a week related to crypto. Callers reported trading for 16 hours a day, making huge losses and struggling to cope with the guilt. As with gambling, where every one addict is estimated to harm seven other people, many were suffering at the hands of someone else’s habit. One recounted how her partner’s trading obsession was leading them to spend time away from the family. Another said their partner had taken to trading while in recovery from alcoholism, spending every waking hour making trades. GamCare has even dealt with young patients who bought digital coins in a desperate attempt to make enough money to get on to the property ladder, only to lose life-changing sums. At Castle Craig, where Steven is receiving treatment, the first crypto addict arrived at the clinic in 2016, followed by more than 100 since then. “More and more people are isolated and are doing this [trading], especially since Covid,” says Tony Marini, the senior specialist therapist at the clinic and a recovering gambling addict himself. “It’s tenfold already since 2016, so what’s it going to be like in the next five years?”With Joel Coen’s The Tragedy of Macbeth and Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story remake both hitting cinemas last month, the long list of Shakespeare adaptations on film – direct, loosely inspired or otherwise – grew a little longer still. Yet despite a solid shared foundation, most Shakespeare on film is as easily forgotten as any old am-dram production: films with a vision to match that language and storytelling are rare and special. The Tragedy of Macbeth, which landed on Apple TV+ this week, certainly has a vision, with its bare modernist design and high-contrast monochrome cinematography, though Coen’s rendering of the play itself is muted and overly composed. In the ranks of movie Macbeths, it lacks the visceral fury of Roman Polanski’s 1971 version (Amazon) or even Australian director Justin Kurzel’s recent, Michael Fassbender-starring adaptation (2015; BFI Player), which divided critics with its slash-happy approach to the text but enthralled me with its blood-and-grime vigour. Anyone taking on Macbeth has to contend with the Japanese master Akira Kurosawa’s Throne of Blood (1957; BFI Player), which mightily moved proceedings to the samurai realm. Kurosawa’s liberties with the narrative shift and reignite familiar stakes, while there’s dreamy horror to its imagery. It isn’t just the most thrilling filmed version of the Scottish play, but possibly the best Shakespeare film, full stop. Challengers for the title include Kurosawa’s two other, very different stabs at Shakespeare: the ravishing epic sensibility of his King Lear adaptation, Ran (1985; BFI Player), couldn’t be further removed from the lean, noir-esque cruelty of his 1960 Hamlet spin, The Bad Sleep Well (BFI Player), but both prove how fluidly these tales translate to distant cultural contexts. Bollywood, too, returns to the Shakespearean well frequently: 2003’s Maqbool (Apple TV+) is yet another thrusting, vibrant redo of Macbeth. Calling Kurosawa the Bard’s greatest screen interpreter might have rankled with Laurence Olivier, the stately classicist who sort of appointed himself Shakespeare’s official conduit in the 1940s. Decades on, the actor-director’s Shakespeare films are a mixed bag. The Oscar-laden Hamlet (1948; Apple TV+) is handsome but a bit stiff, though his Henry V (1944; Amazon) still leaps off the screen with iridescent colour and fury, while his Richard III (1955; Google Play) contains possibly his most vital, sinuous screen performance. The less said about Olivier’s blackface Othello the better, particularly with Laurence Fishburne’s dynamite performance as the Moor available to view in Oliver Parker’s 1995 film (Google Play). Still, Orson Welles’s brooding, carved-in-marble film of Othello (1951; Amazon) remains the play’s best screen outing. Welles’s magnificent Chimes at Midnight (1965; Apple TV+), meanwhile, remains as academically adventurous as any film-maker has got with Shakespeare, weaving together elements from multiple plays, leading with Henry IV Parts I and II and Henry V. That trio also provides the very loose, wayward spine of Gus Van Sant’s My Own Private Idaho (1991; Chili), the wonderful queer road movie that finds tender heartbreak in the tragedies. Back on the traditionalist bent, Kenneth Branagh took Olivier’s mantle with wildly inconsistent results. His four-hour Hamlet (1996; Amazon) is his directorial masterpiece, textually complete and shot with mad kineticism. But the more novel achievement, perhaps, is 1993’s Much Ado About Nothing (Apple TV+). Far less frequently attempted than the tragedies, Shakespeare’s comedies have an odd tendency to wilt on screen, but this glintingly sunlit all-star romp is the very model of how to get it right: spry and sexy and actually funny, performed with palpable exuberance. Only Gil Junger’s 10 Things I Hate About You (1999; Amazon) – in which The Taming of the Shrew is ideally relocated to the battleground of 90s high-school courtship, with irresistible results – comes close. Less hyped at the time, it’s now as essential and beguiling a Gen X artefact as Baz Luhrmann’s swirling, swooning Romeo + Juliet (1996; Disney+). Or Derek Jarman’s radical, radiant The Tempest (1979; BFI Player), a film perfectly suited to the category-resistant oddity of the play itself. Jarman treats it as equal parts romance, tragedy and comedy, and his film is a beautiful alien object in itself. All the world may be a stage, but the best Shakespeare films stray far from it. Also new to streaming and DVD this week Herself (Picturehouse) The Irish actor Clare Dunne writes herself the role of her career as a young mother fleeing spousal abuse to build (quite literally, as it turns out) a new life for herself and her daughters. The compelling grit of her performance must contend, however, with Phyllida Lloyd’s frequently overblown, faux-inspirational direction. The Man Who Sold His Skin (Studio Soho) Somewhat surprisingly nominated for an Oscar last year, this luridly absorbing Tunisian art-world satire effectively repurposes a macabre old Roald Dahl premise – in which a man has a valuable artwork tattooed on his back, making himself a walking collector’s piece – for our age of migrant exploitation. Nightmare Alley (Signal One) A well-timed Blu-ray reissue, given that Guillermo del Toro’s fine remake is out later this month, Edmund Goulding’s riveting 1947 noir remains a startlingly black-hearted work even by the standards of the genre, blending icy underworld corruption with the whirling freakery of the American carnival scene. • This article was amended on 17 January 2022 because an earlier version of the Throne of Blood caption gave the Japanese name for the film but misrendered it as the actor’s name, and omitted the name itself, Toshiro Mifune.It was back in August, with the transfer deadline looming, that Arsenal began to think seriously about signing Barcelona’s promising 22-year-old right-back Emerson Royal. Talks were at an advanced stage and the club’s technical director, Edu, had already got in touch with the player to establish a relationship. But there was a stumbling block. Mikel Arteta, the Arsenal manager, had doubts. Never mind that the analytics department had run the numbers and given Royal their stamp of approval. Never mind that the club were bottom of the Premier League table, the fans were in uproar and time was running out to sign a right-back. Never mind the fact that if Arsenal passed up the chance to sign Royal, he would almost certainly join Tottenham instead. Arteta was not convinced, and so Arsenal pulled the plug. Meanwhile Tottenham, scenting an opportunity to pull off an audacious deadline-day coup over their rivals, swooped in with a bid of about £26m, a sum which – quoting the Telegraph – “sources claim Barcelona still cannot believe Spurs offered to pay”. No matter. Tottenham had won the battle Royal, along with all of its associated headlines and bragging rights. Five months down the line – and without wishing to be overly unkind to Royal, who played very well at Real Betis last season – it is possible to observe that Arteta’s misgivings over his ability to adapt to English football may have had some merit. Royal is both a fine athlete and a sound technical player. But rarely, alas, at the same time. Ask him to combine two or more skillsets – run and cross, chase and tackle, control and shield – and immediately you can see the panic begin to set in, the limbs malfunctioning, the mainframe overheating like a browser with too many tabs open. He’s not terrible. He’s just not a £26m player, or an Antonio Conte player, or the sort of player Tottenham should be aspiring to sign, which is why Tottenham are now willing to pay top dollar to replace him with Adama Traoré. As for Arsenal, they plumped for Takehiro Tomiyasu of Bologna, a long-standing right-back target who has been quietly revelatory: a poised and fearless defender with a fine record in aerial duels and a habit of doing the simple things well. And yes, sometimes these things just work out. Yet it was hardly the first time that Arteta and Arsenal had decided against taking the easy short-term option, doing the obvious crowd-pleasing thing, throwing some red meat to their base. Whether in transfer strategy, team selections or the decision to freeze out senior players like Mesut Özil and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, Arsenal have consistently taken the long-term view, even at the risk of short-term ridicule. And as they prepare to take their withered squad to Tottenham, this is perhaps the sharpest point of contrast between the north London rivals. Increasingly, it is Arsenal who are prepared to take the hard choices; Tottenham the club addicted to shock treatments, knee-jerk reactions and short-term fixes. This is a distinction that manifests itself well beyond the transfer market. Indeed, perhaps the primary example is Arteta himself, who on Sunday will face his third Tottenham manager in as many meetings. Nothing about this was inevitable: Arteta has endured some dreadful runs of form in his two years in charge. Three straight defeats in August was their worst start to a season since 1954. At Christmas 2020 they were 15th and widely believed to be in a relegation battle. Each time, given Arteta’s inexperience and the rage of the fanbase, cutting him loose was probably the easiest thing to do. Instead Arsenal have not simply backed their man, but backed his vision. In contrast to Royal, the transfers of Ben White and Aaron Ramsdale in the summer were both pushed over the line despite their premium fees, in large part on Arteta’s insistence. Once pivotal players, like Willian, Aubameyang, Bernd Leno and Sead Kolasinac, have been gently eased towards the exit. Alexandre Lacazette and Eddie Nketiah are likely to follow in the summer (and contrast Arteta’s intense relaxation at losing his top scorer with the uneasy truce between Harry Kane and Tottenham). For the first time since he joined this feels like Arteta’s squad, even if injuries and illness have temporarily reduced it to a skeleton. This is the key point. Arsenal are one of the few clubs that can basically will itself into crisis. Indeed, there is a whole cottage industry based around the idea of Arsenal being permanently in crisis, the ineradicable urge to keep ripping things up and keep starting again. Defeat at Nottingham Forest in the FA Cup; the temporary absences of Thomas Partey and Nicolas Pépé at the Africa Cup of Nations; the stand-off over Nketiah and Lacazette’s contracts: all these could, given a fair wind, be the ingredients for a seismic January flip-out. Should Arsenal slip up at Tottenham and fall behind them in the league table – a fair bet, given the thinness of their resources – the lust for reinvention and revolution, fresh faces and fresh blood, will doubtless kick into gear again. And yet perhaps the bravest thing Arsenal could do is to keep the faith. Results can be deceptive. You don’t always get what you deserve. The league table lies all the time. What seems the obvious solution now may not seem it later. These are not always the easiest things to say in football, and yet the story of Arteta’s time at Arsenal suggests that it is the only real way of building something that lasts. At the very least, you feel the least he deserves right now is a little patience.The way Armando Shashoua remembers it, the story starts in an abandoned warehouse somewhere in Russia. When it is almost told, the former Tottenham midfielder asks a question of his own. The interview has just finished without inquiring about men such as John McDermott, Justin Cochrane, Matt Wells or Scott Parker, so he says something that says as much about him as it does about them, to which the answer can only be of course: “Is it OK if I talk about the coaches I’ve had, because they’ve been really important to my journey?” At 21, it’s a journey which has a long way to go: next stop Sunday’s Copa del Rey last-16 tie against Valencia for Atlético Baleares, the Mallorcan side who are the only third-tier club left in the competition, who already knocked out two primera teams. It is also unusual, multinational. Shashoua has Egyptian, American, Venezuelan and Spanish heritage, was born in London, and attended one of the most English institutions of all, a former boarder at Harrow like Lord Byron and Winston Churchill. And his first football memory comes from Syetun, Moscow. “We lived in Russia because my dad was working there. I don’t remember well because I was only about four but he hired a trainer for my brother and I. We went to an abandoned warehouse and worked with a ball without a flat surface so it bounced off walls weirdly to test your touch. And that’s where it all started.” It was an unorthodox beginning but it worked. Armando and Samuel, 17 months older, soon joined Tottenham. Armando, not named after Maradona although “the link’s nice”, joined Friday sessions at Spurs Lodge aged seven and progressed to the under-23 squad, leaving in January 2020. Now, both are in Spain: Armando at Baleares; Samuel at second division Tenerife. Shashoua smiles. “My mum spent so many hours driving us to football she injured her back: all the love in the world goes to her. And I think my dad’s happy he didn’t give away the money sending us to Harrow that would have provided a career path and a ‘normal life’.” Alejandra is a Venezuelan-Spanish psychotherapist, Mark the Egyptian-American CEO of the events multinational Hyve and a “massive, massive Matt Le Tissier fan”. Their sons are eligible to play for all four countries and England, their passports British. “I was born in Chelsea, we went to Russia, came back, lived in the countryside,” he says. “I played for London Colney Colts, where a Spurs scout saw me. My brother went to Harrow, I moved to Battersea to finish prep school then went too.” Harrow is more a rugby school and worlds apart from N17, where Shashoua could have found rejection. “I never really got that,” he says. “I definitely felt a little different, going from boarding school to training, but it’s really helped me come to terms with a variety of things; different cultures, people, upbringings, ways of life and thinking. My Tottenham friends and school friends hang out together. It’s funny how that intersects and it works fine. I never felt ostracised. “It’s something I got more from coaches: ‘You’re posh, you could have your life sorted. How much do you really want it?’ That does get brought up; it’s up to you to show: ‘No, I want to play because I love football.’ Teachers might say: ‘You’d be better off doing X.’ But it’s how much you want it, essentially.” A lot, and there was support too. Teachers accepted absences because he did well; Tottenham provided tutors through A levels in maths and economics. There’s warmth and gratitude when he talks about his coaches. McDermott, the academy director, “strengthening you mentally, ready for the outside world”. Cochrane “making everything easy”. Parker, “who I hope can see 1% of him in me”. And Wells: “obsessed,” studying football to an “absurd degree”. “They’re doing really well at Bournemouth, which makes me very happy,” Shashoua says. “Our playing style in the under-17s and under-18s with them would remind you of Pep.” He grew up an Arsenal fan – “I love Santi Cazorla” – but joining Spurs changed that and his real idols were Xavi Hernández and Andrés Iniesta. Which is why he wears No 6. “For Thiago [Alcântara] too,” he says, smiling. He says Guardiola’s Barcelona team had “a magic about it”, yet he “loves” Real Madrid too. The next step made sense. “My friends are in London: sometimes you just send a picture. You’re on the beach and they send back one of the rain,” he laughs. But it’s not that. “Spain had been on my mind a while, thinking it might suit my style, but I was focused on making it at Tottenham. The under-23 league is great but managers don’t see it as a ‘real league’ in terms of experience, so I wanted to play games and Atlético came up. “My brother had gone a couple of years before and did really well, which opened a pathway. This was a January loan and I didn’t see a route to the [Spurs] first team. I thought: ‘Why not?’ So, I went there and …” Shashoua delivers the punchline with perfect comic timing: “… it didn’t go well.” In Mallorca, Armando briefly lived with Samuel, although they never played together. He also lived with the Scotland Under-21 international Jordan Holsgrove, now at Celta. But playing was different. “The manager said he wasn’t sure who I was; just that I was Sam’s brother. It was more the technical director who signed me. Then Covid hit. I played once and the season was written off. “Still, they offered me a contract the next season. There’s a lot of upward mobility in Spain’s lower divisions so I thought: ‘I’m going to try again, this can work.’” It has. “The set-up at Baleares is outstanding,” Shashoua says. “We have an owner who really cares, a new stadium, good scouts, technical director. Our manager [Xavi Calm] is very, very good: we love him.” They are well-placed to try for promotion and in the cup they didn’t just knock out Getafe; they hammered them 5-0, the island going wild. “I was in shock; it was crazy,” Shashoua says. “At one point we were keeping the ball and the fans were doing the olés and everything and it feels surreal. Especially because in the last round we’d gone to a team in our division and were losing until our goalkeeper scored in the 94th minute. It went to penalties – I missed mine – and went through, then went and beat Getafe 5-0. “There were three teams in our pot and Barcelona and Madrid in the other. And it turned out we were the ones that didn’t get them. You think: ‘Ah, so close’ because that’s a dream. But you’re playing a first division side, and it’s great anyway.” Beating them too, a 2-1 win over Celta leaving Baleares facing Valencia, the story of the season. “We’re all on a high, so happy. I was speaking to someone on the pitch after the Celta game, saying: ‘You know what? Let’s win it. Let’s win the cup. Why not?’ The odds are minimal, but that’s football. The dream carries you.”If it is a political truism that a cabinet is all smiles when the ruling party is well ahead in the polls, it is equally the case that nothing highlights ministerial ambitions more than a vulnerable PM. With Boris Johnson on the ropes over lockdown party allegations, all eyes are now on his cabinet colleagues and other senior Tories. Most have offered him support – so far. But will any break cover over the weekend, particularly if there are any new revelations? The Guardian looks at the ones to watch. Rishi Sunak The chancellor’s endorsement of Johnson was one of the latest, and perhaps the most equivocal. Having spent Wednesday 200 miles from the Commons on a visit to Devon, Sunak waited until eight hours after Johnson’s apology to tweet that this had been the correct thing to do and “I support his request for patience while Sue Gray carries out her inquiry.” Since then there has been silence, met by irritation among some fellow Tory MPs about the lukewarm extent of Sunak’s public support for his boss, and how it hints at his apparent eagerness to take over. Liz Truss As another perceived frontrunner to replace Johnson, the foreign secretary’s long delay in tweeting support for the PM – it took until 9.15pm on Wednesday, an hour after even Sunak – was viewed as significant. Unlike the chancellor, Truss has been spotted since, defending Johnson in a BBC interview. Even here, however, the message was not entirely straightforward. While talking up the PM’s wider record, arguing “I think we now need to move on”, a grave-faced Truss said of the lockdown parties: “We are very clear that there were real mistakes made.” Michael Gove The levelling up secretary was given the unenviable task of defending Johnson publicly at the 1922 meeting of Tory backbenchers on Wednesday. He did so robustly, saying Johnson had made the right calls on Covid and laying into Scottish Conservative leader Douglas Ross, who has called for the prime minister to resign. But Gove is likely to have been frustrated that a crucial announcement on dangerous cladding remediation was overshadowed by the continuing rows over parties. And Gove has form for changing his mind. Johnson allies have never quite trusted him since he scuppered the prime minister’s first leadership bid in 2016. Jeremy Hunt The former foreign secretary has been rebuilding his reputation from the backbenches as chair of the health and social care select committee. He has tried and failed in a pitch for the leadership once before, and would be a rank outsider this time too. But some commentators have suggested he might still have a chance – and his quiet manner would certainly be an antidote to the mayhem of Johnson’s chaotic time in Downing Street. Hunt has admitted his ambitions have “waned a bit”, but that might not stop him from sticking the boot in to the man who beat him in 2019. Theresa May Few critics of Johnson have been as forensic as the former prime minister, who was tortured during her own time in No 10 by Johnson. She has described him as “ill-judged and wrong” over his handling of the Owen Paterson sleaze allegations and decried him for threatening to break international law during Brexit trade negotiations. Johnson, she said, had abandoned “global moral leadership.” Is this the moment to exact a final revenge?In the winter sunshine they glinted and gleamed, bright white flowers dotted around the lawns and wooded slopes of a glorious garden on the edge of Dartmoor in Devon. And within minutes of opening its doors, the Garden House was busy with hordes of galanthophiles – snowdrop lovers – taking in the sight of a beloved flower that at this time of year provides a vivid reminder that warmer, cheerier seasons are ahead. Last year’s lockdown meant that the annual snowdrop festival at the house in the village of Buckland Monachorum became an online-only affair, but on Friday the aficionados were allowed back in for the 2022 celebration. “It’s wonderful to be here,” said Robert Stride, 63, who was meandering around the garden. “The snowdrops are a sign that spring is on the way, that new life is with us. This is such a natural place, so restful. After the couple of years we’ve had, the sight of the snowdrops lights up the soul.” There is no shortage of snowdrops in the 10 acres of the Garden House, with about 375 varieties to enjoy, and the warm weather over Christmas means many are appearing earlier and in greater numbers than usual. Self-confessed galanthophile Pat Eaton, a volunteer snowdrop adviser at the garden, was darting around pointing out some of the highlights, such the variety Galanthus ‘Ivy Cottage Corporal’, so called because it features two green Vs resembling a corporal’s stripes. A charming snowdrop named after Shakespeare’s Ophelia nestles next to one called ‘Dionysus’, the god of the grape harvest, winemaking, orchards and fruit. They aren’t all white, either. ‘Primrose Warburg’, a dainty snowdrop with yellowish leaves, is among those making an early appearance this year. The garden may be best known for ‘Trumps’, which has an elegant flaring pagoda shape, but Eaton said she was most delighted when she came across an example she didn’t recognise. “I love the excitement of finding that something has come up and flowered that we hadn’t seen before.” One of the charms of the place is that nobody knows exactly how many types of snowdrops there are, and foraging animals and birds often shift the snowdrops around or bring new ones in. Eaton pointed out one she found last year. “I’m not sure what it is, but it’s different. When I saw it, it was: ‘Whoopee I might have found a new one.’ Then comes the detective work, trying to piece its story together.” The snowdrops bloom from September through to March, peaking in January and February, and are carefully labelled, tucked into herbaceous borders and scattered across banks, some in plain sight and others hidden away in secret corners. Just now they are poking up in small clumps, but within a few weeks there will be swathes of them. “The banks will be completely white with snowdrops,” said Eaton. The house and gardens, once home to the vicars of Buckland Monachorum, trace their history back to 1305 and feature romantic ruins including a thatched barn and a tower with a spiral staircase. A modern vicarage was built in the 1920s and just after the second world war was bought by Lionel Fortescue, a retiring Eton master, and his wife, Katharine, who set about renovating and developing their garden. They bequeathed the house and garden to the Fortescue Garden Trust, an independent charity that continues to run the property. The collection was established by Matt Bishop, the former head gardener at the Garden House and one of the authors of the “galanthophile bible”, Snowdrops: A Monograph of Cultivated Galanthus. Snowdrops collected by a second expert, Colin Mason, who travelled to Turkey and Georgia, sometimes searching on horseback for unusual examples, were bequeathed to the garden and have been added in. The head gardener, Nick Haworth, said one of his favourites was Galanthus ‘Fly Fishing’, which has a long, slender pedicel (stalk) that looks like a fishing rod. But he said the garden does not advertise all its varieties. Some are so rare that a single bulb would be worth about £150 and they do not want fans to walk off with them. “Snowdrops are very pleasing,” he said. “Lots of people have a story about them. I was brought up to think of them as magical, and looking at them here today, they really are special.”It is no exaggeration to say the world was watching when Carl Nassib became the first active player on an NFL roster to come out as gay. Some watched with shock, most with support. Still, for many of us, myself included, beyond the celebration of his barrier-breaking announcement, was something deeper behind our attentive gaze, a question: What now? A couple weeks after the initial media craze, it seemed like business as usual for the Las Vegas Raiders and the sports world as a whole. Only Carl himself will know just how much his announcement tipped the scales of acceptance and bigotry one way or the other in his locker room, on the field, and with peers or fans. As an NFL veteran, I know that most teams will go through collective obstacles, distractions and hard times, and that off-the-field problems or events can affect on-field performance. However, after last Sunday’s playoff clinching performance, we can all proudly say that Carl’s coming out was not one of those things for the Raiders. If anything, the Raiders’ focus seemed to improve after finding out that one of their team leaders was a proud gay man. Nassib’s coming out preceded extreme backlash from the surfaced emails of the team’s head coach Jon Gruden. In Gruden’s emails, he used racist, misogynistic and homophobic comments and hate speech, which felt especially upsetting and ironic from the first NFL coach with an out athlete on his roster. Still, the Raiders rallied around each other and interim head coach Rich Bisaccia, whom I had the pleasure of knowing when he was the special teams coach in Dallas, and pressed on. They pushed through even when the team’s star receiver Henry Ruggs was charged with a DUI that resulted in the tragic death of a young woman. Add these huge tragedies and disruptions into all the other things that a team faces during a season – injuries, players violating team policies or drug policies, trades, cuts, and so much more – and then factor in a season continually disrupted by the persistence of a global pandemic, it turns out that the least of this team’s worries was one of their players finally being honest about who he is. So it stands that with an openly gay player on their roster, the Raiders return to the playoffs for the second time in 19 years. Counter to what some have claimed for years, Carl Nassib proves that coming out is not a distraction to a team or the game but that you can win big when your team can accept and support its players. Now not only will LGBTQ+ athletes, fans, and individuals be able to see themselves represented on Sundays when the Raiders are playing on their local channel but on a national stage in the NFL playoffs. Regardless of the outcome for the Raiders during wild card weekend, it’s essential to document this moment in history, one that is a first in all the years the game has been played. Whether Carl and the Raiders become Super Bowl champions now is not a moot point because, for the first time, closeted athletes, out athletes, LGBTQ+ sports fans, and people alike can know it’s possible. This weekend, we will see the first ever playoff game with an active LGBTQ+ player. Looking to the future, it’s a distinct thrill to know that one day we will have a queer player with a Super Bowl ring. It’s important to mark these milestones and to keep pushing forward, especially now that it’s no longer a question of if but when. RK Russell played three NFL seasons for the Dallas Cowboys and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.Finland is joining Sweden and Norway in culling wolves this winter to control their population, as conservation groups appeal to the European Union to take action against the slaughter. Hunters in Sweden have already shot dead most of their annual target of 27 wolves, while Finland is to authorise the killing of 20 wolves in its first “population management cull” for seven years. Norway will kill about 60% of its wolves this winter – 51 animals – to maintain a maximum of just three breeding pairs in the country, with its population including animals living between Sweden and Norway limited to four to six breeding pairs. Conservationists accuse Nordic nations of creating the most hostile environment for wolves in western Europe and flouting EU laws that protect the species, which has made a comeback in recent years but remains endangered in many countries. “Its a horrific situation,” said Siri Martinsen, chief executive of Noah, an animal rights group that is challenging Norway’s wolf hunts in its courts. “Norway’s wolf management is out of control and they are just shooting wolves because some people don’t like them. It is outrageous to hold a species at a critically endangered level.” In Norway, 5% of the country is designated a wolf protection zone, where the protection of wolves is a priority. Despite this, 25 wolves will be killed inside the protection zone this winter, unless the court action by Noah, together with WWF Norway and Association Our Predators, is successful. Wolves found outside the protection zone are not allowed to breed and are killed if a regional committee decides they “may pose a threat” to livestock or semi-domesticated reindeer. While Norway is not a member of the EU, wildlife groups say its wolf cull violates the Bern Convention on the conservation of European wildlife and natural habitats. Christian Anton Smedshaug, state secretary to Norway’s minister of climate and environment, said: “Keeping the Norwegian wolf population at this level is a political compromise reached by a majority in parliament in 2016 in order to keep both wolves and livestock production in Norway and bridge different societal views in Norway. “The primary concern for managing large carnivores in Norway is to maintain livestock grazing, with as few losses as possible. Furthermore, husbandry also contributes to common goods like cultural landscapes and biological diversity. “Wolves prey on game animals, and the presence of wolves may consequently affect hunting locally. Wolves may also pose a threat to dogs used for small and big game hunting. Reducing effects on hunting is, however, not a main objective behind the population target or a main focus in the management of large carnivores.” In Sweden, wildlife groups say the 395 population estimate for 2020-21 could have fallen below 300 by that winter’s end. “Sweden has promised the EU we should not go below 300 – that’s the bare minimum,” said Magnus Orrebrant, chair of the NGO Svenska Rovdjursföreningen. “We have informed the EU that 300 is way too low. We have habitat that could house more than 1,000 wolves.” “The common denominator in Norway, Sweden and Finland is the strong hunting organisations which make the politicians worried,” added Orrebrant. “There are no farms near some of the packs they are hunting this winter. The wolves have not created any problems whatsoever but it’s an important place to hunt moose and hunters want a large moose population.” Hunters also object to wolves because they kill much-prized hunting dogs, widely used in Nordic nations to track game and deer. Finland’s wolf population of 300 is the highest for a century, according to Sami Niemi, a ministry of agriculture and forestry official tasked with wolf management. Modelling by Natural Resources Institute Finland says that a genetically healthy wolf population should be more than 500. “The long-term goal is to reach the genetic viability of the wolf population,” said Niemi. “When we set down the goal for the management hunt, we took into consideration we weren’t aiming for a population reduction. The goal for the management hunt is to increase the tolerance to the wolf population especially among people who share their environment with wolves.” Of the argument a wolf cull reassures anxious rural communities that wolf populations are under control, and thereby reduces illegal killing, Sami Säynevirta of Luonto-Liitto, a Finnish wildlife charity, said: “This argument has been made for many years but we still have the problem of poaching. The authorities should really act to prevent it. “There needs to be a change of attitude towards wildlife. It’s important to talk about the benefits of the wolf – they play a key role in a healthy ecosystem but news about wolves is pretty much concentrated on the negative side.” Prof Fiona Matthews, founding chair of Mammal Conservation Europe, said: “It seems extraordinary that countries are blatantly doing things that are illegal under the EU habitats directive. You’d think these countries would be able to live with their predators particularly given their low population densities. It seems to be driven by hunting interests and the argument that wolves are a danger to hunting dogs.” Wildlife groups in Finland and Sweden have appealed to the European Commission and the European court of justice to declare the wolf culls illegal but both national governments maintain that derogations from the habitats directive allow for legal culls. In Norway, Martinsen called on other European countries “to intervene and file complaints with the Bern Convention so we can stop this situation where Norway is leading the way to tolerating an extinction policy and making these conventions not worth the paper they are written on”.West Ham regained fourth place by beating Norwich on Wednesday and will hope to continue their winning run when they host Leeds. They saw them off in the FA Cup last week and Marcelo Bielsa’s side, who are eight points above the bottom three, still have a long injury list. Bielsa will hope Patrick Bamford and Rodrigo are back to lift his side’s attacking threat. West Ham, meanwhile, are sweating on Mark Noble and Tomas Soucek, with Kurt Zouma also pushing for a place on the bench. Jacob Steinberg Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue London Stadium Last season West Ham 2 Leeds 0 Referee Mike Dean This season G13 Y44 R0 3.38 cards/game Odds H 4-6 A 43-10 D 3-1 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Ashby, Oko-Flex, Baptiste, Zouma, Alese, Longelo, Masuaku, Soucek, Noble, Yarmolenko, Kral, Perkins Doubtful Noble (knee), Soucek (Covid), Zouma (hamstring) Injured Ogbonna (knee, unknown), Fredericks (knee, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Benrahma (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y24 R2 Form DLLWWW Leading scorer Antonio 8 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Gelhardt, Drameh, Greenwood, McCarron, Summerville, Bate, Jenkins Doubtful None Injured Phillips (thigh, Mar), Cooper (thigh, Mar), Gelhardt (ankle, Feb), Shackleton (calf, Feb), Cresswell (shoulder, Feb) Suspended Llorente (one match), Roberts (one match) Discipline Y52 R1 Form WDLLLW Leading scorer Raphinha 8Guillermo Del Toro used to describe Hollywood as “the Land of the Slow No”. Here was a place where a director could die waiting for a project to be greenlit. “The natural state of a movie is to be unmade,” he says over Zoom from his home in Los Angeles. “I have about 20 scripts that I lug around that no one wants to make and that’s fine: it’s the nature of the business. It’s a miracle when anything at all gets made.” Nevertheless, Del Toro has established himself as this century’s leading fantasy film-maker, more inventive than latter-day Tim Burton and less bombastic than Peter Jackson (with whom he co-wrote the Hobbit trilogy). From the haunting adult fairytale Pan’s Labyrinth and the voluptuously garish Hellboy romps to his beauty-and-the-fish love story The Shape of Water, which won four Oscars, he is the master of the glutinous phantasmagoria. Waking up the morning after the Academy Awards ceremony in March 2018, Del Toro found himself in an industry newly receptive to his ideas, even if it wasn’t quite the Land of the Fast Yes. “There are still parameters,” says the 57-year-old. “But I’m able to get things made that would be going through a more tortuous process otherwise.” These include his stop-motion animated Pinocchio, set in Mussolini’s Italy, which will premiere on Netflix later this year. Before that, there is Nightmare Alley, a ghoulish noir thriller that is the first of his films not to feature fantasy elements. “Every time I make a movie, I always say that the worst monster is a human,” he smiles. “I decided to continue that, but without the safety net of whimsy or flights of fancy.” Adapted from the 1946 novel by William Lindsay Gresham – though not a remake of the 1947 film version starring Tyrone Power – Nightmare Alley follows the shifty Stanton Carlisle (Bradley Cooper), who flees the scene of a murder and hides out at a carnival. There he falls in with its shady personnel: clairvoyant Zeena the Seer (Toni Collette), sideshow performer Molly Cahill (Rooney Mara), who “conducts” lethal levels of electricity, and grizzled barker Clem Hoatley (Willem Dafoe), responsible for “the Geek” (Paul Anderson), who lives in a cage and bites the heads off live chickens. A self-professed carnival obsessive, Del Toro drew much of the film’s rich detail – including a woman posing as an arachnid-human hybrid – from memories of his childhood in Mexico. “The spider-woman act is one I saw when I was four or five,” he says. “I have a photograph of my brother and me on a little horse cart on the day we saw her. I was tiny, and the impression it made on me was so strong. I can remember exactly what she said: ‘Oh woe be me, I was turned into this for disobeying my parents!’ I knew it was not a real spider, but the image was so disturbing. And the lady seemed so bored. The carnival in the film is not magical but at least it’s honest about being dishonest. That is the advantage I see over the city. People in the city are pretending to be honourable.” It is in the city – Buffalo, New York, to be precise, but as symbolic a nucleus of corruption as any noir metropolis – that Stanton’s grifting skills make him a superstar on the mentalism circuit. It is here also that he meets figures murkier than anything the carnival can throw up, including Cate Blanchett’s femme fatale psychoanalyst Dr Lilith Ritter. Del Toro has had more than his share of bruises and setbacks in the film industry, from an early run-in with the Weinstein brothers, who butchered his 1997 giant-bug horror Mimic, to the time Universal pulled the plug suddenly on his epic adaptation of HP Lovecraft’s monster-fest At the Mountains of Madness. Is the city depicted in Nightmare Alley analogous to his experiences in Hollywood? “It’s analogous to most human endeavours,” he says. “Our capacity to be brutal with each other is infinite, unwarranted and gratuitous. And it seems to come naturally. I think we are paradoxical beings: we are the very best that has happened to this planet and the very worst. There is no reason to deny one side. We are capable of absolutely beautiful loving acts and absolutely brutal ones. We don’t exist in a single space.” This gets him thinking about childhood again. “I saw real corpses when I was young,” he recalls. “People who had been shot, or had accidents. You get a sense of how fraught things are. It’s certainly not a rosy life when you grow up in Mexico. There is that famous, touristic but very real dichotomy for me as a Mexican, where the notion of living and of death as an impending destiny is fused into a single concept.” As a Mexican he has also had to contend with a US administration that made no secret of its hostility towards people like him. Just over a year after Donald Trump’s inauguration, Del Toro began his Oscar acceptance speech with four vital words – “I am an immigrant” – then proceeded to argue that “the greatest thing our art does, and our industry does, is to erase the lines in the sand. We should continue doing that when the world tells us to make them deeper”. It was an inspiring speech to suit an uplifting film: in The Shape of Water, four outsiders (a mute domestic, her African American colleague, her gay neighbour and the amphibious creature she falls in love with) triumph over a fascistic US colonel in cold war-era Baltimore, just as the Francoist general is vanquished in Pan’s Labyrinth, and the ghosts of the Spanish civil war confronted at the end of Del Toro’s allegorical horror The Devil’s Backbone. But Nightmare Alley is not a movie born out of hope or healing. Despite being set in the 1940s, it is unmistakably a product of our times. “One hundred per cent,” agrees Del Toro, who describes it as the story of “the rise and rise of a liar” who “aims for what he thinks is success, and is therefore perpetually famished”. How Trumpian. “We are in a very divided moment,” he says. “As a storyteller, I am reactive, so I didn’t feel I needed to make an engaging love story at this moment.” That said, a love story did emerge from the production. The director’s 20-year marriage to Lorenza Newton, mother of his two daughters, had already broken up by the time he began collaborating on the script with Kim Morgan, film critic and former wife of the Canadian director Guy Maddin. The co-writers got hitched last spring. No trace of romance survives in the film. “These are very bleak times,” Del Toro says. “For an audience, my movies form a filmography. But for me, it’s biography. In exchange for two hours, I give you three years of my life.” Make that two and a half hours in the case of Nightmare Alley – an awfully long time to spend in the company of a greedy, deceitful protagonist who fails to reach any understanding about himself until the final minutes. “It’s not a surprise where Stanton ends up,” Del Toro explains. “But it’s how he ends up there. You don’t watch the history of Jesus and root for him not to get crucified. You don’t watch Oedipus and bet that he’s not going to bed his mother. The inexorable fate will happen because character is immutable. That’s the power and the difficulty of a movie like this.” Industry lore decrees that you can generally knock a zero off the gross if your hero isn’t changed or redeemed. Add to this the reluctance of pandemic-era audiences to fully embrace cinema-going and it is perhaps no surprise that Nightmare Alley struggled at the US box office. The film, budgeted at $60m, took less than $3m in its opening weekend, which according to Forbes magazine is “below even the over/under $5m ‘Covid normal’ for the likes of King Richard, The Last Duel and Last Night in Soho.” A Searchlight spokesperson admitted that “the numbers were a bit more modest than we had predicted”. Whatever the picture’s commercial fate, Del Toro’s determination to warp or withhold familiar noir pleasures is to be admired. “Noir was born at a time in America of disillusionment,” he says. “I wanted to go into that existential quality and to stay the fuck away from venetian blinds and rotating fans and a detective in a gabardine mac walking along a wet street.” It is also a film that places emphasis squarely on behaviour. “Destiny is the sum of your choices. There is no punishment or tarot or bad luck in what happens to Stanton. We made a very clear happy ending in the middle of the story where he gets the girl and he’s leaving the carnival for a better life. I even do a beautiful crane shot, like the ending of a movie. And then two years later, he has a great act in a luxury cabaret, lives in a fancy hotel with room service, and it’s not enough. He’s still unhappy.” Anyone reluctant to face the bitter pill of the second half, then, is advised to dash for the exit after that crane shot. “Yeah,” he says, warming to the idea. “Audiences not interested in a gut-punch are very much invited not to stay.” Nightmare Alley is in UKcinemas from 21 January.Albert Stubbins, the only footballer to feature on the cover of the Beatles’ Sgt. Pepper’s album, scored the winner when Liverpool last hosted Brentford at Anfield in the league. That was in October 1946. Seventy-six years on, Jürgen Klopp takes charge of Liverpool for the 350th time boasting the highest win percentage (60.74%) of any manager in the club’s league history. With Manchester City or Chelsea, or both, guaranteed to drop points when they meet on Saturday, Klopp will be desperately seeking an improvement on Thursday’s display against Arsenal to take advantage. Andy Hunter Saturday 2pm Venue Anfield Last season n/a Referee Jon Moss This season G12 Y23 R4 2.25 cards/game Odds H 1-3 A 21-2 D 5-1 LIVERPOOL Subs from Kelleher, Adrián, Pitaluga, Williams, Gomez, Matip, Tsimikas, Milner, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Morton, Gordon Doubtful None Injured Phillips (cheek, 23 Jan), Thiago (hip, Feb), Origi (knee, Feb), Elliott (ankle, Feb) Suspended None Unavailable Salah, Mané, Keïta (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y28 R1 Form WWWDLD Leading scorer Salah 16 BRENTFORD Subs from Thompson, Lössl, Forss, Mbeumo, Ghoddos, Valencia, Peart-Harris, Bidstrup, Zamburek, Racic, Canós, Baptiste Doubtful Henry (hamstring), Canós (hamstring) Injured Jørgensen (hamstring, 22 Jan), Dasilva (hip, Feb), Jeanvier (knee, unknown), Raya (knee, unknown), Fosu-Goode (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Onyeka (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y38 R1 Form DWLLWL Leading scorer Toney 4For the first time in a while more than just bragging rights are up for grabs in the north London derby. Arsenal head to the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium in fifth place and with genuine hope of forcing their way into the Champions League for the first time since the 2016-17 season. Tottenham sit two points behind them thanks to a run of eight league games undefeated since Antonio Conte’s appointment. Tottenham will be without Son Heung-min and Eric Dier while Granit Xhaka is suspended for Arsenal following his second red card of the season. Stephen Hollis Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Tottenham Hotspur Stadium Last season Tottenham 2 Arsenal 0 Referee Chris Kavanagh This season G9 Y38 R2 4.44 cards/game Odds H 8-5 A 2-1 D 12-5 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Doherty, Gil, Rodon, Alli, Ndombele, Clarke, White, Bergwijn, Lo Celso, Scarlett, Paskotsi Doubtful Bergwijn (calf) Injured Romero (hamstring, 23 Jan), Dier (illness, 23 Jan), Reguilón (knock, 23 Jan), Son (knock, Feb), Suspended None Discipline Y32 R1 Form WWDWDW Leading scorer Son 8 ARSENAL Subs from Leno, Okonkwo, Tavares, Elneny, Balogun, Marí, Tomiyasu, Smith Rowe, Soares, Bierith, Giraud-Hutchinson, Patino, M’Hand Doubtful Tomiyasu (calf), Smith Rowe (groin), Saka (match fitness), Soares (hip) Injured Kolasinac (hamstring, unknown), Ødegaard (Covid, unknown) Suspended Xhaka (first of two matches) Unavailable Aubameyang, Elneny, Partey, Pépé (all Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y31 R2 Form LWWWWL Leading scorer Smith Rowe 8As a professional photographer, Stephen Tayo’s usual reason to travel is for work. Since visiting Marrakech solo in 2019, however, he had been raving to friends about how much they all needed to go. Bored after a year under Covid restrictions, he eventually rallied five friends from his home town of Lagos, Nigeria, to join him on a mini road trip. The group began in Tayo’s beloved Marrakech, then decided to head to the beach to slow the pace a little. “We hired a bus and headed for Essaouira on the coast, but stopped any time we saw something interesting. Shortly after a roadside coffee break, we saw this tree filled with goats taking shelter and resting,” Tayo says. His muses usually take human form, but he’d never seen goats in a tree before. “I thought it was spectacular,” he says. “They were so relaxed and serene. Our driver helped us ask the friendly farmer who owned them for permission to get closer. I didn’t need to disturb them – some just happened to be looking our way.” In the end, Tayo reached for his camera only a couple of times during the friends’ 10-day trip. “I was more documenting it for myself,” he says, “and a phone always seems less intimidating when I’m exploring different communities,” he says.The Indian biotechnology and biopharmaceutical company Biological E has produced the country’s first locally developed Covid-19 vaccine in partnership with the Texas Children’s Hospital Center for Vaccine Development at Baylor College of Medicine. The Hyderabad-based company has already produced 150m doses of the vaccine, called Corbevax, and will produce 100m doses each month beginning in February. It is expected that 1bn doses will be produced by the end of 2022 – just shy of India’s nearly 1.4-billion population. The company said: “The vaccine will be effective both in scale and affordability, providing sustainable access to low- and middle-income countries.” The development of Corbevax, a recombinant protein sub-unit vaccine made by a process involving yeast and the coronavirus spike protein, was made possible because of a patentless formula shared by Texas Children’s Hospital scientists Drs Peter Hotez and . Maria Bottazzi. Founded in 1953, Biological E initially produced liver medication and blood thinners. Soon after in 1962, the company launched its Vaccines and Biologics business unit, with the mission of “transitioning from treating diseases to preventing them”. This made Biological E the first Indian private business to enter the vaccine industry. Biological E has also developed vaccines for tetanus, Japanese encephalitis and measles and rubella. Corbevax has been approved by the ministry of health and family welfare’s drugs controller general of India, the nation’s authority on drugs and vaccines licenses. In a statement, Biological E’s managing director, Mahima Datla, said:“Over the years, we have worked to make quality vaccines and pharmaceutical products accessible to families around the world. With this as our backdrop, we resolved to develop an affordable and effective Covid-19 vaccine. It has now become a reality.”Hundreds of thousands of people living in flats are facing “completely unaffordable” increases to their energy bills because their communal heating system’s supply is not protected by the government’s price cap. While households with conventional heating systems have been told they could face 50%-plus increases to gas and electricity bills when the cap is increased on 1 April, people who bought or rent apartments in one of the 17,000 blocks in the UK that rely on communal heating and hot water systems are facing fourfold increases as suppliers pass on the huge wholesale price increases unchecked. It is thought that up to 500,000 people live in developments where at least some of the heating or hot water is provided by a centrally controlled system, usually administered by the company that manages the estate. Apartments in these developments are all supplied by a single energy supplier, and because this is classified as a commercial deal rather than domestic supply, the residents have not had bills protected by Ofgem’s price cap. Among those affected are residents of the high-profile Chips building in the New Islington area of Manchester who have seen some of their energy charges triple after the building’s energy supplier collapsed in November. Those living in the nine-storey building have control over their heating in their individual flats and how much energy they use but not over who supplies the power and what tariff they are on. All of their hot water is provided centrally from a green boiler. One resident has described finding neighbours in tears after they were all sent enormous bills on 21 December. In some cases, the bills, which are based on usage rather than estimates, have more than trebled. One owner of a two-bedroom flat saw bills rise from £80 in November to £260 for December. Others have received even higher bills, as the unit gas price has tripled, alongside rising electricity charges. “The cost of our energy has tripled overnight,” says Magdalena, an academic who lives in the block, who declined to give her surname. “The gas supplier we had previously went bust and Ofgem appointed a new supplier. As the building I live in has a community heating system we (the residents) are not allowed to change supplier. “Lots of people in the building, which is a mix of owners, rent-to-buy and tenants, simply can’t afford this sudden huge cost increase. It’s so bad that some have started looking for alternative accommodation, while others are simply not using their heating. “People are saying that they will have to move out as paying thousands of pounds for heating is just not an option. This has all been done by the management company, with the residents seemingly powerless to stop it, or even have a say … It feels incredibly unfair,” she says. Switch2 Energy, the billing service provider for the Chips scheme, and the building’s new energy supplier, Pozitive Energy, say the increases experienced by residents stem from the failure of the previous supplier, and reflect the rise in wholesale prices. Chris Wright*, who lives in the Deptford Landings complex in south-east London, which also features a communal hot water system, contacted Guardian Money to say that he and other residents on the huge site have been told that their hot water charges are about to rise by 464%. “For some families in the block who use more hot water than we do, this is going to be a big financial blow. How is it that everyone else has their bills capped but flat dwellers like us don’t?” he asks. Lisa Gregory, who runs the Birmingham-based consultancy Ginger Energy, which is a big player in the sector, says this “truly dreadful” situation is an injustice that will have serious consequences for those affected. “It is highly likely that many will struggle to pay the new costs and will then get into a debt situation,” she says. “We are about to have to tell the residents of some blocks that they will be paying four times the previous unit charge for their energy. While normal residential consumers are protected – at least for a period – through the price cap, the consumers in these blocks are fully exposed to the market changes.” She says the classification dates back to a 2012 decision made by the industry regulator Ofgem and predates the current turbulent market conditions and the price cap. “We are requesting an entire review of the price cap. It doesn’t include our residents; it doesn’t work for suppliers. The system is completely broken,” she says. In late December, the government announced that it wants Ofgem to take over as the regulator for heat networks, as they are termed. However, it looks as though it will be months if not years before this is enabled as it will require legislation. In the meantime, those living in the unregulated homes could face years of paying higher bills than if their building had a conventional heating system. This week the boss of British Gas’s parent firm warned that the problem of high energy bills could remain for a further two years. Stephen Knight, a director of Heat Trust, the national consumer protection scheme for heat networks, says legislation to protect consumers who rely on communal heating schemes is long overdue. “We welcome the government’s commitment to regulating heat networks and the news that Ofgem will have new powers to oversee the sector. In the absence of regulation, a growing number of consumers are being left unprotected. As the reliance of the country on heat networks grows, so will the scrutiny of their performance and service standards. To avoid any further delays, we need the government to commit to the legislation in May’s Queen’s speech,” he says. Ofgem said it was committed to taking over the regulation of heat networks but said the timings were outside its control. Mark Thomas, the chief executive of Communal Energy Partners, which provides energy to Deptford Landings, says suppliers have no choice to pass on the rise in wholesale costs. “I would ask the government and the regulator to help smooth out the cost to the customer through company loans, or removing green levies or VAT from bills. This would all be very welcome,” he says. “We totally understand this is a worrying time for Chips residents,” Switch2 says in a statement. “The new tariff reflects the market increases experienced over the last 12 months, which have seen the wholesale gas price increase fivefold since January 2021.” RMG, the managing agent for the Chips building, told the Manchester Evening News that it had no “involvement in the procurement or placement of utilities contracts”. Pozitive Energy said it had huge sympathy for the residents but said it inherited the contract and was therefore forced to buy gas to supply the building at the current market rate. Heat networks are considered by ministers as a proven, cost-effective way of providing reliable low-carbon heat at a fair price to consumers. The UK government has said it is working towards growing the heat networks sector, which provides roughly 2% of UK heat demand but could meet about a fifth by 2050. * Not his real name“What the American public wants is a tragedy with a happy ending,” the American critic William Dean Howells once said (at least according to Edith Wharton). Maybe it’s what we all want, now, from our dramas. Who wants to sit down to make-believe tragedy at the end of a day brimming with real tragedy? Let the Netflix show – even if it plays with tragic tropes – end on an intriguingly unresolved note. Let no stage be bestrewn, with the utter finality that we see in Hamlet, with the corpses of pretty much all its cast. (After Hamlet’s ending, no one’s going to be asking for the spin-off series, Fortinbras Rebuilds Elsinore.) The critic George Steiner declared tragedy dead in 1961, so perhaps its absence is hardly a surprise. One of his most pertinent points was how little purchase tragedy had had since the Athenians invented the form in the fifth century BCE. Tragedy, as a narrowly defined theatrical genre, had flowered at distinct moments, he argued, when both the sociopolitical and theatrical conditions were just right: on the Elizabethan stage, for instance, and in Scandinavia and Russia in the early 20th century. Do such conditions exist now? It would seem that they do not. Tragedy involves a character’s forward motion – often from greatness to abjection (though Greek tragedy was a much more varied form than either Aristotle argued or the surviving few plays convey). What seems of particular interest in our own moment is different: a retrograde motion, in which the nature of a character is tracked back to its deep origins – as if Aeschylus’s Oresteia was played backwards, and we were first shown Orestes’s madness, and then offered its explanation by way of his family’s history of murdering each other. The “trauma plot”, it has recently been argued, has come to dominate fiction of all kinds, from Hanya Yanagihara’s A Little Life to Karl Ove Knausgaard’s My Struggle. And yet, tragedy does seem to be wanted and needed – in that tragedies keep being produced on our stages. In London over the past couple of years, despite the many periods of theatre closure, there has been Cush Jumbo’s triumphant Hamlet, James McArdle’s Macbeth and Ian Rickson’s production of Uncle Vanya. In the summer of 2021 – during one of the interludes when theatres opened – I saw Kae Tempest’s version of Sophocles’s Philoctetes, renamed Paradise. It’s a drama about the moral injury caused by war. But, in that moment, it also seemed to speak powerfully about physical distress and pain, and isolation, and the difficulties of a return to “normality”. “When you write a play,” playwright Zinnie Harris told me recently, “you want to give the audience an experience that rehearses what might happen to us collectively or individually. You are working with factors that are both internal and external to the character.” Greek tragedy is deeply interested in playing with the limits of human agency against a backdrop in which the gods are all powerful, vindictive and often arbitrary. Oedipus starts out respected, powerful and admired, and within the real-time course of the drama, ends up self-blinded and exiled. The knife’s edge on which he and other characters in Greek tragedy live, certainly resonates strongly with our unstable times, when, but for an accident of birth and a twist of fate, any of us might be leaving a once comfortable life to set out on an inflatable boat across a perilous sea (which is actually the premise of one of Harris’s plays, How To Hold Your Breath). Even so, Harris resists complete bleakness. It’s better, she told me, to show “how we can keep moving in the face of whatever comes”. And, as she says, this is a perfectly reasonable Greek-tragic position: Aeschylus’s Oresteia does not end with a pile-up of corpses but a new political order, and a suggestion of a way out of a violent cycle of bloodletting. There has been a recent exception to the rule of endless Hollywood uptick: the film Don’t Look Up, a climate crisis allegory about a scientists trying to warn an unheeding world about a giant comet on course to hit Earth. It is a satire, rather than a tragedy. But what it does do – spoiler alert! – is upend the conventions of the disaster movie, in that it refuses to fulfil the most important rule of the genre – that the plucky group of good guys will save the day, even against the most terrific of odds. Hollywood usually tells us that “villains reform, and crime does not pay”, as Steiner put it. Don’t Look Up tells us that the rich and wicked are the only ones with even the faintest sliver of hope. Some may find that more truthful than the usual Hollywood redemption. The problem might be, though, that “if the world is totally doomed no matter what, little or nothing is demanded of you in response”, as Rebecca Solnit wrote in Hope in the Dark. For her, “the ease of despair” is to be strongly resisted. If there’s no hope of turning the dial, there’s no point in trying to change things for the better. Perhaps the problem now is that what Harris would call the external factors that exert control over human lives – in today’s terms pandemics, climate crisis, even the algorithms produced by powerful tech companies – are too amorphous, huge and unfathomable to begin to be contained within the tragic form. The past two years have been full of human struggles and sorrows, but the pandemic itself has no obvious tragic shape – rather it is a sort of horrible, formless penumbra, “an endless Covid twilight”, as director Rupert Goold put it. Humans doing things to each other on stage (“drama” is Greek for “deed”) is starting to look inadequate to express what needs to be expressed, especially in the face of climate crisis. Human timescales and dealings – the stuff of plays – are puny compared with the immenseness of tree-time, of ecosystem time, of planetary time. And yet these are the timescales that somehow have to be considered. Maybe we want tragedy because it’s actually comforting to be told individual human actions have a meaning and a grandeur. And maybe no one’s really writing them because we don’t believe, any more, that that’s true. Charlotte Higgins is the Guardian’s chief culture writer and the author of Greek Myths: A New RetellingAs the US approaches the annual holiday honoring Martin Luther King Jr, the family of the late civil rights leader is urging Americans to hold off on celebrations. Instead, they’re urging Americans protest and to demand the Senate pass sweeping voting rights legislation. But the prospects for such an effort, for now, seem bleak. On Thursday, Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin, two Democrats who staunchly support the filibuster, said they would not back an effort to change the rules to advance voting rights legislation. Because no Republicans support the changes, that effectively kills any chance of passing voting rights legislation. Martin Luther King III, the son of the civil rights leader, bluntly criticized Sinema, an Arizona Democrat, for her position on Thursday, saying history would remember her “unkindly”. “She’s siding with the legacy of Bull Connor and George Wallace instead of the legacy of my father,” he said. The Guardian spoke with King III, and his daughter Yolanda, 13, about where the fight for voting rights goes from here. You put out a statement after Senator Sinema’s speech saying history will not remember her kindly. After what you saw, is she persuadable? First of all, I think you have to keep making the argument. It’s perplexing that you would say you’re for something, you’re for voting rights preservation, voting rights expansion, voting rights protections, but yet you’re not willing to, if a provision is in a way to keep that from happening. You’re not willing to modify [it]. I think we’ve got to see what happens when the vote [happens]. When the rubber meets the road, which is when the vote is taking place. Which is one of the reasons we’re going to be in Phoenix. Because we hope to mobilize more and more people in the state of Arizona, so that her voters can weigh in on this issue. I think there’s an important reason for them to be engaged. I also think that other Americans, on the holiday, the hope is that millions of people from around the nation will weigh in and let their senators know, we want these bills passed. So senators know, we want these bills passed. That certainly applies to Senator Manchin as well. We’re going to continue to exert pressure. We’re going to sign petitions. The holiday is in every state as you know, and a lot of cities. We have called on those to observe the King holiday to not observe it in a traditional sense of celebrating. But a sense of activation, engagement, of activism. And that activism means reaching out. Maybe sending text messages. Maybe sending Instagrams. Every modality we have, we want to flood the senators’ offices. Not just the two Democrats. All the senators. But we’re going to really focus on the two Democrats who have said they’re not gonna make any changes. You’ve obviously been meeting with both of those senators over the last couple of months. I know you spoke with the president and met with him in Atlanta on Tuesday. Can you tell me what you’ve been saying to them privately and how you make this argument to them and whether you feel heard? I think the president made a very, very strong presentation when he was here earlier in the week. His presentation about the filibuster and even the characterization of those who are not willing to do something being on the wrong side of history. I thought all of that was very good. Something that I had hoped we would have heard already, but the fact is it’s happening now. So I think the president is doing now more than what he was doing initially. And I’m thankful for that. I have not had the opportunity, we have not spoken to Senator Sinema. We requested meetings but we’ve not been able to get her to confirm a meeting. Senator Manchin on the other hand, we did meet with him, maybe a month or two ago. We’ve not met with him recently. There’s going to be a vote on the voting rights legislation Tuesday. Given the speeches we heard, it seems like the filibuster will hold. What does continuing this fight look like beyond that vote? We come out of a tradition that whenever it’s darkest, you look to the stars. And so, things that look insurmountable have always been that way in the African American community. It’s always felt like ‘oh, this is gonna be we cannot accomplish’. But yet we find ways to be victorious. I’m not willing to concede. Our tradition, if we were to go with what conventional wisdom is, as Black folk, we’d still be slaves. At the bottom of the day, things were not gonna change. But it’s because people keep pushing and rising up that changes do occur. We’re gonna continue to push to get something done. Because to me, it’s fundamental to the foundation of our democracy. It’s those on the other side who seem to have lost the perception of what democracy is. And the way they’re operating is as if it’s a democracy but we change the rules when we want to, to make it whatever we want it to be made. The sad part about it is that it has been couched as a partisan issue when voting rights is non-partisan. I mean we’re not telling people who to vote for. We just want to make sure that everyone has the unencumbered opportunity to be able to cast their votes in the easiest way that it can be done. And what they are doing in these 19 states with these 44 laws is they’re making it harder for people to vote. And these are all Republican legislatures. Or at least the votes are all Republican votes. And that’s almost a crime. But it certainly is a shame and a disgrace. You guys have called for marches, for protesting for the right to vote. I think you’ve even said last month that there shouldn’t even be celebrations without protest and pushing for voting rights. Have you ever made that kind of call in the past? When my mom and others envisioned the King holiday, she often said it’s a day on, not a day off. So it has always been a day of engagement. We have ramped that up even further to say this year we specifically want to be focused on protecting, preserving and expanding the right to vote. And there shouldn’t be celebration without legislation. Obviously, if we had legislation, then we could celebrate momentarily. Again, we have to stay on the battlefield because there’s still many more battles to win. This is to me one of the most fundamental, it’s one of the cornerstones of my father’s legacy. The right to vote. Our daughter, who’s sitting here next to me, was born in 2008. And yet, in 2013 the supreme court eviscerated the Voting Rights Act. And then in 2021, Georgia created all these new draconian laws and suppressive and oppressive laws for voting. So Yolanda has less voting rights today than she had when she was born. Thinking about your father at this moment, I’m curious if you’ve thought about how he might respond to a setback like we saw yesterday. How might he have approached this moment and tried to galvanize support for getting rid of the filibuster? He would continue to dig in. He stayed on issues. When we look at the demonstrations that took place, whether it was Birmingham, whether it was Selma. Birmingham created the climate for the Civil Rights Act of 1964. They didn’t just give up and say, ‘oh, we’re not gonna get a civil rights act. They continued and continued and continued and ultimately a civil rights act was passed. The Voting Rights Act was a campaign. There were several marches. The first one, John Lewis and Hosea Williams from my dad’s organization led across the Edmund Pettus Bridge. But there were two or three more attempts and finally the third march that they had and finally the Voting Rights Act was passed. So my point is, Dad would be mobilizing, organizing, strategizing and making a way it would seem out of nowhere. I wanted to give Yolanda a chance to jump in. I don’t know if there’s anything she wanted to add about what she’s seen over the last week or how she’s feeling going into this weekend. Yolanda King: What I saw yesterday was disappointing, but you have to have perseverance. I think one of the most important things you have to learn in order to do this type of work, in order to be an activist, is that you have to learn how to persevere. As my dad was talking about, if you don’t do anything, things are going to stay the way that they are. Interview has been condensed and editedEarly on Sunday morning, Ebrima Dukureh, 60, answered a phone call at his home in the Gambian town of Allunhari. It was his nephew, Haji Dukureh, 49, calling from New York City, to check in – as he often did. The two men caught up on news, asked after each other’s families and exchanged blessings. “May God protect us, may God give us peace,” they prayed. When the call dropped out after a few minutes, Haji sent a voice note: “I might be delayed sending back money, but if you need anything or there is an emergency, tell me immediately, don’t wait.” It was the last time Ebrima would hear his voice. Later that night, a fire tore through the Bronx apartment block where Haji lived, killing him, his wife, Haja, and three children, as well as 13 others. Eight of the victims were children, and most of them had intimate links to families in this tiny West African country. Sunday night’s tragedy in New York has plunged communities on both sides of the Atlantic into grief and consternation. Haji had lived in New York for 17 years, and was one of many Gambians – most with roots in Allunhari and another town, Soma – who lived in the block at 333 East 181st Street. The 19-storey building had since the 1980s been a landing spot for Gambians and other West Africans seeking a better life in the US. Ebrima’s eyes were still red from tears as he reached for his phone and swiped through pictures of Haji and his family. Although they were close in age, Ebrima had become a father figure for Haji when his parents died. And in a culture where personal success also means success for the family and wider community, Haji had stayed in close contact after he emigrated. Most families in Allunhari survive on limited means, reliant on farming – and remittances from sons, daughters, husbands and wives who have left to seek their fortunes in other African countries or farther afield. Pointing to a stack of rice sacks in a store that Haji had paid for earlier this month, Ebrima said that his nephew sent money every month for food, school fees and other expenses. “He was obedient, he was always reaching out to me, helping the family,” he said. Haji earned modest wages doing “night-time work” in New York, said Ebrima, but he also sent money to extended family members and even neighbours when they held celebrations. Such payments can have an outsized impact in a country where about 48% of the population live in poverty, according to the UN. According to the Gambia’s central bank, remittances to the country are worth 20% of its GDP. The fire has stunned the people of Allunhara. There has been no official declaration of mourning, but grief from the deaths has gripped the entire town. Televisions were muted and groups of people sat in the shade in a sombre mood. Along the roadside, where pounding music normally blares from loudspeakers, welders worked in silence. “Such a thing has never happened here,” said one passerby. “Entire families perishing – when have we witnessed that?” In Soma, a few hours to the west, well-wishers streamed into the compound of the Tunkara family. Some brought food, money or gifts. Others just sat and remembered 41-year-old Fatoumata Tunkara and her 13-year-old son, Omar, who both died in the fire. Aji Mama Tunkara, 71, pulled out fraying photographs of her sister, in Soma, where she was born, and in New York, where she moved about 20 years ago. “I did not have any child and after two years our late mother gave me the responsibility to raise her. She was not only a sister but like my child,” she said. Fatoumata had also helped the family, sending monthly remittances, which helped their lives improve. “She was the pillar of the family. I spoke to her hours before she died,” said Tunkara. “But now it seems our situation will get worse.” Fatoumata, who worked two jobs in New York, did not live in the building where the blaze occurred but her childminder looked after Omar there, said Jaha Dukureh, a prominent human rights activist who was born in Soma and now lives in Atlanta. “When she went to pick him up it was very late so she decided to stay – and then the fire happened,” Dukureh said. “It’s important to highlight that she had two daughters, two sons and she was all her kids had,” she said. “The people who died aren’t people who lived a luxurious life. It’s really sad to see them living in such conditions and dying in the way that they did.” Jaha Dukureh, who campaigned to have female genital mutilation banned in her home country, said that support from the Gambian community – both in the US and abroad – has been profound. But she added that the families affected by the blaze would need much more help. Fatoumata’s daughter had set up a GoFundMe page for donations, Dukureh said, to look after her siblings, now living with a relative. “Fatoumata cared about her children, she was always smiling, always laughing. I don’t think I’ve ever met anyone as gentle as she was,” Dukureh said. For many Gambians, the Bronx felt like a home away from home. “The community has everything that you need: you have the African stores, the products. You can’t step outside without speaking to your people. That’s what makes this place a place you’d want to come to. It’s also what makes this a tragedy.” In Soma and Allunhar, there were mixed feelings about whether the bodies of their relatives should be returned to the Gambia to be buried or buried in New York. “Bringing the corpses to Allunhari will be more devastating because we have never witnessed such a tragedy,” said Haji Dakureh’s aunt Aja Musa Njie. “The vacuum left behind by Haji cannot be filled by anyone.”A new Covid-19 vaccine is being developed by Texas scientists using a decades-old conventional method that will make the production and distribution cheaper and more accessible for countries most affected by the pandemic and where new variants are likely to originate due to low inoculation rates. The team, led by Drs Peter Hotez and Maria Bottazzi from the Texas Children’s Hospital Center for Vaccine Development at Baylor College of Medicine, has been developing vaccine prototypes for Sars and Mers since 2011, which they reconstructed to create the new Covid vaccine, dubbed Corbevax, or “the world’s Covid-19 vaccine”. Although more than 60 other vaccines are in development using the same technology, Bottazzi said their vaccine is unique because they do not intend to patent it, allowing anyone with the capacity to reproduce it. “Pretty much anybody that can make hepatitis B vaccines or has the capacity to produce microbial-based protein like bacteria or yeast, can replicate what we do,” Bottazzi said. Patent wars over mRNA vaccines have recently heated up. Moderna and the National Institutes of Health are in a dispute over who should get credit for specific discoveries that led to a Covid-19 vaccine which has been delivered to more than 73 million Americans. If Moderna is found to have infringed on the federal government’s patent, it could be forced to pay more than $1bn. At the same time, activists have called for Pfizer and Moderna to share the technology and knowhow for producing their vaccines, including taking the fight to the World Trade Organization. Low-income countries, which have few vaccine research and production facilities, have vaccinated just one in nine people, according to the World Health Organization. The US has fully vaccinated 67% of the population and provided a third vaccine dose to more than one-third. Corbevax’s clinical trial data has yet to be released due to resource constraints, but Texas Children’s hospital said the vaccine was over 90% effective against the original Covid-19 strain and over 80% effective against the Delta variant. The vaccine’s efficacy against the Omicron variant is currently being tested. The process to create the vaccine involves the use of yeast – the same method by which hepatitis B vaccines are produced. The Moderna, Pfizer and Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccines currently authorized in the US use different technologies, or vaccine “platforms”. Moderna and Pfizer use messenger RNA (mRNA) technology. This platform introduces the immune system to Covid-19 by delivering instructions on how to produce its most recognizable feature, the spike proteins which coat its surface. This helps the immune system recognize and fight the virus later, if a person is exposed. Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine introduces immune cells to the spike protein through an otherwise harmless cold virus, a technology called viral vector. The Corbevax vaccine uses a platform called recombinant protein sub-unit technology, which places an actual piece of Covid-19’s spike protein in yeast cells. The yeast cells then copy the vital protein and the protein is introduced to the immune system. “We make the protein, directly and synthetically, in the lab using the yeast system,” Bottazzi explained. “We ask the yeast to make a protein that looks just like a protein that is made by the virus. Then we immunize the protein and the body then processes this protein and presents it to the immune system. Therefore, you don’t ask your body to do any major manipulation of the coding.” Crucially, storing the Corbevax vaccine only requires standard refrigeration, unlike the Pfizer vaccine, which requires ultra-cold storage in transit. Biological E, an Indian pharmaceutical company accustomed to producing hepatitis B vaccines with whom Bottazzi’s team has a longstanding relationship, has already produced 150m doses of the new Corbevax vaccine and will soon be able to produce 100m doses every month. After being overlooked by government organizations for funding, Bottazzi said, the developers behind Corbevax relied on philanthropic donations to get them over the finish line. The Texas Children’s Hospital Center for Vaccine Development is an academic and scientific institution in nature, but Bottazzi said developing Corbevax had forced them to stretch their resources in order to gain visibility as a serious candidate for Covid vaccine development. “We ourselves are learning how to do work that is regulatory-enabling, that enables good quality, good reproduction, good record-keeping … we mimic as if we were a small biotech or manufacturing entity,” she said. “Every technology has pros and cons. Nobody is claiming one is the super-duper, only solution. All the [vaccines] are part of the solution. But when you have a situation of such gravity around the world, you don’t pick and choose a solution – you try to use all solutions,” Bottazzi said. Bottazzi said the reason she and her team did not patent the vaccine was because of her team’s shared philosophy of humanitarianism and to engage in collaboration with the wider scientific community. “We want to do good in the world. This was the right thing to do and this is what we morally had to do. We didn’t even blink. We didn’t think, ‘how can we take advantage of this?’ You see now that if more like us would have been more attuned to how the world is so inequitable and how we could have helped from the beginning so many places around the world without thinking ‘what’s going to be in it for me?’, we could have basically not even seen these variants arise.” Bottazzi hopes her move will incentivize others to follow suit and make affordable and accessible vaccines for other diseases and viruses, like hookworm. “We need to break these paradigms that it’s only driven by economic impact factors or return of economic investment. We have to look at the return in public health.”One Sunday last summer, 18-year-old Eloy Cardoso left his mother’s house on the outskirts of Havana to collect an Atari game console from a friend. He’d stayed at home the previous day, while the largest anti-government demonstrations since the revolution had ripped through Cuba. The authorities had managed to quell the protests in most of the country overnight, but not in La Güinera: unrest was still raging in the humble and normally calm neighbourhood, and Eloy walked out into a bloody brawl. Shops were smashed and looted, party supporters wielded clubs, police wrestled with youths, and one man was shot dead. Amid the tumult, Cardoso began to throw stones at the police. He was arrested a few days later, and at a closed trial earlier this week he was sentenced to seven years in prison. The trial is one of scores currently playing out across the island, as, six months after the demonstrations, Cuban courts have quietly started imposing draconian sentences on the protesters who – sometimes peacefully, sometimes less so – flooded the streets last summer. Though the state has a history of issuing stiff sentences to organised political dissidents, the punishments now being meted out are unusually severe. “They want to make an example of him,” said Cardoso’s mother, Servillia Pedroso, 35, holding back tears. Because her son is at college, police initially told her he would get a “second chance” charging him with “public disorder” and telling him he would get away with a fine. But in October, the charge was upgraded to sedition: in other words, inciting others to rebel against state authority. Since December, more 50 people in La Güinera have been sentenced for sedition, according to the civil society organisation Justicia 11J. Most are poor, young males. Justicia 11J said more than 700 people were still being detained following July’s protests, with 158 of those accused of or already sentenced for sedition. Earlier this week one man in the eastern province of Holguín was sentenced to 30 years. Erika Guevara-Rosas, Americas director at Amnesty International, said detainees have faced summary proceedings without guarantees of due process or a fair trial. “Prosecutors have pushed for disproportionately long sentences against people who were arrested in the protests. In addition, many people stand accused of vague crimes that are inconsistent with international standards, such as ‘contempt’ which has been consistently used in Cuba to punish those who criticise the government,” she said. “The state is trying to send the message that there are dire consequences to rebelling against the government,” said William LeoGrande, professor of government at American University in Washington. “The fact that the government feels under and is under unprecedented threat – not just from increased US sanctions but from the pandemic and the global economic situation – makes it less willing to tolerate any type of dissidence.” Trump-era sanctions contributed to the food and medicine shortages people were protesting against. The sanctions also slowed vaccine production, aggravating a Covid surge that was sweeping through the island at the time, and contributing to the fury. But many protesters also wanted freedom from Communist rule. Economic complaints are a constant in La Güinera: it’s hard to afford shoes and medicine. A schoolbag costs 2,500 pesos – more than half a teacher’s monthly salary. “I’m sure that if it wasn’t for the economy, none of this would have happened – but the economy never improves,” said Yusniel Hernández, 36, a teacher turned taxi driver, who said a dozen friends had been incarcerated for throwing stones and assaulting police officers. Analysts say the government is using exemplary sentencing to snuff out any further protests because it is bracing for further economic hardship. As sanctions have hardened, a longstanding siege mentality among the leadership seems to have ossified in recent years. The fact that the Biden administration reversed its policy of normalisation with the island after July may be another contributing factor. But the pain from the crackdown is palpable. “None of these kids were activists, they don’t belong to any organisation,” said Migdalia Gutiérrez, 44, whose son, Brunelvil, 33, has been sentenced to 15 years. “If someone has nothing to do with politics, and you are accusing them of political stuff, then you are making them political prisoners,” she added. Her nextdoor neighbour, María Luisa Fleitas Bravo, 58, lives in poverty. The roof of her kitchen, living room and second bedroom collapsed when Hurricane Irma struck in 2017. The state provided her with the breeze-blocks she needed to rebuild, but four years later the cement still hasn’t arrived. Her rotting wood ceiling is covered with plastic sheets secured by clothes pegs, but it still leaks when it rains. Her unemployed 33-year-old son, Rolando, was sentenced to 21 years for attacking a police officer during the protests (a charge he denies). Pedroso has been running a small online campaign to free her son. But shortly after she and seven other local mothers made a video demanding justice , she received a visit from the police, who informed her that the video was being shared on Facebook for “counterrevolutionary” ends. She has since been questioned by state security, and told that if she takes to the street to protest for her son’s release, she could be charged with public disorder. Pedroso, a housewife, had applied for a job at Havana’s international airport, to work in immigration. The job was all but in the bag, she said, until she was asked about her son during a final check-up interview. That was September. She hasn’t heard back since. “Nobody who has a child accused of anything can work in the airport,” she said, before adding, with a touch of gallows humour: “In fact, yes: they can be accused of murder, but not of counterrevolution.”Hundreds of clinical psychiatrists and psychologists have warned that the police and crime bill reaching its final stages in parliament “will have a profound negative impact on young people’s mental health”. “We cannot think of better measures to disempower and socially isolate young people,” they say in an open letter signed by more than 350 academics and clinicians and published online. The intervention comes as the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill reaches the final stages of its journey into law. It has been widely opposed by human rights activists, racial justice groups, former home secretaries and parliament’s joint committee on human rights, which called the proposals “oppressive and wrong”. Among the anti-protest measures in the bill are new powers for police to ban marches and demonstrations deemed “seriously disruptive”, including being too noisy; sentences of up to 51 weeks for protesters who attach themselves, or “lock on” to, another person or to an object; and sentences of up to 10 years for anyone found guilty of the “desecration” of a statue or memorial. “One result of this legislation, if passed, will be that young people face a choice between being intimidated into inaction and isolation, or possibly criminalised if they choose to act,” the letter says. “Some may deliberately choose to escalate their actions to be more disruptive and possibly violent, given the severe consequences for even minor nonviolent activity.” Signatories include Susie Orbach, psychoanalyst and author of Fat Is a Feminist Issue, Eric Taylor, the emeritus professor of child and adolescent psychiatry at King’s College London, and Mike Wang, the chair of the Association of Clinical Psychologists, who signed on behalf of his entire organisation. Orbach said young people, full of the “great hope and ennui” of adolescence, were keen to make a difference to the world. “Imagine then a bill that robs you and your friends of initiative and agency,” she said. ‘“We bring children up to act and then the government says no. This bill sews confusion. It attempts to disable engagement. It will depoliticise youth, which is maybe what is wanted, but what a tragedy personally and collectively.” The letter was drafted by Lynne Jones, a consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist, who was awarded an OBE for her work with children in conflict zones in central Europe in the late 90s. Jones said she was inspired by an Australian environmental activist, Marco Bellemo, who called on professionals to oppose restrictions on activism. She said of the bill: “It is terrifying because it is undermining one of the pillars of our democracy, and it is also attacking the young people who most need our support. “Priti Patel has made no bones that she’s targeting eco-protesters, that means she’s targeting young people.” The Guardian has contacted the Home Office for comment.“I have been doing this for 14 years,” Andrew Faris half yells down the phone over the rush of noise behind him. Volunteers at his charity are preparing dinners for homeless people – veggie curry and chicken wings. “People ask me: do you ever take a day off? But there’s still so much to be done.” Faris, who tells me he is in his late 40s, runs a small, London-based charity called Rhythms of Life. The former photographer takes no salary and has put his life savings, about £70,000, into it. (The charity also receives donations.) For Faris, this work is personal. He was homeless for six years in the 1990s. He had run a successful commercial lettings business, but overleveraged himself and went broke. His first night sleeping rough was terrible, he says. He sat and thought, “No, I won’t do silly things. I will get through this.” There is so much to think about when sleeping rough. Where will you shower? Where will you wash your clothes? How will you find something to eat? Faris didn’t even have a sleeping bag. He asked other homeless people and they sent him to a nearby shelter. “Every day, you repeat the whole episode,” he says. “Get up and go to a shelter. Get your clothes washed and have a shower. Have some cheap coffee and powdered milk and bread that has gone off.” Most homeless people have a spot they favour. Faris’s was behind the Savoy Hotel, where there were some bushes he would conceal himself in. It’s best to make yourself inconspicuous. The general public can be cruel, especially people who are drunk. “Stag parties would tie your shoelaces, pour lighter fluid on your shoes and set them alight,” says Faris. “You’d wake up with your feet tied together and burning at the same time.” A woman once urinated on him. “It was a dare,” he explains, “among a group of girls. I woke up in disgust and felt bad for myself that this had happened.” But abusive drunks weren’t the worst thing about being homeless. “Being nobody is the worst thing,” he says. “Nobody says hello. That’s what I missed the most. I wasn’t acknowledged as a human being.” Eventually he found work selling The Big Issue, and then on a market stall. He saved enough money to buy a camera and become a photographer. Six years later, by the 2000s, he was no longer homeless and his career was thriving. But he kept thinking about the people he’d left behind on the streets. In day centres for the homeless, he says, the vibe is usually negative – food bad, staff uninterested. Faris realised that he knew more than most about what homeless people really needed, and so set up Rhythms of Life in 2008. He and his team of 40 volunteers distribute food to homeless people four days a week; two days a week, he goes to domestic abuse shelters. It’s not uncommon for queues of up to 150 people to form in Trafalgar Square for his food. “We do it with passion,” he says. “We know their names. We make sure they have tea and cake in the queue while they wait.” Faris collects leftover food from supermarkets most evenings, and spends the following day preparing meals. “Andrew is the most selfless, dedicated man I have ever met,” says volunteer Frazier Stroud. “He has delivered food, support, employment opportunities and care to homeless people across London and, to my knowledge, has never taken a day off.” Faris’s team also try to empower people to get off the streets. “We do 10-week courses,” he says, “where we teach IT, English and life skills like how to open a bank account or try to reduce your drug and alcohol consumption.” Sometimes homeless people are offered volunteer positions with the charity – if they perform reliably, Faris will give them a reference and vouch for them to future employers. Faris is an incorrigible workaholic. When I try to ask him about his treat, calls go unanswered and texts unread. Eventually, after months of being pestered, he suggests one thing that would improve his life: an iPad to use when making presentations about Rhythms of Life to potential donors. His laptop is battered and slow. He has a big funding meeting coming up which will determine whether he’s able to hire a bus to take a group sightseeing around London, and for a special meal. AO.com provides Faris with a new, top-of-the-range iPad just in time for his big meeting. He uses it to show executives photographs of people queueing for meals, and statistics about how many people they’ve served. “They were impressed,” he says. He plans to use the iPad to collect data about clients’ needs in real time, from shoe sizes to training needs. And with that, a streamlined, more efficient Faris bids me goodbye: he has more mouths to feed, and places to be. “It’s all good,” he concludes, no doubt already thinking about preparing the next dinner. Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.com“I don’t know if I was enjoying myself or just in a continual state of curiosity,” says Meg in Snakebite, one of 10 short stories in 25-year-old British author Saba Sams’s exceptional debut collection. Sams joins the ranks of writers such as Megan Nolan and Frances Leviston with these acute portraits of the fragile intimacies and euphoric moments snatched by a generation of women coming of age into a precarious future. The first story in the collection, Tinderloin, was shortlisted for the White Review short story prize in 2019; the second, Overnight, was published by Sally Rooney in the literary magazine The Stinging Fly; and the third, Snakebite, has recently featured in Granta. Sams’s characters navigate the gaps between expectation and reality that emerge with encroaching adulthood – preoccupied parents, uneven friendships, misleading kisses. Unfolding against a backdrop of grimy pubs, music festivals and yoga yurts, these funny, surprising stories articulate the wonder and disillusionment that go hand in hand with testing new boundaries. Sams excels at teasing out the micro-dynamics of relationships: crushes, rivalries, hierarchies. In Snakebite, an inexorable tale of lopsided attraction, rudderless student Meg gets caught up in the reckless orbit of Lara, who is drunk on the coercive power of her own beauty. Their transformative friendship – “I understood that I was her project” – turns toxic, yet Meg is helplessly complicit in her own exploitation. This story has echoes in Blue 4eva, about a newly blended family’s holiday on a Balearic island. Twelve-year-old Stella seeks approval from Blue, her older stepsister’s friend, a magnetic alpha who basks in Stella’s admiration and, like Lara, enjoys flexing her influence at others’ expense. Similarly, in The Mothers and the Girls, two 13-year-olds vie for the attention of an older boy who seems to hold all the cards. Yet repeatedly, Sams’s young women turn the tables, rejecting victimhood, wrongfooting presumption, embracing independence, or simply picking themselves up and moving on. Their experiences are often shaped by their bodies, a source of power that can also be weaponised against them: “cracked open” like a nut, as in the sexual assault Maxine recalls in Overnight. In the title story, Send Nudes, the protagonist is a slave to diets and shapewear. The prose is suffused with her shame – “her hair is wet against her forehead, slapping like a strip of raw bacon” – until she shares naked selfies on an anonymous messaging app, and feels something like liberation. Subjects such as pregnancy and self-harm are handled without sentimentality or squeamishness. When, in Tinderloin, Grace has a miscarriage, she draws comfort not from her wet-blanket boyfriend but from the growing devotion of his dog. You never feel Sams is “exploring an issue”; rather, each story presents the textured fabric of ordinary lives, woven from wry observation, psychological insight and blunt Gen Z dialogue. Digital natives reared on Snapchat and Tinder, Sams’s characters are largely blase about sex. In Here Alone, seduction begins as a game for Emily – “this was her favourite part: the exchange of signs” – but she loses control. The ensuing tale of delusional desire and casual male cruelty nails rejection with stinging clarity. Family offers little by way of a safety net, as beleaguered parents inhabit an extended adolescence of their own. Roles are reversed: one daughter tries to shield her inebriated mother from social services, another fashions a consolatory beach in a high-rise flat when the pandemic scuppers a long-awaited holiday. In spare, rhythmic sentences, this exhilarating collection captures the light and dark of negotiating relationships, solitude, sexuality and loss. Sams makes language her own, conjuring piercing imagery that leaves its imprint on your mind, just as traumas mark her characters, even if they do bounce back. What distinguishes her from millennial writers such as Ottessa Moshfegh, who shares her deadpan humour and visceral style, is that her characters aren’t jaded, but voracious. They’re not immune to existential angst – “Do you ever worry that nothing you do matters?” – but they get on with living, devouring new experiences with gusto. Does this herald a tonal shift in twentysomething fiction? It’s too early to tell, but it’s precisely this earthy resilience and joie de vivre that make Send Nudes so rare and uplifting. • Send Nudes by Saba Sams is published by Bloomsbury (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.It’s very common to make a bean, chickpea or lentil stew at least once a week in Spain – we Spaniards love our pulses, and there’s nothing quite as comforting in the colder months. Today’s fishy recipes are quite traditional, especially the suquet, which is a real feast and the type of dish that’s perfect for a special occasion. They’re much lighter and quicker than meat stews, but they’re still incredibly warming and good for scooping up with a spoon. Bean and clam stew (pictured above) Prep 20 min Cook 1 hr 20 min Serves 4-6 1kg clams 1 tbsp fine sea salt, to clean the clams (see method) 75ml extra-virgin olive oil 5 garlic cloves, peeled and diced 2 onions, peeled and diced 1 leek, white part only, chopped 1 green pepper, stalk, pith and seeds removed, flesh diced 1 red pepper, stalk, pith and seeds removed, flesh diced 1 bay leaf 2 dried chillies, finely chopped 200ml white wine 1½-2 litres prawn stock (or shellfish or fish stock) 500g dried haricot beans, soaked overnight in cold water Sea salt and black pepper ½ bunch chervil, chopped, or dill or tarragon Check with your fishmonger whether the clams have been cleaned – if not, you’ll need to do so yourself by putting them in a bowl of cold water with a tablespoon of fine salt and soaking for 40 minutes. Gently move the clams around in the water every 10 minutes: the salt water makes them expel any sand. Put the oil in a large saucepan on a medium-low heat. Once it’s hot, add the garlic and onions, and saute, stirring, for 10-12 minutes. Add the leek, fry, stirring, for five to six minutes, then add the peppers, bay leaf and dried chillies, and cook for eight to 10 minutes, until really soft and sweet but not coloured. Pour in the wine, cook until the liquid has evaporated, then add the stock and the drained beans. Half-cover the pot with a lid, and leave to cook very gently for about 45 minutes, until the beans have soaked up lots of the stock and are nice and soft; if at this stage the beans are still a little hard, add extra water and carry on cooking until they soften. When the beans are done, season the mix, then drain the clams and add them to the pot. Half-cover the pan again, and cook the clams over a medium heat for three or four minutes, until they open (discard any that do not). Stir in the chervil, then taste and adjust the seasoning and serve with lots of bread for mopping up the sauce. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Suquet (fish and potato stew) Prep 20 min Cook 1 hr Serves 4-6 For the stew 25ml good extra-virgin olive oil (I use arbequina), plus extra for the picada and for toasting the bread 1 large onion, peeled and finely diced 100g ripe tomatoes, peeled and chopped (or 100g drained and chopped tinned tomatoes) 1 generous pinch saffron 2 tsp sweet pimentón 125ml dry white wine 100ml Spanish brandy 100ml manzanilla or fino sherry 80ml pastis 150g waxy potatoes, peeled and cut into 1cm cubes 1.7 litres good-quality fish stock 200g cod fillet, cut into 2cm pieces 200g monkfish fillet, cut into 2cm pieces 200g gurnard fillet, cut into 2cm pieces Sea salt and black pepper 3 slices good white bread, cut in half, to serve For the picada 1 small bunch flat-leaf parsley, roughly chopped 2 garlic cloves, peeled and roughly chopped, plus 1 clove extra, peeled and halved, to finish 50g whole hazelnuts, blanched and lightly toasted 50g whole almonds, blanched and lightly toasted First make the picada. In a mortar, crush the parsley, garlic and nuts with a drizzle of olive oil until you have a rough paste, then set aside. Now start on the stew. Pour the oil into a large pan over a medium heat and, once it’s hot, add the onion and cook, stirring, for about 10 minutes, until slightly golden. Add the chopped tomatoes and saute, stirring every now and then, for about 10 minutes more, until the mix reduces to a paste. Add the saffron, pimentón and picada, cook, stirring, for a minute, then add the wine, brandy, sherry and pastis, and cook until all the liquid evaporates. Add the potatoes, stir for a minute, then add the stock and leave to simmer for 10 minutes. Add the chopped fish, half-cover the pot, and leave to cook for five to seven minutes, until the fish is just cooked through. Taste the broth and adjust the seasoning accordingly. Meanwhile, in a medium frying pan, fry the bread slices in a drizzle of olive oil until golden on both sides. Remove from the pan, rub one side of the toast with the halved garlic and serve alongside the hot stew. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Nieves Barragán Mohacho is chef/co-owner of Sabor, London W1 • The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. Check ratings in your region: UK; Australia; US.I do not write historical fiction. But I envy those who do. I can picture them sitting in the lamp-lit halls of the New York Public Library on 42nd Street, thumbing through fraying, early 20th‑century telephone directories or spinning the roulette of the microfiche machine, or meeting at a nearby coffee dispensary with fellow history-minded wordsmiths in the wee hours of the day, like hunters getting ready to put a bullet through the heart of a wildebeest. The best are able to address the current moment through deft metaphysical journeys between the present and the past, to illuminate our wayward realities by reminding us that it has ever been so, that the past is not even the past, or whatever Faulkner said. Personally, I have trouble building a literary time machine. A decade ago, when I wrote a memoir set primarily in the 1980s, all I could remember of that era was Michael J Fox running around in a varsity jacket. The rest of my memories were just volumes of mist that sometimes trickled out of my minor brain holes, tantalising but highly suspect emissions that bore news of events which may or may not have been. When one’s teenage years are a distant Greek island, imagine trying to write a novel about the romantic entanglements of the Italian futurists or the political cataclysms of Meiji-era Japan, or anything at all about the ancient Egyptians. As a child of two failing superpowers, the Soviet Union and the United States, I have always found myself in a maximal historical position. The headlines of the newspapers, whether Pravda or the New York Times, were always screaming about events on a global scale. There was no “Local Drive-In Theater to Feature Annual Jaws Marathon” or “Piggly Wiggly 5k Marathon Nets Hearts and Dollars for Muscular Dystrophy Research”. It was all “The Struggle Continues, Angola Will Win”, or our Marines lying dead in the rubble of Beirut. For as long as I’ve been alive, I have been, like the character of John Self in Martin Amis’s Money, addicted to the present. And writing about the perfidy, the hubris, the insanity of these two large, imploding imperial suns, the US and USSR, in something like real time has been my mandate from the start. My first novel, written as a five-year-old and paid for in pieces of glossy Soviet cheese by my literature-obsessed grandmother, concerned Lenin meeting a magical socialist goose and conquering Finland. The rest of my work has pretty much followed suit. When the pandemic first hit, I had been writing a humour-forward dystopian novel in which New York University had taken over most of Manhattan, building walls and checkpoints round the island, and deputising its own military force, the Violet Helmets (violet is one of the school’s colours), to keep out the non-matriculated. Come March 2020, reality rushed over the draft of my funny dystopia in waves. Once people started dying and our president continued lying, I realised the smallness of my attempted novel, the way the academic satire seemed much too easy and glib. I had undershot my historical mandate and had to make amends immediately. I trashed 240 pages of NYU conquering Manhattan and began to write a tight Chekhovian take on the disaster at hand, a novel with the simple title Our Country Friends. The importance of the moment presented itself right away. My first novel looked at the world through the prism of the collapse of the Soviet Union and the immigrants who had washed ashore on the other side of the Atlantic; my second through the prism of oil politics and American foreign policy. My third examined the advent of tech as the ultimate arbiter of American society (and the death of its democracy); my fourth the way America had become fully financialised by a class of useless and clueless meritocrats. I had always hovered around the present moment, a few years behind it or, in the case of my third novel, Super Sad True Love Story, slightly ahead of it. That book was recently mentioned in the pages of this newspaper in an article about how banks such as Lloyds and NatWest have demanded the firing of faculty staff at London’s Goldsmiths art college – in Super Sad, the school has been rebranded as HSBC-Goldsmiths and offers double qualifications in finance and art. With Our Country Friends, I began running after the present like an elderly terrier pursuing a turkey meatball rolling down a minor hill, huffing and puffing after the object of its desire. I saw the pandemic as a reflection of American decline writ large, the way our individualism and distrust (and racism and ingrained ignorance) made us useless in the face of calamity. I wanted to capture it all, but within the confines of a small, character-driven work set in the countryside. But how confined could I make my novel? I couldn’t ignore the murder of George Floyd, for instance, and the resulting fascist counternarratives. But at the same time I couldn’t let the headlines dominate. I wanted to write about a group of friends clinging to each other for survival in a Decameron-like country setting, not about a president telling his citizens to drink bleach. The particular horror of the moment required tenderness, not satire. Whether you looked at the clown formerly inhabiting the White House or the poof of hair still haunting 10 Downing Street, the satire was already built in. When I told my writer friends I was writing about the pandemic, they were worried for me. Who would want to reach for such a book after experiencing the pandemic first-hand? The UK publisher of my previous two books declined to publish Our Country Friends, citing Covid fatigue as the main reason (it will be published in the UK by Atlantic this month). But as a writer who has taken the present moment as his mandate, there was no way for me to look away. To write about the world today is to confront a never-ending series of calamities strung together like a set of exploding Christmas lights. In the past year, in America alone we have experienced an attempted coup instigated by our president, a series of attacks on Asian Americans prompted at least partly by vitriol coming from the same man (this forms one of the narratives in Our Country Friends, where half the characters are of Asian descent), forest fires that have singed parts of California and coloured our skies apocalyptic orange as far away as New York, heatwaves that have struck the Pacific north-west with unheard of brutality, killing the vulnerable and the old. And, yes, more than 800,000 pandemic deaths and counting. How should fiction deal with all of this? Should it deal with all of this? The pandemic is not going away. Many Americans, including my relations, drunk on misinformation, will never get vaccinated. The political will to truly combat climate change comes and goes with each new administration, and by the time wealthy nations truly decide to reverse course, it will almost certainly be too late. Populist, crypto-fascist movements such as the post-pretence, white-supremacist-aligned Republican party will continue to thrive across the world, and will form new commonwealths of illiberal states to circumvent the opprobrium and sanctions of the few remaining democratic ones. As the ecological order collapses, migrants from the global south, most vulnerable to the devastation, will continue to stake the survival of their families on moving north, reinforcing the cycles of authoritarian far-right despots who will capitalise on their plight. Again, what are we as writers to do? A re-creation of Chekhov’s play Uncle Vanya plays a part in Our Country Friends, and as I was rereading his work, I remembered that as far back as the late 19th century the Russian master was writing about his country’s ecology, the disappearance of its great forests beneath the logger’s saw. None of the themes I’ve described above, from authoritarianism to plagues to burning forests, is new, and yet their intensity will increase with every suffocating summer and deathly hurricane, every stolen election and misinformed electorate. The writer of the present or the near-distant future (increasingly, they are one and the same) may wish to consider two strategies. First, focus on the personal, the micro-detailed, the human. We are all small individuals kicked ass-first on to the stage of history, given terrible lines and worse costumes; but what remain interesting are the few things we cling to, the self-expressions of grieving and desire, the inability to define love. Beneath the ever-growing historical calamities that define my fiction, my first novel was, at heart, about a son aching for his mother’s love; my second about a son wanting the same from his father; my third about two lovers unprepared for the dictates of their own hearts; my fourth about a father trying to love a son … and so on, in an endless permutation of ecstatic sadness. Take away the history, and I’ve got a bunch of small, furry immigrants bumbling away against a green screen. Overamplify the history, and it’s hard to remember why you’re reading the book as opposed to clicking through some very strident think pieces. Second, entertain. I don’t have the strength to read a boring novel, even if the blurb on the back cover is shouting about its urgency. A writer is not a thinktank. The collapse of humanity is as deathly funny as it is heart-rending, like watching a drunk beaver claw its way out of a collapsed dam. If I’m going to see members of my son’s generation being burned like ants beneath the super-sun, I at least want the flicker of a smile along with my last drawn breath. And then, if any of them survive (oh, please God, let it be so), and reconstitute themselves in the last livable parts of Canada or Novaya Zemlya, let our chronicles of the present remind them of both their ancestors’ stupidity and their infrequent but sometimes moving moments of grace. Let there be a record of all we have wrought and all we have endured. And maybe, as they suck on the last of a melting, penguin-flavoured iceberg, let them try to remember what laughter once sounded like. • Our Country Friends is published by Atlantic on 27 January (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. *** Joking aside Ten 21st-century comic novels, selected by Justine Jordan A Fraction of the Whole by Steve Toltz (2008) Riotously inventive, motormouthed tale of the criminal misadventures of an Australian family, shortlisted for the Booker prize. Skippy Dies by Paul Murray (2010) Set in a Catholic boys’ boarding school in Ireland, a bittersweet tragicomic epic about the horrors and heartbreak of adolescence.. The Sellout by Paul Beatty (2015) Attempts to bring back slavery and segregation form the surreal plot of this savage, taboo-busting satire on racism past and present, the first US winner of the Booker. The Adulterants by Joe Dunthorne (2018) Set against the backdrop of the 2011 London riots, a pitiless take on millennial masculine insecurity, vertiginous house prices and the rubbishness of modern life. My Year of Rest and Relaxation by Ottessa Moshfegh (2018) A young woman withdraws from the world into a drugged sleep, but 9/11 waits around the corner. Brutal, knowing satire on privilege, numbness and American dreams. Middle England by Jonathan Coe (2018) With the characters from The Rotters’ Club now the other side of middle age, Coe finds humour in Brexit arguments, ageing and clown fights in garden centres. Weather by Jenny Offill (2020) The terrors of Trump, climate crisis, parental anxiety, toothache, monogamy and overwhelming modern existence – pared down with a scalpel wit into fragments, jokes and apercus. Hell of a Book by Jason Mott (2021) This dazzling satire on media coverage of racial violence won last year’s US National book award for fiction. My Phantoms by Gwendoline Riley (2021) An introverted woman struggles to maintain her sense of self in the face of monstrous parents; icy, razor-sharp comedy honed from the messiest and most toxic family relationships. Sterling Karat Gold by Isabel Waidner (2021) The current Goldsmiths prize winner is a tour through austerity Britain, pitting queer and trans energies against a hypocritical and repressive establishment.Pottery and yoga, East Sussex Just outside Brighton, in the South Downs, Luna Wilds is a new, off-grid wild spa and retreat built with reclaimed materials by local yoga teacher Laura Brown and her partner Mike Lord. As well as regular day events with spa treatments and time in the wood-fired sauna and outdoor tubs, there’s a choice of weekend options. On a Wild Creativity break, guests learn pottery and practise yoga and meditation. Food is plant-based and plentiful, there are evening campfires, time in the spa and a guided South Downs walk. Book a basic pre-pitched tent with blow-up mattress (£30) or bring your own. Next Wild Creativity break 13-15 May, £325 (£300 if booked by 31 January), lunawilds.co.uk Breath and resilience, Wiltshire Newly launched by breathwork practitioner Natalie Keany and yoga teacher, sound therapist and breathworker Sarah Marten, Resilience Retreats are held several times a year at Sarah’s Georgian home in Wiltshire. Combining breathwork, yoga, nature walks and sound baths, the focus is on relieving tension, reconnecting and learning resilience-building techniques. Retreats run year-round, with the option of staying off-site. Next retreat 18-20 February, from £490, studiobritford.com Women-only wild weekend, Lancashire and Kent Love Her Wild, a women-only online community, will run two Wild Weekends in 2022. Camping in beautiful settings, they offer a chance to destress with yoga and meditation, and learn new skills (workshops range from astronomy and navigation to bushcraft). There are also inspirational speakers on subjects from planning big adventures to conservation. The venues are Waddow Hall, a lansdcaped estate near Clitheroe, Lancashire, and an outdoor centre near Tunbridge Wells in Kent. Lancashire 1-3 April, Kent 27-29 May, both £105, loveherwild.com Holistic wellness, Pembrokeshire Opened last June by coach Emma Hooper, the Retreat at Old Lan Farmhouse in Login village, outside Narberth, has views of rolling Pembrokeshire hills. Weekends run year-round, from “singing and music for health” to a men-only retreat, for a maximum of eight guests. The popular Holistic Wellness Retreat offers everything from movement classes to aromatherapy workshops, with a packed itinerary tweaked to suit the group. On-site chef Fern prepares healthy feasts and accommodation is in rooms in the main farmhouse and annexes, some with private hot tubs. Next retreat 21-23 January, from £550, oldlanfarmhouse.com Slowing down, Cornwall On Bodmin Moor, on a farm with 100 acres of magical temperate rainforest, Cabilla Cornwall’s retreat choices include Wild Calm: the Power of Slowing Down, which runs several times a year. As well as yoga and meditation, there’s a guided nature walk, a sound bath, a visit to the on-site beaver enclosure, dips in woodland pools and a plant-based cookery workshop. Chef Kate Munro-Boot whips up colourful vegan meals and accommodation is in new triangular wooden cabins with skylights (Cabilla is in a dark sky park), micro-woodburners and thoughtful touches, from sheepskin rugs to poetry books. Next retreat 14-17 April, from £675, cabillacornwall.com Foraging and yoga, Dartmoor Adventure Yogi has a new, four-night summer Walking and Foraging Yoga Retreat. Guests stay in a comfortable country house on the edge of Dartmoor, and take a deep dive into nature with a guided hike and a day’s foraging to learn about edible and medicinal plants. Yoga is a mix of energising morning and relaxing evening sessions, and meals are colourful, nutritious and plant-focused. Other UK options include the Peak District and Norfolk. 15-19 August, from £645, adventureyogi.com Wild yoga, Scottish Highlands Wild Roots Highland Guiding is a new company launched by mountain leader Anna Danby last year. Options include a three-day Wild Yoga Journey with two nights’ wild camping. Yoga practice and nature-based mindfulness meditation sessions are woven into the day, led by teacher Lindsay Warrack. Weather will dictate routes, but guests will walk an average of six miles a day. All equipment is provided, as well as delicious food from local providers. 10-12 June, £395, wildrootsguiding.scotland Yoga and swimming, Lake District Yoga and swimming are a perfect match, offering plentiful physical and mental benefits, and a new, two-night trip to the Lake District with Swim Trek combines them brilliantly. It includes two guided swims a day in lakes and tarns surrounded by breathtaking scenery – with fell walking between locations. Yoga classes top and tail each day, to limber up or unwind, and accommodation is in the lovely Glenthorne Guest House in Grasmere. Swimmers don’t need open water experience, but should be capable of a 1.5km swim. Three dates from June to September, starting 27-29 June, from £510, swimtrek.com Spa hotel, Richmond, London Atop Richmond Hill, with views over the Thames, 18th-century Richmond Harbour Hotel has an all-new spa, with hydrotherapy and plunge pool, gym, 13 treatment rooms, 20-metre pool and juice bar. Classes range from Hiit (high-intensity interval training) to yoga. The Zen garden and Scandinavian hot tubs add to the calming ambience, and The Gate restaurant serves wholesome dishes in stylish surroundings. Guided meditation walks or running sessions take place in Richmond Park, which is next door. Small doubles from £95, half-day spa entry with 30-minute treatment and £20 lunch credit from £95, harbourhotels.co.uk Activity retreat, central Scotland Based in Drymen village – near Loch Lomond and 14 miles from Glasgow – Retreat Scotland offers flexible stays and activities year round. Filling their days with anything from yoga and fitness classes to mountain hikes and life coaching, guests can stay for as long as they like and join in as much or as little as they like, adding local excursions and extra treatments as they please. Food is a healthy detox mix of juices, soups and vegetarian stews (with a non-detox option of continental breakfast). There’s a choice of accommodation, from bunk rooms to a spa hotel. Retreats £100 a day, including activities and all food, with accommodation extra, from £30 a night in a shared bunkroom, retreatscotlanduk.co.ukIt was only 12 years ago that Harry Styles took the day off from his job at a bakery in Cheshire, north-west England, to go and sing Stevie Wonder’s Isn’t She Lovely for Simon Cowell at an entirely unremarkable audition for The X Factor. This week, it was announced that he would be joining Billie Eilish and Ye (the artist formerly known as Kanye West) as one of the three headliners of Coachella 2022 – marking the end of a decade of an incredible transition from boyband heartthrob to credible rockstar. Other acts announced include Phoebe Bridgers, 21 Savage, Megan Thee Stallion, Lil Baby, Doja Cat and Maggie Rogers. It must be a pinch-me moment for Styles, who like Taylor Swift and Beyoncé before him, has found that sweet spot between critical acclaim and mass popularity. To play in the Indio desert, known for its psychedelic culture and heavy magic mushroom use, will be the icing on the cake. Festival lineups are not curated out of thin air, they are painstakingly put together – in a New Yorker profile the Coachella boss Paul Tollett discussed the vast array of metrics he studies to decide not just who gets booked, but who gets to be in larger font on the poster. The final lineup is a reflection of what audiences want and where promoters believe music is heading. It’s no surprise there are very few bands on the bill. Bands have slowly been erased from most metrics of popular music over the past half-decade, as solo artists with big Instagram followings and a powerful sense of image take over. The lineup page on the Coachella website could easily be mistaken for the directory of a modelling agency. Spotify publishes its top five most streamed artists each year and there hasn’t been a band in the mix since 2016 (when US duo Twenty One Pilots squeaked it in at number four). Among the top 20 most popular artists on the streaming service this month, the only non-solo artists are Coldplay and Imagine Dragons. But on festival bills and in concert arenas bands have maintained some dominance – Rage Against the Machine, Tame Impala, Radiohead, The Killers, Arctic Monkeys, Metallica, Wolf Alice and Foo Fighters have remained dominant. This year not only are none of the headliners bands, but neither are any of the 20-odd acts in the tier below, with the exception of the Mexican banda artists Groupo Firme and Banda MS – both exciting groups with record-breaking stints on the Billboard 100 for Mexican artists but, with their heavy use of woodwind, not typical festival rockers. While the traditional rock band may have fallen from favor, the ascent of Styles suggests something rising from its ashes. He is arguably the most successful indie musician in years – his album draws on Laurel Canyon classic rock and Pitchfork favourites such as Phoenix and M83. His tours centre musicianship and the traditional band set-up. Styles, like Eilish and Ye, has found a way to make interesting music in a culture obsessed with personal brand and influence. He’s an actor, a TV host (he often fills in for James Corden when Corden is off on the Late Late show) and one of the most followed people on Instagram. He acts like a celebrity, yet the music he’s making, influenced by Peter Gabriel and Crosby, Stills &amp; Nash, is part of the traditional rock canon. He’s indie without any independence, a rock band while being a solo artist, jumping through the hoops of what it takes to become a headline act in 2022. By riding the wave of influence and image that’s driven popular culture over the past decade, he’s become arguably the biggest rock artist working today. Ye was in some ways a pioneer, constantly trying to move back and forth between music, fashion and celebrity, furiously fighting for a seat at every table. During Trump’s presidency, West’s brand seemed to be under threat but the Coachella lineup suggests he’s been forgiven for his Maga support and his comments on TMZ in 2018 that slavery “sounds like a choice”. Around that time, influential figures in hip-hop radio including Hot 97 host Ebro, and Shay Shay and BiGG from Detroit’s The Bounce promised to boycott Ye. Those boycotts appear to have faded and after a critically acclaimed album, Ye is back in favour. But perhaps the most radical thing about the Coachella lineup is how little reverence it has for what’s gone before. Ten years ago Coachella was still obsessed with the golden oldies – the 2012 festival had Madness, Jimmy Cliff, Dr Dre, Buzzcocks, Pulp, Noel Gallagher and Squeeze dotted through the lineup. This time around that sense of indebtedness to heritage acts has almost completely disappeared. The only acts on the 2022 bill that were releasing albums in the 90s are Spiritualized, Fatboy Slim and film composer Danny Elfman. A much greater chunk of the acts on the lineup weren’t even born in the 90s. Eilish, aged 21, will be the festival’s youngest headliner ever, and is reflective of a lineup that has managed gender balance without making a song and dance about it. For years people complained about the same old headliners playing every year – this feels like a new starting point for live music.The hellebores are coming. The early ones started flowering before Christmas; now the rest are gathering pace and will keep it up until April. In grand old gardens and smaller, newer ones, banks of them will tumble open as they drift among cyclamens and ferns and accompany bluebells, wood anemones and other lovely spring things. There are so many hellebores out there: doubles, semi-doubles, chaste-looking singles and ones with frills. Look a little closer and you’ll find speckles, spots, dots, dashes and smudges on the petals. There are glowing red clarets, duskiest pinks, sombre metallic purples, deep roses, slate blues, brilliant yellows and vivid and livid greens, not to mention foliage that can vary from dark black to silver. The place to see them in all their glory is John Massey’s private garden, attached to Ashwood Nurseries in south Staffordshire. It produces up to 10,000 hellebores each season and reopens to the public next month (dates TBC). The truly serious can go behind the scenes with one of the nursery’s Hellebore Tours. If a visit to the Midlands is out of question, it does mail order (inter-species now, garden hybrids from February to March) from about £5, up to £80 for rarities. The eagle-eyed can grab a bargain with its online-only bundles of seedling plug plants – a very economical way to start your drift. Hellebores are not quick to bulk up; they take their time to get established. It will be a year, maybe two, before they’ve properly decided their feet are happy, then they start flowering their socks off. They are tolerant to drought and neglect, but thrive best in moist but well-drained soil. Poor drainage is the only thing they truly hate. Once settled, they will increase gloriously year on year, particularly if you feed them. They are hungry things, so mulch in late spring when the flowers are over and in autumn to fatten them up before they flower again. If you grow hellebores in containers, be aware that they drink a lot when in active growth in autumn and spring, but not when they go into non-active growth during summer. Hellebores need some sort of shade – the more open the situation, the more moisture they need in the soil. The leaves are tough and rubbery and tend to look tired by now, so remove any of last year’s leaves to make way for the new growth and flowers. Once the flowers are over, remove the seed heads unless you want hundreds of seedlings. These will be in muddy colours, and it will take you at least three years to find this out, so it is easier to prevent this and force the plant to concentrate on next year’s flowers rather than this year’s seed.On 2 December, the White House announced its winter plans for a likely Covid surge that would come as cold temperatures and holiday plans drove people indoors. It included an alarmingly inadequate plan to get at-home tests to people. The plan dropped nine days after scientists in South Africa had announced that they had discovered a new variant of the coronavirus, one that appeared to be even more transmissible. The US had acted quickly to ban travel from South Africa and several other southern African countries, claiming that such restrictions would “slow things down” and “buy time” for the US to prepare. But as the days ticked closer to Christmas and New Year’s, and the inevitable surge of infections that would follow, it was difficult to see what we were buying time for. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, had scoffed at the idea of providing free tests for Americans and mailing them to homes, as many other countries have done. Instead, the administration said that 150 million Americans – less than half of the country – could be reimbursed for tests if they had insurance, if they fronted the money, if they could wait to be reimbursed, and if they didn’t buy them until mid-January. Tests purchased before the holidays would be ineligible for reimbursement. Meanwhile, tests were impossible to find in huge swathes of the country – or required standing in lines so long that they were only accessible to those who could afford what amounted to a tax on people’s time. It was a plan that was so complicated, so limited, so inadequate, and so fundamentally wrong-headed that it exemplified everything that has gone wrong with the Biden administration’s response to the coronavirus to date. A mantra of successful health campaigns is “make the healthy choice the easy choice”. But the Biden administration has been intent on making matters that should be easy difficult, prioritizing rules and regulations over results, deferring to private industry in matters of state responsibility, burdening individuals already at their breaking points, adding cumbersome barriers of time and logistics, being too slow, and displaying too much contempt and too little urgency in responding to cries for help. This week, the US shattered world records for the most coronavirus infections and hospitalizations of any country since the pandemic began. Two years into this crisis and a year into Biden’s presidency, we seem to be even worse off than we were under Trump in the most lethal metric: more deaths are taking place under the Democrat than occurred under his predecessor. What is going on? How did the richest country in the world – a country now governed by the party that allegedly “believes the science” – get here? Why have the Democrats given up on saving the lives of those they claim to represent? A promising start When he took office, Biden flooded the country with vaccines, and rightly so. The US had many advantages then: three approved, domestically produced vaccines and a Democratic president and Congress that appropriately funded getting jabs into arms via every possible lever of society. At one point, the US was vaccinating four million people in a single day. But Democrats around the country have pursued a vaccine-only strategy at times when there is simply too much virus bouncing around communities. Vaccines work best in tandem with other mitigation measures, such as ventilation, masks, distancing, and paid lockdowns when necessary, so that people encounter viruses as infrequently as possible. Biden has fought Republicans to require employers of more than 100 people to mandate vaccines or testing, a plan which the supreme court blocked in a genocidal fashion this week. But even if that protection were still in place, there were times when the president and Democratic governors and mayors should have closed worksites wherever possible. A vaccine is like a rain jacket. A good rain jacket will keep you dry in the rain, especially if you also use an umbrella and rubber boots. But if someone turns a firehose on you and points it at you for days or weeks, you’re going to get wet, even in the best rain jacket possible. That’s what’s happening right now, as many vaccinated people are getting mostly moderate, but still contagious, breakthrough infections. The US recorded 1.35 million new cases on Monday alone, to say nothing of unrecorded cases. With so many children still unvaccinated, schools should have gone remote this month for a few weeks. The federal government should have paid as many workers to stay home as possible in a short-term “circuit-break” lockdown to lower community viral loads. This has not happened. At the same time, the populations of prisons, jails and Ice detention centers – some of the most potent vectors of all – should have been reduced. This also did not happen. ‘Follow the science’ In mid-December, Vice-President Kamala Harris told the Los Angeles Times that the Administration hadn’t seen mutations coming. She even seemed surprised that “it turns out” that SARS-CoV-2 “has mutations and variants”. In October, the outgoing director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Francis Collins, told MSNBC that “we underestimated the vaccine hesitancy issue,” admitting: “I wish we had somehow seen that coming and come up with some kind of a myth-buster approach.” These are confounding statements from officials in an administration that has claimed it will “follow the science”. The NIH funds plenty of virologists who have long predicted mutations (and provided advice on how to deal with them), as well as sociologists, anthropologists, and psychologists who have studied vaccine hesitancy (and how to deal with it). Utilizing science means changing the course of action as the conditions being studied necessitate. A common defense to justify keeping schools, prisons or job sites open through a Covid wave has been to say, “It’s not early 2020 anymore; people are vaccinated.” Some people are, but it’s not early 2021 either, when we hoped these vaccines would largely stop onward transmission. The vaccines do offer excellent individual protection, and they do seem to be decreasing onwards transmission. But how much they decrease it could change with each variant, and they don’t stop it as much as we’d hoped they might. So, when positivity rates get too high, the science says we must wear high-quality masks, distance when possible, and lock down if needed until levels drop to levels where the vaccines are most effective. (Restaurants, very dangerous worksites, should definitely be closed and their workers paid to stay home.) But Democrats in Washington, Chicago and New York keep using vaccination as justification to keep schools open as daycare centers. Is this really for our collective safety? Or to keep workers earning more wealth for the Democratic donor class? Optimizing capital In June and July of 2021, Abbott Laboratories laid off 2,000 workers and destroyed millions of rapid Covid home tests, the New York Times reported. Demand for the tests had fallen as cases fell, and the company was making a business decision. It would only be a few weeks before the Delta variant sent demand soaring again, but by that point the tests were already gone. In its drive to optimize every inch and every second – how much did Abbott really save by not having to warehouse those tests? – US capitalism has no resources to spare for contingency plans, or the public good. Abbott destroying tests it saw no market for isn’t solely the fault of the Democrats. But if the Biden administration had been looking ahead to the winter – a time we always knew would see an increase of transmission as people moved indoors – it could have bought and stored those tests for a likely surge or, better yet, made its own and had a ready supply. In assessing the health of the nation, the Democrats fetishize “the economy” without specifying who benefits from it. Marcia Fudge, the secretary of Housing and Urban Development, recently bragged on Twitter that “the United States is the only major economy in the world where the economy as a whole is stronger now than before the pandemic”. But whose economy? Google has provided its highest paid employees, who were already working remotely, with a $1,000 device so they can also perform rapid Covid tests at home. Meanwhile, shift workers must spend hours waiting to be tested for the virus they are much more likely to have been exposed to. As the ruling class has worked safely from home, having goods delivered by human shields, their wealth has increased because they are extracting value from the viral underclass, who are paying with their time on lines, their pathogenic work, and, sometimes, their very lives. Too little, too late I often think about how the deadliest year for Aids in the US was 1995. This was 15 years into the pandemic, and just before life-saving medications to treat HIV became available. About 50,000 people died. Last week, the United States was averaging almost 2,000 Covid deaths a day. We are churning through the same volume of death Aids caused in its worst year every five, six, seven weeks. Covid vaccines are very good at protecting individuals’ lives, and they have certainly saved a lot of them. But alone, they have not stopped US Covid deaths from surpassing the sum of 40 years of US Aids deaths in less than two years. On Thursday, the White House announced the federal government was purchasing 1bn at-home tests for distribution. That’s only three tests per American, and it’s too little, too late. By the time they are available, the Omicron surge may have come and gone. But how many infections could have been prevented if the administration had acted sooner? When experts said the national production and distribution of masks and tests was needed and other countries showed how this approach worked? And why is the administration still pushing reimbursement schemes for the insured and complicated ways to get tested rather than mailing tests home for free and giving them away wherever anyone will take them? Why are Biden and Harris both telling people to Google where to get tested, when 18% of people below the federal poverty line – those most at risk for Covid – don’t have internet access? What if the administration had spent the time and energy it spent scapegoating South Africa looking ahead to what the US needed to do domestically? What if it had actually used the time it was “buying” to buy and distribute masks and tests? I fear the administration is scared of spending money that “doesn’t do anything” – that it’s afraid to spend money on preventing catastrophes that never occur, and is more comfortable responding to tangible disasters after they’ve happened. But if neither Republicans nor Democrats are willing to look forward, be proactive and deal with the root causes of this disaster, then despite our alleged wealth, I fear the US will continue to be the country with the most infections and deaths on planet Earth. Steven W Thrasher PhD, a former Guardian US writer-at-large, is a professor at Northwestern University and author of The Viral Underclass: The Human Toll When Inequality and Disease Collide, to be published by Celadon Books and Macmillan Publishing in August.With Veganuary expected to reach more than 2 million sign-ups globally since its launch in 2014, the 31-day plant-based pledge is once again making headlines this January as food manufacturers, supermarkets and restaurants cater to the movement. But for people wanting to eat more sustainably, yet not willing to cut out meat completely, there is another consumer challenge to try: Regenuary. The idea for people to source as much food as possible from producers who use regenerative farming methods was hatched three years ago by Glen Burrows, co-founder of the Ethical Butcher, who was a vegetarian for 25 years because he didn’t like the way meat was produced. “Back in 1989, being a vegetarian was basically like being a Martian,” he says. “I became that awkward guy at dinner parties and slightly enjoyed that moral smugness, but then after a long period of time, I wasn’t that well. It wasn’t suiting me.” So he started eating meat again. “It was like a life-force had been switched back on … I was going for my second black belt in martial arts.” He particularly likes offal. “For me, it’s almost like doing drugs.” Burrows’ aim with Regenuary is to get people thinking more about how their food is produced. “The whole point of the movement is to think more about the impact of their food choices, and stop the oversimplified narrative that all plant-based foods are better than animal-based,” he says. Unlike the fairly self-explanatory rules of Veganuary, Regenuary is more nuanced and involves eating seasonal produce from farms that proponents say have lower, or even beneficial, environmental or social impacts. This idea is gaining ground and “regenerative” may be the farming buzzword of 2022. It remains a rather broadly-defined concept – essentially it is any form of farming that simultaneously improves the environment, including in a social sense. At the Oxford Real Farming Conference (ORFC) last week, there were talks about regenerative dairy, regenerative suckler cows, regenerative fashion, the regenerative mindset, and even regenerative women. At last year’s Groundswell, the UK’s flagship event for nature-friendly farming, the environment secretary, George Eustice, said Brexit was a chance for the UK to take a lead on supporting regenerative agriculture. Farming is the biggest driver of biodiversity decline in the UK. But many farmers are anticipating the change in subsidies and starting to make ecological improvements on their farms already. But while many support the idea of regenerative farming, they argue that the priority should be to stop people eating meat. Simon Lewis, professor of global change science at University College London, says: “While I’m supportive of regenerative agriculture and community agriculture and protecting soil, I do think Regenuary is greenwash for eating meat and drinking dairy.” Lewis says we need to be clear on the science that plant-based diets are better for the planet, and he is worried movements like Regenuary are “muddying waters” on this issue. Avoiding meat and dairy is considered to be the biggest single way someone can reduce their impact on the planet. Scientific studies show humans farm about 4.1bn hectares (10.1bn acres) of land globally, and that if we all adopted a vegan diet, just 1bn hectares would be used. This would mean more space to protect wild habitats for nature and plant trees. This is the land “sparing” approach to wildlife protection. Many regenerative farmers believe in land “sharing”, essentially that wildlife and farm animals can co-exist within more natural, lower intensity grazing systems, creating a mosaic of habitats and requiring fewer chemical inputs. At the end of last year, a poll showed more than a third of the UK public is interested in becoming vegan, with meat consumption dropping by 17% over the past decade. “People pushing Regenuary would be better to say ‘hey, when you’ve finished your Vegenuary, if you still feel you need to eat meat occasionally, you should get it from regenerative agriculture,’ rather than it being opposed to people who are exploring being vegan for a month,” says Lewis, who believes the government must make the most environmentally friendly option the cheapest and easiest one for consumers to choose. Burrows believes people should eat “better” meat, but not necessarily less of it. For him, the value in food comes from being able to see where it comes from, supporting grass-based grazing systems and getting farmers and consumers involved in short, direct supply chains. He also encourages people to move away from eating only prime cuts and to embrace snout-to-tail eating, which means less of the carcass is wasted. However, in terms of carbon emissions, science says regenerative meat-eating is only sustainable if coupled with a reduction in the total amount eaten, a fact which the UK’s farming unions are still loth to admit. Although exactly how much meat we should be eating is a movable feast, the Lancet recommends a maximum of 100g of red meat a week. Prof Sir Ian Boyd, former chief scientist at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs says sheep and cattle numbers need to drop by 90% as half the nation’s farmland needs to be converted to woodland. Other estimates have been much more conservative. The UK’s advisory body, the Climate Change Committee, is calling for people to reduce consumption by 20% by 2030, with a focus on eating “less but better” meat. Regenuary and Veganuary are both part of a growing movement of people being more conscious about the effect on the environment of food production and their supporters should be allies, not competitors, says John Lynch, a researcher on the University of Oxford’s future of food programme. “I kind of endorse much of the ‘less but better’ movement, which is if we do want to eat better meat, often, the welfare argument coming in there as well as the environmental one,” he says. Lynch believes some farmers feel they are “painted as the villain”, which means they disengage. “People are more willing to get on board if they’re not just giving up livestock farming, but they are still having some of the carbon and biodiversity benefits,” he says. Environmental efforts such as protecting soil, planting trees and restoring peatlands and wetlands are expected to be supported by future government farming subsidies. Increasingly, there are efforts to integrate trees with existing livestock and crop systems and, given agriculture takes up 70% of the UK, such efforts done on a large scale can make a big impact towards a more regenerative farming industry. Equally, among consumers, many people would not be willing to do Veganuary, but might try Regenuary and that is to be applauded, says Lynch, so long as reducing meat consumption is part of that effort. “Some people are already vegan, and they want to carry on not eating any livestock products, and that’s fine. They don’t need to have a target of eating meat once or twice a week. Whereas if you’re eating meat or dairy every single day then even if you just cut back slightly that’s still going to be a good step in the right direction,” he says. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and features“We tell ourselves stories in order to live,” wrote the late, great Joan Didion. But what if the narratives we compulsively weave end up being the death of us? Another 335 deaths within 28 days of a diagnosis of Covid were recorded on Thursday, even as the pandemic is being dismissed as essentially over by many in the government and media. “Endemicity” is the new virological watchword of 2022, meaning – at least when touted by those opposed to Covid restrictions – the mutation of Sars-CoV-2 into something so mild and weedy it is no more threatening than a common cold. Yet 335 deaths are an entire jumbo jet’s worth of people, crashing from the sky above. Has it really taken less than two years to become inured to such dizzying daily casualties? Perhaps, if we are honest with ourselves, what herd immunity really means is our newfound capacity to render ourselves emotionally untouched by – immune to – mass loss of life. The departed as no more than a hum of background noise. Medics do not have that luxury. We witness death close up and viscerally. The rattle of saliva in a larynx, the sheen of sweat on a cheekbone, the pulse so weak it scarcely flickers. Set against our current experience, the most pernicious story of all this January is the emerging narrative – aggressively promoted since Christmas – that the NHS has “coped” with Omicron. First, Boris Johnson insisted in a televised press conference that no new restrictions were necessary. Although hospitals were “sending out signals saying that they are feeling the pressure hugely”, he claimed, we could nevertheless “ride out” the Omicron wave with nothing more than “a difficult period for our wonderful NHS for the next few weeks”. Next, cabinet ministers waded in to insist that the prime minister had got it spot on. Michael Gove, for example, told BBC Radio 4 last week: “His judgment has been vindicated. He argued publicly that we would be able to get through this with the booster campaign.” But have we, really, got through it? More than 30 hospitals have declared critical incidents. The army has been drafted in to provide basic bedside care. Pressures on some ambulance services have been so severe that heart attack patients have been told to make their own way to hospital. Critically ill patients have died in their homes, died on the way to hospital, or died while stuck in an ambulance on a hospital forecourt, waiting 10 or 12 hours for a bed inside. Enduring conditions so manifestly unsafe for patients, multiple frontline staff have risked their jobs to go public. One emergency medicine consultant, Helen Goldrick, spoke for us all when she tweeted: “Never have I seen patients receive such suboptimal care and be at such risk. They are coming to serious harm as are [emergency department] staff who feel overwhelmed, broken, abandoned. This was predictable and preventable.” The politically convenient story of a plucky NHS being pushed to the brink, yet bravely soldiering on, is built on a false and dangerous binary. Healthcare cannot be neatly categorised into success or failure, coping or not coping. We are overwhelmed by stealth, by degree. The greater the pressures, the lower the standards of care we can provide. We need to be honest about what “riding it out” actually means. Bluntly, not everyone has. This winter, some have died from Covid who needn’t have. Some have died from NHS overcrowding, mistakes and delays who needn’t have. These are avoidable deaths, ones we could have prevented with different choices. What the prime minister announced, in effect, in his press conference was the decision to turn a blind eye to preventable dying – to knowingly sweep it under the carpet. Is it any wonder that record numbers of staff are quitting the NHS frontline? More than 27,000 people voluntarily resigned from the NHS from July to September last year, the highest number on record. Too often on the wards I see nurses or doctors breaking down in tears. I know colleagues who have seriously contemplated suicide. Burnout, depression and post-Covid PTSD are rife. We are dismissed as crying wolf, blamed for bleating incessantly about exaggerated winter crises. But only someone privileged enough not to know, or have been, an NHS patient this January could possibly pretend the NHS is coping. In his new book Dirty Work, the American author Eyal Press investigates the phenomenon of “dirty” work – labour that society considers essential, yet ethically compromised. He argues that the essential workers we prefer not to think about – guards in violent offender units, abattoir staff, drone operators inflicting aerial strikes from afar – engage in activities that sustain modern society yet are deliberately concealed from our gaze. It sounds ludicrous to suggest that these activities may have anything in common with those of highly trusted and valued professionals like doctors and nurses. But the connection is stigma, shame and moral injury. In an overwhelmed NHS, staff are conscripted, whether they like it or not, in the soul-destroying business of delivering substandard care. It feels rotten, corrosive, morally reprehensible. You are forced to see, hear, touch and smell the patients you are certain you are failing. There is no hiding behind weasel words like “coping”. Every shift is an act of survival – or not – for staff and patients alike. We can keep arguing about how much of the current NHS crisis is due to Omicron, versus the most prolonged funding squeeze in NHS history, but to do so misses the fundamental point. For years now – and long before Covid – the NHS has been quietly imploding, failing more and more patients as the months go by. It may suit the government to gloss over reality, but each of us actively chooses what stories to believe. You may have never witnessed the patients dying on trolleys, in lifts, on the floor, in their own excrement, but please – please – don’t pretend they’re not there. Rachel Clarke is a palliative care doctor and the author of Breathtaking: Inside the NHS in a Time of Pandemic• The album Mirages: The Art of French Song (Champs Hill), with the baritone Roderick Williams and pianist Roger Vignoles, grew out of a Wigmore Hall recital, recreating the intimacy and shape of a concert programme to delicious effect. In no area of repertoire, it seems, is Williams not at ease as well as expert. Recent Schubert song cycles (with pianist Iain Burnside) and English repertoire stand out in his varied discography. Now, with Vignoles as an ever idiomatic and responsive partner, he has turned to French song. Opening with the sensual mystery of late Fauré – four songs, including Reflets dans l’eau and Danseuse – the duo steer gracefully to atmospheric ballads by Debussy’s friend André Caplet, spiky Arthur Honegger miniatures and Ravel in Spanish mood (Don Quichotte à Dulcinée). Williams’s own idiomatic, semi-declamatory Verlaine settings, Les ténèbres de l’amour (1994), form an effective bridge to more Honegger, Poulenc and, in perfect conclusion, Debussy’s Beau Soir. • Ennio Morricone, orchestrator, conductor, trumpeter but above all composer of scores for more than 400 films, died in 2020, aged 91. Had he stopped his cinema career after The Good, the Bad and the Ugly (1966) or The Mission (1986), he would still be famous, his music plundered, borrowed, recreated in every genre from hip-hop and reggae to jazz and classical. A new album, Ennio Morricone: Cinema Suites for Violin and Orchestra (Arcana), conducted by his son Andrea Morricone, invites us to enter the dreamlike atmosphere of his scores as music alone, those haunting theme tunes given subtle orchestration and new colour. Performed by his longtime collaborator, violinist Marco Serino, with the Orchestra Haydn di Bolzano e Trento, it features arrangements Morricone had made since the 1980s, revising them late in his life. The process was interrupted by his death and finished, in tribute, by Serino. A must for film music devotees but interesting, too, as a testament. • The BBC Philharmonic’s concert from Manchester’s Bridgewater Hall, conducted by Ludovic Morlot, with Carolyn Sampson (soprano), explores the idea of home and away: Copland’s Letter from Home, Betsy Jolas’s Letters from Bachville, Dutilleux’s Correspondances and Dvořák’s Symphony No 9, “From the New World”. Radio 3 in Concert, Friday, 7.30pm/BBC Sounds.When I was eight, roller skates were things you stepped into while wearing your outdoor shoes. They had laced, red leather toe-pieces that you pushed your shoes into, and red straps to buckle round your ankles. Two chunky black wheels sat either side of your toes, and two either side of your ankles. The metal base could be shortened or lengthened as needed. The skates made a loud clacking noise and didn’t roll well on -carpets or bumpy -pavements. If my sister and I were to build up any momentum at all, there was only one place to go. Down the crem. The crematory was cavernous. The clackclackroll of skates was loud on the tiled floor, which was cold and hard to fall on, but goodness, you could pick up some speed. On the other side of the immense wall was the chapel. We knew that during the day coffins came through one hatch and were rolled across to three steel ones on the opposite side: cremators 1, 2 and 3. But we only went down the crem – as we all called it – when the room was still and the furnaces empty and cold. Each cremator had a small, nautical-style wheel that, when spun, opened the doors on to the scorched bricks of the incinerators. These wheels were handy to grab hold of when we needed to slow down. Occasionally, we’d spin one to see inside. My sister climbed in once, and her trousers were never the same again. Of course, everyone needs distance to appreciate the quirks and oddities of their particular childhood. My father was the superintendent of a Birmingham city council crematorium, and the job came with a small house set within the grounds. From our kitchen window we could see the wrought iron gates through which the funeral processions came every 20 minutes and rolled past our window. It was all I knew. It was normal. Nevertheless, I think I was slower than I could have been to realise just how unusual it was to have spent my formative years in such an environment and to consider how it shaped the person and writer I became. In my memory, those years were divided into two seasons, not four. It was all about British summer time. As soon as the clocks went forward, we zipped up our windcheaters and headed outside until late October. Once the lofty iron gates were padlocked at 6pm, my sister and I, along with our dog, had free range of the grounds. They were beautiful: no wonky old gravestones, but banks of foliage and flowers, a lake, a small fountain, well-kept lawns and a copse of silver birch trees. There was also the giant pile of grass cuttings to jump into from spring to summer’s end in the gardeners’ yard, sit-on mowers with their exquisite petrol smell and secluded areas for an impressive, private bonfire each November. And if we came across a scattering of bluish grey powder? Well, we knew to jump over, never on, it. There were indoor playgrounds, too: a well-equipped office, especially appreciated on those endless Sunday afternoons. I enjoyed the electric typewriter, shooting its letters like bullets at the lightest of touches; the adding machine that printed out sums with a satisfying grind; and the sniffable felt tip pens. Best by far, though, was the little telephone switchboard, with compact levers to snap up and down, illuminating tiny red and green lights. We had no neighbours, no nearby friends to play with. It wasn’t until I started infant school, three miles away, quite unprepared and astounded at the vast number of children in one place, that I began to learn how to mix with others. It was an undeniably lonely and isolated early childhood. But I appreciate, now, how much solitude was a key nutrient in my compost. There was nothing to do except watch everyone and everything closely, and develop an imaginative inner world. This constant attentiveness not only saved me from death by boredom, but gave me a keen eye for detail and a certain self-sufficiency. Once at school, the place where I lived continued to set me apart. The school I attended was built to serve a nearby leafy suburban estate. My sister and I were in a tiny minority travelling to school in a car, therefore unavailable for the easy coming and going after school and before teatime that happens naturally in close-knit neighbourhoods. Occasionally I would invite someone to play after school, but it had to be arranged in advance with their parents and I could see their amusement or irritation at such organisational rigmarole. Picking their child up once the gates were locked seemed to pose more of a problem than I thought it needed to. In retrospect, I wonder whether their reluctance was more about what was on the other side of the gates than the difficulty of getting through them. Once my older sister went to secondary school, she would have chosen hot coals underfoot rather than her friends knowing where she lived. Without a social life, from infancy to the age of 12, whatever needs I had seemed to be met, one way or another, by the crem. When, at 10, I wanted to learn the piano, it never occurred to me that my parents might buy one. There was a perfectly good organ in the chapel and waiting to teach me every Tuesday afternoon after school, the ancient chapel organist. Wheezy, with nicotine-yellow fingers resting on the keys, he was employed to play a couple of hymns during each service, and something reflective as the mourners entered and exited. He was also happy to be slipped a few bob every week to be my teacher. It wasn’t a successful venture. Maybe it was Mr Fleming, his curved back hunching over the organ, as ill at ease next to a 10-year-old girl as she was with him. I wasn’t a good student, but neither was he a good teacher. I could already read music, thanks to the recorder club at school, but it was beyond me how all those notes stacked on top of each other related to my fingers. I was supposed to practise every day once the last funeral was done, but I spent most of the time flipping down the organ stops, playing with the volume, flicking the switch that closed the curtain around the catafalque, the platform on which the coffin rests during the funeral. Sometimes, in a frenzy of boredom, I’d stand up and simply run back and forth over the enormous foot pedals. If Dad appeared from the office to see how I was getting on, I would look serious and twiddle on the keys with intent. He wasn’t taking much notice and never talked to Mr Fleming about my progress. But, by some miracle, one tune from the beginner’s book landed. Not only did I find myself able to play it with both hands, but before long, I didn’t even need the music. One half-term, I was sitting in the kitchen with Mum, laying low. This was what we did when a funeral procession was passing. Our garden was visible to the mourners, so every 20 minutes, when the glossy black cars rolled past, we had to become invisible. It was never spelled out to us, but we grew up understanding that it was somehow disrespectful for us to be seen running round the garden, having a good time, looking too … alive. By now my sister was old enough to get on the bus and meet her friends in town. So it was just Mum and me when Dad burst through the kitchen door and, unusually for him, ignored me. “Put the girl in a black dress,” he said. “Mr Fleming’s gone home sick.” Five minutes later, when Dad and I left the house, the hearse was already sitting under the porte-cochere with two lustrous Daimlers behind it. I bent forward to look at the people emerging from the cars, like dark flowers unfolding in the sunshine. Another unspoken message I had imbibed: grief was more disturbing to witness than death itself – the hearse was, after all, one big flowery window display for the coffin, whereas mourners were hidden behind car windows of jet glass – and undertakers were a dignified, distinguished elite, who weren’t afraid to be close to these people whose grief somehow set them apart from the rest of us. Undertakers stood sentinel alongside the otherwise isolated mourners, quietly directing, guiding, assuring. Hitching my sister’s black dress back over my shoulders yet again, I needed to come clean. “Dad,” I said, “I can only play one tune.” “Then play that,” he replied, walking on, “over and over. And don’t smile.” I did as I was told, making full use of my favourite organ stops: trumpet, swell, tremolo, mute, oboe. Verse, chorus, verse, chorus, verse, chorus … Towards the end of the service, I even tried a ponderous syncopated version. A few weeks later I received a cheque from Birmingham city council in payment for my services and genuinely thought no more of it. That same year, there was a shocking fusion of school and home. A girl in my class ran into a busy road from behind a parked car and was killed by oncoming traffic. I remember the teacher coming into the classroom red-eyed to tell us. As others started to cry and ask questions, my mind went straight to practicalities. Would she come to our crem, or go to the cemetery in the centre of town? Once we knew she was definitely coming to us, I felt a strange and fierce ownership of the tragedy. None of my classmates would attend the funeral. My inside knowledge felt heavy and significant, and spilled out of my mouth to tell mute, wide-eyed friends what would be happening to the body once the coffin had passed through the hatch. My familiarity with this sorry world separated me not only from their upset but also my own sense of loss. I remained emotionally detached from my friend’s death for months. Flannery O’Connor said that anyone who survived their childhood has enough material to last a lifetime. In researching my book about the Aberfan disaster, when a coal waste tip slid down a mountain on to a small village primary school, I read about the embalmers arriving in the early hours to prepare the bodies for identification, then for presentation in their coffins before burial. It felt natural for me to find out more, to talk to embalmers, hear their stories, watch them at work. There was a palpable sense of homecoming in it. Their manner, their humour, their deep respect for the dead and their loved ones felt incredibly familiar. As I write this, I have two friends in our local hospice. I’m assailed by childhood memories of black hearses and gleaming Daimlers, of mourners funnelling from the cars into the crem chapel. If I grew up watching the theatre of death, I’m now finally in the play myself. This is what all that performance was about: helping people deal with the shock of mortality knocking you sideways, the question of how on earth to say goodbye, to carry on with any sense of optimism. My early exposure to the never-ending procession of funerals means I haven’t struggled as much as others with the inevitability of death. But my upbringing has done nothing to prepare me for the sharp affront and protracted disbelief at having to say goodbye to someone too soon. My father died nearly 40 years after we left the crematorium. Despite a lifelong career in the funeral industry, he refused to contemplate his own death and, even as a frail, elderly man, made no end-of-life plans. But there was never any question that he would be cremated, the means of disposal he had championed as the modern, clean, civilised option. For years I viewed burial as old-fashioned, unsophisticated, unsustainable. Today, the green burial movement offers a simpler, more environmentally friendly approach; many choose willow or cardboard coffins over the expensive treated wooden ones. My husband and I have already chosen the green burial ground we will be buried in – something my younger self would have been surprised at. But when it came to my father, cremation and a heavy, lacquered coffin seemed the only way to go, with his ashes being scattered in the crematorium grounds of which he had been so proud. By then, my childhood home had been converted into the administration block. The bedroom my sister and I had shared was now the waiting room. A few days after our father’s funeral, it was into this room that the undertaker came, carrying the urn containing the man who was, in my mind, simultaneously putting his head round the door, telling us to be quiet and go to sleep. We left the building to go down the crem one last time. Our various selves – grown women, young girls – watched him scattered on consecrated ground, also our playground. The mysteries of time, place and memory are unfathomable. I didn’t attend a funeral as a mourner until I was in my 20s, a long way from my childhood home. It was a time of life when the crem seemed more distant to me than it does today. I entered this chapel to solemn, dignified music. The organist played hymns that we sang along with, and soft, beautiful music to distract us as the curtain closed round the catafalque. I found myself thinking back to my one-off performance as a funeral organist, and wondered what those poor mourners must have thought as their loved one was seen off this Earth by a 10-year-old girl in a baggy black dress, playing a sluggish, incessant rendition of Home on the Range. • A Terrible Kindness by Jo Browning Wroe is published by Faber &amp; Faber on 20 January at £14.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Pioneers of the New Romantic movement, Spandau Ballet’s career launched in the late 70s within the walls of Blitz, an enigmatic club in Covent Garden known for influencing the sound and style of 80s pop. Formed by London school friends Gary Kemp, Tony Hadley, Steve Norman and John Keeble – and later Gary’s brother and former roadie Martin – Spandau Ballet went on to soundtrack the bombast and excess of the decade, selling 25m albums globally. Known for their bitter breakup – Tony, Steve and John launched an unsuccessful case against Gary for a share of the band’s songwriting royalties – they’ve since reformed but are now on hiatus. Martin has gone on to have a successful television career, while saxophonist Steve and his band, the Sleevz, celebrate the 40th anniversary of Spandau’s debut album with a UK tour later this year. Martin Kemp This was on the set of the video for To Cut a Long Story Short, our first single. I was 18 at the time and my face is very serious. We were stern young men who wanted to take over the world. But behind that mask we had the best laugh. I always thought of Spandau as five boys who went to Benidorm for 10 years. After this photo was taken, the single went on to sell about 400,000 copies and everything shot like a rocket. Before I joined the band, I used to tag along to some of my brother’s school parties. Steve would be there and I always liked him. He never treated me like I was younger or looked down on me. We became best friends really quickly. When the band went away in the early days, we had no money so I always shared a hotel room with him. There are lots of secrets from those days but sadly nothing that we are allowed to share publicly! My favourite days were right at the start when we were completely unknown, travelling the world and totally clueless. On our first trip to Germany, Steve said to me: “When we get there, I’m going to take you to a sauna!” At this point in the 80s, all of the saunas were mixed. I was just a teenager at the time, so sitting on the top shelf of a sauna looking down at these naked women, it felt like I’d landed on a different planet! After a while, Steve said: “Come outside, I want to show you something else.” There was this long trough full of pummel stones. He said I should get in it – according to Steve it was great for getting the dead skin off your feet. So there we are, both completely naked, walking up and down this trough, digging our feet into the stones, dead skin flying off, and all of a sudden this German woman bursts out of these double doors and shouts: “What are you doing? You are in my plant pot!” We weren’t even in the sauna any more, we were in the reception. Those memories beat anything like playing in front of 150,000 people in Madrid. Every friendship goes through ups and downs. It’s how you deal with it that’s important. My band dealt with it well for a certain amount of years, but we found it a struggle in the end. I have nothing against anyone in the band – if I saw Tony tomorrow, I would speak to him and love him the same as I do Steve today. If that’s reciprocated, I’m not sure, but I pretty much guarantee if we bumped into each other in a room, we would be laughing and joking within seconds. But what’s made mine and Steve’s friendship last so long is that we’ve never fought. We had a few years, during the court case, where we didn’t speak on the phone. Then there was the period of time in the 90s when I was having treatment for my brain tumour. I have no idea which friends came to visit, Steve might have been there, but all I remember is Shirlie [Holliman, Kemp’s wife]. It’s a big black hole in my head and it turned me from a boy into a man. But whatever has happened in my life, Steve and I still loved each other very much. Having fun was always core to Spandau, and when I think of Steve, in my head he is laughing. He hasn’t changed an inch. Inside and out. He still fits into that kilt! Steve Norman When this was taken, we represented a huge, burgeoning movement. We rocked up at the London Dungeon to shoot the video – it was before they tarted it up and made it into a theme park. It really was quite scary. There was an incongruousness to seeing our look against that kind of decay. We felt like we were smashing our way through the doors into the future. The first time I met Martin he was 13 – I’d popped over to Gary’s family home, off the Essex Road. They shared a room at the time: Gary had posters of Bowie, and on the other side, Martin had Bruce Lee. I was into both of them. We got on straight away. Before the band got properly big, both of us spent a lot of time in the arcades playing Space Invaders. We had odd jobs, like handing out magazines at Chancery Lane, but were skint, so we’d drink at home before going out. I had a beer-making kit and a couple of pints of it was like rocket fuel. Or we’d nick a bottle of Martin’s dad’s homemade wine which was lethal. One time we were drinking that stuff all afternoon, and decided to head off to Exmouth Market. I can’t remember too much; we went to a pub, and there was a stripper. We were meant to be going to Blitz – it was the time when people were popping pills, so I got us some Pro Plus tablets instead. The next thing I know it’s the next day and we’re passed out in a tiny little park in town, being woken up by a homeless guy who’s saying we’re sleeping on his bench. Martin was a sweetheart back then and still is. To this day he’s never been in a fight in his life. Well, I’ve seen him in one with his brother in the early 80s and it was handbags at dawn. No punching, just flapping. Spandau were always gentlemanly but when it came to bolshiness, we were right at the front, sticking up for each other. We’re coming! Better move! We were mob-handed in that respect. We needed to be, as what we wore was quite shocking – on trains people would stand and stare like we were aliens. The band that fell to Earth. Then, soon enough, Princess Di was wearing frilly collars and it had hit the mainstream. Even though I never treated him like a younger brother, I always looked after Martin – I still do. He’s a popular man. Since he was in EastEnders, people often approach him when we’re out together, so I tend to step in and say: “No autographs! He’s got to go!” I love it. I’d hate to have the fame he’s got. I’m surprised he can handle it because he is such a shy man. At the peak of Spandau’s fame, we’d be touring together for the best part of a year. We’d desperately need space from each after we got back home. But back in the day Martin and me had girlfriends who knew each other, so once our bags were unpacked, he’d give me a bell and say: “Steve, do you fancy going for a pint and a curry with the girls?” I’d reply: “I’ll see you in an hour!” I’m never tired of Martin. Never anyone in the band, but least of all him.Scott Boland, the least qualified batter in the match, has scored 13 without being out. David Warner and Rory Burns, the two men entrusted with facing the first ball for either side, have been out three times and made not a single run. It’s a foony game. Sam Billings, who has batted well and kept wicket superbly on his Test debut, is now giving an interview. And he’s good at that too, just like last summer, when he was captaining Oval Invincibles in The Hundred. “All results are still possible, absolutely,” he tells David Gower. “Tomorrow the first session’s going to be huge. You’ve got to look at those big moments in each game and really grasp them.” That’s it from me. Thanks for your company, your correspondence and your support for Boland: The Musical, or possibly The Western. 19th over: Australia 37-3 (Smith 17, Boland 3) England are rushing around, trying to get another over in, but the batters are wise to this and it’s not going to happen. Wood gives it his all as ever, almost producing a lethal yorker off the last ball, but the hero of Boland: The Musical makes it through to the close. He’s faced 25 balls out of the 35 since Khawaja was out. So that’s the end of a riveting day that has brought 17 wickets. Australia added 42 for four this morning, as Chris Woakes the bowler came to the party at last. England lost both openers cheaply but battled their way to a decent position, with Malan and Root going well, only to throw it all away in true English fashion. Sam Billings did well on debut, and Woakes cashed in on a couple of dropped catches, but 188 all out was another feeble effort to add to England’s collection. At the close, even though they’ve bowled well again, Australia are sitting pretty with a lead of 152 and Steve Smith still there. “Re Boland the Musical,” says Jane Evans, “a classic Western, surely? Bowlin’, bowlin’, Boland …” 18th over: Australia 37-3 (Smith 17, Boland 3) Robinson is still asking all the right questions, while possibly alarming his osteopath. He has stepped up the pace from medium to medium-fast, around 81mph. Billings thinks he’s got Boland caught behind, but nobody else seems very interested. Billings’s demeanour behind the stumps has been spot-on – positive, smiley, relishing the occasion. If this is to be his only Test, he’s making sure he enjoys it. 17th over: Australia 36-3 (Smith 17, Boland 2) Wood keeps it spicy, but the batters keep him out. Boland pops one up and would be caught at silly point if there was a man in there. Here’s Brian Withington. “Talk of stage and screen,” he muses, “has me wondering whether England’s Ashes performance might be viewed through the prism of The Producers, where messrs Giles and Silverwood channel Bialystock and Bloom by conspiring to sabotage the tour at the expense of a bunch of hapless (OBO) angels? Show stopping numbers might include ‘Springtime for Harrison and ECB’ as the cast sing and dance to potential box office oblivion.” 16th over: Australia 34-3 (Smith 16, Boland 1) A maiden from Robinson, who continues to pepper the pads, but Boland survives. There’s now some light rain falling. As so often in this strange series, the conditions are ridiculously English. It’s like those moments in the Bond movies when Bond arrives in the villain’s lair to find that without even asking he’s being offered a dry Martini, shaken not stirred. 15th over: Australia 34-3 (Smith 16, Boland 1) Mark Wood is on fire. The ball that was far too hot for Khawaja to handle was clocked at 91mph. The Aussies are wary enough to send out a nightwatchman with 20 minutes to go. It’s Scott Boland – more fodder for the musical I’m planning. Batting for the second time today, he just about survives a couple of short balls and then pushes to backward point for a single, to nick the strike. So he’s got some courage as well as some skill. Another one! And it’s a snorter from Wood, flicking Khawaja’s glove and very nearly taking his head off. 14th over: Australia 33-2 (Khawaja 11, Smith 12) Robinson continues and raps Smith on the pad, repeatedly. Smith is playing so badly here that he’s almost certain to get a hundred. 13th over: Australia 33-2 (Khawaja 11, Smith 16) After all those dots, Khawaja has gone from famine to feast. As Mark Wood replaces Broad, he uses the extra pace to clip for two and thick-edge for four. In between there’s a big appeal for caught behind. Khawaja is getting stuck in the crease – and showing how much harder it is to open the batting than to swan in at No.5 when the ball is old. 12th over: Australia 27-2 (Khawaja 5, Smith 16) Hang on, it’s Ollie Robinson! Back from his back spasm, not with a bang but with some medium pace, 73-76mph. But that steep bounce is still there and he comes close to nabbing Smith, not once but twice. First, there’s a nick that bisects the keeper and leg slip, and then there’s an LBW appeal as Smith plays no stroke – going over the top. That’s a great effort from a wounded soldier. 11th over: Australia 23-2 (Khawaja 5, Smith 12) Khawaja adds a four, without any conviction – it’s a full ball in the channel from Broad, sliced past gully. England have bowled well, but can they keep it up with only Mark Wood (I presume) as a change seamer? 10th over: Australia 19-2 (Khawaja 1, Smith 12) In the first innings David Warner somehow managed to make a 22-ball duck. In this one Khawaja reaches 24 balls without troubling the scorers, but then goes and ruins it by flicking Woakes to long leg for a single. 9th over: Australia 18-2 (Khawaja 0, Smith 12) Broad beats Smith with a beauty. Smith is at his most hyper, pulling out his trademark non-shot, the exaggerated leave. He’s hogging the strike, too: he has already faced 21 balls, two more than Khawaja. “Australia 7-2 and 5-2 in this Test,” says Andy Zaltzman on Twitter. “12 runs is the second fewest runs they’ve added in a Test for the first 2 wickets since the 19th century (when dismissed in both innings).” 8th over: Australia 17-2 (Khawaja 0, Smith 12) Woakes now thinks he’s got Smith LBW, but as the ball dribbles away to the rope, a four is signalled. And the umpire is right again – it was yet another inside edge. That’s the first boundary of the innings and there’s another, off the middle, as Smith cover-drives with some intensity. In between, there was a glimmer of a run-out chance as Khawaja sent Smith back, quite rightly. 7th over: Australia 9-2 (Khawaja 0, Smith 4) No alarms in this over from Broad as Smith tucks into the on side for a single. “Hello from very grey London!” says Cordelia. “Knowing Australia they’ll be 12/3 again and then make England chase 400. Just making a cuppa tea and swallowing my bitter hopes…” 6th over: Australia 8-2 (Khawaja 0, Smith 3) Woakes bowls an exemplary ball to the left-hander, nipping away off a length, and thinks he’s got Khawaja caught behind. Umpire Wilson disagrees, England review, but there’s nothing on Snicko. 5th over: Australia 8-2 (Khawaja 0, Smith 3) Smith, facing Broad, continues to live dangerously. Broad is pitching it up, aiming at the stumps, sometimes drifting down well leg. “I don’t mind that,” says Steve Harmison, who knows a thing or two about spraying it around in Australia. 4th over: Australia 6-2 (Khawaja 0, Smith 1) In comes Steve Smith, on a pair like Warner, his partner in crime. He’s twitchy even by his high standards, getting so far across to off that he has to be LBW, except that he’s not – saved as so often by his exceptional eye. He gets off his pair with a single, but only by wafting outside off. He may be the worst-looking great batter of all time. Another strangle down the leg side! And it’s karma for Woakes, who was out that way himself about five minutes ago. 3rd over: Australia 5-1 (Khawaja 0, Labuschagne 5) Broad beats Usman Khawaja outside off. “Re: the Scott Boland musical at over 33,” says Rowan Sweeney. “I feel it could have a throwback, Grease sort of vibe, making Dan Sultan a shoo-in for the lead role. Your thoughts on the rest of the cast?” I suspect Olivia Newton-John is available. 2nd over: Australia 4-1 (Khawaja 0, Labuschagne 4) With Ollie Robinson injured, the new ball is shared by Chris Woakes. He find some swing and squares Marnus Labuschagne up, producing a squirt past gully. Rory Burns, chasing after it, attempts a dive that turns into an awkward fall and a sore knee. He’s not having a great comeback here. 1st over: Australia 1-1 (Khawaja 0, Labuschagne 1) A replay from above shows Warner going at the ball with his hands and forgetting to move his feet. Broad, who just loves bowling to him, joins Robinson and Wood as England’s leading wicket-taker of the series, on a rather modest 11. Cummins and Starc have 18 apiece. “Serious question,” says Eamonn Maloney. “For as long as Broad remains good enough to be picked as a bowler – and he has been England’s best in the series – do you now just DNB him? He looks terrified of being injured, which is surely a self fulfilling prophecy, and he’s no good to you as a bowler if he gets hurt. He’s been a terrific villain down here but that was just sad.” Warner gets a pair! Broad gets his man! And Ollie Pope gets a great catch, leaping to his right at backward point. “Greetings from deepest darkest Devon,” says Charles Sheldrick. “Can we stop playing day/night matches in Auz? It is so much nicer to wake up to read the obituary that watch the last rites. “Still it will soon be over. One more morning of torture and the Tests will be done. Going to go to the allotment and dig a big hole. No particular reason, just feels appropriate. Keep up the good work on the OBO.” Wood, with only the injured Robinson for company, decides it’s time for some hit-and-giggle. He almost wallops Cummins for a straight six, then steps away and misses a full straight one. And England’s tail, which wagged briefly, is now between their legs. Australia lead by 115. 47th over: England 182-9 (Wood 10) So Woakes finally departs after surviving two dropped catches early on. He went on to make England’s top score, for what that’s worth, and he is now fourth in the England batting averages for the series, just behind Billings. And Broad continues his trajectory from almost-all-rounder to utter rabbit. Next time he complains about England’s batting, he might want to name and shame himself. Stuart Broad gets a ball he could easily leave and inside-edges it onto his stumps. He lasted four balls and looked like getting out to every one of them. Another one! And it’s another strangle down the leg side – not given by the umpire, but well reviewed by Cummins, as HotSpot shows the faintest of edges. 46th over: England 180-7 (Woakes 34, Wood 10) Now they’re even tucking into Cummins. Woakes chips him over midwicket, for just a single, and then Wood blasts him past cover for four. The partnership is already 28, off only 25 balls, but Australia still have a comfy lead of 123. 45th over: England 174-7 (Woakes 34, Wood 5) It’s a double change as Starc joins his opening partner. He’s been expensive on this pitch, just as Wood and Woakes were yesterday, and that continues as they help themselves to four singles and a four, squirted through the slips by Woakes. The TV director gives us a general view of the ground and it’s a picture – the hills, the clouds, the lights, the moon, the lot. 44th over: England 163-7 (Woakes 28, Wood 1) Green’s reward for taking his first wicket of the match is to be taken off as Cummins brings himself back. Woakes plays two false shots outside off, one in orthodox fashion, the other stepping away to have a mow. In between, Wood gets off the mark with a measured push into the covers. He’s good enough batter, surely, to enable Woakes to play normally. 43rd over: England 161-7 (Woakes 27, Wood 0) Woakes, unruffled by the loss of his partner, guides Boland between third slip and gully for four. If Pat Cummins believed in attacking fields, that would have been a dot. And Boland’s Test average goes into double figures! He now has 15 for 154. 42nd over: England 152-7 (Woakes 22, Wood 0) For the first time in his Test career, Billings wasn’t very switched on there. Woakes had just received a similar ball, played a shaky hook and got six for it – so, as with Pope, a warning had been issued. Nooo! Billings pulls a lifter from Green, doesn’t get on top of it, and gives a simple catch to fine leg. That was the worst decision he made in a promising first Test innings. 41st over: England 145-6 (Billings 29, Woakes 15) Woakes, facing Boland, picks up a streaky two off a thick inside edge, but finds his feet and adds a classy four with his signature shot, the cover drive. Billings gets four too, with a squirt past gully, playing it late enough to get on top of it. Ten off the over! From Boland! The counter-attack is on. 40th over: England 134-6 (Billings 25, Woakes 9) For a change, Green beats Billings on the inside edge, cutting him in half like an old-school magician. But Billings, composed as ever, spots a juicy full one and off-drives to the rope. That’s his fifth four, so he’s top equal with Malan. 39th over: England 130-6 (Billings 21, Woakes 9) Boland continues too and beats Woakes with another booming outswinger. Are you Jimmy in disguise? 38th over: England 129-6 (Billings 20, Woakes 9) Cameron Green is still on, finding both lift and movement. Billings does well to play-and-miss and then to steal a single after fending off a lifter. Woakes gets the one bad ball of the over, a half-volley, and straight-drives it beautifully for four. “A classical on-drive,” says Mark Ramprakash. “Good morning Tim.” Good morning Kim Thonger. “It seems inevitable to me that Woakes will lead the fightback with a fine century, so may I suggest now that the selectors in future choose him as a batsman overseas and a bowler at home?” Ha. There’s only one selector at the moment, Chris Silverwood. That’s a big part of the problem. On the telly, Mark Butcher and Alastair Cook are discussing that awful stroke from Ollie Pope, and England’s feeble batting in general. “It’s almost back to the drawing board after this series,” says Cook, “because you can’t reinvent the wheel.” 37th over: England 124-6 (Billings 19, Woakes 5) Woakes is dropped again, wafting at Boland and seeing Usman Khawaja tip it round the post as he goes to his left at third slip. Had he left it, Steve Smith at second slip might well have held it. Woakes, like Pope, has played Boland as if he hasn’t even watched the last two Tests. And that’s tea, with Australia all over England, and England all over the place – though Sam Billings has shown some promise and composure. His job now is to marshal the tail and try to scrape 200. He’ll have to play two roles at once: the boy stood on the burning deck, and the boss. 36th over: England 124-6 (Billings 19, Woakes 5) Woakes clips a single off Green, but only after being beaten yet again outside off. To be fair to England’s bowlers, the Australian seamers have the lights on their side here. It’s also warmer than yesterday, which may be adding to the movement through the air. But we may have to brace ourselves for the possibility that Australia are just a much better team at the moment. 35th over: England 123-6 (Billings 19, Woakes 4) Billings sees that dab for four from Woakes and thinks he’ll have one of those too. If he stays in for another 20 minutes, he’ll be England’s top scorer. “I always feel a bit sorry for Billings,” says Tom van der Gucht. “He’s always had Bairstow and Buttler ahead of him in the ODI team, limiting his chances. Yet, with the Test and ODI squads potentially set to diverge in the future, could this be his time to shine and bring his counter attacking skills to the longer form in the Gilchrist style we’ve been hoping to see from Buttler for the past half decade?” 34th over: England 119-6 (Billings 15, Woakes 4) Woakes gets off the mark with a dab for four off Green. And then he plays and misses, even though the ball jagged into him. The Aussies are making the old ball talk, whereas for England it didn’t do much after the opening salvo. 33rd over: England 115-6 (Billings 15, Woakes 0) Boland beats Billings with a really good ball, boomeranging away from the channel. Just before Pope’s howler, Boland was in danger of seeing his Test average creep up into double figures. It’s now back below nine – in his third Test, he has 15 wickets for 134 from 64 overs. His story is the stuff that dreams are made of. And Disney musicals. 32nd over: England 115-6 (Billings 15, Woakes 0) Cummins does love a bowling change: it’s the only way, so far, in which his captaincy has been creative. (Not that it has needed to be.) He makes another change now, replacing himself with Cameron Green: height for height. Billings plays a handsome force off the back foot. He’s showing good temperament here, not letting the situation get to him. 31st over: England 110-6 (Billings 10, Woakes 0) The really maddening thing about that was that Pope had got away with it off the first ball of Boland’s over, cover-driving at thin air. He had never faced Boland before, yet it didn’t occur to him to have a look and leave a few. And Woakes is dropped, first ball –a simple chance to Warner at first slip. The shambles is back. Another one! And it’s a poor shot from a good player – Pope pushing out at a tempter outside off, with nothing to gain and everything to lose. 30th over: England 110-5 (Pope 14, Billings 10) Pope clips another fluent four, with added wristiness this time, but Cummins has both batters in some bother as the pink ball grips this green surface. “It’s still doing plenty,” says McGrath. 29th over: England 105-5 (Pope 9, Billings 10) Pope, facing Starc again, takes a quick single and finds Billings, a very alert cricketer, responding eagerly. Dear Zak and Rory, that’s how it’s done. 28th over: England 104-5 (Pope 8, Billings 10) Billings spots another half-volley from Cummins and off-drives for his first four in Tests, which brings up the hundred. Next ball, same again, and England have avoided the follow-on. There must be a false shot coming – yes, a thick edge, but he keeps it down. “England player of the series,” says John Plunkett, “has to be Steven Finn. Funny and enlightening on TMS, plus I can’t listen to him without immediately thinking of Greg from Succession, so it’s an all-round win.” 27th over: England 96-5 (Pope 8, Billings 2) Pope is off the mark too, getting forward to Starc and easing him through the covers for four. Next ball he tucks for four to midwicket, also with ease, but then Starc beats him outside off. Twice. If Pope isn’t careful, he will become An Enigma. 26th over: England 88-5 (Pope 0, Billings 2) Cummins continues. He’s been the main man today, with three for 17. Pope takes a leg-bye and Sam Billings faces his first ball, greeting it with a punchy back-foot push back to the bowler. Second ball, he gets a friendly half-volley on the pads, clips it for a couple and allows himself a smile. “England needed an injection of youth,” says Glenn McGrath. Billings is 30. Welcome to Test cricket, Sam Billings. 25th over: England 85-5 (Pope 0) Stokes had already flirted with danger once in that over, glanceing Starc between the keeper and leg slip. And that’s drinks with this series threatening to finish just as it began – a green surface, a hundred from Travis Head, a shambles from England. Stokes cuts Starc and Nathan Lyon takes a great catch in the gully. It’s yet another England collapse. 24th over: England 81-4 (Stokes 0, Pope 0) Cummins threatened with a couple that jagged back violently and he finally had his man. Two new batsmen, twilight, pink ball, and Cummins. He has 3-17. It’s ominous for England. That’s just about me done, you’ll have Tim de Lisle now. Thanks for having me! What a delivery from Cummins. He has Root trapped on the crease with one that nips back viciously and Umpire Tucker gives it immediately. Root doesn’t bother reviewing. DRS shows it was umpire’s call, but it still. looked. very. out. If that’s possible. England in trouble. 23rd over: England 81-3 (Root 34, Stokes 0) Simon Katich on SEN radio is suggesting that Starc has rarely bowled seam up this innings. Perhaps when he does, he’s swinging it? The first is very wayward and Root has to reach to get himself some runs to fine leg. Boland runs around and stops one, good good fielding. Starc’s too straight again, so Root helps himself off the hip for another. Starc’s then down leg to Stokes, who misses. The final one is nearly a wide, outside off. From Paul Turp: “Morning Sam, am admittedly fuelled by coffee and optimism, but is fair to say with Crawley, Root, Malan, YJB, Stokes and, say, Foakes, we’re maybe only one opener from potential batting competence. As I write that, Malan has tickled one. As you were! Cheers” Morning Paul ... 22nd over: England 78-3 (Root 31, Stokes 0) Cummins replaces Green. The big two bowlers up against England’s most likely bats, under lights. Cummins is wide of the crease to Root, is full and makes a half shout before realising Root has smashed it into his pad. Root then nabs another single to Labuschagne. Cummins then takes Malan’s inside edge down the leg side, removing him (see below). The breeze is at Cummins’ back now, his last one flies through the Carey, who takes it fingers up. Oh no. Malan is caught down the leg side. It’s a full, rank delivery nowhere near the stumps, Malan is trying to flick it, and it takes an inside edge. Taken easily by Carey. The Australians laugh. Such an innocuous dismissal. Now the lights are on. 21st over: England 77-2 (Malan 25, Root 30) Starc replaces Boland, and he offers a full, half-volley to Root, who makes no mistake in crunching him to the boundary. If Starc is wayward here, Root could well capitalise. And again, Starc is now on Root’s pads, and he clips for two. Root is 27 from 34. But then Starc is full again, a big shout for LBW, turned down, but they’re REVIEWING! Don’t think there was bat, it looked pretty adjacent. Hits Root’s knee roll, I think the main issue is whether it’s going to be hitting the stumps. Impact is Umpire’s Call, but it’s missing the wickets, Root survives. Australia lose the review. Root was beaten, but the ball wasn’t coming back enough. The next one does come back but Root uses it to flick him through square for three. Breezy stuff from Root, but Starc will be encouraged by the movement. Malan gets one that swings from the hand, it’s just a floaty half volley and Malan slaps him square for four. Big over. 20th over: England 64-2 (Malan 21, Root 21) Root’s getting busy, he tries to take another single in front of point but there isn’t one there. Green looks more likely bowling to the Yorkshireman. He’s hitting the wicket hard and Root can’t get forward. Doesn’t stop him looking for runs, and Lyon stops another at backward point. Root can be susceptible when quietened, but the paradox is that he’s rarely quietened, and he hammers one to cover, which bursts through the fielder and allows Root a single. Green is around the wicket to Malan and oooh, that just misses off stump. Always bouncing over, on replay. Malan then steers Green behind point for four, nice and bright now from England. Apropos of little ... just enjoyed it. 19th over: England 59-2 (Malan 17, Root 20) ooooooh Root caresses one sumptuously through the covers for four. Time. Elbow up. That’s good to see. And rare to see from Boland’s bowling. He pulls his length back for the remainder, one keeping a little low at one point, seaming in. Root still finds a single in front of point, he’s picking things up. 18th over: England 54-2 (Malan 17, Root 15) It’s Green, and Root scores again through leg. Malan is taking a little more time - he nearly squeezes through the off side but Lyon makes an excellent diving save at point. He’s lacking fluency, Dawid, but he then manages to slash one that bounces over Lyon at point for four. It picked up pace off the practice wickets, sliding nicely over point. 17th over: England 49-2 (Malan 13, Root 14) Looks like Boland has Root caught behind but it’s merely a play and miss - one of those on TV where the ball follows the trajectory of a nick. More heads are thrown back and Root survives. The next one is worked nicely through the onside all the way to the boundary, and the following is a single (“good cricket”). Root looking to score now, which is probably the way to make progress on this deck. Malan is now defending with the characteristic open face to square. But then Boland beats him al ends up with one that pitches and leaves him. 16th over: England 44-2 (Malan 13, Root 9) Root confidently flicks Green through mid wicket for three to begin things this over, it was too full and capitalised upon from just outside off, and then Malan drives him handsomely through the offside for four. That’s a bit better from Dawin. Now, what’s this? Green cuts Malan in half and is that an appeal for caught behind? No one’s really into it, BUT ... snicko is suggesting a nick! Justin Langer winces and throws his head back in the viewing area. I think it took bat. 15th over: England 37-2 (Malan 9, Root 6) Khawaja has wandered into leg gully as Boland reverts to around-the-wicket. We’re seeing replays of Khawaja snaring Boland in this very position now, just for fun. Three leaves in a row. The final one spits up and takes the lower handle - Malan’s hand comes off his bat. Maiden. Malan is strangely sedate this innings. Is this true? 14th over: England 37-2 (Malan 9, Root 6) It’s Cameron Green from the other end. Is he freshly shorn around the sides of his hair? Is the fade a little higher? Might just be me. He’s slamming the ball from this great height into the wicket, and Root finds two behind square. Cummins fancies Green to Root - who’ll get it done this time? Green finishes with a beauty to beat Root, who was late and hanging his bat at it. 13th over: England 35-2 (Malan 9, Root 4) Boland resumes after the dinner break. He’s bowling to Root and you know where he’s landing it. But you’re here, so why don’t I describe it anyway? He’s bowling from “mid-crease”, slightly angling into to Root, pitching the ball fractionally short of a good length, tracking on fourth stump, and Root is either defending straight to mid on, or leaving. His fifth is on Root’s pads, so the England skipper gathers one to deep backward square. Malan strokes the last to shortish mid-off, not quick attacked, not quite defended. Just ... languidly stroked. After a flurry from Nathan Lyon with the bat, Australia got to work with the ball and will be happy to pick up two wickets before things get dark. Rory Burns was the victim of some Zak Crawley hesitancy and some slick Marnus Labuschagne fielding, and he was narrowly run out without scoring. Welcome back to Test cricket, Rory. Cummins and Boland then settled in for a spell of typically tight and challenging bowling, and Australia’s skipper got his rewards when he removed Crawley, who had begun to (again) look dangerous. Crawley was dealing with anything full, short or wide, until Cummins got one to jag back fractionally and take his inside edge, which ballooned up off his pad to Travis Head’s alligator hands, judging from the South Australian’s reaction. At the other end, Malan has looked in nothing but survival mode. England will be hoping that the wicket continues to flatten, and that the Australians - five Tests in - flatten, too. They’ve a bit of a mountain to climb, and they’ll need Root, who by his standards is due. Matters will resume in circa 35 minutes, under luminescent Hobart skies. Catch you then. 12th over: England 34-2 (Malan 9, Root 3) Last one before the dinner(?) break. Root breaks the shackles, somewhat - he shuffles across the wicket and down the deck and works Cummins through mid wicket for three. Malan has four to see out, and he’s tight enough. That’s the break. 11th over: England 31-2 (Malan 9, Root 0) Boland stays over the wicket. Feels like he could get Malan numerous ways, but behind the wicket stands above all. Malan dabs him into the ground, he never seems to defend in front of the wicket. He defends again to gully, Cameron Green’s wingspan does it again. Finally Boland concedes runs - Malan gets two around the corner. 10th over: England 29-2 (Malan 7, Root 0) Cummins is up for an LBW to Root, but there’s an inside edge and they don’t review. They’re hungry for another wicket before dinner here, Australia. Pretty redundant sentence though isn’t it? What else are they here for? Anyway, Cummins is doing his relentless thing here. Boland has dried things up, Cummins is circling. A little sense of “where’s the next run?” now. Cummins jags one back into Root’s inner thigh. Root overbalances forward. Loves getting hit there. Then another play and miss. What an over. He worked him over there. 9th over: England 29-2 (Malan 6, Root 0) Boland registers four dots while I catch up describing Crawley’s wicket. Thank you Scott. You know the deliveries: around the wicket to Malan, off or fourth stump. Malan semi-forward, semi-back, most are defended square. Boland then changes his angle on the last. Malan is squared up, but survives. 2 overs, 2 maidens. 8th over: England 29-2 (Malan 7, Root 0) Cummins and Crawley “resume hostilities”. He looks particularly across his stumps, but it enables him to turn an off stump delivery through mid wicket for three. He’s looking great, again. Cummins maintains the channel - Crawley leaves one and it flicks the pad, and only a half-hearted shout. But then Cummins gets him! Crawley didn’t do too much wrong, just a bit of seam from Cummins created the chance. This will be well received. Cummins maintains the channel to Crawley and gets him caught at short leg! Crawley is forward and inside edges it onto his pad - it pops up and Head claims it above his ... head. Crawley was looking great, Cummins will be satisfied with that. 7th over: England 25-1 (Crawley 15, Malan 6) Boland replaces Starc, and the crowd likes it. The accuracy begins immediately. Malan eventually wafts at one of these accurate deliveries, and misses. He looks loose, does Dawid. It’s untidy at the minute. He’s got no idea where the next is going as Boland crashes into his inside edge, squirting it out to leg. And there you have it, six dots. From Brian: Hi Sam, I share John Starbuck’s frustration and rising blood pressure as England yet again struggle to mop up the opposition tail. Who would have thought that Nathan Lyon might be vulnerable to a good length ball hitting top of off? Mysterious game. Cheers, Brian 6th over: England 25-1 (Crawley 15, Malan 6) Malan with a very tight leave on the first, so tight Cummins almost starts celebrating in anticipation of it bowling him. Then there’s another play and miss, before Malan is the beneficiary of a poor misfield from Boland - through the foot and knee of his “long barrier” - and Malan gets off strike. I’m looking forward to Crawley v Cummins though. Crawley took him down in the second innings at Sydney, and the youngster is looking to score at every opportunity. How does the Australian skipper respond? Well, it’s on the money, but Crawley drives loosely in front of point for four. His bat spun in his hands. Cummins smiles wryly. Crawley is more watchful to finish. 5th over: England 20-1 (Crawley 11, Malan 5) Starc is full and wide and Crawley doesn’t miss out. It’s forward of point and carved comfortably. If you’re short or wide, or straight as Starc is next ball, he will deal with you. Okay, it’s four leg byes, but the point still stands! Starc needs to be tighter here and he is: a leave. Crawley then drives splendidly for four past mid off - he’s always looking to score. He looks still, balanced and focused. Twelve from the over. Ponting on Burns’ run out 4th over: England 8-1 (Crawley 3, Malan 5) Cummins bowls a ripsnorter past Crawley, and another - both bring him forward and the first has Carey collecting the ball with fingers pointing up. Pace, movement, carry. The next is straighter and Crawley whips him to long leg for one. Shades of Sydney in Crawley’s confidence there. Cummins is up for an LBW but he quickly withdraws, it pitched outside leg, and Cummins indicated there may have been glove, too. Malan is then struck in the stomach for his trouble. Pain. 3rd over: England 7-1 (Crawley 2, Malan 5) Malan is playing Starc from the crease, awkwardly. There’s a few play and misses, even as Malan corrects by making a big stride to the ball. Malan earns a reprieve with a half-volley on middle and leg, which he dispatches through mid on for four. 2nd over: England 3-1 (Crawley 2, Malan 1) We’re getting a look at snicko, suggesting Burns may have nicked one in Starc’s first over. There’s a thick spike as the ball passes the bat, but there seems to be a gap between ball and bat. No one on the field was interested. Warne, on Fox, is! Cummins is hitting his area before Crawley takes a quick single and Burns is struggling ... we’re going to have a look! As you now know, Burns is out, possibly burnt. Cummins takes Malan’s edge later on but it escapes the clutches of Khawaja at third slip safely enough. He gets one for it. Oh no! Crawley dabs to cover, says “yes, yes, wait...”, there’s a slight stutter, Burns is running to the keeper’s end, Marnus swoops on the ball and throws down the stumps fiercely and directly, and Burns is out by a few centimetres. Bad running, exceptional fielding, deflating for England! 1st over: England 0-0 (Burns 0, Crawley 0) It’s Starc to Burns, there’s a memory. This one bears no trauma. He’s back and defending. The next is a big shout for leg before but turned down. Sliding down leg. Beat him for pace, Burns’ leg getting across there too. Australia has three slips, all the usual condiments. He defends, he leaves, he nearly plays on, he plays and misses ... but he survives. That’d be better than Australia! An entertaining innings - from over 1 to 75 - comes to an end and Australia registers 303. Some may remember this for Travis Head’s scintillating run-a-ball hundred, commencing at 12-3 in bowler-friendly conditions, others will remember this innings for Marnus’ meme-able dismissal. Broad finished with 3, as did Wood - who went at nearly six-and-a-half an over. The entire thing was fast and frenetic, and all eyes now turn to England with the bat. Has the wicket flattened, as is the Hobart promise? We’ll soon see. Lyon had found a few runs early in the over but he cleared that front leg one time too many. He misses the slog, and it takes his off bail. A fantastic innings from Australia’s number 10. 75th over: Australia 301-9 (Lyon 29, Boland 10) They’re backing Wood, which is fair enough ... if they can get Boland on strike, which they can’t yet. Lyon misses a huge swipe/pull outside off. Will they go again? No need! He carves him behind point for four! He loves the pace. That was deft and stylish! So Wood goes shortish, Lyon lifts it, it’s in the air for many, many seconds, Billings sprints 40 metres to attempt the catch but he can’t get there! He gets two. Lyon is clearing his leg now and having fun. He belts one but it doesn’t get past mid-on, that’s one. In the mean time, Australia registers 300. Wood is great, except when it’s Wood v Lyon. 74th over: Australia 294-9 (Lyon 22, Boland 10) Broad carries on after drinks (which is to say he continues bowling, not that he misbehaves). A rare quiet over, notable only for a Lyon single. To sum up that hour, on the scorecard it’s probably England’s. 3 wickets, 50-odd runs. But Lyon’s intervention will have curbed any greed they had for a quick finish to the innings. How much longer can the final wicket last? DRINKS... while Rod Tucker puts the ball through hoops again 73rd over: Australia 293-9 (Lyon 21, Boland 10) Can Boland bat? At first glance, not especially. But following a play and miss he props forward and thickishly edges one past gully for four! Scratch what I said earlier, Boland has just clipped Woakes, Mark Waugh-esque, for four through midwicket! I was wrong. Boland was right. Again. Simon Katich on SEN notes that it’s a good sign of the quality of this wicket for batting. England may be buoyed! Two more for Boland. Annoying runs, if you like England. 72nd over: Australia 282-9 (Lyon 21, Boland 0) So Lyon gets another win, Wood is removed from the attack. Broad continues in the absence of Ollie Robinson, whose prognosis looks worse on every report. Broad wisely eschews the bouncer barrage, so we are treated to many balls dribbling to mid off for no runs. A Broad yorker goes under Lyon’s bat, but misses off stump. The GOAT then gets two to fine leg. Johnstarbuck’s here: “Waiting for the tail to droop isn’t doing anything good for my blood pressure, which I’m now taking as I do every morning. It seems, according to TMS, that England are the worse team in regular play for mopping up the tail. Why is this? They used to study each batting bowler’s technique e.g. to Denis Lillee, bowl straight.” If true, I wonder if it’s more to do with other teams investing more in the quality of their lower order bats? 71st over: Australia 280-9 (Lyon 19, Boland 0) So Woakes grabs Carey, and Australia’s favourite son, Scott Boland, heads to the crease. Australia will have wanted 300 (because it’s a round number, I guess), and they may yet get there if Wood keeps bumping Lyon. Boland drives the last, square, but can’t beat point. Lyon will be on strike. From Brian: “Good morning Sam, Hope you have solved the smoke alarm issue - possibly set off by the friction of Mark Wood’s relentless bumper barrage? Never mind rubbing two sticks together - how about two brain cells?” I thought Wood’s approach was working wonders, he just picked the wrong guy. If you are referring to my brain cells, the horse has bolted. Bowled! Carey chops on to Woakes. He half-prods forward, but inside edges it onto his stumps. A bit of bounce? It takes leg bail. 70th over: Australia 280-8 (Carey 24, Lyon 19) The short tactic continues from Wood, but Carey gets inside the line of the third ball and parries it to fine leg for four. He pulls the next to deep square for one (“good cricket”). Wood gets two at Lyon and he smashes it out of the ground for six! Kids start scurrying out on to the ground to find it. I don’t think that landed on the roof, that cleared it! There’ll be a new ball now, won’t there? These are valuable runs. Wood goes over the wicket - a win for Lyon - but it doesn’t matter, Lyon obliterates this one for six too! Straight onto the hill! What a shot, that is sensational batting. Wood was causing fear until this point, Lyon has sat him down. What a riposte. Wood has now conceded 100+ runs. 69th over: Australia 263-8 (Carey 19, Lyon 7) Woakes (1-50 off 12) replaces Broad, and his first is clipped for two by Carey, who pressures the hatless Broad with his running and elicits the misfield. Same again, but it’s just one to Broad, whose wide brim is now back on. Less fire this over, three from it. From John Little via email: “For all the naysayers, England are unbeaten this year. More than can be said for Bangladesh, India and New Zealand.... just a matter of perspective.” That’s the spirit, John. 68th over: Australia 260-8 (Carey 16, Lyon 7) So, Wood succeeds against Cummins, bringing Lyon to the crease. Same ball, but Lyon hits down. Wood is now bowling bouncers every delivery, including to Carey. The Australian bats are almost facing chest on, legs wide apart, halfway to the crouch upon release. Wood’s at Carey’s chest, Carey stays leg side of it, and he slices it - with control - down to third for one. Lyon then pulls Wood for six! It splits Wood and Crawley who were making ground on it. Lyon plays that shot well, one knee up of course. That said, I’m probably backing Wood here. Wood is too short, next delivery. Cummins accepts the invitation to pull, he’s not in control, it gets too high on him and Cummins - who slightly took his eye off the ball as he played the shot - hit it straight down Crawley’s throat at deep square. Cummins was in trouble facing Woof from the off... Wood’s tactic is working. 67th over: Australia 252-7 (Carey 15, Cummins 2) Carey chases a wide one from the round-the -wicket Broad, and his inside edge just misses the stumps. Meanwhile, a smoke alarm is going off inside my house, and it is not for smoke reasons. No one is home. Now I have decisions to make. It is not a battery issue. I think I’ve solved it. Anyway, Carey hooks one to fine leg for one and Cummins is defending to cover. Broad sends a fielder to the boundary and goes short to Cummins who pulls vigorously, achieving one run to deep square. I’d ordinarily think the game is quite even, I just have reservations about England’s capacity to amass a match-winning score. That said, Root is due, and I’d like to see it. 66th over: Australia 250-7 (Carey 14, Cummins 1) The chest-guarded Cummins faces up to Wood, who continues with the short stuff. There’s a wide slip, someone at third, and a bat pad. Cummins is uncomfortable. He somehow gets one around the corner for one. Carey’s then backing away trying to slap him through the off-side, but missing. Funky fields and tactics now. Carey’s back and across to the next, which is also short, and he fends it into space behind square for one. Cummins has the last, and he’s jumping then ducking underneath. Whoosh. Cummins laughs as he meets Carey mid-pitch. 65th over: Australia 248-7 (Carey 13, Cummins 0) Broad’s in to Carey now. There’s two slips and a gully, but no pad pad to Australia’s keeper. Carey pulls him sweetly to the boundary rider for one. Cummins then works one to backward square, via the pad, and Billings hares after it to keep it to one. Carey sees off the last. 64th over: Australia 246-7 (Carey 12, Cummins 0) There’s a bat pad for Wood now. He nabs Starc as described. Cummins is next, and Wood is wayward down the legside but Billings gloves it brilliantly, sprawling to his left. Wood is clearly trying to shorten him up, as Cummins ducks another. So Wood comes around the wicket and he hits Cummins. The skipper wanted to duck, it wasn’t that high, and it careers into (what looks like) his forearm. Wood bangs it in short, Starc is late on it - he top edges it and it’s caught by a backwards-running Rory Burns at square leg, easy as you like. Starc looked uncomfortable facing Wood, and Wood gets his man. 63rd over: Australia 246-6 (Carey 12, Starc 3) Broad’s too straight, allowing Carey to tuck him off his hip to square leg for one. Some chat on radio here about who’s ahead ... most agree Australia are by virtue of England missing their opportunity in the first session. Must be said the pitch does now seem decidedly more docile than yesterday. Mike Atherton is also noting that there were some whispers that Craig Overton was set to play yesterday, before Ollie Robinson was included last-minute. I write this as we watch Ben Stokes seek an inspection of the pink ball from the umpire yet again. The cricket’s back on, and Starc looks far more comfortable coming forward to Broad than the guy at the other end. Something’s going on here ... Broad has to pull out of his run-up, just before his gather, and he’s immensely put off by the Fox SpiderCam, or FoxCam, or whatever it’s called. He remonstrates with it. Michael Vaughan laughs nervously, before they cut to SpiderCam. 62nd over: Australia 244-6 (Carey 11, Starc 2) Wood’s first is timed quite nicely off Starc’s pads for one. Wood’s running in hard - though I suppose he always is. Carey gets one to fine leg. His partner Starc rides a throat ball into the ground quite easily, prods the next to mid-on looking a little jumpy, and that’s the over. 61st over: Australia 242-6 (Carey 10, Starc 1) Broad accompanies Wood. Starc drives handsomely early on but Stokes moves around at mid off and throws the stumps down, too. Starc gets one for his trouble and is off the mark. Carey is trying to drive the next, but can’t beat mid off. The next one is in the same area: Carey leaves, deliberately. 60th over: Australia 241-6 (Carey 10, Starc 0) Wood starts with a pretty sharp yorker to Carey, he jams it to square leg. Only three balls in this over, not a bad one to start with. Next one beats Carey all ends up, huge appeal, Wood is arm aloft celebrating ... but then there’s doubt, and no review, and replays confirm Carey was nowhere near it. Carey defends the last to mid-off. I said it was cloudy on screen. Well, the sun’s out now! Jerusalem is rung and sung. We’re away. Acquaint yourself with the state of things with Geoff Lemon’s piece from yesterday ... Weather update 90% chance of rain (1-3mm), cloudy, any rain will be late afternoon, evening. It looks cloudy on screen, but everything’s in readiness to start on time. Looks like Ollie Robinson is struggling... Morning, afternoon, evening all. Well, we were treated to a whirlwind yesterday, weren’t we? From 12-3 and calls for Bellerive to be stripped of Test status, to a run-a-ball hundred from Head, to further delivery of The Cam Green Promise, and that ceaseless wonder about what James Anderson could and would have done with it all. All in all, Australia finished with 241-6 – a scoreline most would be satisfied with after a full day’s play, only that this was achieved in 59.3 overs. Perhaps this isn’t quite the Chief Executive’s Wicket predicted ahead of the game. Nevertheless, both teams will be hoping to push things on today. For Australia, quick runs and a shot at England under lights, and for England, crossed fingers that the Bellerive wicket does flatten out, as is the local promise. How are you seeing things from your vantage point? Let me know via email at sam.perry.freelance@guardian.co.uk or on the Twitters @sjjperry. Weather and other preliminary material up next...It is unlikely that West Ham would have signed Jarrod Bowen had they decided to give Manuel Pellegrini one more transfer window. Every attempt to convince Pellegrini to move for Bowen had fallen on deaf ears, with the Chilean insistent that the winger was not good enough for the Premier League, and the club’s recruitment department probably would have had to accept defeat had the board chosen not to change managers at the end of 2019. After all West Ham were not the only top-flight side monitoring a talent whose performances for Hull had marked him out as one of the best forwards in the Championship. Crystal Palace and Newcastle also had Bowen on their radar and West Ham, who had replaced Pellegrini with David Moyes, were in danger of missing out as the January transfer window drew to a close. Diligent when it comes to buying players, Moyes had not had much time to work out what his new squad required to avoid relegation. The Scot knew that he needed more pace in attack, but he could not make up his mind on Bowen. Could the youngster make an instant impact? Was he fast enough to get away from Premier League full-backs? Yet time was running out. Palace and Newcastle were making moves and other figures at West Ham urged Moyes to act. The prevailing view at the London Stadium was that signing Bowen would pay off and so, with the deadline approaching, West Ham jumped in, agreed a £22m fee with Hull and managed to get the deal done just in the nick of time. “We were attracted to the goals he has scored over the years,” said Moyes, whose decision to take a risk on Bowen looks anything but misguided now. West Ham, who have gone from relegation candidates to contenders for Champions League qualification, cannot get enough of the 25-year-old’s relentless running, bending crosses, team ethic and hunger for goals. Bowen has established himself as one of the sharpest forwards in the top flight and even Moyes, who tends not to go overboard when he praises his players, agrees that the former Hull man would not look out of place in the England squad. “When players come from the Championship you hope they will develop and Jarrod has taken to it really well,” Moyes said after Bowen’s double helped West Ham beat Norwich 2-0 on Wednesday. “When you look at the competition for England – Marcus Rashford, Raheem Sterling, Jack Grealish, Jadon Sancho – it’s a decision for Gareth Southgate. But he’s getting closer.” As Moyes acknowledged, it will not be easy for Bowen to force his way into England’s plans before the World Cup. The squad is settled and Southgate is not short of options. Moyes did not even mention Bukayo Saka, Phil Foden and Emile Smith Rowe, who made his debut in November; Bowen, to put it bluntly, could well be fighting a losing battle. Yet the West Ham winger should not be discounted. Bowen has been directly involved in 16 goals in all competitions this season (eight goals and eight assists), more than any other English player in the Premier League, and is a regular source of inspiration for Moyes’s side on the right flank. “It’s all about progressing,” Bowen said after scoring in West Ham’s 2-0 victory over Leeds in the FA Cup last weekend. “Whether that is assists or goals, they are the main two things you look at as a winger. Mo Salah is the perfect example, the goals he scores and assists he gets since he joined Liverpool. He is definitely one that I look at.” As it happens Liverpool have been looking at Bowen. Jürgen Klopp sees him as a potential backup for Salah and could try to sign him this summer – not that West Ham, who are fourth before hosting Leeds on Sunday, are likely to welcome offers for one of their most important players. Bowen, who has helped West Ham reach the last 16 of the Europa League, has become invaluable. His versatility enables him to play through the middle when Michail Antonio is missing, but he is at his best on the right. Bowen’s left foot allows him to cause havoc with inswinging crosses, he can be relied on to track back to protect his full-back and he is always willing to get into goalscoring positions, even though his finishing could be more refined at times. Moyes often speaks about Bowen, who could have scored five against Norwich, needing to become more clinical. Yet part of Bowen’s appeal is that he never stops going. He scores all types of goals – he beat taller defenders to open the scoring with a header against Norwich – and does not let his head drop when he misses easy chances. It is not part of Bowen’s character to give up. As a teenager he had an unsuccessful trial at Cardiff City and he went six months unpaid during a spell at Hereford, who were strapped for cash at the time, but he refused to let go of his dream. Bowen kept finding ways to improve and that spirit, that refusal to roll over, is still with him now. It does not matter if people write him off: Bowen has fought his way to the top and his rise is far from over.Composers dream of a big commission from a world-class chorus and orchestra. With the delight comes terror: infinite choices, decisions, expectations. Will the work say anything new? Will the quixotic array of options be used to most expressive effect? The British composer Julian Anderson (b.1967) has had more than a few such opportunities. His latest, Exiles, direct, atmospheric, powerful, was commissioned by an elite trio: the London Symphony Orchestra and Chorus, Boston Symphony Orchestra and Bayerischer Rundfunk. For a work in part about the enforced “exile” of Covid, it has been tripped up rudely, like much else, by the pandemic itself. Two of its projected five movements were premiered by the LSO and Simon Rattle last September, with a third, for unaccompanied double chorus, added last week, the soprano Siobhan Stagg a gleaming soloist. Anderson seemingly carries an entire solar system of orchestral sound in his head. (He’s the one you want on your team in a music quiz – having once sat gratefully by while he hoovered up every point – capable of identifying music in a split second, like knowing a painter from a speck of pigment.) His compositions may fall generally within the conventions of the concert hall but his voice is intense and incisive, combining and dividing instruments to create fresh timbres and textures. The new movement is a homage to the American diplomat Varian Fry, who saved thousands of Europeans threatened by Nazi invasion in 1940-41. Variously intoning their names freely, or singing Psalm 46 (“God is our hope and strength”), the London Symphony Chorus performed, hidden away, in the Barbican’s balcony, voices soaring in disembodied, many-layered splendour. Blame social distancing, but it worked. All five movements, with texts in French, Hebrew and English, will be performed (and broadcast live) in Munich on 21 January. The rest of the programme, by no means conventional and the better for it, included the Blumine movement from Mahler’s Symphony No 1. He ditched it; I’d be happy to as well. Yet Rattle and the LSO turned it into a thing of sensuous beauty, the saccharine, mawkish trumpet melody, now taut and lean, played superbly by the orchestra’s new principal trumpet, James Fountain. Like so many brass players, he has a brass band background, his sound pinging, pure and eloquent. The spirited and capacious third movement from the Symphony in E major (1878-80) by Hans Rott was the evening’s novelty. Rott was a friend of Mahler but loathed by Brahms and came to an early and unhappy end. The evening’s second half opened with Webern’s Six Pieces for Large Orchestra, a miniature treasure chest of perfect structure and variety. Dvořák’s Symphony No 7, with some small smudges but enormous drive, definition and rhythmic urgency, completed an enthusiastically received evening. Grange Park Opera has pulled many a trick out of its magic hat in response to the constraints of the past two years. Its latest effervescent offering is Puccini’s Gianni Schicchi (1917-18), an ideal choice for GPO’s sixth filmed opera. Part of his triple bill, Il trittico, this humane comedy is drawn from a tale of greed and trickery in Dante’s Inferno. In Giovacchino Forzano, Puccini had a versatile librettist, capable of providing the text for another Trittico opera, Suor Angelica, about a nun and her heartbreak over an illegitimate child. He was also, food for thought, later a director of fascist propaganda films for Mussolini. The cast of 12, led by William Dazeley in the title role, put glee and humour into every note and gesture. Chloe Morgan (who made the most of the opera’s big number, O mio babbino caro) and Luis Gomes were irrepressible as the young lovers. Merely being in one room with the likes of Ailish Tynan, Sara Fulgoni, Jeffrey Lloyd-Roberts, Jeremy White and more must have felt like a party, never mind the joy of romping through Puccini’s wriggling, quicksilver score. According to past practice – in Owen Wingrave and L’heure espagnole – the company sweet-talked friendly patrons into lending their premises for the action, in this case a deluxe home and a garage workshop (Schicchi is updated from Florentine “new money” trickster to car mechanic). The sound was recorded at Wigmore Hall, with Chris Hopkins as music director and pianist. A small and nameless canine star nearly stole the show. Star ratings (out of five) LSO/Rattle ★★★★ Gianni Schicchi ★★★★ The LSO concert will be available online on Medici TV from Thursday 3 February, 7pm Gianni Schicchi is free to watch on YouTubeAs one of the most unexpected recent breakout seasons came to an end in November, Emma Raducanu seemed to have built a solid base for the new year. After the grand slam success, the first round of new endorsements, the questions over her coaching choices and the predictable dip in form as her life changed for ever, Raducanu closed off her year by hiring an experienced, well-regarded coach, Torben Beltz, to guide her through her next steps of her young career. With the off-season beckoning, Raducanu frequently spoke about her goal of improving her physical strength and fitness in order to address the gap between herself and the chiselled, grown athletes she will now face every week. As she navigates so many first-time experiences under a glaring spotlight, a complicated second season was always on the cards but Raducanu had positioned herself well. However, not everything can be accounted for. In the middle of December, Raducanu tested positive for Covid-19 before she was due to compete in an exhibition in Abu Dhabi. While she was one of a number of players to contract Covid then, her recovery has seemingly taken the longest. Rafael Nadal won a title in Melbourne a few weeks later, Denis Shapovalov was back in action shortly afterwards. Raducanu, meanwhile, says it took 20 days until she began training at a decent intensity and she is still pacing herself back to full fitness. “It’s a challenge to try and find the balance of wanting to get out there and practice so much straight after coming out of isolation, but if you ever do it with the hours after not doing anything for 20 days, you always start picking up small niggles,” she said during the Australian Open media day on Saturday. “I’m just trying to find that balance.” Thus, Raducanu arrives at her Australian Open debut in far from ideal circumstances. Last week she competed for the first time in the new season and was hit clean off the court by the immensely talented Elena Rybakina in Sydney, losing 6-0, 6-1 in less than an hour. “The first week I wasn’t able to practise so much,” she said. “But after Sydney, the match, it was just good to see where I was at that point in time.” This coming week will mark another new experience for Raducanu. The only other time she has competed in Australia was as a 16-year-old junior in 2019 and she lost in the first round of the junior Australian Open. In her senior debut this year, she will contest a headline match against Sloane Stephens in a battle of two US Open champions. At 14, Raducanu was watching as Stephens won her title in 2017 and the pair have hit together in the past. If the various posters of Raducanu across the grounds are any indication of her favour with the organisers, they will do battle on one of the stadium courts. The path that Stephens has taken in her career underlines how little guarantee there is of sustained success after one grand slam title. Stephens is one of the talents of her generation, blessed with supreme athleticism, one of the heaviest forehands in the sport and a relatively complete game, and she is still capable of achieving even more. But her time at the top of the game so far, although brilliant, was fleeting. She is now ranked 68th and, although there have been recent glimpses of promise, Stephens remains extremely inconsistent. She is just as capable of rising to the moment and picking off any opponent in the world as she is of throwing in a lethargic, uninspired performance to nobody at all. After indicating that she remains a fair distance from the height of her physical abilities, Raducanu says she is approaching this match calmly and feels no pressure on her shoulders for the coming week. “I feel like I’m just happy to be here and have a swing,” she said. “I had to jump a few hurdles to play here, so I’m very – just want to go out there and have fun and enjoy on the court.” This is the beginning of a new season for Raducanu, one that will reveal plenty about her game and character, but also one that will require patience as she learns the ropes of professional tennis under pressure. It will be instructive to see if, when and how she finds her feet. In the meantime, patience will be an essential quality, which she says she is still working on. “I’m a bit of a perfectionist,” she says. “Whether that’s practice, whether that’s off the court, I want to be the best I can all the time. Sometimes it’s just not very viable. I think that’s one thing, I need to just relax. As long as the trend is trending upwards, just a matter of small fluctuations, I think I can be proud.” In the build up to the Australian Open, Nike released a typically slick commercial featuring Raducanu. As she stood from the baseline and attacked balls, words flashed behind her: “distracted”, “fluke”, “one-hit wonder”. In a few fleeting months, and with only four tournaments played, the discourse surrounding Raducanu has notably soured. One of the keys to success will be in the ethos of that video; blocking out noise, focusing on herself and understanding that consistent work will yield success even if it takes some time. Asked about her opinion on the subject on Saturday, Raducanu smiled. “I think the video speaks for itself,” she said. “Yeah, that’s how I feel. That’s it, full stop.”The actor Jamie Dornan has revealed he was stuck in hotel quarantine in Australia when he received the news that his father, Jim, had died from Covid after being hospitalised for a routine knee operation. Dornan, 39, most famous for Fifty Shades of Grey and crime drama television series The Fall, found himself on the other side of the world with four days of his quarantine remaining when his father died in Dubai last March, so was unable to travel to visit him. Dornan was required to isolate in Australia before filming the BBC drama The Tourist, in which he plays a man who has no idea who he is and why he has been left stranded in Australia’s outback. Figures released by the BBC on Friday showed The Tourist is the third most successful drama launch on iPlayer, having been streamed more than 18m times. Losing his father made 2021 “the worst year …  and the hardest” of his life, Dornan told the Sun. “It’s been a brutal time for lots of reasons and for lots of people. We’re all just trying to ride it out and come out the other side – and hope we’ve got our heads intact,” he said. Prof Jim Dornan was a renowned obstetrician and gynaecologist at the Royal Victoria hospital in Belfast. He was said to have been proud that his son is starring in Sir Kenneth Branagh’s Oscar-tipped eponymous film set there, alongside Dame Judi Dench. The coming of age comedy-drama about a young boy and his working-class family getting caught up in Northern Ireland’s Troubles in the late 1960s received seven Golden Globe nominations and won in the Best Screenplay category. It will hit UK cinemas in late January. Dornan, who lives in rural Gloucestershire with his wife, Amelia Warner, 39, and their three young daughters, said that the plot of Belfast resonated with him on a personal level, and still calls himself a “Belfast man”, although he left the city aged 20. In the film, Dornan plays a father who has come to England to work in the hope his family can join him there and leave the tensions between Protestants and Catholics in Belfast behind. “[Belfast] is home. We probably feel like that’s a particular thing, a ‘Belfast man’, and I think we all know what that means,” Dornan said. “If you’re from Belfast, no matter what era you grew up in, you’ve been through something. You’ve been through a certain hardship and you’ve been tested at many different stages of your life.” Jim supported his son’s pursuit of an acting career and helped him navigate the loss of his mother, Lorna, from pancreatic cancer when he was 16, telling his son: “Don’t let this be the thing that defines you.” “I’ve been subjected, early on in my life and now, to a lot of pain and loss,” Dornan said. • This article was amended on 15 January 2022. Prof Jim Dornan died in a hospital in Dubai, not Belfast as an earlier version said.A big life The latest epic from Hanya Yanagihara, To Paradise stretches from 1893 to 2093 in imagined altered states of America. It also follows 2015’s ubiquitous A Little Life, which traumatised and entranced readers in equal measure. (It was 96 in the Guardian’s 100 best books of the 21st century.) Downtown man The cover of the US edition of A Little Life featured a photo of a man seemingly in despair or pain, but it’s actually titled Orgasmic Man and is taken from a 1960s series on the theme by photographer Peter Hujar, who chronicled the intrigues and explosions of life in downtown New York. The game of the name Hujar, who died in 1987 from Aids-related pneumonia, is the subject of a recent book by Linda Rosenkrantz. On 18 December 1974, she asked Hujar to document everything that happened to him in one day – the pair then discussed it, recording their conversation. The results have been transcribed in Peter Hujar’s Day. Rosenkrantz is also a baby-naming industry pioneer: in 1988 she and Pamela Redmond Satran published naming guide Beyond Jennifer &amp; Jason. Get Shor-ty Redmond Satran’s 2005 novel Younger, about a woman in her 40s who pretends to be more youthful to get an entry-level job in publishing, was turned into a TV series by Darren Star (Sex and the City, Emily in Paris et al), starring Sutton Foster, Hilary Duff and Miriam Shor. The latter had a role in Reagan-era spy drama The Americans, created by former CIA officer Joe Weisberg. To a T Joe’s journalist brother, Jacob, is the co-founder of podcast company Pushkin Industries. Jacob’s wife is Deborah Needleman who, from 2012 to 2016, was editor of the New York Times’s T Magazine. As well as writing novels that rip your heart out, Yanagihara is a journalist; in 2017, she took over running T. Pairing notes Read Talk is Linda Rosencrantz’s 1968 “reality novel”, in which she taped and transcribed hours of conversations with friends, documenting more lives of 1960s New York bohemia. Eat The Instagram account @toparadisenovel has been trailing details of the book, including a recipe for “broiled raccoon with lovage and grits”. Delish.As niches go, a work that combines a tribute to the great American choreographer Merce Cunningham with juggling is a particularly narrow one. Yet the odd thing about Life, which launched the London international mime festival last week, is just how universal and all-embracing it feels. I for one am not a fan of mime or circus. I have always admired the works of the Cunningham more than I have loved them. Yet this act of affection is surreally life-enhancing and joyful. Its pivots are Gandini Juggling’s founders, Sean Gandini and Kati Ylä-Hokkala, who seem in love with the mathematical and philosophical purity of juggling, and Jennifer Goggans, a former Cunningham dancer who has learned to juggle. The resulting piece recreates excerpts from the choreographer’s works and his distinctive style, but with the twist that balls, hoops and clubs arc through the air to add their own parabolas, rises and geometric lines to his sharp jumps and angled limbs. Accompanied by Caroline Shaw’s music and Guy Hoare’s sublimely simple lighting, Life has a serene beauty, a geometric poetry, that satisfies the eye and dazzles the mind. To begin with, it is all rapid movements, and white balls shooting upwards in seemingly uncanny motion; later the dancers freeze into slo-mo groups, their intricate movements functioning like an elaborate machine. At one moment, Gandini stops the action with a randomness of which Cunningham would have been proud, to explain that they are about to recreate a particular piece. One performer demonstrates the original version; two men stand together to create a four-handed creature to elaborate on the theme. There’s a pure pleasure in the cleverness of all this; the performers are uniformly transfixing, their smiles utterly infectious. It feels like a very good way to start the year. Gandini Juggling: Life is at Sadler’s Wells, London, until 15 JanuaryBruce Chatwin was 15 when he first cycled through the Vale of Ewyas, a place he would later refer to as “one of the emotional centres of his life”. Wordsworth and Turner also loved this rough knuckle of mountains abutting the England-Wales border. I was 20 when I first visited, and was so smitten by the swooping hills that I leapt out of the car and ran barefoot up Hay Bluff, seized by a reckless delirium. Two decades later I’m on a new yoga and fell walking weekend here, with Chatwin’s beloved valley unfurling below. The packing list had included sun cream – but this is Wales, in winter, and the weather isn’t playing ball. Rain pitter-patters on still-green leaves. Boots squelch in oily mud. Mist shrouds a seam of oaks. “Bracken is the enemy,” says this morning’s guide, local author Rob Penn, as we bushwhack a path through the pernicious fern. “Nothing eats it – not even sheep!” Clambering over a stile, we enter a fenced-off area where Stump up for Trees, the charity Rob co-founded, has planted 135,000 native broadleaf saplings – the first of a million it is planting in this corner of Wales. Immediately we see signs of regeneration: oak saplings periscoping up through the bracken, young rowans ablaze with berries. “Our native tree cover is just 12% – a third of Germany’s,” says Rob. “We have to turn the tide.” A lesson in ecology isn’t what you might expect on this sort of retreat, but Ruth Pickvance, a former British fell running champion and the founder of Element Active, the company organising my weekend, wants the break to be about more than just covering the miles. “It’s about the landscape, the ecology, the history of these hills,” she tells us. “Connection, not calories.” Ruth, who lives locally, is on a mission to get women into the wild. “When I became British fell champion in 1989, women didn’t really run – it was seen as odd,” she tells me. While the winning man was presented with a North Face jacket, Ruth’s prize was a set of heated hair curlers from Argos. We cover five miles this morning, 16 over the course of the weekend: across wind-bullied uplands, through elvish woods, along the runnels of old drovers’ tracks, past hedges dripping with blackberries and sloes. Gerald of Wales, the 12th-century traveller and chronicler, described the Vale of Ewyas (also known as Llanthony valley) as a “wilderness far removed from the bustle of mankind”, and even now, centuries later, his words ring true. Despite the inclement weather, it’s soul-reviving stuff. After lunch on the first day – a walkers’ feast of lentil soup and homemade blackberry crumble – we set out from the ruins of nearby Llanthony Priory. Ruth leads the charge this time, recounting tales of Norman warlords, cross-border quarrels and Reformation ruin. Later we marvel at Cwmyoy’s wonky 13th-century church, whose tower, Ruth proudly informs us, leans more than Pisa’s. Inside, it feels like we’re standing on the deck of a listing ship. As we loop back down from the hills that afternoon, the sun briefly pierces the clouds, throwing an anchor of golden light on to the priory: the dark ruins are illuminated, the fields glow rice-paddy green. We all stop and gaze at it, awestruck. A medieval pilgrim might have sunk to their knees, convinced it was a message from God. Our basecamp is Llwyn Celyn, a 15th-century farm in the Black Mountains. Now owned by the Landmark Trust, the farm was a ruin when it bought it in 2014, the last inhabitants two old men who had simply moved rooms as the walls collapsed around them. It’s a tale straight out of Chatwin’s On the Black Hill, the novel he set in these hills. The days begin and end with yoga in Llwyn Celyn’s huge stone barn, with underfloor heating and original wooden doors. Kirsten Steffensen, a wiry Dane who is co-founder of The Sports Ashram in Leeds, puts us through a series of slow, core-based asanas, frequently reminding us to connect with our breath. Her teaching is delivered with wit and warmth backed by decades of experience. “Always think kind thoughts about yourself,” she says, just as I’m cursing my trembling abs. To make the weekend accessible for all budgets, accommodation isn’t included. I stay with friends locally; others stay at the Bridge Inn (doubles from £95 B&amp;B) just over the English border at Michaelchurch Escley. Another three sleep in the bunkhouse at Llwyn Celyn , which is a steal at £25 a night. I’m not normally one for women-only events, but the 14 of us, all roughly middle-aged, bond quickly, with much chat and cheer. Many in the group – which includes two GPs, a frontline respiratory consultant, a nurse and a teacher – have witnessed the worst of the pandemic. Some are experienced yogis; others don’t know their cobra from their downward dog. On Sunday we make packed lunches and set out for an eight-mile walk along the spine of Hatterall Ridge, right on the border. Wild ponies graze, their coats riffling in the wind. Skylarks explode from the heather. There’s butter-yellow gorse, russet bracken and scarlet haws. To our right are the Marches – a pastoral idyll of hedged fields and frothy copses – the distant glint of the Bristol Channel and the blue smudge of the Malvern Hills. To our left, in sharp relief, brood the dark hills of Wales, their slopes scarred by sheep tracks and woolly with bracken. I imagine centuries of English soldiers peering over this mountain parapet, legs trembling. For an hour Ruth asks us to walk in silence, a practice she calls “walking together, walking apart”. The exercise acts like a mild psychedelic, heightening my perception. I notice the textures of the mountain – spiny gorse, sharp quivers of sedge, acid-green pillows of sphagnum moss squishy underfoot – and delight in a pair of ravens scything through the air, buffeted by the wind. We are weary and a little damp for the final yoga session, but it’s just what we need. Sunlight lances through the barn windows, pooling on the floor, and somewhere outside a buzzard mews, its call slicing through the deep silence of the valley. We groan. We laugh. When Kirsten tells us to reach for our toes, mine feel as distant as the Pleiades, and I vow to do more yoga. “Let go of your expectations,” says Kirsten. “Just come with the body you have on the day.” I leave with aching legs, shredded abs and a full heart. In these disconnected times, weekends like this are exactly what we need. The trip was provided by Element Active, which will run six fell walking or fell running and yoga weekends in 2022 (check website for dates), from £275pp including lunches and tuition; accommodation is extra. There’s also a Special Treberfydd Women’s Walking Weekend in November, including one-person en suite rooms, all food and drink, plus a massage, for £580Vigils are taking place across Ireland and the UK in memory of murdered 23-year-old teacher Ashling Murphy. Irish police are continuing to hunt for the killer of Murphy, who was found dead on Wednesday after going for a run on the banks of the Grand Canal in Tullamore, County Offaly. The Garda Síochána said it had made “significant progress” in its investigation amid reports that detectives had identified a person of interest. Gardaí said they were not releasing details for operational reasons. On Saturday afternoon a large crowd gathered in London to pay tribute to the teacher. The vigil took place at around 4pm – the time at which police said the fatal assault occurred. Attenders queued to sign a book of condolence and lay flowers in Camden Square, north London and a minute’s silence was held. Vigils are also due to take place in Edinburgh, Glasgow and Brisbane. Earlier in the day parkrun runners in the Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland and beyond held moments of silence on Saturday morning for Murphy. Hundreds of people also gathered in Cork on Saturday morning for a vigil, with more planned in towns and villages across the weekend. Thousands of people gathered in the late afternoon in Tullamore, Dublin and Belfast on Friday, as Ireland continues to reel from the murder of Murphy, with echoes of the national reckoning that was sparked in the UK last year by the murder of Sarah Everard. Events also took place in Belfast, Dublin and other towns and cities on Friday. Murphy’s family attended a candlelit vigil near the murder scene on Friday evening. Her father, Ray Murphy, paid a poignant tribute to the talented young musician by performing her favourite song, When You Were Sweet Sixteen, on the banjo. The taoiseach, Micheál Martin, has said that the murder has “united the nation in solidarity and revulsion”. “No stone will be left unturned in terms of bringing this investigation to a completion and to bring the person responsible for this to justice,” he said on Friday. Michelle O’Neill, Stormont’s deputy first minister, said at the vigil in Belfast: “I think the sheer fact that, right across every town, village and county across this island today, people are gathering in large numbers to remember Ashling Murphy shows that women have had enough. We are entitled to feel safe, we are entitled to be safe. We are entitled to go for a run. We are entitled to go to work and feel safe, we are entitled to go to the shops and feel safe. I think this is a watershed moment in our society today.” The death of Murphy has sparked fresh debate about the safety of women in Ireland, with many asking how such an attack could happen in broad daylight. “We, as a society, need to face up to this. There is an epidemic of violence against women. It’s been going on for millennia, quite frankly,” Leo Varadkar, the deputy prime minister, said on Friday.There was a moment in the trajectory where the impossible announced that it was, in fact, possible. Nathan Lyon had just played a pull shot, which was nothing unusual. His only shots in Test cricket are the pull shot and the sweep shot, which for Lyon is the pull shot he plays while kneeling down. He knows fast bowlers will bowl bouncers at him and he has devised one method of deflecting them. So it is normal to see Lyon lean back and heave across the line. It is not unprecedented for him to hit one of those shots for six, which before this match he had done nine times in 2,335 balls faced. It was unprecedented for him to hit more than one of those in an innings, a stat bettered on the second day in Hobart by clearing the fence three times. The most astonishing thing was the timing on the second six, a ball that came so cleanly out of the middle of the bat, at such a perfect point of the swing, that it soared. At the point where a Lyon top-edge for six should be descending to land just behind the rope, this Lyon six was still going up, up, into the blue sky, over a small brown-roofed pavilion at the city end of the ground and on a journey into a front yard some distance down Church Road. This was the crowd’s favourite moment of the day. The kind of people who want to scorn women’s sport will often pronounce they only want to watch the best in the world versus the best in the world. Except, they don’t. They want to watch Glenn McGrath make 61 at the Gabba. They want to watch Lyon hit a six. They want to watch Ross Taylor bowl a filthy wide drag-down in his last Test for New Zealand and pick up the winning wicket. Because these things are fun. We don’t have a mix-up round at the Olympics where we make the kayak racers do rhythmic gymnastics, but it would be sold out if we did. There is more significance to the run-scoring exploits of Australia’s bowlers than a bit of fun for the crowd. In crashing 31 runs from 27 balls, Lyon along with Scott Boland and Alex Carey added 51 for the last two wickets, taking the score from 252 to 303. That addition may not end up being needed against the opposition’s underpowered batting, but it certainly deflated England. On the flipside, when England’s lower order have been called upon to bat, the end has rarely been very far away. Australia’s final four partnerships in the series have returned 619 runs. England’s last four have made 151. Pat Cummins has had a quiet series with the bat by his standards, dropping himself from No 8 to No 9 in this Test, but 59 runs from four innings exceeds what Jack Leach, Stuart Broad, Ollie Robinson and James Anderson have managed from five or more. Mitchell Starc with a tally of 154 has bettered Mark Wood and Chris Woakes. It’s not just about the two lower orders. Cummins has more runs than the England opener Rory Burns, who has played one more innings. Starc has outscored Haseeb Hameed, Jos Buttler and Zak Crawley. Statisticians noted the quirk on day two here that Australia’s 10th-wicket partnership averaging 14 for the series was better than England’s opening partnership of 12.77. Those numbers go far further. Australia’s eighth-wicket partnership is 44, which is better than any England partnership except for the third-wicket work between Joe Root and Dawid Malan. Australia’s ninth-wicket partnership of 29.6 only trails England’s third wicket and fifth wicket, where Ben Stokes has done some tough work with a range of partners. All through the series, England’s specialist batters have struggled while Australia’s bowlers have increased the pain in the form of runs. No wonder, then, that Lyon played with the breezy freedom of a man whose two shots felt entirely sufficient to deal with what was in front of him, as Wood bowled bumper after bumper having already lured Starc and Cummins to their downfall in the same way. As has been the case all series, whatever Australia has done has worked. One side is staring down at the pitch with misgivings, the other is watching something rare take flight against the blue, blue sky.India’s Virat Kohli has stepped down as captain of the Test side following their 2-1 series defeat by South Africa, saying of his time in charge: “I’ve left nothing out there.” On Friday, as his side lost by seven wickets in Cape Town, he conceded it had been “a tough one to take” after India had won last month’s first Test. The 33-year-old first led his country in red-ball cricket temporarily during the winter tour of Australia in 2014 before he permanently took the reins from MS Dhoni at the end of the series. Acknowledging his predecessor, Kohli said in a statement: “A big thank you to MS Dhoni who believed in me as captain and found me to be an able individual who could take Indian cricket forward.” In the statement, posted on Twitter, he added: “It’s been seven years of hard work, toil and relentless perseverance everyday to take the team in the right direction. I’ve done the job with absolute honesty and left nothing out there. Every thing has to come to a halt at some stage and for me as Test captain of India, it’s now. “There have been many ups and also some downs along the journey, but never has there been a lack of effort or lack of belief. I have always believed in giving my 120 percent in everything I do, and if I can’t do that, I know it’s not the right thing to do. I have absolute clarity in my heart and I cannot be dishonest to my team.” Kohli gave up the Twenty20 captaincy in September and was replaced as one-day international skipper in December, with Rohit Sharma taking over in both formats. Kohli led India in 68 Tests, winning 40 and losing 17. During his tenure they became the No 1 side in the ICC’s Test rankings and finished runners-up to New Zealand in last June’s World Test Championship final. The Board of Control for Cricket in India acknowledged the outgoing captain’s contribution on Twitter, congratulating Kohli “for his admirable leadership qualities that took the Test team to unprecedented heights”. Kohli has played 99 Tests and scored 7,962 runs at an average of 50.39. He has struck 27 Test centuries but his last three-figure score in red-ball cricket for his country came in November 2019, 15 matches and 27 innings ago. He missed the second Test in South Africa and managed a top score of 79 during the series.Pressure is mounting for Boris Johnson to resign after a tumultuous week of revelations about rule-breaking Downing Street parties, with senior Tory MP, Tobias Ellwood, saying the prime minister must “lead or step aside”. A growing number of Conservative MPs have called for him to go. Up to 20 Tories MPs are thought to have submitted letters of no confidence in Johnson, according to the Telegraph – although that is well short of the 54 needed to trigger a leadership vote. These are some of the Tories who have strongly criticised Johnson, with five publicly urging him to quit. Andrew Bridgen, MP for North West Leicestershire: I don’t need to see what Sue Gray says to know that for me, Boris Johnson has lost the moral authority to lead the country. If there’s another emergency where he has to call on the public to make sacrifices, he doesn’t have that authority. That makes his position in my book, as prime minister, completely untenable. It doesn’t matter whether the prime minster was present or not present – ultimately, he is responsible for what goes on in the government, he’s responsible for the culture in No 10 and what we’re seeing is a culture where there’s one rule for them and the rest of us do what we’re told, and that’s just not acceptable. I’m not sure that any apology is going to put that right. Tobias Ellwood, the chair of the defence select committee and MP for Bournemouth East: The prime minister must lead or step aside. We need leadership. Guy Opperman, pensions minister and MP for Hexham, said Johnson should stay in his post but was critical of the rule-breaking. His two boys died shortly after birth. He said: I feel pretty emotional about this because in May 2020 my wife and kids were unwell and they went to hospital. I was not able to go there to support them. And I’ve got constituents who couldn’t go to the care homes, to funerals, who were obviously obeying the rules and quite clearly in No 10 at that time there were a number of people not behaving appropriately. I feel pretty emotional that I wasn’t able to support my wife and kids. Caroline Nokes, MP for Romsey and Southampton North: There are a lot of MPs in parliament who owe their seats to him. There are also MPs like me that recognise that when it came to winning that election in 2019, he did a fantastic job but now, regretfully, he looks like a liability. He is damaging the entire Conservative brand. Sir Roger Gale, MP for North Thanet: After prime minister’s question time [on Wednesday], it sounds to me, I am afraid, very much as though politically the prime minister is a dead man walking. I think it’s serious. I think it’s very serious indeed. And I frankly think that he’s done a good job delivering certain things. But I think we’ve now got to the stage where, frankly, we have to find another leader. William Wragg, MP for Hazel Grove: I don’t think it should be left to the findings of a civil servant to determine the future of the prime minister and, indeed, who governs this country. The prime minister’s position is untenable.” Douglas Ross, leader of the Scottish Conservatives: I don’t think his position as prime minister and leader of the Conservative party is tenable and he does need to resign.Nancy Pelosi: Queen of Stonks Here’s a thorny philosophical quandary for you: if you’re a politician who shapes policy and is privy to confidential information that will impact the stock market, should you and your immediate family be able to trade individual stocks? For most people the answer to this is “hell no”. Allowing lawmakers to buy and sell individual stocks raises glaringly obvious conflict of interest issues: America may be divided on a lot of things but the country is incredibly unified on this. A recent poll found that found that 76% of voters believe that members of Congress and their spouses have an “unfair advantage” in the stock market – just 5% of respondents approved of members trading stocks. Were those 5% of respondents related to politicians, I wonder? Because the people on Capitol Hill sure seem to love playing the market. In the early days of the pandemic there were multiple scandals about well-timed stock trades by Republican and Democratic lawmakers. In one of the most egregious examples, Senator Richard Burr and his brother-in-law dumped $1.6m in stocks in February 2020 a week before the market crashed; Burr’s brother-in-law reportedly sold his holdings one minute after getting off the phone with the senator. There were the usual internal investigations into all these trades but nobody faced any meaningful consequences. Eventually the issue faded from the headlines. Now, however, political stocks are back in the spotlight. On Wednesday two Democratic senators (Jon Ossoff from Georgia and Mark Kelly from Arizona) introduced the Ban Congressional Stock Trading Act, which would prevent congressional lawmakers and their immediate families from picking stocks. Spotting that this would clearly go down well with the public, Republicans immediately got in on the act. Josh Hawley announced a competing proposal to limit stock trading just hours after. On Friday it was reported that Ted Cruz might introduce his own legislation. “Hawley and Cruz want to one-up each other,” a source told On The Money. “They don’t want to let the other one own the issue … they’d never join the other senator’s bill because it would mean they couldn’t be the star.” Hawley and Cruz aren’t exactly known for championing progressive issues: why are they so keen on being the face of this? Most likely, I reckon, because they don’t think the legislation will really go anywhere but championing it will make them look good. And also, of course, because it gives them a perfect opportunity to bash house speaker Nancy Pelosi who, along with her husband Paul Pelosi, are extremely active, and very successful in the market. Some young TikTokers have even started to watch her financial disclosures for stock tips. Pelosi, known as the Queen of Stonks, has become something of a meme. Funnily enough, Pelosi (who is one of the richest people in Congress) isn’t keen on the idea of having her stock market activities limited. “We are a free-market economy. They should be able to participate in that,” Pelosi told Insider when questioned on the issue last year. She conveniently ignored the fact that there are plenty of ways that politicians can participate in the stock market without it raising such ludicrous conflict of interest issues. They can passively invest in mutual funds or put their assets in a blind trust. Let’s be very clear here: for most people, actively trading individual stocks versus passively investing in index funds is a great way to lose money. There are endless studies on this. If you’ve got a track record of picking great stocks then you’re either very lucky or you might just have information other people can’t access. Last week, in an interview with the Guardian, Bernie Sanders lamented the fact that the Democrats have turned their back on the working class, leading Republicans to win more and more support from working people. Pelosi’s attitude toward stock trading is a perfect example of this phenomenon. Ossoff and Kelly’s bill to ban congressional stock trading is very good – and very overdue. But here’s what I’m afraid is going to happen now: Republicans will hijack the issue and endlessly message about Pelosi’s multimillion-dollar stock trades. They’ll cast her, and the Democrats, as out-of-touch elitists. Which of course, many of them are. The Democrats will lose even more support from working people – which they’ll most likely blame on progressives. The Week in Patriarchy is a newsletter about feminism: some readers might be wondering why I’m writing about stocks this week. Here’s the thing though: gender inequality is inextricably bound up with economic inequality. Feminism isn’t about championing women like Pelosi just because they’re women in high-powered positions: it’s about fighting for a more equal society. It’s a shame that the Democrats don’t seem to realise that. Judge gives man convicted of sexual assault choice of joining military or jail Brandon Scott Price, a former Kentucky jail guard convicted of sexually assaulting a female inmate, was recently told his one-year sentence would be probated (meaning no jail time) if he joined the US military. “You’re getting a huge break,” the male judge said. Price may have a little trouble enrolling, however, as an army spokesperson has said you’re not eligible for enlistment if you’re convicted for a sex offense. Which seems sensible since the military already has a massive sexual assault problem: female service members are reportedly more likely to be sexually assaulted by a colleague than shot by an enemy combatant at war. Judges sure seem to love finding ways for men to avoid jail time for sexual assault Price is hardly the only man to have a judge try and spare him jail time. In Illinois, 18-year-old Drew Clinton had his sexual assault conviction overturned this month after a judge said a prison sentence was “not just”. Last November a private school kid called Christopher Belter was given eight years’ probation instead of jail time for assaulting four teenage girls during parties at his parents’ house. The judge said he thought incarceration wasn’t “appropriate.” And we all remember Brock Turner, of course. There seems to be endless amounts of what the philosopher Kate Manne calls “himpathy” for men who hurt women. Indonesian woman flogged 100 times for adultery, man gets 15 lashes The man denied all wrongdoing, apparently, so the judges were more ‘lenient’ on him. Mississippi middle school offered girls shapewear to assist with ‘body image’ Parents were sent a letter explaining that girls are more likely to suffer from negative body than boys due to “unrealistic social and cultural beauty ideals”. The school offered to help out by sending the kids shapewear so they could mold themselves to those unrealistic ideals. Queen strips Prince Andrew of military roles and royal patronages This comes after a judge in New York ruled that the Duke of York can’t squirm his way out of a sexual abuse lawsuit brought against him. The week in pawtriarchy Last month a Canadian couple ordered a blender they were looking forward to preparing smoothies with. When the package arrived their three cats took a shining to the purr-chase and have been holding it captive for a month now. Their kitchen has become a war zone and people around the world, desperate for some good mews, are highly invested in the standoff. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for orderMy first love was Italian football. It was so flamboyant. Gianluca Vialli was my idol; he had this effortless style. I was also transfixed by the Football Italia show on Channel 4, James Richardson sitting by a swimming pool with his pink Gazzetta dello Sport and his tiny little cup. I said to Dad, “Why is his cup so small?” He had to explain it was an espresso, not a tiny cup of bog-standard tea. I can be romantic. When I proposed to Ab [Abbey Clancy, Crouch’s wife] in a villa in Ibiza I set up candles all the way downstairs so she could follow them to me. I once whisked her away for a weekend in Paris and surprised her with a new outfit each night. Not all of it was perfect, but I tried my best. When I played football I used to write little poems for her and leave them around the house. I should still do that really. I was very apprehensive about fatherhood. You just don’t know if you’ll be any good. Ab was very maternal. But babies weren’t a huge thing in my family. I have four kids now, I can safely say I’m quite good. Maybe football fans liked me because I’m one of them. Some players get caught up in their own hype. But I knew I was lucky. I enjoyed myself, people could relate to that. Some players don’t even smile when they score. I find that difficult to understand. I first did my robot dance at David Beckham’s house party before the 2006 World Cup. After a few drinks I thought, “I’ll do something stupid on the way to the toilet.” I didn’t know the camera got me. I shat myself when I saw it had been filmed. The lads were saying I should do the dance next time I scored. So I did. I’m the most political I’ve ever been. I recently had a meeting with Tracey Crouch, the former Sports Minister, and Prince William about the plight of non-league football, whose finances have been crippled by Covid. It’s so unfair. I joined Dulwich Hamlet as a 17-year-old and it opened my eyes to real football. This was people’s lives. A win mattered. Finances were hard. I’m a director there now, I’ve gone full circle. These clubs need help. I sometimes worry about getting dementia. As a tall player [6ft 7in], I headed more balls than anyone in Europe for five or six years, so if anyone is going to struggle, it will be me. As a kid I used to practise heading until my vision became impaired and I saw stars. Today, I would never do that with my children. But back then we weren’t to know. My greatest achievement was changing people’s opinions of me. I was very different to a lot of footballers, so I got a lot of stick. The tall gags got a bit tiresome. And the terraces aren’t kind to a young, skinny 18-year-old lad. But to overcome all that and play for England meant I’d proved myself. Peter Crouch: Save Our Beautiful Game is available on discovery+ nowBack in the day, mixtapes – on actual cassettes – were given away to friends, lovers and bandmates. They were vectors of shared passion, party playlists or just a way of introducing yourself. Caprisongs, British R&amp;B singer FKA twigs’s third album-length project overall, is a self-declared mixtape, not merely in the hip-hop sense of a record put out for free, but in the old-fashioned one. It starts with the plasticky clunk of a tape being inserted into a deck. Tellingly, it feels addressed to twigs herself as much as anyone else, although this is a record that very much reintroduces her, and to a wider audience. Through 17 tracks, this formerly niche artiste makes a bid for the mainstream, in the company of featured guests (eight in total) and producers (22 all told), friends (many) and a perfumer called Christi who is also an astrology buff. One significant presence is the electronic musician Arca, who worked on twigs’s LP1 (2014), among other releases. But all sorts of helpmeets had a hand in this effort: Welsh producer Koreless, Kanye alumnus Mike Dean, in-demand creative Sega Bodega and Nick Cave associate Warren Ellis. (Twigs and El Guincho co-executive produce.) If twigs’s previous album, Magdalene (2019), was a conceptual deep-dive into the historical figure of Mary Magdalene conducted through left-field digitals, Caprisongs collates a set of more ephemeral pop tunes in which twigs broadcasts selfhood 17 ways, finding unexpected common sonic ground with artists such as Grimes, Charli XCX and Self Esteem. Magdalene pivoted around a neglected herstory; Caprisongs is both intimately autobiographical and keen to display how twigs, until now something of a cult figure, is actually very much up for wider worship. It is very bop-led. If twigs’s recent single alongside the Weeknd, Tears in the Club, found her reclaiming her body for herself after a relationship, on Oh My Love, a slow slice of trap-infused R&amp;B, she aches at a lack of clarity in a love affair. Papi Bones borrows from dancehall reggae and celebrates moving friskily. It’s a practice central to twigs’s artistry – she is a former dancer who incorporates physical disciplines from pole dancing to martial arts into her work; Kate Bush is a clear foremother, both physically and vocally. All of these party tunes mark twigs’s emphatic arrival into the pop space, following last November’s Measure of a Man – from the soundtrack to the film The King’s Man – a bold repositioning that was basically a Bond theme manqué. But although friskiness is very much on her mind, it’s impossible to hear Caprisongs without reference to trauma. Just over a year ago, twigs – born Tahliah Debrett Barnett – went public with a lawsuit against her former partner, an infamous US actor, for sexual battery, assault and infliction of emotional distress. Despite being uncomfortable with the glare of intrusive public scrutiny Barnett had endured in a previous relationship with another actor, she was keen to detail the tactics of coercive control her more recent former partner had used, especially in the wake of lockdown, where at-risk women were shuttered with potentially volatile individuals. Caprisongs is very much about how OK twigs is now, and how suffering through high-profile relationships is emphatically not her USP. It also looks back to the more distant past. On the UK-themed Darjeeling, a small-town girl moves to the big city. Which Way ponders choices Barnett has made on the way up. “I had a good job and I left, I left cos I felt it was right,” she sings. “Left! Right!” But many of these tunes do deal in deeper self-understanding, often through the prism of astrology. “Sagimoon, Pisceveen… Caprisun,” specifies the standout Meta Angel (“Pisceveen” means, at a guess, Venus in Pisces). The outro to Oh My Love declares the importance of knowing your worth, of a piece with Self Esteem’s recent LP Prioritise Pleasure. The dreamy music-box tune Lightbeamers starts like a series of notes to self: “Did you give yourself away, again? Don’t do it again.” “When I’m winning I’m a flyer, soprano in the choir,” sings twigs, at her highest. “I wanted to die, I’m just being honest,” she sings on Thank You Song, recalling herself at her lowest. No woman should be defined by their relationships with men; the work of female musicians should not be understood in relation to their male exes. But Caprisongs feels like it’s about learning, on every level. And as twigs points out on the biography that accompanies this release: “I learned to write a hook.”CMAT isn’t a new Gen-Z acronym you haven’t heard of yet - it stands for Ciara Mary-Alice Thompson, a bubbly, acerbic 25-year-old from Dublin. Her tacky-glam country-pop channels the Nashville greats plus references to Robbie Williams, Philip Larkin, Waitrose and Irish novelist Marian Keyes. “The only way to make country music in 2020 is to completely bastardise it,” she told the NME last year, adding that her musical style is a mashup of Dolly Parton, Weird Al Yankovic and Katy Perry. Her songs are mournful yet accessible, emotionally literate and cleverly crafted, but, crucially, with a huge sense of humour, which will appeal to fans of 2021’s newly crowned queen of Britpop, Self Esteem. Thompson was originally in an electro duo, but a songwriting masterclass with pop dynamo Charli XCX – and some wise words from the lady herself – convinced the Irish musician to pursue a solo career. She started as she meant to go on; her debut track in 2020, Another Day (KFC), was a doo-wop bop about being dumped so she “double downed on chicken for some moral support”. (To promote it, she livestreamed herself eating an 80-piece bucket while listening to 2000s indie on Instagram.) Now an album is on the horizon, full of hugely catchy songs about flirting, longing and cheating, such as Every Bottle (Is My Boyfriend), I Wanna Be a Cowboy, Baby! and the superb I Don’t Really Care For You. She promises it sounds like “the Nolans making a record with Glen Campbell, which would go on to be covered by Paris Hilton”: the combination you never knew you needed. Yee-haw! If My Wife New I’d Be Dead is out on 4 March on AWAL. CMAT tours the UK and Ireland from MarchElla Dalby would have been 16 this summer. She loved Latin American and ballroom dancing. Her parents were separated, but she saw her father, Tom, every weekend, as part of a close extended family. In the early hours of 28 May 2018, in the kitchen of her Gloucester home, Ella, 11, was stabbed 24 times by Christopher Boon, 28, her stepfather. Ella was trying to protect her mother, Laura Mortimer, 31, whom she adored. Laura was stabbed 18 times in what the judge called “wanton savagery”. Boon fled, leaving his and Laura’s two younger daughters, aged six and two, alone in the house after telling them that he had killed their mummy and sister. On Wednesday, a joint investigation known as a domestic homicide review (DHR) and a serious case review – called when a child or vulnerable adult dies or is injured under certain circumstances – will be published, more than three years after the deaths. A DHR is intended to allow lessons to be learned and recommendations made. Astonishingly, Wednesday’s DHR is in its 14th draft and some recommendations have already been implemented. “In the first draft, my daughter was described as an alcoholic, rubbish mum. It was awful,” said Mortimer’s mother, Hilary Stinchcombe. “Laura had her own successful wedding planning business. She was a wonderful mother. The night she died she’d been to her auntie’s pub, but that doesn’t make her a drunk. The DHR also had a number of facts wrong, so how can the right lessons be learned?” After the deaths, Stinchcombe, Ella’s paternal grandmother Kim Clements, Ella’s aunt Jo Piontek and Sue Haile – an advocate for the charity Advocacy After Fatal Domestic Abuse, (AAFDA), which supports families after a killing – became a formidable quartet battling to establish the truth and reclaim Mortimer’s reputation. What they have achieved, supported by Nicole Jacobs, the independent chair of the DHR and now the domestic abuse commissioner for England and Wales, may prove groundbreaking. “The attitude of the DHR panel when we first turned up with our questions was, ‘What on earth are you doing here?’” Clements said. “We, the panel, are here to discuss the loved ones you have lost – but that has nothing to do with you.” “Families are too often pushed to the back of the queue in the DHR process,” said Haile, who is completing a PhD on women’s voices in DHRs. “Families know stuff that agencies don’t,” added Frank Mullane, the AAFDA’s founder. Now, Stinchcombe, Piontek and Clements hope that if the DHR’s recommendations are widely implemented, Ella’s death may yet save other children. Domestic abuse features in 41% of child deaths and stepchildren face a higher risk. For seven years from the age of four, Ella’s behavioural problems at school were interpreted as a conduct issue, not a signal that at home she and her mother were under duress. The family say that the DHR’s recommendations tackle the patchy understanding of coercive control demonstrated by the police, social workers, teachers and GPs. Perpetrators of abuse use psychological, emotional, financial, sexual and physical means to isolate, intimidate and invisibly incarcerate a partner. It takes skill to detect a pervasive pattern of abuse and not an alleged sudden “loss of control”. So, for Mortimer and Ella, what clues were missed? Within weeks of meeting Mortimer in 2010, Boon had moved into her home. Within months, she was pregnant. What the family didn’t know – and police didn’t divulge – is that earlier in 2010, Boon had been given a suspended sentence for assaulting his previous partner and her mother in front of two children. Between 2011 and 2018, Ella’s behaviour became an issue. In school meetings, Boon was always present, while Ella’s father was excluded. The DHR calls for clarity in the recording of family relationships and the people involved in decision making. Boon claimed Ella had attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and that she told lies, and he treated her differently from his two biological children. “Ella would often say she didn’t like Chris,” said Clements. “But when I asked why, she would change the subject. Perhaps she had conflicted loyalties, not wanting to upset us or her mum.” The family subsequently discovered that all of Mortimer’s income was going into Boon’s account. A fantasist, he was £28,000 in debt. “He hid the back-door key and he and Laura only had one key to the front door,” said Piontek. “So she had to be home to let him in.” Mortimer often saw her GP and attended hospital with leg, stomach and back pains, but no one asked her about domestic abuse. The family say an opportunity was lost on Boxing Day, 2014. Ella and her mother, who was in a distressed state, had run to a neighbour. Mortimer said Boon had punched her in the face, but subsequently changed her story and refused to press charges. A social worker saw Boon as a high risk. She called the school, but didn’t explain why she was making inquiries. In April, the case was closed. Mortimer could have been given more support – although she have may decided then that remaining in the relationship was safer. In 2017, according to the Femicide Census, 55% of women killed by an ex-partner were murdered in the first month of separation, 87% in the first year. Prof Jane Monckton Smith in her book, In Control – Dangerous Relationships and How they End in Murder, has identified an eight-stage homicide timeline that begins with the abuser “love bombing” a victim, then moves on to isolation. “I thought she was writing about Boon. It was exactly what happened,” said Piontek. The DHR recommends that frontline professionals are trained by Monckton Smith. In hundreds of DHRs, similar recommendations have been made and ignored. They include improved collaboration between agencies, risk assessment, mental health awareness and management of serial perpetrators. Sophie Naftalin, a solicitor with Bhatt Murphy, has worked on 10 DHRs. She said: “Some DHRS are excellent, but as a lawyer my job is to get to the truth. Unlike a coroner’s inquest, where the documents are available to the family, DHRs rely on agencies to self-report. Some may be upfront and truthful; others are not. Even when truthful, the significance of what might be important may not be understood. DHRs give the appearance of investigation and reflection but too often they are a thoroughly blunt tool. That needs to change.” Last year, the Femicide Working Group, a coalition of NGOs and lawyers who support and represent bereaved families in investigations, campaigned for a central repository for all DHRs, investigations into police conduct and coroners’ findings and a national oversight mechanism to ensure recommendations are implemented. This is also one of the aims of the Observer’s End Femicide campaign, launched with the Femicide Census. The Home Office has now provided funding for a DHR repository alongside which the Domestic Abuse Commissioner’s office is developing a national oversight mechanism, which could come into operation this year. “I believe that this new mechanism can help prevent future tragedies,” said Jacobs. Stinchcombe is a fierce defender of her granddaughters’ happiness. Both children are receiving therapy. Piontek said of one niece: “We went to the pantomime to see Snow White. She was so upset when a [prop] knife was brought out in the forest she didn’t sleep for two nights.” Boon is serving 29 years. The little girl’s constant refrain is: “I’ve got 26 more years and then we’ll never be able to leave the house again because Chris will be out.” In January 2018, Mortimer learned that Boon had had an affair. In May, days before her death, she said she’d told him to leave the house. Ten days before the killings, her older child said at her school that her father had punched the door and hurt his hand – “It was a bit scary.” “Why didn’t the school and social workers and police join up the dots?” said Clements. “If they had, Laura and Ella might still be here.”Keir Starmer has ramped up the pressure on Boris Johnson as the prime minister fights to save his job, arguing that it is in the “national interest” that he steps down as he is “unable to lead”. In a speech to the Fabian Society conference, the Labour leader accused the Conservatives of running the NHS into the ground because they are “too preoccupied defending his rule-breaking”. Stressing that “waiting times were the shortest on record” when Labour left government 12 years ago, he said: “Rather than concentrating on getting through the pandemic and bringing down waiting lists, this self-indulgent Tory party is instead having a fight about a leader who they should have known from the start is not fit for office.” “We are witnessing the broken spectacle of a prime minister mired in deceit and deception, unable to lead,” Starmer said, adding that it was “very important that the Tory party does what it needs to do and gets rid of him”. Responding to questions after his speech, Starmer said the revelations about coronavirus rule breaches in Downing Street had exacerbated issues people were facing with their mental wellbeing. He said: “I think, by the way, the scandal of partygate, for want of a better word … what’s happened in recent weeks, where it has become obvious that while the vast majority of the British public were obeying the laws the government made, the government and the prime minister were partying in Downing Street. I think that has added to mental health stress because so many people are now asking themselves: ‘Why on earth did I do that then, while they were doing what they were doing?’” The opposition is not alone in calling for Johnson to step down over rule-breaking after his public apology to the Queen on Friday for the parties that took place on the eve of her husband’s funeral. On Saturday Tobias Ellwood, the chair of the defence select committee, said that “we need leadership” and Johnson must “lead or step aside”. Asked about the emerging claims of regular “wine-time Friday” gatherings in No 10 despite restrictions, Andrew Bridgen, the MP for North West Leicestershire and a former Johnson ally, repeated his calls for the PM to resign, telling BBC Breakfast: “It doesn’t matter whether the prime minster was present or not present – ultimately, he is responsible for what goes on in the government, he’s responsible for the culture in No 10 and what we’re seeing is a culture where there’s one rule for them and the rest of us do what we’re told.” He later told Sky News that Johnson’s future as prime minister was “untenable”. He said he had received hundreds of emails from his constituents about the issue. “We had 150 emails regarding the prime minister’s position. We cleared them down … and by midday there were another 168.” He said there was a “pattern of behaviour that the inner circle can do what they want and the rest of us have to what we are told”. “The prime minister needs to do the honourable thing and call it a day for the good of the country.” The claims of end-of-week drinks being held during a time when indoor household mixing was prohibited were reported on Friday evening by the Mirror, which said that Johnson knew about the socialising and that staff invested in a special drinks fridge. A No 10 spokesperson said: “There is an ongoing investigation to establish the facts around the nature of gatherings, including attendance, setting and the purpose, with reference to adherence to the guidance at the time. The findings will be made public in due course.” However, the prime minister is reportedly preparing a plan to stay in the job in which top officials may be sacked instead of him. First reported by the Independent, the drive has been dubbed “Operation Save Big Dog” by Johnson himself, and could involve his chief of staff, Dan Rosenfield, and his private secretary and author of the infamous “bring your own booze” email, Martin Reynolds, being asked to take the hit for the scandal, which has caused the Tories to plunge in the polls. The relaxation of Covid restrictions is another avenue being considered by Johnson in the fight to salvage his position. The prime minister has been in contact with the political strategist Lynton Crosby, according to a report in the Telegraph, and will seek to limit the fallout from “partygate” by lifting plan B measures, such as work-from-home guidance, at the end of the month. The restrictions are due to expire on 26 January subject to a review.Manchester United leapfrogged Tottenham to move into third with a blistering defeat of Birmingham to kickstart their year. Marc Skinner’s side, in search of Champions League qualification for the first time, sit a point above Spurs and four away from the leaders, Arsenal, albeit having played a game more after Covid cancellations hit scheduling. United had clearly heeded the warning of the increased threat of Birmingham after their impressive 2-0 win over Arsenal last week. The Blues stunned the undefeated Gunners to secure a first win of the season. “It wasn’t a banana skin but it was a game that could have easily thrown us off if we didn’t attack it in the right way,” said the former Birmingham manager Skinner. “I’m a huge fan of Birmingham the club, in terms of the opportunity it gives people, but not for this 90 minutes. Now I can return to being a fan of the people of the club. We did our job and I’m Manchester United through and through while I’m here.” Within minutes of kick-off, United’s intent was clear, as the Norway midfielder Vilde Bøe Risa forced a fine save from Emily Ramsey, with the follow-up cleared off the line. Ramsey, on loan from United for the season, had performed well in the victory over Arsenal but there was little she could do with her team failing to stem wave after wave of her parent club’s attacks. At the heart of the home team’s dynamic play was Leah Galton, the winger providing an assist and scoring twice within six first-half minutes to quash any confidence Birmingham may have had after lifting themselves off the bottom of the table. First, she cut back for Katie Zelem, who clipped the ball over Ramsey with one touch. Then, Galton pounced on Alessia Russo’s teasing ball across the face of goal, with Louise Quinn unable to divert its trajectory, to fire in from close range. Two minutes later she had her second. A line-splitting pass from the right-back Ona Batlle was met by Ella Toone, whose cross found Galton and she fired in near the far post. Those body blows were just reward for the tactical upending of the previously well-organised Birmingham under their interim manager, Darren Carter. The fourth goal was particularly cruel, as Toone’s swerving strike from distance crashed off the underside of the bar before bouncing off Ramsey’s back and in. All but over, the game was quieter after the restart but there was time for Russo to head in a cross from the substitute Hannah Blundell. “I’ve just said to the players there it’s the highs and lows of football,” said Carter. “I’ve been through it plenty of times in my career, where you’ve got a fantastic result one week and then the game’s got a funny way of knocking you on your backside the next. “We came out flat, we came out sluggish in that first 20 minutes and just said to the players that, even when you’re not at your best, you’ve got to find a way to grind it out and stay in a game and to concede was it three goals in six minutes is criminal and it can’t happen.”Tottenham have been left furious after the Premier League accepted Arsenal’s request to call off Sunday’s north London derby, believing rules regarding coronavirus-related postponements have been manipulated to create “unintended consequences”. Arsenal would have been without at least 15 first-teamers for their visit to Tottenham Hotspur Stadium and requested the postponement because they felt they would be unable to meet the league’s criteria for fulfilling a fixture. At the time of the league’s decision Martin Ødegaard was the only one of those players known to have Covid-19, although at least one more squad member is understood to have tested positive on Saturday. Injuries and a four-strong contingent at the Africa Cup of Nations formed the core of Arsenal’s request and, in a strongly worded statement, Spurs criticised the rules’ inconsistency. “We are extremely surprised that this application has been approved,” the statement read. “We ourselves were disqualified from the European Conference League after a significant number of Covid cases meant we needed to reschedule a fixture [against Rennes] and our application to move our Leicester fixture [on 16 December] was not approved – only for it to be subsequently postponed when Leicester applied. “The original intention of the guidance was to deal with player availability directly affected by Covid cases, resulting in depleted squads that when taken together with injuries would result in the club being unable to field a team. We do not believe it was the intent to deal with player availability unrelated to Covid. “We may now be seeing the unintended consequences of this rule. It is important to have clarity and consistency on the application of the rule. Yet again fans have seen their plans disrupted at unacceptably short notice.” The league’s guidance, which was adapted in December amid the spike of Omicron cases, says criteria to apply for postponement include: “Where a club has been unable to field 13 outfield players and a goalkeeper for a match due to Covid-19 infections, injuries, illness and/or those isolating.” Beyond their Covid cases, Arsenal are missing at least eight players with injury. Granit Xhaka would also have been absent through suspension, although that was not a factor in the league’s decision. There is a sense at Spurs and other rivals for top-four places that Arsenal are pushing the rules to the limit. The Chelsea manager, Thomas Tuchel, responded: “It’s much better for me not to answer the question,” when asked about the postponement, but the Premier League has arguably set a precedent that was impossible to unravel. When Leicester’s match at Everton, scheduled for 11 January, was called off the league cited “Covid-19 cases, injuries and players on international duty at the Africa Cup of Nations” as the contributing factors. The same three reasons were given in justifying the derby’s postponement, with the difference that “existing and recent injuries” were cited. One element of Arsenal’s stance is that they have had to deal with 11 Covid-19 cases in their first team since 21 December and there have been knock-on effects in terms of fitness, player welfare and pressure on their squad. They depleted their resources, however, by sending Ainsley Maitland-Niles and Folarin Balogun out on loan this month. This is their third game to be postponed in the last four weeks: Covid cases at Wolves forced a Premier League game scheduled for 28 December to be called off, while their Carabao Cup semi-final first leg against Liverpool was controversially moved after a spate of cases among Jürgen Klopp’s squad that turned out to be false positives. Although it may raise eyebrows that a well-stocked Arsenal Under-21s team of players signed on professional contracts played against West Ham on Friday night and Chelsea 72 hours previously, with a further four of its members being named as unused substitutes for the first-team’s tie at Anfield on Thursday, there is no obligation for clubs to delve into their age-group squads to avoid postponement unless those players are “appropriately experienced”. That definition applies to those who have played at least one senior game for that club, another Premier League or EFL club, or an overseas club in the current season, with the exception of the FA Cup third round. It leaves the Premier League in an invidious position. Neither Arsenal nor any of the other clubs involved in the season’s 21 postponed games to date have pulled off anything that is outside the regulations, but it is clear they are being stretched to their limit and matches have been called off that are likely to have gone ahead before the pandemic. Mikel Arteta himself admitted on Friday, hours before Arsenal submitted their request, that fixture pile-ups have left a cloud hanging over the 2021-22 campaign. He was asked whether the postponement of Saturday’s match between Burnley and Leicester, which leaves the Clarets with four games in hand on some rivals, was evidence the league’s integrity has been compromised. “I think it has already,” he said. “You talk about a team that is behind on those numbers, it’s just not the same: not the same level of competition, not the same level of availability. I don’t know when they’re going to have to play those games but it changes, certainly it’s different, it’s not the regulations we are used to. We are trying to adapt, everyone is trying to do their best, but it’s a big question mark.”It is fair to say that Kevin De Bruyne has history with Chelsea. And not only because of his frustrating spell at the club earlier in his career. The Manchester City midfielder was wounded on every level by them in last season’s Champions League final – roughed up by Antonio Rüdiger, his game ended early with a fractured eye socket; condemned, as well, to a runners-up medal. This was a measure of revenge. It had been a meandering meeting of first versus distant second in the Premier League, marked mainly by what did not happen. Romelu Lukaku did not execute a straightforward pass which could have set up Hakim Ziyech and the Chelsea striker did not beat Ederson when through on goal. For City Jack Grealish did not finish when one on one with Kepa Arrizabalaga. But City were the better team, Chelsea simply not showing enough ambition, and De Bruyne made the difference with a goal that showcased so many of his best qualities. There was the intelligence to sniff out the space between the lines, getting goalside of N’Golo Kanté, and then the strength to ride the Chelsea midfielder’s attempted slide tackle. Finally, when neither Thiago Silva nor Mateo Kovacic could get close to him, there was a glorious right-footed curler from outside the area that was out of the reach of Arrizabalaga, who appeared to show him too much of the far corner. Chelsea had needed to win to keep their faint hopes of a title challenge alive but City, who kicked off 10 points clear of the visitors, will not be caught by them now. Can Liverpool stop City? It feels unlikely after this, a 12th league win on the spin for Pep Guardiola’s machine. He is primed for a fourth title in five years and this is what a dynasty looks like. For Chelsea it is now two wins in eight in the competition. They have let their standards slip. City carry such a fear factor that opposing teams can have damage limitation as a legitimate end. Still, it was disappointing to see how Chelsea set up, Thomas Tuchel’s back three looking more like a five and Christian Pulisic and Ziyech often deep in the inside forward roles. Mason Mount would be used only as an 81st-minute substitute. Chelsea were happy to cede the initiative to City, asking them whether they could break them down. “Boring, boring Chelsea,” grumbled the home crowd. With Raheem Sterling too quick for Marcos Alonso on the City right, the battle lines were drawn early on, the hosts on the front foot, dominating the ball, probing for incision. Chelsea wanted to counter and they had the chances to do so, mainly in the opening quarter of the game, only to miss the final pass. Tuchel’s trademark brand of professional dramatics were on show because Ziyech was guilty of misplacing two balls, one for Lukaku, who had rushed up the inside-right channel. But it was the centre-forward who erred most grievously in the 10th minute. Lukaku had benefited when John Stones missed a tackle, allowing him to surge forward, and he had the option to shoot or to go left or right. He chose the latter, trying to usher in Ziyech, only to overhit the pass dreadfully. Ziyech was also offside. It felt as if Chelsea could live to regret that. They defended well in front of their penalty area but they struggled to get out of their half, especially before the interval – a consequence of how high and aggressively City pressed. Stones had headed straight at Arrizabalaga from a corner in the 14th minute and a snapshot of the first period from a City point of view came shortly after the half-hour. Phil Foden, who played in the false nine role, sliced up the inside left, exploding past a clutch of dark blue shirts to cross, but there was nobody attacking the six-yard box. The big moment of the first half came on 39 minutes. Alonso played Kovacic into trouble and, with De Bruyne all over him, the Chelsea midfielder tried to move it square. De Bruyne made the tackle and the ball spun kindly for Grealish who, rather abruptly, had only Arrizabalaga to beat. Chelsea were exposed but Grealish could not finish, Arrizabalaga out quickly and able to turn his shot past the post. Chelsea had not mustered a shot on goal before the interval but they sprang forward to do so straight after the restart when Kovacic released Lukaku. The striker knew what he wanted to do: open up his body and bend a left-footed shot past Ederson, who was high off his line. The trouble was that everybody in the stadium also knew the plan, including Ederson, who dived right to save. It would be Chelsea’s only shot on target and, for Lukaku, it would be a day to forget. Tuchel apart, there was for long spells a strange lack of energy about such a big game, including from the stands. The Chelsea support waved inflatables of the Champions League trophy; their City counterparts searched for something to get behind. De Bruyne provided it. He had worked Arrizabalaga with a free-kick and Sterling had dragged a shot wide of the far post from a Foden pass when De Bruyne bent the game to the force of his will. The Chelsea substitute, Timo Werner, would see a shot blocked while Foden fired high late on. But City had done enough.David Hytner was at the Etihad, and his report has landed. Clickity click! Thanks for reading this MBM. A smiling Pep Guardiola is asked by BT if his side deserved their win. “Absolutely. The way we played, everything we have done. We can not forget we played the European champion, they are incredible. You try to find spaces, but they are not there. They were waiting for a transition to punish us, but we won from a transition. We created enough chances. The team were incredible, brilliant. We won, what we have done, we have won it together. Kevin De Bruyne is world class but humble with the humility to do everything for the team. I want more of him, because I know he can do it. I am so satisfied for him. He has everything. He knows what he can do. His mum and dad have to be so proud.” “If City keep winning every game, nobody can catch them.” On that subject, their next three matches are against Southampton, Brentford and Norwich, three teams in the bottom half of the table. It might be prudent for Chelsea and Liverpool to concentrate their hopes and dreams on the cups. Thomas Tuchel is happy with his defenders, not so chuffed with his attackers, telling BT: “The result is disappointing, but this can happen when you play at City. I thought we deserved a draw, we defended very well. We did not allow big chances. We were not under so much pressure. Performance wise, this is OK. The commitment, I am absolutely OK. A draw would be a fair result but we don’t have it. We have won games like this against City, so it feels very different! We had eight or nine offensive transitions, but had zero touches in the box. That was a big problem today, the performance of our front players. A lack of position, timing and composure. We lost too many balls too easily. Romelu Lukaku sometimes needs to do the service, he is included in this, he had many ball losses in very promising circumstances, he had a huge chance. Of course we want to serve him, but he is part of the team, and the performance up front, we can do much better. We will never give up, but if City keep winning every game, nobody can catch them.” Kevin De Bruyne talks to BT. “It’s a big game. They had a very good plan and were tight defensively but we played a pretty good game and it was nice to score the goal. The team played well. We knew if we won today we’d make the gap bigger, but we don’t have to look at that. We’ve been in this situation before, and a lot of things can change, the momentum can swing quickly. There is another team dangling there. We can only try to win our games, and that is it.” That’s City’s 12th successive Premier League win. Chelsea by contrast have only won one of their last six, and so the top of the table looks like this: It’s probably fair to say the title is now City’s to lose. Chelsea’s race certainly looks run. Liverpool could put a little bit of pressure on the champs by winning both of their games in hand, but even then they’d also need to beat City at the Etihad in April, and still hope Pep Guardiola’s relentless team somehow misplace their mojo. An awful lot of variables there, and you wouldn’t bet the farm on it. Manchester City go 13 points clear of Chelsea at the top, thanks to Kevin De Bruyne’s wonder strike! 90 min +3: Walker trundles a cross through the six-yard box from the right. Jesus can’t quite reach it, not that it’s likely to matter. 90 min +2: Rudiger launches long. City mop up with ease. Lukaku can’t get a sniff. 90 min +1: Kante rolls a simple pass out of play for a throw to City. Chelsea’s race looks run, in more ways than one. 90 min: Alonso whips a pass down the right in the hope of releasing Werner. The striker, not for the first time in his career, has gone way too early, and the flag goes up. There will be three extra minutes. 88 min: Another long pass in Lukaku’s direction. Ederson races out of his box to head clear. The City fans enjoyed that. They’re also appreciative of Foden, who receives a warm ovation as he departs, to be replaced by Jesus. 86 min: Grealish sashays down the left and creams a shot goalwards from a tight angle. Kepa does extremely well to parry, then acrobatically stops the ball going out for a corner. If there’s to be another goal, this is much more likely to end 2-0 than 1-1. 84 min: De Bruyne is replaced by Gundogan. 83 min: Sterling romps down the right and feeds Foden, who larrups over the bar from the edge of the box. Not so far away. 82 min: Mount tries to release Lukaku but only manages to sail the ball straight through to Ederson. On the touchline, Tuchel throws his arms wide, striking the internationally recognised pose for Why Do I Bother? 81 min: Chelsea’s title hopes are fast disappearing down the swanny, so it’s time for one last throw of the dice. On comes Mount - strange that we’ve not seen him earlier - for Alonso. 80 min: Silva goes sliding in on Alonso, out on the left. Free kick, and a chance to load the box. Hudson-Odoi takes, and sends a strange flat delivery into the area. Easy for De Bruyne to clear. Incredibly poor. 79 min: Azpilicueta finds a bit of space down the right and fires a low cross into the mixer. Ederson flops on the ball calmly, despite plenty of Chelsea presence. 78 min: Foden barrels down the middle of the park. He’s got Sterling to his right. One pass, and he’d be free. But Silva gets in the road to put a stop to Foden’s notions. Fine last-ditch defending. 76 min: City knock it around in a mellow style. They’ll be feeling very good about themselves right now. 74 min: Relief for City as De Bruyne is almost immediately back up and running. 73 min: The goalscorer De Bruyne is down, holding his left ankle. On comes the trainer. 72 min: Chelsea try to hit back immediately. Alonso swings in from the left. Azpilicueta, at the far post, cuts back for Werner, who slams straight at Laporte from six yards. A fine block. De Bruyne battles his way past Kante into space down the left, glides infield, uses Silva as a shield, and curls a gorgeous shot around the defender and into the bottom right. Kepa, at full stretch, had no chance. What a goal! A goal that takes City ever closer to the title. They’ll be 13 points clear! 69 min: Chelsea make a double change, replacing Pulisic and Ziyech with Werner and Hudson-Odoi. 68 min: Lukaku is robbed by Rodri, who sends Sterling racing down the inside-right channel. Sterling enters the box, uses Sarr as a shield, and drags a shot across Kepa and inches wide of the left-hand post. 67 min: Lukaku battles for a header but can’t get anything on target. No panic for City. 66 min: A rare period of Chelsea possession results in a free kick just inside City territory. Kovacic hits it long for Alonso, who wins a corner out on the left. Ziyech will take. 64 min: De Bruyne hits it deep. Foden shapes to volley spectacularly, only to have the ball taken away from him by his own team-mate Silva. Howls of frustration echo around the Etihad. Chelsea clear their lines. 63 min: De Bruyne curls powerfully towards the top left. Kepa is behind it all the way, and palms over for a corner on the left. De Bruyne will take that, too. 62 min: Grealish shakes his hips to get past Azpilicueta, and is about to enter the box when he’s clipped by the Chelsea man. A free kick to the left of the D. De Bruyne’s eyes light up. 61 min: Silva dribbles down the inside-right channel with purpose, reaching the byline before attempting a cutback for Sterling. The ball takes a deflection and rolls softly into the arms of Kepa. 59 min: Kovacic tries to release Lukaku down the middle, but clumsily clanks the pass straight through to Kepa. He has the good grace to apologise to his team-mate, who had made a promising run. 57 min: City force a corner down the right. Foden takes, and whips it towards the near post. Azpilicueta flashes a header behind for another corner. That was very close to an own goal. Chelsea’s captain does better with take two, heading firmly clear. 55 min: Sterling drops a shoulder and dribbles into the box from the right wing. He squeezes between Alonso and Kante and goes over. He wants a penalty, and he might have had a case, had Silva not been caught offside in the build-up. 53 min: Walker is clipped by Kovacic, 25 yards from goal. A free kick, just to the right of centre. It’s a dangerous position, but De Bruyne weakly floats an uncharacteristically dreadful chip straight into Kepa’s arms. 52 min: Grealish fizzes a low cross through the Chelsea six-yard box from the left. The box is full of defenders, but no attackers, and flies harmlessly away from danger. 51 min: City ping it hither and yon, but Chelsea hold their line on the edge of the box. There’s no way through. 49 min: Lukaku plays a cute ball around the corner, and looks to have sent Ziyech free down the left. But Walker turns on the jets to intercept. What acceleration! 47 min: City immediately get back into their pass-and-move groove. De Bruyne slips into space down the left and whistles a low ball into the box. Sterling stretches to meet but doesn’t get there. He’s lightly tugged by Alonso. City want a penalty, but they’re not getting one. Chelsea go straight up the other end, Kovacic releasing Lukaku down the middle. He’s one on one with Ederson. The keeper wins the battle with a fine parry. The ball breaks to Ziyech, who lashes over the bar. Quite the end-to-end start to the second half! City get the second half underway. No changes. Half-time entertainment. Meanwhile at the other end of the table ... Nothing happens during the bonus 60 seconds, and both teams troop off for their half-time oranges. It’s been tight and tense. 45 min: There will be one extra minute. 43 min: De Bruyne whistles a speculative shot over the bar from a tight position on the left. Chelsea could do with hearing the half-time whistle, even if they’ll be getting a strip torn off them by the manager soon after. 42 min: In the technical area, Tuchel continues to give his team what for. He’s urging them to step it up, having been second best for the past 20 minutes or so. His half-time team talk promises to be spectacular. 41 min: Pulisic slides in on Cancelo, who accidentally stands on his leg. No serious damage done, although Pulisic felt it, so no booking. 39 min: City should be leading. Kovacic plays a blind pass infield from the left, and Grealish is suddenly one on one with Kepa! He tries to lift his shot over the keeper, but Kepa gets something on it, deflecting the ball wide right. Nothing comes of the resulting corner. 38 min: Walker sends De Bruyne clear down the right. De Bruyne looks for Grealish in the middle. Rudiger hacks away, just in time. Then the flag goes up for offside, De Bruyne having gone far too early. Fine defending by Rudiger, nevertheless. 37 min: Silva rolls a pass down the right for Sterling, who wins a corner off Sarr. Foden takes short. De Bruyne slams his cross straight into Azpilicueta, and that’s the end of that. 35 min: Chelsea are struggling to get out of their final third now. City are dominating possession. Foden bursts down the left and rolls an inviting ball across the front of the Chelsea six-yard box. Nobody in sky blue has taken a gamble, and Alonso is able to calmly clear. 33 min: Rudiger heads the corner clear. 32 min: Silva grooves in from the right and is hacked down by Kovacic, who follows Alonso into the book. A free kick in a dangerous position. Everyone lines up on the edge of the Chelsea box. De Bruyne takes and hits deep. Alonso batters it out for a corner. 30 min: Tuchel indulges in some more highly strung jigging in his technical area. He’s not happy with his team at all, and urges his defence to push upfield. 28 min: Azpilicueta strides into space down the right and feeds Pulisic. City are back pedalling in panic, but Pulisic inexplicably slows everything down, cuts back, exchanges passes with Azpilicueta, and is flagged offside. Chelsea keep making a mess of very promising situations. 27 min: City stroke it around the back awhile. 25 min: Cancelo chases after a loose ball down the left, then fires it low into the mixer. Rudiger does very well to block and clear, with plenty of sky blue shirts waiting to poke home from close range. 24 min: Grealish feeds De Bruyne down the left. De Bruyne takes a whack from the left-hand corner of the six-yard box, but it’s an easy claim for Kepa. 23 min: Silva drifts in from the right and nutmegs Sarr, nearly finding Sterling inside the box. Not quite, and the ball runs through to Kepa. 21 min: Foden is robbed by Kovacic, who sends Ziyech into space down the left. Ziyech looks for Lukaku with a low cross, but it’s never finding him. Chelsea are causing City a few problems, although they’ve yet to achieve anything in the final third. 19 min: Lukaku is finding some good positions, hovering around City’s defence, waiting for the long pass in the hope of breaking clear. He nearly spins Stones again, but the defender stands firm this time. 17 min: Sterling dribbles into the Chelsea box from the right. Sarr comes across and crunches him with a perfectly judged tackle. Foden claims for a penalty, but it was a fine challenge. Nothing comes of the resulting corner. 16 min: City pass and probe in the patient style. 14 min: From the resulting corner, Stones heads straight at Kepa. Chelsea counter, and Ziyech has the opportunity to send Lukaku clear with a simple pass down the middle. He overhits woefully. Up pops Tuchel, beyond livid, effing and jeffing at his player’s lack of accuracy. That’s two big situations Chelsea have spurned already. 13 min: Sterling takes on Alonso, much as expected, and crosses deep, looking for Grealish. Azpilicueta eyebrows away, just in time. 12 min: Grealish nearly diddles Rudiger out on the left, but just as he gains a yard on his man, he runs it out for a goal kick. A few mistakes being made out there, with six points on the line, sort of. 10 min: Chelsea should be leading. Lukaku spins Stones with absurd ease and romps towards the City box. He should enter the area and slam a shot goalwards, but tries to slip Ziyech clear instead with a pass down the inside-right channel. It’s a clumsy pass, and flies out for a goal kick. Why didn’t he shoot? City were all over the place at the back. 9 min: Kepa very nearly has the ball taken off his toe by Foden. Not the most assured start for the Chelsea keeper. 8 min: Nothing comes of the resulting free kick. Expect Sterling to do plenty of probing down the right flank now. 7 min: Sterling skins Alonso down the right and is cynically clipped by the Chelsea left back. He goes in the book, and it’s going to be a long afternoon now. 6 min: Walker has already given the ball away a couple of times. This is his first Premier League start since getting himself stupidly sent off against Leipzig in the Champions League, so he’ll be in the process of shaking off some rust. 5 min: Kepa redeems himself by plucking the corner from the sky. No fuss this time. 4 min: Yet another long pass, this time by Laporte down the left for Grealish. Kepa races out of his box to clear, but only manages to shin it into his own player, Azpilicueta. He’s fortunate that the resulting ricochet flies wide left of the unguarded goal. First corner of the match coming up. 2 min: ... and now De Bruyne nearly releases Silva down the left. Azpilicueta was on point and intercepts. A determined start by the champions. 1 min: Stones plays a simple long pass down the middle and very nearly releases Sterling. Chelsea almost caught snoozing. Here we go, then. Chelsea get the ball rolling ... but only after everyone takes a knee. A gesture met with firm approval. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out. They’re blue, ba-da-be, City wearing sky, Chelsea royal. Anticipation and excitement crackling around the Etihad. We’ll be off in a couple of minutes! Thomas Tuchel has a word with BT. “Even if we had everybody available, it can never be a must-win game at the Etihad. Let’s respect what City is in the moment, they are very strong, and let’s be realistic about us, but we are up for the game and will try to find solutions to win. We will hunt them down and make them under-perform. There is a lot to do.” Pre-match entertainment. Here’s Barney Ronay on the special stuff that gives City their edge: extreme competence. Pep Guardiola talks to BT Sport. “Thomas Tuchel changes the shape in many games, sometimes during games. They will be more aggressive than they were at Stamford Bridge, because he said that in the press conference! They will be more aggressive in their build-up, and in all departments. They have top quality up front. It is a huge challenge, they are European champions, we know that. But we will try to do a good performance and deserve to win.” The state of play. Chelsea don’t quite need a miracle yet, but they do need a win. Should City prevail this lunchtime, you’d expect the Premier League trophy to stay put at the Etihad. Liverpool will presumably be watching with interest, more in hope than expectation. This is, of course, a game between the champions of England and the champions of Europe. It’s also a replay of last year’s Champions League final. A reminder of that, should you require one, and/or fancy reliving it. City make four changes to the starting XI sent out at Arsenal a fortnight ago. Kyle Walker, John Stones, Jack Grealish and Phil Foden return; Ruben Dias, Nathan Ake, Riyad Mahrez and Gabriel Jesus drop out. Chelsea make five changes to the team named for the League Cup semi-final second leg against Spurs. Marcos Alonso, Thiago Silva, N’Golo Kante, Christian Pulisic and Hakim Ziyech take the places of Andreas Christensen, Callum Hudson-Odoi, Jorginho, Mason Mount and Timo Werner. Manchester City: Ederson, Walker, Stones, Laporte, Joao Cancelo, De Bruyne, Rodri, Bernardo Silva, Sterling, Grealish, Foden. Subs: Dias, Gundogan, Gabriel Jesus, Steffen, Fernandinho, Mbete-Tabu, McAtee, Lavia, Wilson-Esbrand. Chelsea: Arrizabalaga, Sarr, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, Azpilicueta, Kante, Kovacic, Alonso, Ziyech, Pulisic, Lukaku. Subs: Jorginho, Werner, Loftus-Cheek, Bettinelli, Saul, Barkley, Mount, Hudson-Odoi, Havertz. Referee: Craig Pawson (South Yorkshire). In which Chelsea desperately try to keep the title race alive. Kick off is at 12.30pm. It’s on!The first mass use of the word “snub” in any given year ushers in award season for me. This year, Kristen Stewart has been snubbed, apparently, after the Screen Actors Guild failed to nominate her for a best actress award for her role as Princess Diana in Pablo Larraín’s Spencer. She had been widely tipped to pick up an Oscar nomination, perhaps for the brazen bizarreness of the casting, which actually sort of worked. If she has been snubbed here, commentators are asking, will she be shut out of the Oscars? As controversies go, it is a tame one, which speaks volumes about the unsettled state that award ceremonies seem to have found themselves in. I say this as someone with a disproportionate love of these ridiculous events, but even I am finding it difficult to care. Usually, I love the clothes and the speeches and being put out when something I adored is passed over in favour of something objectively worse, and feeling thrilled when Olivia Colman inevitably wins everything, and I love looking out for that precise moment when an actor adjusts their face from “absolutely fuming” to “gracious in defeat”. But television audiences are declining rapidly, year on year, and award show chatter has become more of a quiet background murmur. Omicron has forced the indefinite postponement of the Grammys. The Golden Globes took place last weekend, untelevised and with no celebrity involvement, after a series of scandals meant any statues it gave out would probably end up in the weird cupboard at the back of the kitchen rather than on the mantelpiece. (I felt for the winners who made history in a year when it was harder to celebrate that, such as Pose’s MJ Rodriguez, who became the first trans woman to win a Golden Globe, for best actress in a TV drama.) The Oscars will have a host after three years without one, though whether that will be Tom Holland or Pete Davidson is the internet’s guess. Anyone to try to stem the tide of fleeing viewers. It is unsurprising that seeing famous people messing around in ballgowns and designer suits and jewellery that requires its own bodyguards has lost some appeal during two years of a pandemic, but whether world events simply hastened a decline that was already in progress is unclear. It could be that these ceremonies go the way of the Golden Globes – if a gong is handed out in an empty forest, does anyone hear the tearful acceptance speeches? – and pare back to basics, or this could be a chance to try an over-the-top, full showbiz spectacle once again. I’d prefer the latter. I’d better follow them all closely, just to see. Elvis Costello: his aim is true in taking that song off his playlist Elvis Costello has been discussing the lyrical content of his 1979 hit Oliver’s Army for years, and now, he says, he won’t be playing it live any more. It famously uses a derogatory phrase for Irish Catholics, which contains a racial slur. “That’s what my grandfather was called in the British army – it’s historically a fact – but people hear that word go off like a bell and accuse me of something that I didn’t intend,” he told the Telegraph. This is not the first time the song’s lyrics have led to a discussion about its meaning and intent. In 2013, BBC’s 6 Music radio station censored it, explaining that a number of factors had been taken into consideration, including the time of day and the context of the programme on which it was broadcast. Costello argued that the BBC was making it worse by drawing attention to the lyrics. “Just don’t play the record,” he said. The song is anti-colonialism and anti-war, so context matters. But Costello has explained it, again and again, and now he has made the decision to retire it. Not to delete it from record collections, just not to sing it live after 43 years. Some may take that in bad faith and see it as another sign of cancel culture marching on unchecked, but it seems to me like a decision taken in good faith, in consideration of attitudes that have shifted and developed over time. Although often it feels like the opposite, I do think we have become better, collectively, at discussing complex ideas. Applying that to a lyrical choice made so many years ago seems perfectly reasonable. Licorice Pizza: California heat, in a cinema. What’s not to like? Finally, after 18 months or so of almost buying tickets and then deciding it probably wasn’t worth it, I went back to the cinema. Even though my only local option is the fancy chain with sofas for seats, which brings food to you at any time – eating burgers while midway through watching a film is an affront to cinemagoing and that is a hill I will die on – I was childishly delighted to be back. Everything about it, from the ads to the trailers to sitting still for more than two hours without any desire to look at my phone, made me determined to go again regularly. It was Licorice Pizza that lured me in. As a fan of both Paul Thomas Anderson and sunshine, I thought it would be perfect to head out into the chill of a winter’s evening and then sit in a dark room soaking up the Californian heat. There were plenty of things to take away from the film, but one that seemed particularly lovely was the fact that its leads, Cooper Hoffman and Alana Haim, had beautifully normal teeth. Is this the beginning of the end for those hyper-real, super-straight white veneers? • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistThe first documentary from Andrea Arnold deals, like several of her fiction films, with fractured mother-daughter bonds. But the mother in this case is Luma, a Holstein Friesian cow; the daughters – and we meet two of them, born during the course of Arnold’s four-year-production period – are calves who are wrenched from their mother’s side with a haste that, like much in the life of a dairy cow, seems unduly callous. This is certainly not the first film to make the point that industrial farming and animal welfare are uneasy bedfellows. Everything from Nikolaus Geyrhalter’s austere, widescreen tableaux of industrial food production in Our Daily Bread (2005) to Robert Kenner’s Oscar-nominated Food, Inc (2008), which lifts the lid on America’s corporate food production, argues that the costs of intensive farming are high and are borne largely by the livestock. But Arnold’s film encourages an intimacy and emotional connection with its bovine subject that is rarely achieved elsewhere. The closest comparison would be Viktor Kosakovskiy’s Gunda (2020), which traced the daily life of a pig through artfully framed black and white photography. Arnold, however, has no desire to prettify her subject matter. The film is shot with handheld urgency, the lens positioned at udder and eye level. She forces us to confront the grinding cycle of life for a dairy cow, the dull buzz of strip lights and the murky gloom in the milking sheds. Perhaps most heartbreaking is the moment of skittish joy when the cows are released into pastures in spring – tellingly, it’s a good 45 minutes into the film before we even glimpse a blade of grass. It’s not an easy watch, certainly – I cried more or less solidly through the last 30 minutes – but it’s an important one.Born in Surrey in 1987, actor Tom Felton rose to fame playing Draco Malfoy in the Harry Potter films. His other film roles include Anna and the King, Rise of the Planet of the Apes, and Amma Asante’s Belle and A United Kingdom. He is also a musician, and is one of the founders of Six String Productions, a recording company devoted to signing young musical artists. He stars opposite Samantha Morton in Sky original Save the Cinema, about a Welsh community’s battle to save their local theatre from demolition. 1. Theatre Dear Evan Hansen I found this really poignant and important. Teen suicide is not a subject people might jump into, but I don’t know any contemporary musical that has opened up more of a conversation on this – and it need to be discussed a lot more. Now, me and my 15-year-old niece can talk about that sort of thing without it being an absolutely terrifying subject. The music’s fantastic, the performances are wonderfully done. And it’s really contemporary: you see texts flying up and down the wall, and visual representations of how things go viral. 2. Album George Harrison: All Things Must Pass I got very excited about the 50-year anniversary box set of this album – it’s a big, geeky fan box full of vinyl, pictures, letters, pieces of writing. I haven’t actually opened it yet – it sits pride of place in my office – but I look forward to sharing it one night with a few other Beatles nut-heads like myself. I like going back to George, especially when I feel like I’ve listened to too much contemporary music – which I love, but his music brings me back to myself. 3. Book Captain Sir Richard Francis Burton: A Biography by Edward Rice I’m reading this at the moment. It’s a Bible-thick book about this guy who was essentially a spy – he was the original James Bond. Except he spoke, like, 17 languages and was one of the first white westerners to infiltrate different religious groups abroad, in places like Asia. I love the old Phileas Fogg idea of going away for 80 days and coming back with all these different spices and whatever else you’ve picked up. And this chap did it on a Herculean scale. I’m getting a real kick out of that right now. 4. Film Vivo (Kirk DeMicco, 2021) I’m completely obsessed with this animated film on Netflix. I’m a massive fan of Lin-Manuel Miranda, who plays the title character and wrote the songs. It’s set in Cuba, and Vivo is a beautifully cute little kinkajou, a small monkey, and he does this amazing musical routine for the tourists with his owner, a very old man who’s been making music his whole life. And they go on quite the adventure. I watched it with my niece, then watched it again a couple of days later by myself. Much like Hamilton, every time you watch it there’s another layer you didn’t see before. 5. Place Westminster Abbey I was very lucky to be asked by the Duchess [of Cambridge] – when I say asked, it wasn’t like Kate gave me a call and was like, “Hey, Tom, what you doing Friday?” – but they asked me to read out one of the poems for the Christmas carol service last month. My mum’s a big fan of hers. We’d never been to Westminster Abbey before, and we got there a couple of hours early to do a run-through. We both love history, so we could have walked around there for days looking at all the different people who had achieved certain things. It was much grander than I expected, and much warmer – sometimes those creepy old cathedral places feel a bit crypt-y. 6. Sport Formula One I was absolutely gripped this year. Hamilton has been dominating the sport for however many seasons it is in a row now, which made it less exciting, because you’re watching the winner win every time. But this year Max Verstappen, this plucky Dutch kid, has been on his tail the entire time, nipping at his heels. It came down to the most nail-biting finish, the sort of thing you’d write in a film, where in the last lap of the last race Max just edged in front. It does wonders for the sport – makes it a lot more interesting to watch. • Save the Cinema is on Sky Movies and in cinemas nowIt is 12 days (as of Sunday) since Novak Djokovic announced he would be flying to Australia, having been granted a medical exemption against the vaccine mandate required for all players who want to play the Australian Open. In that time, public opinion in Australia has veered between outrage that he should be given an exemption at all to dismay and embarrassment at the way their government has handled the entire thing, throwing Djokovic into a detention hotel and rescinding his visa for a second time. Djokovic’s behaviour in the days after his positive Covid-19 test – especially the following day, when he fulfilled a magazine interview commitment without telling anyone there that he was positive – was widely criticised and drew an apology from the world No 1. Many feel he should not be there, but at the same time don’t like what’s happened to him. What of Djokovic’s fellow players? For a man who, in 2020, co-founded a new players’ union (the Professional Tennis Players’ Association), designed to serve the interests of all players, it will not be lost on the Serb that support for him among his peers has been relatively unenthusiastic. Though some have sympathised with his plight, many believe he should have done what they did, get vaccinated, the only certain way to ensure entry to the country. Part of that might be down to the complicated nature of what has happened to Djokovic since he arrived in Melbourne late on 5 January, believing he had a valid medical exemption, which was issued by the state of Victoria and approved by Tennis Australia, due to him testing positive for Covid on 16 December. However, since a previous infection is not a valid reason for overseas travellers to enter Australia, federal officials revoked his visa. The saga has dragged on to the point where Djokovic, having won an initial appeal, awaits a further appeal on Sunday to see if he can defend his title. Tournament victory, as unlikely as that looks right now, would give Djokovic a record 21st grand slam title. There is a lot on the line. The ATP revealed last week that 97 of the men’s top 100 have been vaccinated. Many, such as Stefanos Tsitsipas, were reluctant to get the jab at first, but did so because they knew that was what was required to continue playing on the tour. Rafael Nadal said in November that not getting vaccinated is “a bit selfish”. Djokovic chose not to. Andy Murray, a strong vaccine advocate, said he would not “kick Novak when he’s down”, adding that the whole thing was “not a good situation for anyone”. But the Australian Alex de Minaur, the world No 42, hinted at the resentment many people feel in Melbourne, which endured the longest lockdown of any city in the world. “Australians have gone through a lot,” he said. “There’s no secret about that. They’ve had it very tough. They’ve done a lot of work to protect themselves and their borders. When you’re coming in, as well as every other tennis player, if you wanted to come into the country, you had to be double vaccinated. It was up to him, his choices, his judgment.” Support has come from the most unlikely of sources, in the form of Nick Kyrgios, hardly his biggest fan. De Minaur’s compatriot, who said he was vaccinated “for others and my mother’s health”, is highly critical of how Australia has treated Djokovic. “It’s just a shit-show,” Kyrgios told the No Boundaries Podcast. “It’s not even about the vaccination any more. I feel so sorry for him. “How we’re dealing with stuff is just so embarrassing. I just think if Australia had dealt with Covid better, I don’t think this would be such a big issue. It’s insane now.” Kyrgios said Djokovic had contacted him to thank him for his support. “Imagine how he’s feeling,” the Australian said. “He probably wants a little bit of support from other players. He’s getting it from me. I’m not the one he expected to go out in the media and have his back. “He’s feeling alienated and as a human that is a dangerous place to be. On a human level, he needs some support from other players.” Many remain annoyed, though. The Portuguese player João Sousa said: “I respect that he fights for what he believes and I can be empathetic with what he is going through in Australia, but it’s a bit selfish from him to arrive here as the only player unvaccinated. It’s tough for us players to accept that.” The Australian Sam Stosur, a former US Open champion who will be playing her final singles match at the Australian Open, said no one has come out of this situation looking good. “It’s all been a little bit messy, that’s probably an understatement,” she said. “It’s a really unfortunate situation that it’s come to at this point in time. “Hopefully over the weekend a decision can be made finally, whether you agree or don’t agree, he stays, he goes. Whatever the case, it’s just got to be decided and hopefully it’s not going to tarnish the rest of the Australian Open. “It’s a huge story around the world. We want the Aussie Open to be for good things, not unfortunately what the Novak situation has become.” Rafael Nadal, who will be among the favourites whether or not Djokovic plays, said: “From my point of view, there is a lot of questions that need to be answered. In some ways I think it will be good if everything is clarified soon. Everyone chooses his road. I wish him all the best. I really respect him, even if I do not agree with a lot of things that he did the last couple of weeks.”August 2018 and England are playing India in the third Test at Trent Bridge. They are losing, 32 for two in the fourth innings and 489 runs behind. Joe Root is in, batting with the team’s latest call-up, Ollie Pope. Pope had made his debut at Lord’s the week before, when he became their youngest middle-order batsman since Denis Compton, 70 years earlier. Here, he hits his first ball through cover for one four and his third through gully for another. Handsome shots, but they betray a vulnerability, too. India’s bowlers hold that line outside off stump and, soon enough, he edges a catch to third slip for 16. England dropped Pope for the next match. It was a tactical decision, they wanted to play Moeen Ali as a second spinner, but it suggested they did not think Pope was quite ready. He picked up on the hint and he did the right thing. Soon after, he suffered a dislocated shoulder and during his time off he got together with his batting coach at Surrey, Vikram Solanki, to talk about what he needed to do to succeed in Test cricket. “We decided the way I was getting out most was pushing at those fifth-stump balls that I should probably be leaving,” Pope said later. They decided he needed to make two changes. One was technical – Pope moved across to an off-stump guard – and the other was temperamental: he resolved to tighten up and stop playing so many loose shots. He said the injury had given him “a real hunger” to play Test cricket. Four years on and England are playing Australia in the fifth Test at Hobart. They are losing, again, 81 for four in the first innings and 222 runs behind. Pope is in. He is playing because Jonny Bairstow’s injury means he has been given an unexpected recall after being dropped. Given his poor form on the tour and the series score, the match might be the last chance he gets in Test cricket for a while. He has started well. There is another of those gorgeous cover drives for four and a couple of boundaries through midwicket. He has made it to 14 and Scott Boland is bowling. There was nothing cunning about Boland’s plan. He gave Pope a ball outside off, Pope played and missed. He gave him two more in the same place and Pope left them. The fourth ball came in at him and Pope blocked it. The fifth ball was back out wide again and Pope could not help himself, he stretched across and prodded his bat at it. The edge flew through to the keeper and he was out for 14. Pope’s was not the only poor dismissal, there were others just as bad. Rory Burns was run out by an inch because of a moment’s hesitation, when a dive for the line might have saved him. But it is worth picking out, because it says so much about the confused state of English cricket. Pope is, most people agree, just about the best young English batsman in county cricket. He is 24, has made more than 4,000 first-class runs at an average of 51. Although it is beginning to feel like a long time ago, he has had some success in Test matches. He won a man-of-the-match award in South Africa a couple of years ago, when he made 135 at Port Elizabeth. And here he is, struggling along, in and out of the team, making the same mistakes. Everyone has their own theories why. Three old batters, Nick Compton, Rikki Clarke and Owais Shah, got into a back-and-forth about it on Twitter. Compton felt it was temperamental, a lack of discipline and patience, and said players had forgotten how to bat for long stretches of time. Shah felt it was technical, that taking guard on off stump was a mistake and it was time to move on to another young batsman because Pope had already been given enough rope. Clarke argued otherwise, he felt it was down to the team environment and the unsteadying effect of the way players had been rotated in and out of the team in the past 12 months. It was an interesting disagreement. It spoke to how losing the Ashes has cracked open English cricket and exposed the multitude of problems in it. It is going to take some smart thinking from the management to figure out which one needs fixing first and how to do it. The team’s managing director, Ashley Giles, says we need systemic change. He might be right. I would ask why the man everyone reckons is the best young batsman on the circuit is making the same mistakes he did when he was a rookie. Pope is not the only good young player who seems to have gone backwards since he came into this England set-up. Zak Crawley, who made 267 against Pakistan, is another, Haseeb Hameed, who made 82 against India on his debut, is another, Dom Sibley, who has scored centuries against South Africa and West Indies, is a third. Root is just about the only player in the squad who has played anything like his best while Chris Silverwood has been in charge. Giles and Silverwood might ask why English cricket is not providing their team with better players, but equally, English cricket might ask why Giles and Silverwood are not getting more out of the best they have been provided with.The Chinese capital, Beijing, has reported its first locally transmitted case of Omicron coronavirus variant, state media reported on Saturday, less than three weeks before the Beijing Olympic Winter Games. An official at the city’s disease control authority said at a press conference that laboratory testing found “mutations specific to the Omicron variant” in the person. The authorities have since published a detailed account of the patient’s activity that dates back to 31 December. Haidian district officials in Beijing said they had sealed up the infected person’s residential compound and workplace. They have also collected 2,430 samples for testing from people linked to the two locations. The detection of the highly infectious Omicron variant comes less than three weeks before the opening ceremony of the Winter Games on 4 February, and the lunar new year celebrations that begin on 1 February. Public health experts say the new variant poses the biggest threat to the country’s zero-Covid strategy. The first Omicron case in Mainland China was detected in the northern city of Tianjin on 9 December from an overseas returnee, who showed no symptoms on arrival. In the past month, at least 14 provincial-level places in China – including Shanghai – have reported Omicron cases, both imported and locally transmitted, according to state media. “Now Beijing’s epidemic prevention and control work faces the double risk of overseas and domestic cases,” Pang Xinghuo, the deputy director of the Beijing Municipal Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, said at the press conference. In the past few weeks, dozens of domestic and international flights have been suspended to control the spread of the disease. The authorities have also urged citizens not to leave town unnecessarily during the lunar new year holiday period. The Chinese capital has been on high alert since the first reported Omicron case in neighbouring Tianjin last month. On Saturday, Xu Hejian, the Chinese capital’s spokesperson, urged the municipal government departments to “ensure the safety of the capital, the Winter Olympics, and its residents”. Last week, Beijing’s traffic management authority asked people to stay away from the special vehicles used to ferry athletes to and from the Winter Olympics venues in the event of a car incident. The Winter Games, which begin on 4 February, will be kept in a “closed loop”. This means that only a limited number of spectators may be allowed in venues. Overseas spectators will not be allowed to enter the country, and personnel involved in the Games will have to avoid contact with people outside the loop. On Saturday, China’s National Health Commission reported 165 new confirmed coronavirus cases for 14 January, down from 201 a day earlier. Of the new infections, 104 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, compared to 143 a day earlier. Additional reporting by Reuters news agencyThe number of Covid infections appears to have reached a plateau in parts of the UK, a senior government health adviser has said, with experts expressing optimism about the latest data. Infections are flattening in London, the south-east and the east of England, while the rise is slowing in the north of England, said Dr Susan Hopkins, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) chief medical adviser. Case figures remain relatively high, however, with an estimated one in 15 people in England infected, while the figure for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland is one in 20. About one in 10 people in north-west England had Covid-19 last week, according to figures from the Office for National Statistics. London’s rate fell from one in 10 at the end of 2021 to one in 15 in the week ending 6 January. While hospital admissions have not yet begun to fall, their rate of increase is also slowing down, Hopkins told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “We are seeing a slowdown in the number of admissions to hospital, but they are slowing down rather than reversing at the moment, so there are still more than 2,000 admissions to hospital across the UK, and nearly 2,500 yesterday.” The latest data comes after more than one in six NHS trusts in England declared critical incidents due to Covid pressures, many as a result of staff shortages. Meanwhile, almost 6 million people in England – a record figure – are currently waiting for hospital treatment, NHS figures show. Hopkins said hospitals had been able to discharge patients more quickly because of Omicron being less severe than previous variants. With about 15,500 people in hospital last week, however, some trusts remain “unable to do much of their elective care”. Dr Chris Smith, a consultant virologist and lecturer based at Cambridge University, said the latest figures gave him “great cause for optimism”, telling BBC Breakfast: “The number of people who are going into intensive care or are on mechanical ventilation beds is actually dropping.” As 96% of people in the country now have antibodies, the vast majority of people are able to better “fend off” the disease and “we don’t see that strong connection of cases turning into consequences”. Linda Bauld, a professor of public health at the Edinburgh University and chief social policy adviser to the Scottish government, also expressed cautious optimism. “The cases, if we look at them, are going down by over 20%,” she told BBC Breakfast, adding that Friday was the first day “for a while” that cases in the UK had fallen below 100,000. Bauld said that “things seem to be moving in the right direction” but warned that hospital numbers remained “very high”.The arrest this week of Stewart Rhodes, the founder and leader of the Oath Keepers militia, marks one of the most significant moments thus far in the federal investigation into the January 6 Capitol attack. Rhodes, along with ten other associates, is charged with seditious conspiracy for plotting to violently overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election – the first sedition charges prosecutors have brought related to the insurrection. Rhodes is the one of the most high-profile arrests yet in the year-long investigation into the insurrection, which has charged more than 700 people and counting with crimes related to the attack. Many of these cases have involved minor charges and the majority of suspects have received light sentences, but the sedition charges facing militia members could carry up to 20 years in prison and signal a shift towards more complex cases targeting organized extremist groups. The conspiracy charges against Rhodes and other Oath Keepers members, as well as separate conspiracy to obstruct Congress cases involving Oath Keepers and Proud Boys extremists, are additionally significant because they may reveal the extent of planning that went into the attack. What level of prior coordination and plotting pro-Trump groups conducted prior to January 6 remains a key question, and one that is set to become a focal point of trials in the coming months. “We’ve had such a good unfolding and narrative of what folks on the ground were doing, but we’ve not yet had a definitive narrative emerge about the people in power behind it and who was organizing it,” said Melissa Ryan, CEO of CARD Strategies, a consulting firm that researches online extremism and disinformation. “Between what we see over the next few months from the justice department and whatever comes out of the select congressional investigation, hopefully a story is going to start to emerge.” Who are Rhodes and the Oath Keepers? Rhodes has been a prominent figure in the far-right for over a decade. Easily distinguishable by his dark eyepatch – the result of dropping a loaded handgun and shooting himself in the left eye during his 20s, according to an Atlantic investigation – Rhodes positioned himself at the forefront of the anti-government militia movement amid its resurgence after the 2008 election of Barack Obama. A former Army paratrooper and Yale Law School graduate, Rhodes announced the creation of the Oath Keepers at a 2009 rally on the site of a Revolutionary War battle. The group, which Rhodes marketed towards former and current law enforcement and military personnel, claimed to stand for defending the constitution and advocated for disobeying certain laws such as gun control legislation. Rhodes was careful to create a broad appeal for the organization, initially trying to distance it from more openly violent extremism and claiming that it wasn’t officially a militia. But the Oath Keepers soon became a leading group in the anti-government extremist militia movement, growing to thousands of members across the country. It became a visible presence at anti-government and anti-gun control rallies, while promoting far-right conspiracies about a totalitarian New World Order. Rhodes frequently told his followers that the US was entering a state of civil war and to arm themselves, a claim that became more frequent during the nationwide protests against racism and police killings in 2020. The Oath Keepers also became ardent supporters of Donald Trump and gained a foothold in the modern Republican party, including providing security for Trump’s longtime ally Roger Stone one day before the Capitol attack. In September of 2021, hackers released a membership list for the Oath Keepers that revealed the extent that the group had become embedded in state institutions. Its members included dozens of law enforcement, armed forces members and elected officials – some of whom used their government emails when signing up for the militia. “The Oath Keepers have just been building more and more political power within the GOP, taking positions at the local level, running for office,” Ryan said. “You have state senators who identify proudly as Oath Keepers. I would not be surprised if they had a member of Congress in the next couple cycles.” A shift in the investigation The charges against the Oath Keepers are some of the most serious to date in the investigation, alleging a well-armed plot to undermine the democratic elections. Investigators also lay out a series of events that contradict the dominant narrative of January 6 among rightwing media figures and many Republican politicians, who have claimed the attack was a mostly peaceful political protest and pushed conspiracy theories that leftists or government agents were behind any violence. The charging documents involving Rhodes and ten associates accused of seditious conspiracy portray a group intent on overturning the results of the 2020 presidential election and willing to use violence to achieve their goals. Prosecutors allege the Oath Keepers conducted extensive planning and coordination, with encrypted messages between the members discussing government overthrow prior to the attack and making plans to form “quick reaction force” teams to move into the Capitol area with firearms. “They coordinated travel across the country to enter Washington DC, equipped themselves with a variety of weapons, donned combat and tactical gear, and were prepared to answer Rhodes’s call to take up arms,” the court documents state. In the weeks leading up to the attack, Rhodes allegedly spent more than $20,000 on weapons and tactical equipment, including on night vision goggles, a shotgun and cases of ammunition. Court documents state that on the morning of the insurrection, Rhodes suggested to other Oath Keepers in an encrypted group chat that armed quick reaction force teams were standing by. (As part of a plea deal last year, one Oath Keeper admitted to stashing an M4 rifle at a Comfort Inn hotel just outside the Capitol.) “We will have several well equipped QRF’s outside DC,” Rhodes texted the Oath Keepers’ group chat. Federal investigators had been circling Rhodes for some time, filing court papers in March that alleged he was in direct communication with Oath Keepers involved in the Capitol attack and then several months later using a warrant to seize his cell phone. Rhodes stated last year that, against the advice of his legal counsel, he sat for a three-hour interview with federal agents to discuss the role that he and the Oath Keepers played in the attack. He continually claimed that he had done nothing wrong. “I may go to jail soon, not for anything I actually did, but for made-up crimes,” Rhodes said in March of last year at a speech in Texas. None of the government’s conspiracy cases related to the Capitol attack have gone to trial yet, and researchers say sedition charges can be hard to prove. The government has charged a number of militia members with seditious conspiracy in the past only for those defendants to go free after the cases went to trial. In the late 1980s, a jury acquitted 13 white supremacists who prosecutors had charged with seditious conspiracy involving a plot to kill a federal judge and overthrow the government. More recently, nine Michigan militia members were acquitted in 2012 after authorities charged them with plotting to start an armed uprising against the government. It also remains unclear what Rhodes’ arrest and the charges facing numerous Oath Keepers means for the extremist organization as a whole. Since the insurrection, some members of the group have advocated for further engagement in local government and political activism. Meanwhile, researchers say they have benefited from a Republican whitewashing of the Capitol attack that has allowed them to continue operating with a degree of impunity. “A lot of us assumed that they would be weakened by January 6,” Ryan said. “It seems like the opposite has happened.”Last year’s boom in British summer holidays was not enough to save thousands of tourism businesses, despite increased domestic bookings to popular places such as Cornwall and the Yorkshire Dales. A survey by the Tourism Alliance of 1,927 tour operators, hotels, attractions, language schools and other travel and hospitality businesses serving foreign tourists found that 11% believe they are “very likely to fail” in 2022, and a total of 41% think they are “quite likely to fail”. The first three months of 2022 are looking bleak, with cancellations soaring in the wake of the Omicron variant. Almost a third of businesses surveyed have lost at least half of bookings made for domestic holidays between January and March this year. With far less government support available after the end of the furlough scheme, a quarter of those surveyed said they had no more cash reserves, and just over half said they would run out within two months. Last summer saw crowded beaches and sold-out seaside resorts, but that masked an overall drop in domestic tourism away from coastal and rural areas, according to Kurt Janson, director of the Tourism Alliance. The alliance comprises more than 60 trade associations that together represent 303,000 UK travel businesses. “There’s traditionally been a huge amount of domestic tourism in towns and cities, and a lot of business travel and conferences, and those sectors have done very badly,” Janson said. “Businesses that rely on international travel have done badly – language schools, events, conferences. And because booking times for these things are longer, they will take longer to recover.” Janson was particularly concerned about tour operators serving foreign visitors. “They are responsible for about 60% of overseas visitors to the UK and if they are not out there promoting the UK as a destination, inbound tourism will take a long time to recover. We need them out there, fighting for our corner of the market.” One indication of the struggles facing the tourism sector came last week, when the Hungarian government said it would again delay a scheme that would have seen as many as 60,000 students visiting the UK this summer. “It would have been a massive boost,” said Huan Japes, membership director of English UK, the trade body for language schools. “We used to get 550,000 students coming, but we’ve barely risen above 100,000 a year since the pandemic.” Janson said the figures showed it was unlikely that the government’s tourism recovery plan would meet its targets. It hopes to see a bounceback to 2019 levels of domestic tourism by the end of the year, and of overseas tourism by the end of 2023. The UK was becoming less competitive as an international destination, Janson said. Visitors could no longer reclaim VAT when they left, other countries were spending more on marketing, and EU visitors now needed passports to enter the UK. Tourists from China and Middle Eastern countries were keen to shop in places like Bicester Village, but were now more likely to choose France because they could get a tax refund when they left. (The UK scrapped the VAT reclaim scheme at the end of 2020.) “The government has basically said to those visitors ‘don’t come here – go to Paris instead’,” said Janson. He said the government urgently needed to promote the UK as a destination. Ireland is spending £33m. Australia will spend £250m in the next three years, and the US is about to approve a £185m budget to rebuild its tourism industry. Joss Croft, chief executive of trade body UKinbound, said: “These figures lay bare the devastating impact the pandemic continues to have on the UK’s inbound, outbound and domestic tourism industry, along with the entire supply chain. We are seeing green shoots, but the crippling border restrictions and ever-changing government guidance continue to stifle recovery.” From 1 April, hotels, restaurants and other hospitality firms will have to start paying business rates again, as well as VAT at the full 20%, following the reduction to 12.5% during the pandemic. Kate Nicholls, chief executive of UKHospitality, said keeping the reduced rate would bolster the tourism trade, instead of raising prices for staycationers and overseas tourists. “The main driver for inbound tourism is price, and travel to the UK is very price sensitive,” she said. “A 1% fall in the cost of a holiday in the UK delivers a 1.3% increase in inbound tourism revenue for the economy.” Bernard Donoghue, chief executive of the Association for Leading Visitor Attractions, said: “Tourism was hit first, hit hardest and will take the longest to recover, and those attractions and businesses which are usually highly dependent on inbound tourists, who have been absent for nearly two years, will take the longest to recover of all. Our industry lost, on average, £200m a day in 2021.”I always thought that joyriding meant nicking cars and taking them for a spin, often when drunk. It was what some of the wayward lads did on the Chingford Hall council estate where I grew up. So, I was surprised when the Waltham Forest newsletter reported a different kind of joyriding: a cycling group that is free, for women, and that loans bikes to the members who need them. It has grown since its inception, but JoyRiders started right here in my borough where we have an infrastructure of 27km of cycle paths, known as Mini Holland. London was edging out of the last lockdown and one of the most isolating years we have ever experienced when I discovered the group. I had returned to my roots after living in California in the hope that this country might be kinder to my youngest son. He had bounced around in the mental health system in the USA for almost a decade, where the “cure” had been worse than the diagnosis. But the pandemic hampered my plan. When my son was admitted to a psychiatric hospital yet again, only here instead of in America, I knew I needed a better road map to find my way through the pain. I hadn’t cycled in ages, but I had loved it ever since first learning to pedal around the podium, a large concrete pad that encircled our estate. I felt safe with the two small additional wheels that Mum had mounted somewhat unevenly on my bike, despite them making me lean to one side, more like a Hells Angel passenger on a Harley than a five-year-old girl on a Raleigh Chipper. When it was time to ride without the stabilisers, Mum ran behind me shouting, “Pedal, pedal!” and then she gave me one almighty push into a world where it was just me and my bike. It was the way she did most things, confident that I would find my way. Mum has long gone from this earth. I am the elder now. I feel it in my joints, see it in my face in the car mirror as I drive to Jubilee Park in Leyton for my first excursion with the JoyRiders. I hope I can keep up. I hope it doesn’t hurt my back. I have already messaged Mariam, the co-director of the group, to say I am 5ft 6in tall and that I am heavy. She is leading the morning ride today and I want to make sure the bike I borrow will bear my weight. In retrospect my note is redundant. It is a sturdy hybrid Raleigh that I will be using, not a miniature pony. Jubilee Park is waking to runners and dog walkers, and it smells of freshly cut grass. I make my way to the container where the stockpile of council-owned cycles is kept. Mariam has a softly spoken accent – a mix of her Dutch and German heritage – and a no-nonsense sense of leadership. She reassures me that my body will remember what to do. “Muscle memory,” she insists. I know that there are other things that my body keeps score of. The trauma of witnessing my son struggle over the years. I don’t say anything about this, though, nor do I say that I am gay and Jewish. It doesn’t seem relevant until the other women start arriving, many of them in traditional Islamic dress. Will it matter to them, I wonder? Is this the right group for me? Will I fit in? Mariam welcomes everyone and works industriously to adjust my saddle so I can touch the ground with my tiptoes. She takes us through an ABCD checklist for our bikes: Air; Brakes; Chain; Direction. It is Soraya who speaks first, introducing herself and reminding me how the gears work. She is also borrowing a bike. I watch as she hitches up her jilbab over a wide belt and places two cycle clips around her trousers. Her hijab is tucked neatly under her bike helmet. Some of the other women wear jilbabs and hijabs, too. There are no padded bike shorts here. No titanium road bikes, either. As the women chat and fish in their rucksacks for their phones, their purses, their water bottles, I get the sense that this group is about community not competition, about pleasure not pace, but I am still not sure if it is for me. We set off eventually with Mariam at the front and a volunteer in a hi-vis vest who takes up the rear. They have the route all mapped out on their phones, which are mounted on their handlebars. Where the streets are wide and quiet, we are asked to double up, to take a primary position, riding close to the centre of the road, where we can be seen more easily. Shazia is my partner. She tells me how she hasn’t been riding that long, but that once her baby was old enough to be left with her mother-in-law, she did the cycle training course for beginners and then progressed to these intermediate rides. Her smile is contagious and I feel smug that we manage to stay aligned without crashing into each other. There are 10 of us on this ride and as we pedal through the entrance to the Olympic Park, an area that I have never seen before even though it is on my doorstep, a child points to us and says, “Look Mum, so many.” I bravely take one hand off the handlebars to wave at him, feeling a slight wobble to my frame. Inside the park we inadvertently spread into a V-shape. Like a flock of birds, we swarm over the wide bridge. A pedestrian sees how much fun we are having. “Who are you? Can I join?” she shouts at our backs. “JoyRiders. You can find us online,” the volunteer replies. Something about our chatter and laughter, the billowing of our clothes in the breeze reminds me of The Sound of Music and the von Trapp family cycling scene. It makes me think of my favourite things: family, my sons, the youngest one who I wish could experience this kind of freedom. Even though there is still a knot of sadness in my chest, I feel it start to loosen. After fighting for support and services for so long, it is important to have a chance to just sit on the saddle and be led, to be told when to turn left or right, to not have to be so hypervigilant. We pass the London Aquatics Centre, an impressive site designed by Iraqi-born architect Zaha Hadid for the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics, then we stop at a café for coffee. One of the women in the group is doing a PhD about female cyclists, how we are still outnumbered by men, and the reasons why. She asks us questions as we sip at our drinks. On the way back I speak to Shabnam, a family practice doctor. She tells me how hard it has been for her during the pandemic and it strikes me how little we know about each other, how many assumptions we make, and the danger of stereotypes. As if this isn’t enough food for thought, as we are pedalling through the greenway, it is not a rider’s long jilbab that gets caught in the chain of her bicycle and brings us all to a halt, but rather it is me. My jacket, which I had tied – somewhat haphazardly – around my waist, gets sucked into the spokes of my back wheel. All the women wait until I am disentangled. No JoyRider left behind. When I get home, I am fatigued in a good way, a way that will help me sleep. I know that Tuesday mornings will be mine now. Weekends, too, on occasion. I invite my friend of more than three decades to join the group. During every ride we stop and pose for a group photograph with our bikes. I receive the pictures on our WhatsApp group, and the messages say things like, “Hey sisters, well done, great ride today.” My favourite ride with the group is to Brick Lane. Amid the colourful graffiti, the women show me where to buy the best samosas. I point out where my grandmother used to come to get pickled herrings, then we talk about me getting my very own bike. Mariam and some of the sisters weigh in with advice. I want a hybrid. Gears are important, and a comfortable saddle. I tell the sisters how happy I am to be rediscovering my neighbourhood. What I know as being most important, though, is the change in my internal landscape, the opportunity to put on my brakes, lean into the community, and ride towards joy. Tanya Frank writes on the intersection of motherhood and mental health. Her debut memoir Zig Zag Boy: Motherhood, Madness and Letting Go will be published by HarperCollins in February 2023When furniture designer Nada Debs first moved to Beirut from London in 2000 on a quest to reconnect with her Lebanese roots, her parents offered her the apartment they’d bought in the 1980s. “At the time it was rented out and they just said: ‘Why don’t you take it?’ So it was more a marriage of convenience than the thunderclap of love at first sight.” Located on the 10th floor of a 1970s apartment block in a residential area of West Beirut, there was nothing immediately remarkable about the space. “The apartment isn’t something I’d have chosen,” says Debs. “But I made the best of it and because it was simple, I had a lot of freedom to use my furniture. I would make prototypes, put them out and see how they looked, before I made them into collections. I used my home as kind of a place of experimentation.” When Debs first got her hands on the apartment she set about stamping her vision on the space, tearing down walls to let the light in and make the most of the breathtaking views of the sea and mountains. “I love breaking walls,” she says with a gleeful twinkle. “The apartment was originally designed for a family and there were four bedrooms, but it’s just me here, so I tried to make it less for a family and more a space for entertaining.” Today her home is flooded with light as Debs leads the way through a series of elegant living spaces, popping with jewel colours. Her curvaceous Yves Klein Blue sofa, that she designed herself, is a striking focal point. “I’m a big fan of blue – the blues of Beirut are beautiful. And every day the colour of this sea and the sky is different, so that definitely influenced me,” she says. Then there’s the cosy pink kitchen/diner, which was inspired by the lush visuals of the Hong Kong-set movie In the Mood for Love. From here we walk through to the yellow TV room, which was originally the balcony, but now serves as an indoor/outdoor living area that catches the morning sun. “I always like to start with colour or colour combinations, before thinking about form and then, finally, I address the details,” she says. “In this house each room is themed. I wouldn’t do that for a client, but this is more an experimental space and I think the colours work together.” And with three different living rooms to choose from, there’s a room for every mood. “It’s, ‘Oh am I going to be blue-me today or am I going yellow today?’ And it’s really interesting, when I have guests, people are drawn to different colours. Some people look at the pink room and think, ‘Oh I’m not going in there, it’s a bit too cozy, I’ll never get up again. So it’s more for late at night.’” Dramatic dark doors add an extra layer of sophistication, while rugs play a key role in separating the spaces. “I based the apartment on placing carpets first,” says Debs. “When you have an open space it’s really hard to place furniture first, but when you put a carpet down that defines the space.” When it comes to form, Nada is big on rounded corners and spherical shapes, partly because they make a home more friendly, “we’re just looking for things that are soft when we want to touch which we all need, especially at the moment after Covid.” But also because it allows her to push the envelope with the craft. “The Romania table in the dining room uses a technique called marquetry strips and I noticed I could curve it, so I decided to create a whole line of furniture where I could do that,” she explains. Of course, the large apartment, with its clean lines and open space, is the perfect backdrop to her standout furniture and many of the pieces, like the Coffee Bean coffee table, so named because her son, who was six at the time, said it looked like a coffee bean, are available made-to-order from her website. Despite her own elegant, pared-back aesthetic, Debs is wary of hotel-like, interior-designed spaces. “Too perfect is soulless. You have to have knick-knacks,” she says firmly. “A home should be personalised and not so rigid. The frame can be a bit to the side, it doesn’t have to be perfect, that’s OK.” For her own part, she likes to mix up finds from Beirut’s Basta antique market alongside favourite art pieces and the odd family heirloom, like the oversized round Chinese terracotta rug in the sitting room, which her uncle bought back from Shanghai in the 1950s. Originally trained in interior architecture at the prestigious Rhode Island School of Design in the US, Debs had been working with marquetry in the UK, a technique used to create patterns on furniture, but her move to Beirut inspired a bold new direction in her work. “When I came to Lebanon, I was looking for Middle Eastern furniture, and I realised it was stuck in the past,” she says. “Everyone was just buying imported B&amp;B furniture from Italy, and all these contemporary European brands, and they were neglecting their own furniture because it was so old fashioned. I was asking, ‘Where’s Middle Eastern furniture?’ And it didn’t exist. So I created my own.” She began working with local craftsmen and artisans, reconfiguring the Middle Eastern designs to give them a more contemporary feel. “Because I grew up in Japan, I introduced my Japanese aesthetics, which is about simplifying and bringing things down to its essence.” They didn’t think that they were allowed to do that. They were sticking to the old ways, because that’s what they thought was the right thing to do. But I kind of gave them the OK. You could change the patterns. You could change the models, you can keep it simple, and suddenly you open this whole door.” The concrete tiles that line the wall of the yellow TV area with their modern take on traditional Middle Eastern geometric patterns and the white Arabesque chairs with their swirling foliage pattern and the lattice screen, are all examples of her “Neo Arabian” aesthetic, as she calls it. “When I moved to Beirut, after Japan where no one was like me, I was looking for like-minded people, but then I realised I wasn’t Lebanese either, because of my upbringing, so my work is a reflection of that,” she explains. “That’s the little twist in my work, because Japanese style is quite understated, whereas in the Middle East everything is overstated.” nadadebs.comKen Wheeler was a Canadian trumpet player who moved to Britain in 1952, became part of the London jazz world and gradually turned into an internationally renowned composer. His work has elements of jazz and classical music, but mostly it’s pure Ken. When he died, in 2014, he left the outline manuscript of a three-movement composition for his longtime colleague and friend, the bassist Chris Laurence. Its title, Piece for Double Bass and Low Strings, doesn’t look very exciting, but at least it tells you what to expect. It’s rare to hear a double bass as star of the show, and Laurence is a wonderful soloist – firm, supple and gloriously adventurous. To accompany him, Ken turned the customary string ensemble upside down, with the bass as soloist on top of two violas, two cellos and one violin, plus vibraphone (Frank Ricotti) and drums (Martin France). The resulting sound is magical and possibly unique. The second of the album’s three Wheeler pieces, C-Man, without the strings but with guitarist John Parricelli added, is less formal and full of fascinating interplay, while the third, Baroque Piece, features Tom Walsh on flugelhorn.All I can say is that I should have known better. No, my decision to visit the branch of Amazon Fresh that has just opened near where I live was not at all a good match for the sweeping month-long programme of mindfulness and joy-sparking I tentatively set in motion for myself on 1 January. But there I was all the same, curiosity having got the better of me. And yes, the result was predictably awful. As any wellness guru worth the name could doubtless have told me, this way lay simmering despair and an almost overwhelming desire to buy a packet of Jacob’s Mini Cheddars. I still have no idea how Amazon got the go-ahead to set up a branch of the grocery wing of its rampaging empire in the grade-II listed building it now inhabits: an old tram depot that when I first came to this part of London was the home of lots of little antique shops (RIP). There was, I seem to remember, a bit of a kerfuffle over its alcohol licence, but in the end it got the green light, in spite of the fact that there are already three large supermarkets mere metres away. Now it stands there rather mournfully, its lurid sign seemingly aiming to attract either those who simply cannot be bothered to cross the road, or those who prefer to keep on their headphones as they shop. (Amazon Fresh’s USP is that it has no tills, so customers need not speak to a single soul.) This, I have read, is one of 10 branches in the capital so far; by 2025, the company hopes to have 260 across the UK. For a while, I wandered dazedly around, struggling to absorb the full – sorry, I’m going to have to use the word – dystopian weirdness. The silence. The bright lights. The banks of cameras above my head. The store is, I would say, angled strongly towards the young and single. There are lots of meals for one in transparent plastic boxes, and an expansive selection of instant noodles. But it’s quite a hotch-potch. Some of the stuff is Amazon branded, but there are also – bizarrely – a number of things from my beloved Booth’s, the so-called Waitrose of the north. On the day I visited, there were three members of staff on hand: one at the entrance, which has gates you enter by using an app on your phone; another standing guard by the booze; and a third at the counter where you can pick up Amazon parcels. But no matter! In place of human interaction, there are urgently perky signs. “SO GOOD IT’S GONE” read the ones on any shelf that is temporarily empty. I followed (in a strictly non-peculiar way) a twentysomething woman with a huge rucksack into which she was hurling her shopping while simultaneously frantically WhatsApping on her phone. It seemed hard to imagine that she could just walk out – “YOU’RE GOOD TO GO” says the sign – with all this booty. But when, like some nervous old granny, I checked, the man at the gate assured me that the cameras miss nothing: no packet of ramen goes unnoticed by their all-seeing eyes. Does this have a peculiar effect on shoppers? I’m guessing that it does, and will do until the novelty wears off. Because no bill is totted up, and no money exchanged (you’re charged via your Amazon account), it’s almost as if everything is free. It is the daylight sober version of late-night drunken internet shopping – though it’s open till 11pm, so it can be both, I guess. Twenty-first century capitalism’s great trick is to make us long for the useless and the unnecessary and, sure enough, grim and lonely though it was inside Amazon Fresh, I could feel that itch starting up. If there was nothing I needed, surely there was something I wanted. Restlessly roaming the aisles, I felt as I did when I first left home and, hardly knowing how to feed myself, my diet was often strange and disordered. Into my bag I put some spring rolls, a box of Feel New tea (an energising blend of aniseed, fennel and cardamom, apparently) and, yes, a packet of Cheddars, which I ate on the walk home, feeling a bit dead inside. The future rose up ahead of me, all vegetable oil, bad decisions and urban desolation.On a sunny afternoon in Portugal in June 2012, Antony Jenkins was preparing himself for bad news. From Barclays’ offices in Lisbon, where he had flown for a meeting, the then retail banking boss was waiting for regulators to announce that Barclays would be fined £290m for manipulating the Libor interest rate, in what was becoming one of the largest banking scandals of the decade. Turning to one of the compliance officers, Jenkins asked for the harsh truth: how bad would the Libor scandal be for Barclays? “I remember looking out of the office and having this conversation, and I could feel my heart sinking,” he tells the Observer. In an attempt to quell public anger, the Barclays board moved swiftly, sacking chief executive Bob Diamond within days and appointing a successor untainted by the vilified image of risky investment banking. Jenkins, who came from the safer retail side of the business, was installed in August and charged with repairing the bank’s reputation, which was in tatters not only due to the Libor controversy, but the payment protection insurance (PPI) mis-selling scandal. Lingering resentment over the 2008 financial crisis only compounded matters. “We literally had our staff being assaulted in the street, we had people being assaulted at charity dinners. We were in a bad place. And we had to do a lot to re-establish the reputation of the company,” Jenkins says. With morale at an all-time low, he did his best to raise staff spirits. “I had been literally going through Canary Wharf, floor by floor, taking a chair and standing on it and just talking to people and saying: ‘Look, I know this feels horrible. I know the way we’ve being characterised is very negative in the media. But we know that the soul of this company has the right intentions … we will come out of this stronger’,” he says. Those sermons, alongside his attempts to bring restraint back into the banking sector – waiving millions of pounds of his own bonuses in the process – would help earn him the nickname “Saint Antony”. But Jenkins’s dreams of restoring the bank’s fortunes within his term were dashed in 2015, when he was effectively fired by the board, who were unhappy with the pace of change and his plans to slash the size of Barclays’ investment bank. The Oxford-educated banker bounced back quickly, though, and within a year had used £1m of his own cash to launch the banking tech company 10x Future Technologies, (now known as 10x Banking) which now counts some of the world’s largest banks, including JP Morgan, among its clients, and investors such as BlackRock and Canada’s largest pension fund, CPP Investments, among its backers. But nearly seven years later, as he sits in 10x’s conference room near Westminster in London, it is clear the pain is still raw. Jenkins has rarely spoken about his departure from Barclays and makes it clear that he does not want to go into detail in his first newspaper profile since he left. He does, however, want to make one point clear: “For me, at least, my departure from Barclays was very unexpected. The conditions of it were surprising to me because everything we were executing was pretty much going to plan, and that was difficult to deal with.” Jenkins admits that moving forward was not easy. “It takes a lot of energy and I had a lot of support from people. Interestingly, when you go through something like that, people can be absolutely wonderful and many were. And some people just drop you entirely.” But when asked whether he would change his strategy in hindsight, he is unwavering: “Absolutely not. I would have to make a choice between compromising what I believed was right for the company, and I wasn’t prepared to do that.” That resilience and steadfastness is easily traced back to Jenkins’s childhood. He grew up in the north-west of England in the 1960s, moving from Blackburn to Manchester and then Nantwich. Ill and missing school due to bronchitis from a young age, he quickly fell behind on his education and was forced to catch up. “I remember being seven and not being able to write my name, which was quite a salutary experience for me.” At home, he would end up listening to hours of programming on BBC Radio 4’s predecessor, the Home Service, which sparked a lifelong love affair with finance and the private sector. “That really sort of piqued my interest in current affairs and business, and I always used to listen to the business news as a child.” * * * CV Age 60 Family Married with two adult children, four grandchildren and two dogs. Education Nantwich Grammar school (now Malbank school); politics, philosophy and economics at University College, Oxford; MBA at Cranfield. Pay Not disclosed. However, his stake in 10x is believed to be worth more than £200m. Last holiday Long weekend in Barcelona in October 2021. Best advice he’s been given “Be true to yourself.” Biggest career mistake Not being able to persuade the board of Citi to make an acquisition in the payments sector. Word he overuses “Awesome.” How he relaxes Running, listening to music and “spending time with my ever-expanding family”. * * * He says his father’s career as a production manager at a pottery factory also contributed to his burgeoning interest in business. “It was quite fascinating to watch a piece of clay be turned into something physical. And that really got me interested in how things work, and also how to make things work better.” Despite his early educational setbacks, he became the first in his family to go to university, studying at Oxford – a feat he credits in part to free tuition policies. “I’ve been enormously privileged, and a real [beneficiary] of social mobility in a way that I think is less available to people today.” After Oxford, he became a graduate trainee at a South Kensington branch of Barclays in 1983, and after 17 years at Citigroup – including in New York – rejoined Barclays in 2006. With the drama of Barclays behind him, Jenkins has built 10x from the ground up to a company worth an estimated £600m after an £187m funding round this summer. The cash injection will help scale up the business, secure more clients in Europe and Asia, and propel its push into the US, where banks’ aging IT systems will probably need to be replaced over the next decade – marking a major opportunity for the cloud-based tech firm. “Half the time, I genuinely can’t believe that I’ve done all the things that I’ve done. And I think back my early childhood, when I really struggled even just to read and write,” he says. He says he is the first to admit he had help, but still takes credit for his motivation and drive – characteristics he says he now recruits for “over raw talent.” “But I have to feel incredibly fortunate to have been able to do the things that I’ve done. They’re intellectually fascinating. They’re very challenging. You learn a lot, you get to work with great people, and hopefully make a difference.” • This article was amended on 18 January 2022 to note that 10x Future Technologies is now known as 10x Banking.The mood last week in Ukraine was eerily calm, despite talk of war. The first winter snow blanketed Kyiv. Many were still celebrating Orthodox Christmas – which falls on 7 January – or had left town for the holidays. Bars and restaurants rang out with Dean Martin’s Let It Snow!, while the fir trees in Independence Square looked like a mini-Narnia. Sure, Russia might invade at any moment. But, as Ukrainians wearily point out, the country has already been at war for eight long years, ever since Vladimir Putin annexed Crimea and kickstarted a brutish conflict in the east of the country, which has claimed nearly 14,000 lives. Friday’s dawn cyber-attack on government websites was merely the latest in a series of hostile acts. What to do in the event of a military operation by Moscow, and whether to stay, flee or fight? The consensus – at least according to surveys – is that a third of the population is ready to take up arms. In the upmarket Podil district, with its art deco mansions, a new piece of graffiti read: “Biy Moskaliv!”(“Beat Up Russians!”) Sitting in a law office just across the road, Serhii Filimonov explains what he intends to do, should the Kremlin attack. “There are about 50 of us. We will meet and decide where we can best fight,” he said. His group is made up of middle-class professionals: IT staff, designers, actors, journalists. Filimonov runs a security business and starred in a film shown at Venice. None of this is likely to alarm Russia’s defence ministry, which has sent 100,000 troops to Ukraine’s border. These include the existing front between the Ukrainian army and the Moscow-run separatist territories of Donetsk and Luhansk in the east, as well as Belarus in the north, Crimea in the south and the breakaway Russian enclave of Transnistria in the west. But the Kyiv creatives know how to shoot. All are combat-hardened veterans of the 2014 war. Filimonov took part in the bloody battle for Ilovaysk, when the Russian army trapped Ukrainian forces, and was wounded by an enemy mortar strike. After an operation to remove shrapnel, he returned to the front, serving as a volunteer against Moscow with the Azov battalion. “We have registered weapons. We will defend our homes,” Filimonov said. “Putin wants to go back to the borders of the Russian empire. You can see this in Belarus, Kazakhstan. Here in Ukraine he wants to create a tsarstvo – a tsardom. This is a war of civilisations. It’s the west versus Eurasia, democracy against slavery and authoritarianism. We want democracy and freedom.” Most experts agree that Russia’s vastly superior army, air force and navy could quickly seize Ukrainian territory. But Andriy Zagorodnyuk, Kyiv’s former defence minister, says the Kremlin’s conscript-heavy military will immediately face resistance, should it try to occupy towns and cities. Volunteers such as Filimonov and small army groups will launch bloody partisan attacks. “There is definitely no panic. I don’t see any panic at all,” Zagorodnyuk told the Observer. He acknowledged Ukraine’s relative military weakness but he said Kyiv had around 500,000 soldiers including reservists. It was ready for guerrilla war “on a huge scale”, he said. Masi Nayyem, a lawyer who founded the Podil practice, admitted he was looking forward to shooting at Russians again. In 2016 he fought with a paratrooper brigade in Avdiyivka, Ukraine’s frontline position outside rebel-held Donetsk. “In peace time you have to be serious, responsible. In war you don’t have any considerations or need to think about consequences. It’s black and white,” he said. Talks between Russia and the US, Nato and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe ended last week in a dead end. The Kremlin has demanded assurances from the Biden administration that Ukraine and Georgia will never join Nato. In essence it wants to overturn the post-cold war order – restoring central and eastern Europe as a zone of Warsaw Pact-style Russian influence, from which Nato troops and weaponry are banned. Beneath the Kremlin’s shrill, tough-man rhetoric lies a mystery. It is unclear why Putin is moving with such strategic haste, demanding that the US and its allies rewrite international security rules in Russia’s favour. His demands are “non-starters”, as the US’s negotiator and deputy secretary of state, Wendy Sherman, put it. Putin’s possible goal, she suggested, was to establish a pretext for war. Andrew Wilson, professor in Ukrainian studies at University College London, said the timing from the Kremlin’s perspective was opportune. Putin has jailed his chief domestic critic, Alexey Navalny, and squashed Navalny’s opposition movement. Russia was awash with cash, thanks to rising energy prices. On the international stage the Kremlin faces off against a US administration it regards as weak and indecisive. What could happen next? “Creating a crisis to create opportunities is what they [the Russians] do,” Wilson said. He added: “I don’t think a full-scale invasion is possibility number one. The Ukrainians have pretty successfully advertised the huge cost of invasion and occupation. But Putin has to have a win of sorts, either on European security or Ukraine itself.” All of which presents observers with a dilemma: how to report on a crisis which does not quite feel like a crisis, and appears largely to exist inside Putin’s head? It is evident that Russia’s president feels emotionally about Ukraine. Last summer he wrote a long essay stating that Ukraine and Russia were “one people”, divided by the whims of Bolshevik map-making and western meddling. “With nothing yet happening on the ground, there’s nothing I can report to tell you something new and impactful,” Nataliya Gumenyuk, a Ukrainian journalist and author admitted, saying it was hard to make sense of a conflict in which Ukraine often appears as a bystander. She added: “We are caught in the position of waiting for the ‘worst scenario’ without a chance to influence the outcome.” Gumenyuk said the Kremlin’s goal was to turn the clock back to the early 1970s, before the Soviet Union signed the Helsinki accords guaranteeing human rights – a mistake, in the eyes of Moscow’s current hawkish leadership. Others have argued that Putin’s preferred geo-political model goes back further, to the imperialist 19th century, when mighty great powers over-rolled lesser ones. In an opinion piece for the New York Times the eminent Russian political scientist Lila Shevtsova said the current stand-off over Ukraine had little in common with the political deals struck at Yalta in 1945, or at the congress of Vienna in 1815. Back then, the participants stuck to the rules. “[Putin’s] aim, really, is a Hobbesian world order, built on disruption and readiness for surprise breakthroughs,” she wrote. How a surprise breakthrough might morph into war is a topic of conversation inside the Kyiv government of comic-turned-president Volodymyr Zelensky. Little was seen of him last week. Zelensky won a landslide victory in 2019 after campaigning on a platform of peace. Faced with Russian intransigence over the fate of Ukraine’s already occupied territories, he has moved towards Nato and the west. US intelligence agencies say the risk of invasion is “high”. Their Ukrainian counterparts think Moscow may be planning a “staged provocation”. This could take the form of an attack on Russian citizens – at the embassy or consulate perhaps – or against Russian soldiers in Transnistria. The Kremlin would blame the “attack” on far-right Ukrainian nationalists, with the incident used for propaganda and as a casus belli. Alex Kovzhun, a political strategist who advised Ukraine’s former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko, said the Kremlin needed to craft a compelling narrative. “They are obsessed with their TV ratings. All of us Ukrainians are extras in their internal TV show. They are the protagonists. From time to time they change the bad guys. Ukraine is not their favourite location.” Kovzhun added: “A fantastic postmodern storytelling device is the wink. In 2014 Putin winked when he said there were no Russian units in Crimea. It’s a conspiracy. He invites all Russian TV viewers to share in this conspiracy. He used the wink in Salisbury. Everybody knew two Russian idiots travelled there to kill Sergei Skripal, as part of a special operation.” It is just possible, of course, that Putin’s brinkmanship is part of an elaborate bluff, the latest in a series of stress tests designed to reveal weaknesses among the west’s ruling class and America. No one – save for the man in the Kremlin – can really know. But Filimonov thinks a storm is coming. “We are convinced something will happen,” he said. “Putin needs Ukraine. An attempt to seize it is inescapable. We will fight until the end.”When the cryptocurrency bitcoin first made its appearance in 2009, an interesting divergence of opinions about it rapidly emerged. Journalists tended to regard it as some kind of incomprehensible money-laundering scam, while computer scientists, who were largely agnostic about bitcoin’s prospects, nevertheless thought that the distributed-ledger technology (the so-called blockchain) that underpinned the currency was a Big Idea that could have far-reaching consequences. In this conviction they were joined by legions of techno-libertarians who viewed the technology as a way of enabling economic life without the oppressive oversight of central banks and other regulatory institutions. Blockchain technology had the potential to change the way we buy and sell, interact with government and verify the authenticity of everything from property titles to organic vegetables. It combined, burbled that well-known revolutionary body Goldman Sachs, “the openness of the internet with the security of cryptography to give everyone a faster, safer way to verify key information and establish trust”. Verily, cryptography would set us free. At its core, a blockchain is just a ledger – a record of time-stamped transactions. These transactions can be any movement of money, goods or secure data – a purchase at a store, for example, the title to a piece of property, the assignment of an NHS number or a vaccination status, you name it. In the offline world, transactions are verified by some central third party – a government agency, a bank or Visa, say. But a blockchain is a distributed (ie, decentralised) ledger where verification (and therefore trustworthiness) comes not from a central authority but from a consensus of many users of the blockchain that a particular transaction is valid. Verified transactions are gathered into “blocks”, which are then “chained” together using heavy-duty cryptography so that, in principle, any attempt retrospectively to alter the details of a transaction would be visible. And oppressive, rent-seeking authorities such as Visa and Mastercard (or, for that matter, Stripe) are nowhere in the chain. Given all that, it’s easy to see why the blockchain idea evokes utopian hopes: at last, technology is sticking it to the Man. In that sense, the excitement surrounding it reminds me of the early days of the internet, when we really believed that our contemporaries had invented a technology that was democratising and liberating and beyond the reach of established power structures. And indeed the network had – and still possesses – those desirable affordances. But we’re not using them to achieve their great potential. Instead, we’ve got YouTube and Netflix. What we underestimated, in our naivety, were the power of sovereign states, the ruthlessness and capacity of corporations and the passivity of consumers, a combination of which eventually led to corporate capture of the internet and the centralisation of digital power in the hands of a few giant corporations and national governments. In other words, the same entrapment as happened to the breakthrough communications technologies – telephone, broadcast radio and TV, and movies – in the 20th century, memorably chronicled by Tim Wu in his book The Master Switch. Will this happen to blockchain technology? Hopefully not, but the enthusiastic endorsement of it by outfits such as Goldman Sachs is not exactly reassuring. The problem with digital technology is that, for engineers, it is both intrinsically fascinating and seductively challenging, which means that they acquire a kind of tunnel vision: they are so focused on finding solutions to the technical problems that they are blinded to the wider context. At the moment, for example, the consensus-establishing processes for verifying blockchain transactions requires intensive computation, with a correspondingly heavy carbon footprint. Reducing that poses intriguing technical challenges, but focusing on them means that the engineering community isn’t thinking about the governance issues raised by the technology. There may not be any central authority in a blockchain but, as Vili Lehdonvirta pointed out years ago, there are rules for what constitutes a consensus and, therefore, a question about who exactly sets those rules. The engineers? The owners of the biggest supercomputers on the chain? Goldman Sachs? These are ultimately political questions, not technical ones. Blockchain engineers also don’t seem to be much interested in the needs of the humans who might ultimately be users of the technology. That, at any rate, is the conclusion that cryptographer Moxie Marlinspike came to in a fascinating examination of the technology. “When people talk about blockchains,” he writes, “they talk about distributed trust, leaderless consensus and all the mechanics of how that works, but often gloss over the reality that clients ultimately can’t participate in those mechanics. All the network diagrams are of servers, the trust model is between servers, everything is about servers. Blockchains are designed to be a network of peers, but not designed such that it’s really possible for your mobile device or your browser to be one of those peers.” And we’re nowhere near that point yet. What I’ve been reading A novel question How Did She Do It is a terrific Guardian Long Read, by Julian Barnes on Penelope Fitzgerald. One great novelist celebrates another. The US outlook In The American Polity Is Cracked, and Might Collapse. Canada Must Prepare, Thomas Homer-Dixon asks how Canada should ready itself for Trump v2.0, a striking Globe and Mail op-ed. Ulysses @ 100 Anne Enright’s essay Dubliners, in the New York Review, examines Joyce’s “strenuous dreaming” as Ulysses reaches its centenary.Gurkha activists have launched a scathing attack on Priti Patel’s controversial policing bill, describing it as “highly dangerous” and warning that it would criminalise their future campaigning work. Gurkha groups, who recently protested outside parliament for equal military pensions with the British soldiers they served alongside, say the bill would crush similar campaigns because of its intention to restrict the right to protest. On Monday, the House of Lords will vote on the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, although a development on Friday suggested the proposals could be killed. Labour peers said they would be “opposing protest clauses added late” to the bill, a reference to 18 pages of amendments on powers to control protests, introduced last November. These include powers for the home secretary to ban marches and demonstrations because they might be too “noisy” or “disruptive”, as well as threaten organisers with heavy fines and up to 10 years in jail. Police would also have more control over where and when demonstrations took place, with extended stop and search powers to target people and vehicles. Last summer, Gurkhas staged a 13-day hunger strike outside Downing Street that was called off when the government agreed to enter talks over equal military pensions. The campaigners, who served with the British army in two world wars and during the past 50 years in campaigns including the Falklands, Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan, warn that the bill’s new powers would make such peaceful protests illegal. Premila van Ommen of Gurkha Equal Rights said: “The bill [is] dangerous because it’s so ambiguous and arbitrary. We’re concerned about not being able to protest in particular places, certain areas around parliament. “Our protests have been effective because they have been in front of Downing Street and opposite parliament. If the Gurkhas had not protested there, the world would not have noticed. Location is really important. During our protests over the summer, we had loads of banners and flags, it was very colourful and visible with huge posters of the Victoria Cross winners. Could that have been deemed too loud, too annoying or disruptive?” Ommen also said the policing of the summer protests offered a worrying glimpse of what can happen when officers enforce vague laws. “[The police] harassed the veterans every night, saying they were not allowed to sleep there and telling us to take our gazebo down because of ambiguously worded bylaws.” Emmanuelle Andrews, policy and campaigns manager of human rights group Liberty, said: “The Gurkha campaigners are one among many groups fighting tirelessly to defend their rights and demand justice. But under the government’s proposed new laws, they would be silenced. Their hunger strike outside Downing Street won them vital assurances from the government – but their protest could be made illegal under new laws to criminalise protest.” She added: “This bill is a serious threat to everyone’s ability to make their voices heard, but particularly the most marginalised, for whom protest is often the only way to stand up to power.” More than 800,000 people and 350 civil liberty groups have signed a petition calling for the bill to be scrapped. Parliament’s joint committee on human rights calls the proposals “oppressive and wrong”. A Home Office spokesperson said: “Freedom to protest within the law is a fundamental part of our democracy, but the police must swiftly deal with the selfish minority of protesters whose actions endanger the public, jeopardise security or stop people going about their lives”.In an ideal world, Cathy Mitchell wouldn’t have to spend her time worrying about a £1bn-plus investment portfolio. The former barrister and deputy leader of Warrington borough council would usually have her mind on schools, adult social care and bus services, with the investments looking after themselves. But things are far from normal for the Cheshire borough or its book of assets: one of its flagship stakes – a 50% share in stricken firm Together Energy – is reportedly on the verge of going up in smoke. Warrington has followed councils across the country in ploughing cash into commercial schemes in the hope of generating returns that can offset a decade of Conservative austerity. However, critics say the Labour-run council has taken the high-stakes strategy too far: putting public money into risky ventures in property, energy and finance – including some firms backed by super-rich Tory donors. “I would rather not be involved in investments as we have better things to do,” says Mitchell, who is the council’s portfolio holder for corporate resources. “But as long as we aren’t funded properly by the government, I don’t feel we have much choice.” Warrington’s energy supply gamble is close to backfiring as Together Energy prepares to appoint administrators. It is the latest among almost 30 small providers to face collapse amid the surging wholesale gas prices that are contributing to the UK’s cost- of-living emergency. The company declined to comment. The council’s investments since 2019 – made with the aim of earning a return and tackling fuel poverty in one fell swoop – have brought it more than £50m of exposure in debt, equity and guarantees to Together, which is based 200 miles away in Clydebank. While it is unclear how much Warrington could lose, it is thought to be less than the headline figure suggests. Mitchell says she can’t comment on a live situation, but insists protections are in place, and that appropriate governance checks were made before investing. “It’s not the council running it; it’s a proper energy company,” says Mitchell. “They’re industry professionals with a lot of experience. We used external advisers and ran an internal workshop where we got all other [political] parties involved [before investing]. We were very careful about the investment.” Her critics beg to differ. The stake in Together Energy is just one of many deals done by the town known for its rugby league club and former wire industry. They include shares in a bank, loans to a giant online retailer, and property ranging from shopping centres and business parks to solar farms in Hull, York and Cirencester. Andy Carter, Conservative MP for Warrington South, worries that the council has bitten off more than it can chew. “It didn’t have to do this,” he says. “Other councils in the north-west have far more meagre levels of borrowing and operate in a different way. It’s a decision taken by councillors to adopt what I think is a really risky strategy, and some of those risks are now coming home to roost. “I’m not saying councils shouldn’t do any borrowing. To do [it] here and there to make strategic investments in your community is a good thing. But Warrington has taken it to an extreme level.” Undeterred, councillors last week approved a fresh £37.5m loan, this time to affordable housing developer Auxesia Homes. Backed by European firm Matter Real Estate and Gary Metcalf, a property developer who was briefly owner of Chester City Football Club, Auxesia specialises in homes for services personnel and NHS workers across the north-west. Critics say this should have been more closely scrutinised. “Have any lessons been learned from the council’s Together Energy investment?” asks Tory councillor Ken Critchley. “One has to ask why the normal providers of finance to private businesses are not providing these loans.” Elsewhere the town has a 33% stake in business bank Redwood, which is controlled by multimillionaire Tory donor David “Spotty” Rowland and his son Jonathan. Another Tory donor, Matthew Moulding, billionaire owner of the Hut Group (THG) has been granted a loan worth more than £150m by the council. The loan is secured on the online retailer’s vast distribution site on the outskirts of Warrington. Halfway between Manchester and Liverpool, Warrington is linked to both by the world’s first intercity railway and has motorways on three sides. This brought the town a warehousing boom in recent years – though it started in 1987, when Ikea picked Warrington for its first UK store. Mitchell says most of the investments are backed by physical assets, so Warrington is protected against defaults, and that the council is investing in local employers that create much-needed growth and jobs. A spokesman for Redwood declined to comment on the bank’s owners, but said it had loaned £133m in the town and wider region since its launch four years ago. Mitchell says investing is necessary to fund services and represents “Labour values in action”. She adds: “It’s difficult to avoid Conservatives when you’re dealing with these sorts of businesses. Sometimes you have to deal with people who you’re not on the same page with.” Warrington has never been short on ambition. Its town hall is an elegant Georgian mansion, and the opulent gates outside it were originally created for Queen Victoria. It achieved a sad fame, however, in 1993, when an IRA bomb killed two young boys. After years of decline, the town has pumped £130m into redeveloping Time Square into a publicly owned market and cinema complex. A similar investment in nearby Preston won plaudits for being “municipal socialism” in action. Andrew Burns, associate director of the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy, which represents public accounting professionals and sets standards, says Warrington’s approach is not new. Birmingham started a bank more than a century ago under Neville Chamberlain, he says, while noting growing demands for local financial autonomy to “level up” Britain’s poorer areas. But while he agrees that there are questions about how far Warrington is pushing it, he adds: “The ultimate test is the local ballot box. If people don’t like what they’re doing, they can vote them out.” In the pursuit of investment returns, Warrington has built up a debt pile worth £1.6bn. And that is due to rise to £2.3bn within two years, putting the council on track for debts worth more than 400% of operating revenue. With interest rates rising to tackle soaring inflation, higher borrowing costs could heap more pressure on the local authority. Warrington has mostly borrowed through the Public Works Loans Board, a Treasury agency which allows local authorities to borrow at low rates – close to those enjoyed by the UK government. However, along with councils including Aberdeen, Lancashire and Guildford, it has secured funds from global bond market investors. Moody’s, the credit ratings agency that monitors the council’s finances on their behalf, has noted that Warrington has a “high-risk appetite”, but a track record of budget delivery. Local authorities across the UK have come under severe strain during the pandemic as income collapsed and pressure on services increased. Ministers had to intervene in the cases of Northamptonshire and Croydon, which issued section 114 notices – meaning they could not meet their obligations. Last March the National Audit Office warned that 25 councils were on the brink of insolvency. Opposition leaders question whether Warrington should be allowed by central government rules to take such a high-risk strategy. “It’s been a little bit like the wild west,” says Carter. “Anyone can go in and borrow, and do what want to do with it. That’s certainly been the case with Warrington.” A government spokesperson said councils were restricted from borrowing to invest for yield, but that they were ultimately responsible for their own investment strategies, adding: “We have been clear that councils should not put taxpayers’ money at excessive risk in pursuit of commercial income.” Warrington’s other MP, Labour’s Charlotte Nichols, who represents the north of the town, admits the debt burden is a problem. “Of course it raises concerns, especially from people who don’t think the council should be in the business of investing,” she says. “Ultimately, I agree with that assessment, but I don’t see credible alternatives being offered. The government needs to cough up or councils like ours will be forced into finding other sources of revenue.” Mitchell says there would be worse dangers for Warrington if the council stopped investing. It has had to find £173m in savings since austerity began in 2010, equivalent to 60p in each £1. “This is about trying to protect people. What does it look like if you instead cut services for children at risk of harm, or for vulnerable people who need care in their home?”England got their Quad Series campaign off to a storming start as they comprehensively overcame South Africa’s Proteas 71-47 in the first of the tournament’s four matches. If the question before the game was whether England would be able to own their pre-series label as favourites, then it was answered in the affirmative. For 55 minutes the Roses flexed the form that brought them back-to-back Tests wins against respected rivals, confirmed by the huge margin of victory. It was only in the first quarter the home side looked bothered by the Proteas’ challenge. Leading the charge for England on her 150th outing was Geva Mentor who set the tone for the match when she made a gain on the ball’s first entry into her defending circle. The flurry of action that followed was all Roses as South Africa looked backwards, breathless on the chase. At the turn of the ninth minute, however, there was a distinct drop in England’s standards. “A little bit sloppy” was the description given by the head coach, Jess Thirlby, to the sudden lapse. As the opportunities became available the Proteas did not hesitate to seize them. Bongi Msomi, their veteran captain, commanded her side to attention. Driving short and directly, England were denied access to the ball and a seven-goal advantage was cut to two. A penalty goal on the buzzer from Helen Housby gave England an extra buffer but the damage had been done. Personnel change was the call at the start of the second quarter to quell South Africa’s rise. Georgia Fisher came on for Eleanor Cardwell at goal shooter and the 23-year-old’s injection was immediately felt. Her fluidity in the circle married with a general shift in defensive strategy by the Roses worked wonders for an team resolute on addressing their previous shortcomings. Unable to react to the fresh developments South Africa fell once again on to the back foot, stuttering as the score at the end of the half blew out to 37-24. The greatest gift a coach can be given by her team is flexibility and with the scoreboard singing Thirlby rested her prized possessions. Serena Guthrie, Housby and Beth Cobden were all rewarded with time on the pine. “It’s always great when the team afford you the chance to roll in some changes,” Thirlby said, with an eye on Sunday’s meeting with the world champions, New Zealand. “We mustn’t lose sight of the task at hand with the Quad Series.” Unlike traditional Tests the back-to-back nature of the tournament means load management features more heavily into the equation than usual. “We’re not complacent, we know they’re going to come hard at us tomorrow,” Thirlby said about the meeting with the Silver Ferns. “They’ve got a couple of change-ups in their shooting end as well, so it will be a big challenge.”This does not quite go down as Wasps’ most famous European victory over Toulouse – that honour remains with Rob Howley and the class of 2004 – but for resilience and character it comes a close second. They played more than half the match with 14 men after Jacob Umaga’s red card in the 34th minute for a dangerous tackle but outfought and out-thought the European champions with Alfie Barbeary rounding off a fine performance with the key try, sending Eddie Jones a timely reminder of his talents. If Wasps can feel aggrieved at Umaga’s red card, they channelled their anger to hugely impressive effect with Barbeary again on song. He seems to have put a difficult run of injuries behind him and, with Jones naming his Six Nations squad on Tuesday, it would be a surprise if the 21-year-old is not included on this evidence. “You could see what he was made of,” said Wasps’ director of rugby, Lee Blackett. “I still think there is loads for Alf to improve, I really do. It is coming up with big moments at times, and that is what you want from your players.” Barbeary was not alone in shining for Wasps. Jimmy Gopperth delivered another performance of quiet authority and supreme goal-kicking, James Gaskell, Charlie Atkinson and Biyi Alo all showed up well against a side shorn of their talisman Antoine Dupont but star-studded nonetheless. Paolo Odogwu impressed on his first appearance for eight months while all four props shone – all the more so given that, as Blackett revealed, had any of them gone down in the week the match would have been called off given how depleted Wasps are at present. Perhaps the greatest shame about Umaga’s red card was that for the time he was on the field he was inspired. Joining the line from fullback, his variety of kicks kept the defenders guessing and he was defensively robust to boot. There appeared to be mitigation in that Martin Page-Relo had been tackled by Atkinson and was falling but ultimately the referee, Chris Busby, decided Umaga deserved a second red card in successive matches. Tomas Ramos kicked Toulouse back to within four points but Wasps weathered the storm until the interval and produced a second-half performance for the ages. It was an ominous start for Wasps, who came into the match buoyant after ending Leicester’s winning run last Sunday but found themselves a try down after 70 seconds when François Cros flopped over from close range. The procession from the defending champions never materialised, however, as Wasps established a foothold and then the ascendancy. They were level when Alo went over from close range and ahead when Brad Shields was awarded the try after a driving maul. Wasps lost Tom Wills to injury on 25 minutes but they continued to carry the fight to Toulouse before the red card. A Gopperth penalty, after Toulouse infringed at the scrum, pushed Wasps’ lead back out to seven early in the second half as the home side refused to be cowed by their numerical disadvantage. Step forward Barbeary and one of his trademark surges up the middle brought another three points from Gopperth and a yellow card for the Toulouse No 8, Anthony Jelonch. There were certainly parallels with Umaga’s tackle – Jelonch going high on Barbeary after Page-Relo had initially tackled the Wasps’ back-row. Toulouse fought their way back to within five points when the hooker, Peato Mauvaka, finished off from the back of a maul but, when they threatened again, Barbeary was on hand for a crucial turnover and familiar celebration to boot. Soon afterwards he powered over in the right corner after Atkinson had passed up a golden opportunity with Ali Crossdale outside him before a late Gopperth penalty sealed the victory, ensuring that, though Toulouse struck with a last-gasp try through Emmanuel Meafou, they missed out on a losing bonus point.Put out more flags. Book in the ticker-tape cannon. Prepare, once again, to be long-range triumphant. Make a nice cup of tea and perhaps everyone else will be along in a moment. At the final whistle here there was a heartfelt staccato cheer around those swooping cantilevered stands. Fists were clenched, seats vacated, aisles filled, the moment locked in. It would be churlish to suggest that the home fans failed to appear suitably wowed, zapped or gripped with ecstasies at the realisation, two weeks into January, that this was pretty much it, another Premier League title all-but-lassoed in by a measured victory against a Chelsea team billed (it says here) as Manchester City’s closest challengers. In the event Chelsea played out most of this game like a high-grade FA Cup minnow in search of a lucrative replay. But then, this is where we are now, the pitch of sustained performance attained by this brilliantly relentless sky-blue machine. The strangest thing about the table isn’t City’s 13-point lead, but the bit that states they have apparently lost two games along the way. Really? Can we factcheck this? Can we have a deep dive into exactly when and how this happened? This meeting of first v second boiled down into a kind of slow-burn tactical arm-wrestle, a struggle for space decided by a startling moment of thrust from perhaps the most interesting player in City’s ranks. Kevin De Bruyne is an unusual presence in some ways. He has the standard broad portfolio of roles, from deep midfield to false nine. But one of his key strands is a kind of throwback role, something from the 1990s: the rampage-midfielder, the Gerrard-archetype, the knees-high, shooting powerhouse who drives from box to box, shoots from distance, Captain Marvels around the place and who might, in a Pep Guardiola team, seem a little risky and out of kilter. Not, though, when you can do it like this. It was that De Bruyne surge, that old-school dance move that broke this game open after 75 minutes on a mild, damp, misty day in Manchester that had seemed to be congealing into stalemate. “We will hunt them down and make them underperform,” Thomas Tuchel had announced before kick-off, which is, if nothing else, expert pre-match fighting talk. We will do such things. They will be terrors of the Earth. But what would those things be? Tuchel’s plan, his depth charges, the bombs dropped on this City system, turned out to be a kind of cold porridge of strangulation. Everyone has a plan until you stand slightly too close to them and nibble their ankles. For much of the first half those two banks of blue pushed up against one another, leaving no space, no air. At times there were groans around as City repeatedly made space but seemed to lack something simple: a body in the right space to finish, an urge to cross the ball. It is tempting to crave these old-school comforts when City are bogged down by an opponent like this. Would Chris Wood make a difference? Should Guardiola revise his plan, tear up the playbook, go “proper”, instruct his wingers to bomb in the crosses? Then again, City are 13 points clear, so, you know. But someone needed to do something. It was De Bruyne who found that moment with the decisive intervention that will look, in isolation, like an old-school moment of surge-power but which was in reality a case of waiting, waiting some more, and being able to see that single opening when it came. João Cancelo laid the ball inside and suddenly De Bruyne was in space between those tightly knit lines. He felt it instantly and began to surge, legs pumping, bouncing off N’Golo Kanté, who also read it but was just the wrong side. De Bruyne knows this pathway to goal, has something in his stride, the picture his brain conjures at these moments, the way he starts to see the arc of the shot, to angle his body four steps ahead. He veered inside, unobstructed, with time to nudge the ball into his path and, with a full sight of the goal, curl the shot into the far corner. Kepa Arrizabalaga dived and, for form’s sake, raised an arm a little sadly, but his only real function here was to act as a kind of usher, a ground crew member semaphoring the ball into the corner of the Chelsea net. De Bruyne left the pitch with five minutes to go, like a grandee being wheeled away by his retinue, applauded on all sides, race run, bath chair calling. For much of the second half he looked a little puce and drained of breath. It has been seven years now for De Bruyne at City, six of them under Guardiola. He seems, as he enters his 30s, a little more distinct, a more stately figure. But he had four shots at goal here, the same number as the entire Chelsea playing staff, made four dribbles, more than anyone else on the pitch, and provided the single outstanding moment of a game that became the first step on the victory lap.More than 125 years ago, representatives of a number of rugby union clubs from the north of England gathered at the George hotel in Huddersfield. The meeting resulted in the formation of a new sport, known today as rugby league. Now a row between the local council and those wanting to honour the sport with a museum at the site of its formation threatens to overshadow the sport’s legacy. The idea began harmoniously when, several years ago, leading rugby league charity Rugby League Cares announced plans to create a National Rugby League Museum. Towns and cities from across the sport’s traditional northern heartlands were invited to apply to host the project. Huddersfield won the bidding process in 2020, beating competition from the likes of Leeds, Bradford and Wigan, with the local Kirklees council offering the George as the venue for the new museum. It was a deliberate offer with deep significance to the sport. The fact that Huddersfield’s bid was centred on the George was seen as crucial by many insiders as to why Kirklees council beat off competition from other towns and cities that were arguably better resourced to take on such a significant cultural project. “There aren’t many sports where you can pinpoint the exact location it was founded,” said Professor Tony Collins, social historian and chair of the independent panel that awarded the museum to Huddersfield. However, the council has now decided it will not use the George for the museum, instead offering a different location in the town. This was greeted with horror by many league supporters, Rugby League Cares and the Rugby Football League (RFL). It has even led to calls from local politicians for the resignation of the council’s leader, Shabir Pandor. “A lot of people feel betrayed by Kirklees council,” said Collins. “Because of what they promised initially, but also the importance of the George to not only the heritage of the game, but also British sport. It highlights a bigger issue for the heritage of Huddersfield, because a major part of the town’s real history is at risk of being lost. One of the town’s key claims to fame is being the birthplace of rugby league and that’s now in danger of being left behind and abandoned.” Talks continued late last week between the council, the charity and the chief executive of the RFL, Ralph Rimmer, and the possibility of an alternative venue in Huddersfield has been raised. But the Observer understands there is little appetite for a different site from either the governing body or the charity. Last night, RFL said: “Rugby League Cares and the RFL are continuing to seek clarification from Kirklees council about both their volte-face on the viability of the George Hotel and the actual location of an alternative venue.” Collins also poured scorn on the idea of a different Huddersfield venue. “The council don’t have a viable alternative, nor do they have a track record of suggesting they have the capability of supporting a museum somewhere else. To say it’s disappointing is an understatement and it’s such a shame for the sport.” The George was home to a predecessor of the proposed museum, the Rugby League Heritage Centre. That project was the brainchild of former Great Britain international Mike Stephenson and opened in 2005 to great fanfare from the sport’s supporters, but closed several years later. Before its closure in January 2013, the George was regularly visited by fans of the game from across the globe, for its significance in the sport’s formation. The building was bought by Kirklees council in 2020 for £1.8m. Pandor has previously claimed that failing to walk away from the deal could have cost local taxpayers in excess of £20m. Kirklees council failed to respond to requests for comment by the Observer. All of which suggests the National Rugby League Museum is likely to end up somewhere other than the sport’s spiritual home. The Observer has been told at least three towns across the sport’s heartlands would be interested in putting together a bid if the project went back to tender. Wigan’s original bid, for example, was believed to be so strong in the initial tender process that only the attraction of the museum being housed at the George made the difference and saw Huddersfield awarded the project.Protesters have taken to the streets in cities across the UK to rally against the police and crime bill, which is reaching its final stages in parliament. The police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, sections of which have been condemned by human rights activists as an attack on the right to protest, will be voted on in the House of Lords on Monday. Hundreds of “kill the bill” protesters rallied in London on Saturday, while demonstrations also took place in cities including Bristol, Cardiff, Coventry, Newcastle, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle, Sheffield and Plymouth. In the capital, demonstrators marched from Holborn to Parliament Square carrying signs reading “defend the right to protest”, while one protester carried a coffin with the words “UK democracy – murdered by the Tories” printed on its side. Many also carried Extinction Rebellion flags. Terry Matthews, 69, from south London, told PA Media: “I think we’re facing a really vitriolic attack on our rights to protest and our freedoms to show our dissatisfaction with the status of the government and the country. And it’s a really dangerous step to try to take.” Addressing the crowd in Parliament Square, the Labour peer Shami Chakrabarti said the bill’s anti-protest provisions “represent the greatest attack on peaceful dissent in living memory”. “This rightwing, authoritarian government used to encourage pro-Brexit demos and statue defenders when it suited them,” she said. Chakrabarti accused the government of hypocrisy, saying it “bangs on about free speech and whinges about cancel culture” and other countries “where fundamental rights are under attack” while clamping down on rights in the UK. “Free speech is a two-way street. And you know what? The ultimate cancel culture, it doesn’t come with a tweet – it comes with a police baton and a prison sentence for nonviolent dissent,” she said. The bill’s anti-protest measures grant police the power to ban marches and demonstrations that they consider to be “seriously disruptive”, including those deemed too noisy. Gypsy, Roma and traveller communities would effectively be criminalised by measures against residing on land without authorisation, while police would also be granted expanded stop and search powers and sentences of up to 10 years could be handed down for damage to memorials or statues. Labour members in the House of Lords will oppose last-minute amendments to the bill, it was announced on Friday. The amendments added in November, which focus on new powers to control protests, include new offences for “locking on” – where protesters attach themselves to objects or each other – and would give police the power to ban named individuals from protesting.A mother whose baby was stillborn while she was in hospital with Covid-19 has urged people to get vaccinated to save themselves the “agony” of becoming seriously ill with the virus. Rachel, 38, from Bilston in Wolverhampton, who did not wish to use her surname, was so unwell she did not realise she had given birth to her son Jaxon, at 24 weeks, in August, and was in a coma and in hospital for three and a half months after contracting the virus. She had gone to get her vaccine while pregnant, but was discouraged by guidance at that early stage of the rollout advising expectant women to perhaps not have it. She said she and her family were “devastated” by the death of her baby, and urged everyone eligible to take up the offer of jabs. She told PA: “I did initially go to get the vaccine, but at the time the advice was not to have it. “I thought I’d have the vaccine when I’d had the baby, but it wasn’t meant to be.” Earlier this week the government launched an advertising campaign encouraging expectant mothers to get vaccinated and boosted, after data had previously shown the vaccine to be safe in pregnancy. The Department of Health and Social Care cited statistics from the UK Obstetric Surveillance System which showed 96.3% of pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid-19 symptoms between May and October were unvaccinated, a third of whom required respiratory support. In December, the UK’s vaccines watchdog made pregnant women a priority group for vaccination after research showing they are vulnerable to more serious illness and pregnancy complications if they are infected with Covid-19. In November last year, experts warned that while uptake of the vaccine among pregnant women was improving, they were worried about some groups shunning the jabs, including younger women, those in the most deprived areas and women from black and minority ethnic communities. Rachel, who thanked staff at both New Cross hospital’s integrated critical care unit (ICCU) and Glenfield hospital in Leicester for their care, said it was “really important” everyone had their vaccines. “I would say take [the vaccine] – it’s a two-minute thing that can save months of agony if you end up like I was,” the bereaved mother said. Speaking about her loss, she said: “I didn’t actually know I had given birth. I was on drugs so they wanted to tell me when I wasn’t sedated, and the obstetrician informed me a few days later. “My emotions were disbelief – one minute you’re having a scan and a gender reveal, naming the baby and getting excited, and then there was this sudden loss. “I was only able to see him once. Normally I’d have been able to spend a lot more time with him and to hold him. But I didn’t get to do that because of the circumstances.” She said things have been difficult for her partner and her 18-year-old son. “We’re all devastated at our loss,” she said. “We were all very excited at this new life, then we were left with nothing.”“Trust has been broken.” “A line has been crossed.” “The prime minister’s position is no longer tenable.” While Conservative MPs have largely nursed their anger privately at the barrage of lockdown-busting party revelations from Downing Street, their Scottish MSP counterparts were blunt and unbridled last week, calling for Boris Johnson to quit in a rebellion that was as unprecedented as it was united. Almost all the 31 Scottish Tory MSPs publicly supported their leader, Douglas Ross, after he became the first senior Tory figure to “regretfully” call for Johnson’s departure, following the prime minister’s admission at PMQs last Wednesday that he had attended a party at Downing Street in May 2020 which contravened his government’s own lockdown rules. While Ross’s predecessors, Ruth Davidson and Jackson Carlaw, have likewise called for the PM to go, the Scotland secretary, Alister Jack, is the only one of six Scottish Tory MPs to openly back Johnson, suggesting his Holyrood colleagues “reconsider” their position if Sue Gray’s report exonerates Johnson. But the MSPs’ support for their leader’s stand appears to have been solidified by outrage at the response from the leader of the Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, who dismissed Ross as “lightweight” and – wrongly – accused him of serial disloyalty. Sotto voce suggestions from some English colleagues that Scottish Tories were playing to the gallery, or pre-empting Scottish Nationalist criticism at Holyrood, are dismissed by those more familiar with the local dynamics. There are frustrations and tensions within any political party, says one senior source, but this was an exceptional circumstance given Ross had stated explicitly both earlier last week and last month that Johnson should resign if it emerged that he had misled parliament: “Douglas Ross is very principled: he resigned over Dominic Cummings, he called out Nicola Sturgeon [when she was accused of misleading parliament over the Alex Salmond crisis], and he had no alternative here.” The reasons for this escalation in long-recognised and sometimes creative tensions with the Westminster party are both principled and practical, says Adam Morris, a communications consultant and former head of media for the Scottish Conservatives: “Douglas had no choice but to ramp up his position. He’s taken a strong position on this before and was not comfortable with taking responsibility for something he didn’t do and wouldn’t have done.” Morris points out it is not as easy to hide at Holyrood: the MSP group was doorstepped on their way in to first minister’s questions last Thursday, where Sturgeon said Rees-Mogg had illustrated the Tories’ “utter contempt” for Scotland. “If they can’t even show basic respect for their own colleagues, what chance do the rest of us have?” she said. On his way to the session, Jamie Greene, the Scottish Tory party’s justice spokesman, urged Rees-Mogg to “go and have a long lie down, maybe not in the House of Commons,” referring to the notorious image of the minister lounging on the green benches. Others vented frustration that remarks such as Rees-Mogg’s not only write the pro-independence playbook, but make it substantially harder to convince Scottish voters that the UK Tories genuinely care about Scotland’s place in the union. Morris says that, while Ross probably laughed off the remarks, he remains angry about the wider circumstances. “Why is he getting put through all this weeks before the first [council] elections he has fought as leader in the Holyrood parliament? He is furious at the distraction.” Ross was still to be re-elected as an MSP and had been leader for just nine months when he successfully defended all Scottish Tory seats at last May’s Holyrood election, despite the continuing Brexit fallout and the popularity of Sturgeon’s pandemic leadership. Sources suggest support within the MSP group for Ross’s position was not heavily orchestrated, but happened naturally. It is understood that many MSPs are disheartened at the lack of airtime to discuss their own policy agenda, or indeed Scottish government failings, because of scandals emanating from Westminster. Even before his election as UK leader, senior Scottish Conservatives feared Johnson could be a “catastrophe” for the UK, turbocharging the campaign for Scottish independence, and reportedly codenamed attempts to foil him “Operation Arse”. Last month, Ipsos Mori recorded its lowest ever approval levels for the prime minister among Scottish voters. MSPs appeared in contemplative mood over the weekend, with some reportedly shocked at the extent of the backlash from Westminster: what may smart more than Rees-Mogg is the usually soothing Michael Gove’s dismissal of Ross as being “in Elgin and the national Tory leader is in London”. Nonetheless, anger from England is more than matched by the anger of Scottish constituents. MSP Sue Webber described Ross’s call for Johnson’s resignation as “a decision with potentially far-reaching impact”. Already the discussion is moving to the possibility for a breakaway or allied centre-right party, first proposed by respected veteran MSP Murdo Fraser a decade ago. More pressingly, if Johnson clings to his premiership, the rift with Westminster can only deepen as the council elections approach. What will the impact of such a toxic stalemate be on the doorstep for MSPs who are desperate to discuss their own ideas for a right to recovery for drug addicts or scrapping the “not proven” verdict to benefit sexual assault complainers? And how will it benefit a Scottish Labour party – which pledged last week it would stand only pro-union candidates – desperate to beat the Tories back into third place?In 2009, when Amazon’s Kindle ebook was launched in the UK, it seemed impossible to imagine that a dozen years later booksellers would be reporting a record year of sales of paperbacks and hardbacks. Despite the fact that bookshops were closed for three months early in 2021, figures show that the rejuvenation of the printed word has gathered pace. That trend undermines the tech companies’ seductive promises that apps and platforms will always and inevitably eclipse physical objects. The unexpected triumph of printed books – partly a result of their enhanced design values – proves that not all upgrades represent progress. As the great after-hours polymath Tom Waits once observed to me: “If I want to walk out in the desert and heat up a tin of beans on a fire, I still can. In movies such as Gattaca, the space-age stuff is always all there is. But in the world there is never just one way of living. It’s more like a big junkyard. Put it this way: I’m not afraid I’m going to end up on a space station in aluminium-foil underwear.” Beguiled by slime Among the more surprising books that currently feature on bestseller lists are those devoted to the biography of the ground beneath our feet. Merlin Sheldrake’s mesmerising Entangled Life, his quest into the subterranean kingdom of fungi, began that trend. I’ve subsequently been hooked on Susanne Wedlich’s uncovering of 3bn years of Slime and Robin Wall Kimmerer’s cultural history, Gathering Mosses. If these books share a thread it is that life is fundamentally cooperation; its principle “we”, not “I”. As the magically named Sheldrake puts it: “A mycelial network is a helpful reminder that all life-forms are processes not things. The ‘you’ of five years ago was made from different stuff than the ‘you’ of today. Nature is an event that never stops.” Legal aid British people find it hard to take lawyers to their hearts. An exception might have to be made, however, for Jolyon Maugham and his Good Law Project. On a busy news day last Wednesday, with the competing shame of the prime minister and Prince Andrew dominating the headlines, Maugham’s latest victory in the high court, proving the illegality of the government’s “VIP lane” for PPE procurement, was relegated downpage. As the full detail of the billions squandered in the chaotic early response to the pandemic emerges, however, it may well prove the story that most defines the unravelling core belief of Johnsonism – that laws are for other people. Old haunts My journalistic highlight of the past couple of years was visiting 93-year-old Jan Morris at her home in north Wales. Morris, the most mercurial of spirits, was full of a powerful presentiment both of her mortality and what might come next. She gaily imagined an afterlife that involved both a great love affair with Lord Jacky Fisher, former admiral of the fleet, and the haunting of her two spiritual homes: the River Dwyfor beside her house and the cliffs of Trieste, where she would again “watch the nightingales swarm”. Her life exemplified a belief that there’s no need to settle as a single being. That shape-shifting spirit is alive and well in the new posthumous collection of Morris’s essays, Allegorizings. In one, she dreams of an alternative Britain in which Princess Diana, our “patron sinner”, still bewitches the world in a “summer dress of blazing crimson and an amazing hat”, eternally uttering the fond farewell Morris always aspired to: “It HAS been fun!” • Tim Adams in an Observer columnistNearly 9,000 people in England are waiting for home care services according to figures obtained by the Observer, but the true figure is likely to be much higher with the situation having worsened dramatically since last spring. Home care is provided to elderly or disabled adults in their home to help with essential tasks, such as cooking and personal care. According to Freedom of Information responses from 96 councils in England, 8,808 people have “unallocated” or unsourced hours of home care, meaning they are not getting the home care they have been assessed as needing. The overall number of unsourced hours rose from 15,905 in April 2021 to 60,664 in December. People with unsourced care may be going without, but are more likely to be receiving care in a less appropriate setting, such as in hospitals or care homes, or being looked after unpaid by family members. Caroline Abrahams, Age UK’s charity director, said: “It comes to something when so many paid-for hours of care are not being used, all because there aren’t enough staff to put them into effect. This inevitably means that growing numbers of older and disabled people are going without the care and support they need, and that where unpaid carers are helping their loved ones, they are being forced to do more for longer, unaided and with no chance of a break. “The prospects for anyone who is waiting for care and on their own, without family or other support, are extremely grim – one has to wonder how some of these people are managing to carry on at all. “It is tempting for policymakers to place all the blame for the growing care workforce crisis on Covid-19 … but it’s been coming for a long time. Where we are now is what happens when there is no effective workforce planning over many years. It would be hard to exaggerate how worried we are about what’s going to happen to home care this year, and to the millions of older and disabled people who rely on it every day.” Jane Townson, chief executive of the Homecare Association, said retention and recruitment of care workers is “more difficult than ever”, blaming “inadequate government investment in social care”. Many staff, she said, leave for better paid jobs in sectors such as retail and hospitality. “We are struggling massively to have any support whatsoever,” Ellen Fenby, whose 19-year-old son is severely disabled, told the Observer. “There’s a lack of staff, there’s a lack of people in the industry, there’s a lack of being able to train people to come in and support us. Since July of last year we have had no support in the home whatsoever.” Fenby’s son has multiple medical needs including brain damage and internal organ problems. Last summer he had to have a PEG tube fitted, which allows feeding directly into the stomach, after he developed severe problems swallowing. “He went from a young person eating normally like everybody else does, to all of a sudden not being able to eat by his mouth, everything by his PEG. We were having to do that feeding, we were having to manage the care of the stoma site, the care of his food and making sure his nutrition and hydration was correct. So his care need grew significantly.” Their local council assessed he needed more care – two hours of home care every eveningfor personal care and his feeding regime. The council increased the funding for Fenby’s son but the family can’t spend it as no provision is available. “It’s sitting there. We’ve been paid the money from the council, and we simply cannot find anybody to be able to actually take those hours,” said Fenby. “It has been very stressful. Both my husband and I have full-time jobs, we have three other children. Trying to make sure he still has his care needs met while trying to seek other agencies – I’m constantly emailing all the agencies in the area to try and see if there is anybody. There is a massive lack of anybody that is PEG-trained.” Nor can they spend the money on other forms of care. Her son’s mental health has suffered, his needs have grown and new elements of his disability have emerged. “We have come to a point where we are a family in crisis, because the need has grown significantly that we are struggling to cope,” Fenby said. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “We are committed to delivering world-leading social care across the country and that is why we’re investing an additional £5.4bn over three years to reform adult social care.”The Nolan Show (BBC Radio Ulster) | BBC Sounds Jimmy’s Jobs of the Future | apple.com Now You’re Asking with Marian Keyes and Tara Flynn (BBC Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Room 5 (BBC Radio 4) | BBC Sounds “Stephen, I use my milk until I see all the wee white bits floating around on the top of the cup,” announces Norman from Bangor. “I remember getting a packet of crisps and they were a year out of date and I ate them and they tasted as good as the crisps you’d buy tomorrow in a shop.” It’s Tuesday morning, the morning after the revelations about the No 10 bring-your-own-booze lockdown party. On Radio 4’s Today programme, on 5 live and LBC, the talk is of little else. Even Mike Graham on TalkRadio is spluttering at Johnson’s hubris: “All of you who say it doesn’t matter, move on: I’m afraid that’s not going to happen.” On LBC, James O’Brien is waxing loopily about Johnson’s psychology: “The only question is, why do people land on his hand like a little sparrow and start pecking these grains of dishonesty, what do they get in return?” But on Stephen Nolan’s mid-morning BBC Radio Ulster show, Nolan and his listeners are chatting about whether “the sniff test” can determine whether your food is edible. What about ice-cream, for instance? Does it go off? “I bought a tub of Caramel Chew Chew ice-cream,” says Nolan. “I got it on offer and I actually drove about three miles up the road to get the offer. But then I forgot about it for three days! I was raging! I didn’t touch it! The Caramel Chew Chew!” The show also discussed whether unionist politicians will refuse to go into government if Sinn Féin wins in the forthcoming assembly elections. But the sniff test chat was much more enjoyable. Speaking of No 10, which we definitely aren’t, the fourth series of the Jimmy’s Jobs of the Future podcast began last week, in which former Downing Street adviser Jimmy McLoughlin interviews “top entrepreneurs” about modern jobs. (It’s usually something disruptive in childcare, or finance, or gas and electricity.) The interviewee? Rishi Sunak. Sunak was perfectly nice, though it did seem as if he and McLoughlin were speaking from another country to, say, Nolan. “From your phone, it’s easy to look at your portfolio, make selections,” said Sunak. “If you have an interest in ESG [environmental, social and governance] investing, or net zero, or emerging markets, whatever you want to do. Make it easy, make it personalised.” As though everyone has spare money to invest, or spare time to monitor what they’re investing in. We’re too busy sniffing our food to see if it’s edible. If you’re after more cheer, and Nolan is not for you, then there’s plenty of warm-hearted joy to be found in Now You’re Asking, a new Radio 4 show in which the actor Tara Flynn and writer Marian Keyes tackle listeners’ problems, such as how to deal with a neighbour putting pink flamingos in the communal garden. Nobody thus far has a Caramel Chew Chew query, but you feel such a dilemma would be ideal for Flynn and Keyes, especially if given a personal twist, eg the ice-cream is your poorly mum’s favourite; should you refreeze and serve it to her? Their advice is funny and surprisingly touching, and the show flies by. Also on Radio 4, producer/presenter Helena Merriman has a new series, Room 5. As she made the excellent cold war investigative podcast Tunnel 29, you might expect this show to be a look at, say, an interrogation room during a war. Actually, Room 5 refers to something more personal. In 2019, in Room 5 at her doctor’s surgery, Merriman was diagnosed with a relatively rare medical problem – otosclerosis – that required a tricky operation and a long, bumpy recovery. Her life was changed forever by her diagnosis, and in this series she interviews people who’ve been through something similar. A sensitive and intelligent interviewer, Merriman is interested in what happens after the Room 5 moment. The medication, the rehabilitation, the strain. The real-life consequences of a couple of sentences said in a room. Her first interviewee was Bex, who, aged 20, suffered a rapidly worsening series of symptoms that culminated in her being in a state of almost continual psychosis. She heard voices, had seizures and believed everyone was conspiring against her. She couldn’t tell what was real. A neurologist noticed that Bex had become very attached to a toy penguin, and it reminded him of similar case he’d seen many years ago. The programme recalled Oliver Sacks’s The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat – weird illnesses and how they can affect our brains – and it’s thoroughly absorbing. Something to think about while you’re contemplating your melted Chew Chew.I think about food 80% of the time. I guess the other 20% is sleeping. My favourite episodes of Off Menu [Gamble’s food and drink podcast with fellow comedian James Acaster] are the ones that just spin off into ridiculous stories, or dig down into how weird people are. Serge from the band Kasabian said when he was growing up, he couldn’t eat food if there was a magician on the telly. No one’s ever said that. Then he says: “I just started thinking about how their props bag must really smell.” So we were like: “That’s the weirdest thing we’ve ever heard.” Well, actually, James was like: “No, I think I understand that.” And I’m like: “Of course you do.” I always rejected the children’s menu. They’d hand you a horrible menu covered in sticky fingerprints, with crayon scribbled all over it that only offered fish fingers or chicken nuggets. Just base stuff for children, which is a mad way of going about things. At no point did I want to eat that. I wanted what my mum and dad were eating. My friends’ parents loved me coming over, because you could treat me like a little human dustbin. I was a lot fatter than the other children. I enjoyed every single morsel presented to me. Which I’m glad of; it gave me a good basis in food. And now that’s a large part of my job. My mum made an amazing chicken noodle dish, a really nice mozzarella pasta bake, and a chicken and sweet potato casserole. It’s really sweet, she sent me away to university with a book she made with all the recipes. And obviously I didn’t cook them once. Actually, I might have cooked the chicken noodle dish once in the third year to try and impress some people. But it was just an absolute pizza feast for three years. I didn’t expect when we met Jamie Oliver [for the podcast] that he’d get into talking about his underpants so quickly. And I certainly didn’t expect him to come back into the room at the end of the interview to show us the underpants he’d just been to the toilet to take off. But the company in question sent us some underpants, I’m wearing them right now. Any diabetic will tell you, it’s like having another, 24-hour job. Especially if you really like food and you like trying new things. Because every time you try something new, you don’t necessarily know how your body will react to it. So I really think about the impact it is going to have, but quite often I’ll go: “I’m going to eat it anyway.” I was vegan for about nine months, I gave that a go. That sums me up a little bit. If I decide I want to do something, I’ll really stick to it quite intensely for a long time. Then one day, wake up and go: “Well, I’m not doing that any more.” And I’ll go completely in the opposite direction. I got really into barbecuing during the lockdown. It became an issue. I was barbecuing five times a week when it was really nice weather. But then I did a roast lamb on the barbecue when it was snowing and I’ve done ribs when it was pissing it down with rain. Washing up is in the family genes. My grandad used to claim he was the Northern Ireland junior champion of washing up. And I believed that for a long time, because someone made him a certificate and he had it on the wall. It took me until I was about 21 to realise it was a joke. My favourite things Food Slow-cooked meat. Or anything slow-cooked, really. I like the feeling of putting together ingredients and just giving it time and a little bit of heat. And then hours later pulling out something that just works and is comforting and warm. Drink A Californian cabernet sauvignon is always a pretty good bet. Restaurant The Quality Chop House in London. That’s the first place I went after the last lockdown was lifted and we sat on a little table outside and just ordered far too much. Dish to make It’s always a big exciting day in our house when I make my lasagne. I do it properly as well: ragu, bechamel, a lot of cheese. I like to think it would upset an Italian but it is bloody tasty. Ed Gamble tours the UK from 3 Feb and he will be a judge on the new series of Great British Menu. Off Menu, with Gamble and James Acaster, is available on all podcast providersNext month brings the likelihood of a 0.25% interest rate rise from the Bank of England, and possibly two more over the rest of the year, as Threadneedle Street seeks to dampen Britain’s overheating economy. At least that would be the reason if the economy were overheating and in need of higher interest rates. In fact, the central bank is simply revealing itself to be weaker than it was in 2011, when inflation jumped to 5% and investors, fearful of runaway prices encouraging workers to demand sky-high wages, demanded action. Interest rates then remained at historic lows. The logic of the position the Bank took last year – that inflation would be temporary and externally driven, and for that reason beyond its influence – was reminiscent of 2011. And given the underlying weakness of the economy, that same logic still applies. Of course, inflation is a problem for households that are facing higher food and utility bills, and especially poorer households which have mostly missed out on working from home. They haven’t saved large sums during the pandemic. To solve that problem, why not reinstate last September’s cut to universal credit? Its removal amounted to a loss of about £1,000 a year, and the money would easily make up for the intangible costs of Covid as well as the more tangible gas bill rise. Meanwhile, the better-off can afford higher prices. The Bank is only concerned by the average worker’s response to inflation and whether it will be characterised by rocketing wage demands – driving incomes higher this year and next. There is little evidence for this, and it seems implausible when so many businesses have successfully driven wedges between their workers, denying them any possible collective action. What about sky-high vacancy rates? Weren’t they supposed to force almost all employers, including those that shunned unions, to pay megabucks – protecting workers against inflation and maybe offering a bit more on top? On this point, the Resolution Foundation has pulled together the latest data from the ONS surveys of online job adverts. In October, transport and logistics firms were looking for about 350,000 workers. By 6 January this had fallen to 200,000. Similar drops in demand were seen in catering and hospitality and construction, knocking another 150,000 off the 1.1m vacancy total. It’s true Omicron played a large part in the decisions employers made about needing extra staff over the festive period. Yet there was also something more fundamental going on, as the foundation’s director, Torsten Bell, says in an accompanying analysis, arguing that a messy reopening of the economy was always going to cause temporary jobs mismatches, adding that over time “capitalism is quite well set up to adjust to shifts in demand”. How else is the economy overheating? The focus is on the latest GDP figure, which shows the economy surpassed its pre-pandemic level in November and, after an Omicron dip that will mar December and January’s figures, looks like picking up again once working from home comes to an end in February. You would think the Bank would look a little deeper into why the British economy has grown, rather than just at the top line, because it is far from being a straightforward story of success, or “a testament to the grit and determination of the British people”, as the chancellor would have it. Much of it is due to the massive increase in health spending over the past two years that countries with larger and better-funded healthcare systems – France and Germany, for instance – had less need for. The construction of a Nightingale hospital feeds into GDP, as does the mothballing and deconstruction of the same shed and beds. It makes no difference to the statisticians that the temporary hospital went unused. Consumers have played a significant part in the recovery while businesses have largely kept their powder dry, holding back on investment until the outlook is clearer. But without business investment, recoveries usually lack the impetus needed to sustain them and quickly tail off. Then there are the tax rises in April that will hit employers and households – mainly the 1.25% national insurance increase, but also the freeze on income tax thresholds. The one dissenting voice on the Bank’s monetary policy committee is Silvana Tenreyro, a former professor at the London School of Economics. She argues higher prices and tax increases will have their own dampening effect without the need for the committee to change course. She makes a good point.Doctors at Tigray’s main hospital are urging the Ethiopian government to allow supplies of insulin to be airlifted into the region, warning that their stocks will run out within a week and that patients with type 1 diabetes are “at serious risk of death”. At the Ayder referral hospital in Mekelle, the largest in the region of 7 million people, staff have been told they only have 150 vials of insulin left and no oral diabetes medicines, according to a statement late on Friday. “This very limited amount will only allow us to serve our patients in need for less than a week,” warns the statement, published on the website of the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) and signed by a group of experts, some of Tigrayan origin. The stark warning is a further sign of the intense strain placed on the region’s healthcare services by the 14-month conflict between Tigrayan and federal government forces, which has been marked by widespread human rights abuses and deepening humanitarian strife. If left unresolved, doctors fear the insulin crisis could affect thousands of people. More than 6,000 people were being treated for type 1 diabetes throughout the region before the war began, about 2,500 of them at Ayder. The Observer has not been able to independently verify the claims. The UN accuses prime minister Abiy Ahmed of maintaining a de facto blockade on the region to deprive it of basic resources including food, fuel and medical supplies. The government denies this, saying forces loyal to the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) have disrupted supplies by attacking critical infrastructure and seizing aid trucks. “In conflicts there are always many wrongs, often on both sides, but we feel denying medical care to innocent civilians under any circumstances is unethical. We appeal to healthcare professionals around the world … to help avert this blockage of critically important, life-saving medicines,” says the statement to the IDF. “In 2022, 100 years after the discovery of insulin, please let us not deliberately sentence our type 1 diabetes population to inevitable and agonising death through collective inaction.” Doctors at Ayder have not received any diabetes medicine from the government in Addis Ababa since July and have been using expired medicines since September, the statement says. Now even those supplies are dwindling, it adds. “A diabetes catastrophe is … unfolding as people with type 1 diabetes cannot live without insulin,” warn the doctors. The hospital has also run out of IV fluids, they add, forcing them to treat patients with acute diabetic complications with just water. This is “extremely difficult because of co-existent nausea and vomiting, resulting in avoidable deaths,” the statement warns. An additional complication is the fact that so many patients are coming in to hospital malnourished, “further reducing their resilience”. The UN’s World Food Programme estimates that around 5.2 million people in Tigray are in need of food assistance. In the statement, signed by the IDF’s president, professor Andrew Boulton of Manchester University, the medics say Ayder hospital has been assured that insulin “earmarked for Tigray” is available in Addis Ababa. They urge authorities to allow supplies to come in on the weekly flights for humanitarian staff that still operate between Mekelle and the national capital. Last week, the director general of the World Health Organization, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, attacked the Ethiopian authorities for the humanitarian crisis in Tigray, saying that the WHO had not been permitted to send medical supplies to the region since July. It was “dreadful and unimaginable”, he said, that “a government is denying its own people for more than a year food and medicine”. The foreign ministry reacted furiously to the condemnation, accusing Tedros, who is Tigrayan, of spreading misinformation and compromising the WHO’s “reputation, independence and credibility”. Earlier this month, when doctors at Ayder raised concerns about supplies of various medicines and equipment, government spokesman Legesse Tulu told Reuters: “What is happening in Tigray currently is the sole responsibility of TPLF.”Are you in control of your smartphone or is it in control of you? Sometimes it is difficult to tell. One minute you might be using FaceTime to chat with loved ones or talking about your favourite TV show on Twitter. Next, you’re stuck in a TikTok “scroll hole” or tapping your 29th email notification of the day and no longer able to focus on anything else. We often feel like we can’t pull ourselves away from our devices. As various psychologists and Silicon Valley whistleblowers have stated, that is by design. Many people are making efforts to resist and step away from their smartphones. A 2021 survey by research company GWI found that people of all ages limit the time they spend on social media – especially younger respondents. Twenty-five per cent of gen Z and 23% of millennials said they now look at social apps less to help manage their mental health. But as recent studies suggest, not all tech time is created equal. Passively scrolling Facebook and comparing your life with other people’s has never been a recipe for happiness. But actively using Twitter for social support can be. So instead of setting well-intentioned but ultimately unsustainable resolutions or signing up for some kind of extreme “digital detox”, think about changing the settings on some of your apps to make them less of a time sink. 1. Twitter Mute people and topics Some people might call it cancelling, but we prefer the term “curation”. You can improve your Twitter experience by muting anything you’d rather not see, such as fad diet tips, Black Friday offers or movie spoilers. It’s easy to do – and undo. For people, simply tap the three dots on their profile and hit “mute”. You’ll no longer see their tweets, but they won’t know. Do the same for words, phrases, film titles or anything else. Go to “settings”, find “privacy and safety”, tap “mute and block” and then press the “+” sign and add anything you want to blot out. 2. WhatsApp Disable read receipts Sending a message and being “left on read” is a huge source of stress for many of us. So is receiving a message and feeling like you have to stop everything you’re doing and reply urgently. Disabling read receipts can quickly reduce these pressures and paranoias. Go to “settings”, then “account”, select “privacy” and toggle read receipts off. Now you won’t see the dreaded blue ticks, and neither will the people you message. 3. Facebook Neutralise your news feed It has undermined 21st-century democracy but if you can’t face leaving, the next best thing is to delete the Facebook app from your phone and make Facebook a desktop-only experience. By doing this, you can reduce the overwhelming stream of random memes and iffy politics by adding a browser extension, such as “News Feed Eradicator” for Chrome, which hides the news feed and displays an inspiring quote instead. 4. Instagram Hide your like count Being a confident, resilient individual, you aren’t concerned with how many “likes” your latest post earns, but you probably know someone who is. Here’s what they should do: remove the like count. On a post, hit the three dots in the top right-hand corner and select “hide like count”. Now, if you click through to who’s liked a photo, only you can see the number of likes. Keen to take it one step further? Hide everyone else’s like counts in “settings”, tap “privacy”, select “posts”, and toggle “hide like and view counts” to on. This makes Instagram feel less like a popularity contest. 5. YouTube Remove related videos Delete the YouTube app from your phone and commit to only watching it on your desktop. Then you can add a browser extension to give you more control. For example, “Improve YouTube” is an extension for Chrome that has a bunch of features to improve your viewing, the best of which hides the “related videos” sidebar. This aspect of YouTube can so often eat up more of your time than you’d intended by sending you down a video rabbit hole. 6. TikTok Set a time limit TikTok can feel like an alternative dimension. You think you’ve spent five minutes watching videos of dogs in hats, when somehow an hour has passed you by. Take control of your viewing by setting a time limit within the app itself. Go to “settings”, “digital wellbeing” and then “screen-time management” to select a time limit of 40, 60, 90 or 120 minutes a day. When your time is up, you’ll need to enter a passcode to keep using TikTok, which should be the nudge you need to go do something else. 7. Notifications Take a hard line How often is your eye drawn by a new, and ultimately irrelevant, notification lighting up your smartphone screen? With most apps they are enabled by default. Think carefully: do you really want to be repeatedly jabbed in the brain by assorted social media platforms, ancient acquaintances and pizza delivery companies? Probably not. Instead, decide which ones you really need. Calendar reminders, yes. That someone you’ve not spoken to in 20 years who has “liked” one of your photos, no. Interestingly, a 2021 study found 89% of phone disruptions are caused by a need to check, not notifications. But getting a grip on notifications could help you get a handle on your phone-checking habit – just try to stick with it past a few days. Be strong. 8. Email Check emails twice a day There are 101 methods that claim to remove the stress from your inbox, from the zero-inbox approach to adding colourful folders or filters. But one straightforward new email habit is: check your emails only once – or twice, if you have to – a day. This is a productivity tip long recommended by Tim Ferriss, the author of The 4-Hour Workweek. You’ll need to turn off email notifications and set an alarm to remind you to check. Scheduling emails will make things easier, staggering replies so your inbox isn’t full again within minutes. You can also create an autoreply explaining your email method and that senders shouldn’t expect an instant response. 9. LinkedIn Unfollow annoying people A useful feature on LinkedIn allows you to unfollow someone so you don’t see their updates. Plenty of people know this feature exists but don’t use it enough. Next time someone humblebrags about their new promotion, Ted talk or number of Substack followers on LinkedIn, consider unfollowing them. It’s easier to reverse than removing or unfriending them, and a good option for colleagues you don’t want to offend – because they won’t see they’ve been unfollowed. 10. Messenger Make yourself unavailable Get rid of the green dot that pops up next to your name in Messenger, showing everyone you know that you’re online. It’s only useful on rare occasions, and the rest of the time this glowing green badge is the online equivalent of having a Post-it stuck to your forehead that says “please talk to me” on it. Head to Messenger, tap your profile, select “active status” and toggle this option off. Becca Caddy is the author of Screen Time: How to Make Peace With Your Devices and Find Your Techquilibrium (Blink, £14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyGrey suit, grey demeanour, grey football. Rafael Benítez looked a haunted man and with the travelling support voluminous in their discontent, it is hard to see where the Everton manager goes from here. His side deserved to lose to a Norwich team who somehow found the strength of character and the quality of play to put an end to a run of six defeats and no goals and claim three vital points in their fight against relegation. Everton, meanwhile, are increasingly being drawn into a dogfight and while Benítez pointed to returning players and an improved second half performance, the fans who unfurled banners at full time calling for his dismissal and that of the Goodison board did not appear to agree. “I am a professional and I have enough experience and I came here to fix issues of the last five years”, said Benítez of his ability to deal with the pressure that is on his shoulders. He has managed five games fewer than Sam Allardyce, once seen as the modern nadir by Everton fans, but his win percentage is some way short of Big Sam’s – 26% to 38% – with Benítez’s record currently the worst of a permanent manager since Howard Kendall’s ill-feted return to the club. “It’s not in my hands,” said Benítez of his future as he lamented the mistakes that “are costing us goals and points each week”. There were many in this match, the first most costly being the toe-poke by Michael Keane that gave Norwich the lead in the 16th minute. Directly from the restart came the second, as Anthony Gordon coughed up possession to Brandon Williams who stormed up the pitch and slipped in Adam Idah for the Republic of Ireland international to score his first Premier League goal. Benítez was able to welcome Yerry Mina and Richarlison back to the squad and put them swiftly on the pitch in the second half, with both having an effect on the game and a hand in Everton’s only goal. Mina unsettled Tim Krul under a driven cross, and Richarlison capitalised on the Norwich keeper’s soft punch to sweep a perfect overhead kick into the net. Everton had the better of the play in the second half, but not to the extent to which Norwich dominated the first and, as odd as it must have been for Canaries fans to experience, the hosts managed the game well to claim victory. The experience of Krul and Grant Hanley was central to the resolute defence but Norwich also offered a cutting edge going forward, something that has been the case for very short periods this season. Part of this could be attributed to Dean Smith’s brave decision to switch to a 4-4-2 formation, the rest to the performance of Idah, who is emerging as a threat just when his team need him. “We’re still finding out what kind of player he is”, Smith said of the 20-year-old. “He’s physically strong and he’s just starting to learn how to use his body to make use of that. He’s got a great touch, he can finish and his first Premier League goal was well deserved today. He’s got an awful lot of potential and it’s our job to get it out of him.” Norwich have moved off the bottom of the table and are at their highest point in the football pyramid since November 2019. One point and a terrible goal difference separate them from Watford and safety, with the Hornets Norwich’s next opponents on Friday night. “I’m really proud of the players because they gave it everything today,” Smith said. “I said to them before the game, ‘It’s not the be all and end all game but we are getting that way’ and it was time for actions rather than words. “We wanted to get our fans behind us by putting in a performance and showing the energy and verve that we needed and we did that. The glass of red wine after the match hasn’t tasted sweet for a while. It will taste certainly sweeter tonight.”The video was, according to former Ukip leader Henry Bolton, evidence of the declining quality of MPs. Anthony Grayling, the philosopher, described her as a “bald-faced emetic” and Philip Pullman, the author, said he was “aghast”. Their collective outrage was directed at the words of Rosie Holt who, asked by an interviewer whether she attended any of the Downing Street parties, said that until Sue Gray completes her report “your guess is as good as mine: I don’t know whether I attended the party”. Holt added: “If there was a party in lockdown when we told everyone they couldn’t even attend funerals, but no one knew about it, was there a party?” At a glance, Holt may be hard to distinguish from the declining number of Tory MPs prepared to stand up for the prime minister, but she is in fact a satirist – an actor and comedian with a strong line in parodies of the political speech that veers into drivel. This video sketch has taken off – 6 million views on Twitter so far – partly because “an awful lot of people” think it’s real, she said. “I don’t go in there to hoodwink people,” she told the Observer. “I get a bit unnerved when lots of people think it’s real because that’s not what I’m trying to do. “But there’s also an awful lot of people who do get it. And I’m quite good at screening out the negative stuff. Some people say ‘oh, you shouldn’t joke about things like this – it’s a serious subject’. “But I’m a big believer in laughing at things that make you sad and angry. And there’s so many things happening with this government at the moment there is always just so much material.” This particular video was created by splicing Holt’s footage with questions from a Sky News reporter to Boris Johnson in which he dodged questions about whether he had gone to the 20 May 2020 garden party. Others have featured Holt as a disingenuous columnist or online commentator, putting forward arguments about issues such as Shamima Begum or the Edward Colston statue. Social media has been flooded with jokes and memes since partygate began. After Johnson’s claim that he “believed implicitly that it was a work event”, people posted pictures of other “work events”: people dancing at festivals, in bars, at pool parties, and England football fans lighting flares between their buttocks. When news emerged that Downing Street staff had taken a suitcase to a supermarket to fill it with booze, supermarket wine shelves were Photoshopped under an “office supplies” notice. Holt’s first sketch appeared in June 2020 during the Black Lives Matter protests. The 30-something actor, who trained at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, had been about to go on tour in The Crown – Live, a parody of the Netflix series, when the first lockdown began. “I moved back with my parents for lockdown one in Somerset and, like a lot of creators, was going a bit mad,” she says. Her first video was prompted by comments by people outraged that Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, planned to remove a statue of slaveholder Robert Milligan from outside the Museum of London Docklands. “All these people were saying ‘you’re trying to destroy history’, ‘this is against democracy’. There was so much rage. It was extraordinary – this visceral reaction of people wanting to protect the statues of slave traders. I had the idea of taking someone who is following those ideas through to their logical conclusion. So I put up a sketch where this character says, ‘oh, it’s terrible, they’re erasing history. Just like Stalin did. Who, incidentally, I have a statue of in my garden’.” Another video about Colston features Holt’s rightwing commentator asking if things have gone too far – will people start demonising men from the past for beating their wives, for burning witches or for Victorian child labour? Holt was nervous about her early videos, and did detailed research on the news to make sure she didn’t make mistakes. “When I started reading the Telegraph and [online magazine] Spiked, they’ll put forward an argument while omitting huge gaps. One issue that keeps getting put forward again and again is that ‘slavery was all right, everyone was doing it’ but there was still a really strong abolitionist movement. They put forward these really strong opinions without evidence to back them up any more, and I find that quite worrying.” Holt’s agent, Hatch Talent, is negotiating various offers that have come her way. Why does she think things have taken off for her now? “I think people are really angry about the parties. So it has hit a nerve,” she says. “I find this government in general quite abhorrent. And I think the problem is that when Boris came to power, he seemed to prize loyalty over competence. So he got rid of a lot of the competent Tories. “And as a result, you’ve got this cabinet of people who are largely, well, morons, really. They are incompetent morons. And so, if Boris does go, who are we going to get instead? Liz Truss? Oh God. How awful.”Bruno Lage recently misunderstood a question about Europe as an enquiry about his plans for a mid-season warm-weather training camp but there was no mistaking what the Wolves fans were singing about as they dispatched Southampton to rise to eighth in the Premier League. The substitute Adama Traoré completed the scoring, a couple of minutes after Romain Perraud headed against the frame of the goal in search of a Southampton equaliser. Wolves had looked comfortable but it turned into a grandstand finish after James Ward-Prowse leathered a swerving free-kick in from 30 yards. Traoré’s 18 minutes on the pitch provided a snapshot of a player who seems to continuously lurch between the sublime and the ridiculous. Seconds before powering through to score his first goal of the season to seal victory, he had skied a shot over from close range after a tenacious run by another substitute, Fabio Silva. It remains to be seen if it proves Traoré’s last act for the club with the winger, who has less than 18 months to run on his contract and, seemingly no closer to extending his stay, attracting interest from Tottenham. These are two managers with little sympathy for their rivals submitting postponement requests to the Premier League. Ralph Hasenhüttl has been critical of the league for allowing clubs perceived wriggle room to delay games to suit themselves and a look at the Wolves lineup reflected the lengths they have gone to ensure they have adequate numbers to fulfil their fixtures during a strained period. Without Romain Saïss, who has captained Morocco to the knockout stages of the Africa Cup of Nations, and Rúben Neves after he returned a positive Covid test, Lage shuffled his pack and handed the 22-year-old Toti Gomes a debut in defence, one of three players recalled from loans this month in order to bolster a thin Wolves squad. Lage also named two goalkeepers and three teenagers among his substitutes. After the game, Hasenhüttl was in no mood to go over old ground but it is impossible not to think more matches would be played as scheduled if every manager followed Lage’s school of thought. “The most important thing is not to make excuses or complain, it is to find a solution,” Lage said. “If we have players we need to continue to play. We have a lot of kids from the academy who are available. I want to play, especially now, because we are in a good moment. I didn’t think about [asking to postpone the game]. I put a kid who is just training a couple of times with us in the game, and we win the game.” Wolves took the lead from the penalty spot after Jan Bednarek clumsily upended Rayan Aït-Nouri inside the box. Michael Salisbury initially awarded a corner but the referee changed his verdict after visiting the VAR monitor and Raúl Jiménez, who stuttered his run-up, sent Fraser Forster the wrong way. Southampton came close to an equaliser before the interval but the Wolves goalkeeper José Sá, who earlier oozed calm when Cruyff-turning away from Armando Broja, twice saved superbly from Mohammed Salisu. Southampton put four goals past Brentford in midweek but lacked the same attacking thrust here and gave Wolves a leg-up when the hosts doubled their advantage approaching the hour. Forster wandered out of goal to claim an Aït-Nouri free-kick, only to halt his run halfway. Max Kilman did not think twice and sent a header looping over the Southampton goalkeeper and against a post. The rebound was there for the taking and Conor Coady obliged, scoring his first league goal at this ground since joining the club in 2015. Ward-Prowse rattled in from distance to tee up a tantalising finish but it was Wolves who had the final say. “Prowsey’s free-kick was world-class,” Hasenhüttl said. “I’ve seen a lot of good ones but I think this is the best one, against this goalkeeper – one of the best in the league – amazing. It was an unbelievable hit. It is a pity we don’t get anything [from the game].”The game had entered the 87th minute when Eddie Howe bellowed a command from the technical area. “Relax,” screamed Newcastle’s manager as his team failed to retain possession. With hindsight, “concentrate” might have been the better instruction as, seconds later, João Pedro rose above Jamaal Lascelles and headed Watford level. As Howe kicked a water bottle with rather terrifying fury, neutrals were left admiring the sublime cross from the substitute Kiko Femenía that prefaced the Brazilian’s equaliser. João Pedro reacted to it a split second faster than his marker, hurling himself at the ball and prompting a heartfelt howl of relief from Claudio Ranieri as it hit the back of the net. Until then it had seemed that, thanks to Allan Saint-Maximin’s wonderful solo goal, Newcastle were about to register a second win of the season and clamber out of the bottom three. Yet they were never remotely convincing and Watford just about deserved their second draw of the League campaign. It arrested a run of seven straight defeats, keeping them 17th, two points and two places ahead of Newcastle before next week’s vital matches against Burnley and Norwich. “I’m satisfied but I want more,” said Watford’s manager. “I’m happy we never gave up but we did not play so good. We were anxious. I know we can do better.” Ranieri gave debuts to his three new signings, the former Nice left-back Hassane Kamara, the ex Udinese centre-half Samir and Edo Kayembe, a midfielder acquired from Eupen. Samir found himself hurled in the deep end, marking Chris Wood, Howe’s £25m new boy. The Brazilian defender did well but, even so, Wood swiftly showed off his potential, the former Burnley centre-forward dragging two defenders out of position and permitting Joelinton to flick the fallout from Ryan Fraser’s whipped in cross against the bar. It proved an all too rare cameo on an afternoon when Wood invariably seemed on a different wavelength from his new team-mates and struggled to link play. Apart from heading a corner from the impressive Kieran Trippier wide, he did little of note as Newcastle dominated first-half possession but created only half-chances. Their final balls were snatched and this consistently rushed approach offered a deep-sitting Watford cause for cautious optimism. Watford at their counterattacking best zipped the ball around with menacing rapidity but all too often João Pedro flattered to deceive. Saint-Maximin, Newcastle’s mercurial game-changer, was also initially below his best and spent much of the opening half flickering rather than flaring into life. Perhaps the French winger was merely lulling the visitors into a false sense of security. Or maybe he did not properly wake up until the 49th minute but suddenly Saint-Maximin was dispossessing Jeremy Ngakia before swerving past two more defenders, shifting his body weight from side to side, as he accelerated into the box and sent a left-foot shot curving away from Ben Foster’s reach. When, shortly afterwards, Moussa Sissoko, a Newcastle old boy, sent Saint-Maximin crashing, painfully, to earth with a crude tackle – correctly earning him a yellow card – it seemed to symbolise Watford’s collective frustration. Creditably, they pulled themselves together and Josh King, once one of Howe’s players at Bournemouth, was left with only Martin Dúbravka to beat but his first touch let him down, enabling the goalkeeper to make a vital save. Undeterred, Watford refused to surrender and edginess gripped the 52,223 crowd, with the tension near unbearable at times. When Lascelles made a horrible error, miscueing what should have been a routine square pass and Emmanuel Dennis – otherwise generally well chaperoned by Paul Dummett – cued up Sissoko, St James’ Park held its collective breath but the shot flew wide. Femenía and João Pedro had to combine to outwit Newcastle’s defence but Howe’s urgent need for at least one new centre-half appeared amply highlighted. “It’s hugely disappointing,” he said. “We’ve damaged ourselves. There’s a psychological failing that we can’t hold on to a lead, the longer the game went on the more anxious and desperate we got. There are mental scars.”Thanks for joining me. Have a fine evening. Start it with Aston Villa v Manchester United. Louise Taylor on Newcastle v Watford. Ben Fisher reports from Molineux. Paul MacInnes witnessed Norwich beat Everton. Newcastle had one shot on target today. Not the best. The great Scott Murray is on top of all events at Aston Villa v Manchester United. Ronay on De Bruyne. The narrative from today will be the added pressure on Rafa Benitez. Will he have the desire to carry on with the fans against him? Another fine win for Bruno Lage. The Canaries hold on. Boos from the home crowd at the final whistle. The sub settles it. Newcastle 1-1 Watford: The Hornets are very much on top ... Wolves 2-1 Southampton: Bednarek whips in a cross from the right which misses everyone, eventually reaching Perraud on the other side of the pitch who sends it over the bar. Newcastle 1-1 Watford: Femenia was the man to put in the inch-perfect cross for the Brazilian to head home. A brilliant header levels things up. A stunning free-kick from about 35 yards gets Saints back into the game. What a strike from the midfielder. Newcastle 1-0 Watford: Dennis is off for Watford and Hernandez on. Interesting decision from Ranieri. Wolves 2-0 Southampton: The final roll of the dice for Saints as Adam Armstrong replaces Broja. Norwich 2-1 Everton: Gordon connects beautifully with a Godfrey cross but his shot is blocked on the line. Flynn Downes equalises for Swansea at Huddersfield. I assume Elis James is currently tops off. Norwich 2-1 Everton: Richarlison gets up after whacking into the advertising hoardings. Six for Fulham! Matt Hobbs on Everton: “A player overhaul is undoubtedly needed but you could also argue Benitez has been dealt with patiently by an owner who sacked Sam Allardyce for finishing 8th. “Everton finished three points off European football last season and the only only significant departures from that squad - James, Digne - were at the behest of Benitez. “His insistence on playing Rondon means young talents like Lewis Dobbin could leave the club and although the club is a mess at boardroom level, it’s becoming increasingly obvious that Rafa is part of the problem, not the solution.” Ronaldo and Rashford are not in the Manchester United squad to face Aston Villa. Anthony Elanga starts. Tom Lawrence puts Derby ahead against Sheffield United. At the same time, Sky Sports are reporting the EFL have given the Rams until 1 February to prove they have a viable plan to move forward. ANDY CARROLL SCORES LEGAL GOAL TO GIVE READING THE LEAD AT MIDDLESBROUGH! Newcastle 1-0 Watford: The Hornets counter after Lascelles loses the ball. The move concludes with Dennis teeing up Sissoko who sends the ball well over. He should do better. Striker! Norwich 2-1 Everton: Aarons goes into the book for cleaning out Calvert-Lewin. It is the Norwich defender, however, who comes out of it worse as he stays on the ground holding his back. The Wolves skipper taps in after the ball comes back off the post. Michael Keane has already scored an own goal for Norwich today but at least his twin brother Will has netted for his own side to double Wigan’s lead at Doncaster. Wolves 1-0 Southampton: The hosts have a goal disallowed after Gomes crosses for Coady to tap in, only to see the flag go up. The Brazilian makes a swift impact to bring Everton back into the game. Newcastle 1-0 Watford: Back to the goal ... Saint-Maximin really is a great talent; he jinked his way past a couple of Watford defenders before whacking a shot that hit the back of the net before Foster could move. Norwich 2-0 Everton Speaking of Rondon, he is off and Richarlison is on. Mary Waltz says: “I see you are under attack from some of my fellow Everton faithful. The squad is bang average at best. Throw in the injuries and the lack of depth is exposed. The only problem I have with Rafa is playing Rondon. He has been useless in my view.” Rondon is ruddy awful, to be fair. The wideman picks up the ball and drives for goal and fires the ball home to cause delirium in the stands. Trialist A has been sent off for Albion Rovers for a second bookable offence. I do not hold out hope of him getting a permanent deal. Mitrovic has a hat-trick! 5-2 to Fulham. Here we go again! Fulham are now 4-2 up against Bristol City. The joys of a late kick-off keeping us amused during half-time. I just think the team is pretty poor and that is why Everton are not doing well. I place the blame on things other than the manager. Manchester City won earlier. Here is the report. Newcastle 0-0 Watford Norwich 2-0 Everton Wolves 1-0 Southampton And Neeskans Kebano has levelled things up for Fulham against Bristol City. A counter offer ... A second from Semenyo puts Bristol City back in front at Fulham after pinging the ball off both posts before it rests in the net. Wolves 1-0 Southampton: Romeo gets a cross into the box which Salisu attacks but Jose Sa is equal to it. Another cross is sent into the box but Tella misses from four yards out. Southampton should be level. A new low! Mitrovic equalises for Fulham against Bristol City. The Mexican sends the goalkeeper the wrong way. Wolves 0-0 Southampton: A very long VAR review for a penalty after a Bednarek challenge on Ait-Nouri. The officials spend time trying to ascertain if Bednarek gets a touch on the ball before cleaning out the Wolves man. The referee is sent over to the pitchside screen and the penalty is inevitably given. Yash Gupta emails: “Just found out Sunday’s game is off, typical Arsenal. Actually I wasn’t very confident as there were two more games in same week. Glad they got so scared they got the game cancelled. I would like to ask you what is keeping Rafa at Everton? Is it the name alone or the owners are Liverpool fans in disguise?” As he knows how to keep am average team in the league. No guarantees any replacement would improve this mediocre squad. Norwich 2-0 Everton: A visiting supporter has just run onto the pitch and tried to get to Benitez. Overall, I would say things are not going well for the Spaniard. I should say the issues at Everton are not down to Benitez and more those above him but hey ho. Wolves 0-0 Southampton: Podence takes the ball down on the right, he cuts in and let’s fly but Forster saves well. “Everton is sleepwalking so far,” emails Mary Waltz, “Norwich outworking the Toffees completely. Sigh.” Fulham are losing at home to Bristol City. They would have been hoping for a better start after thrashing Reading 7-0 in midweek. Newcastle 0-0 Watford: Wood finds himself one-on-one with the goalkeeper but Cathcart gets back to stop the debutant from opening his account for Newcastle. Norwich 2-0 Everton: Losing this game would put further pressure on Benitez. How long can he survive at Goodison? What a dreadful day for Everton this is already. Rondon loses the ball and Norwich quickly counter. The ball finds its way through to Idah who pokes the under Pickford. Aarons finds Sargent who sends in a cross which Keane awkwardly turns into his own net. The defender does not cover himself in glory. Max Power opens the scoring for Wigan at Doncaster. He got his name from a hairdryer. Newcastle 0-0 Watford: The reinvented Joelinton whacks a dropping ball at goal and it comes off the crossbar. Wolves 0-0 Southampton: The Saints are on top at Molineux. Ward-Prowse has put in a few dangerous set-pieces. The latest sees Bednarek get an effort on goal but Jose Sa does well to keep it out. Newcastle 0-0 Watford: The Hornets break on Newcastle; the attack ends following a Shelvey foul on the edge of the box. Dennis takes the free-kick but he hits the top of the wall. Newcastle 0-0 Watford: Saint-Maximin, Newcastle’s talisman, puts a cross into the box but it finds no one and dribbles out of play. Wolves 0-0 Southampton: Podence spends some time on the deck after an arm across the face from Broja. Not much in it, as the referee confirms. Fulham v Bristol City is delayed by 15 minutes due to a power outage at Craven Cottage. Millwall v Forest will start at 3.10pm due to a medical emergency in the crowd. Peep! Peep! Peep! There go the whistles across the country. THERE ARE A LOT OF FLAGS BEING FLOWN AT ST JAMES’ PARK. Will the Watford players be intimated by flags? Everton have gone with a front three of Gray, Rondon and Calvert-Lewin. It will be interesting to see how they set up. Will Calvert-Lewin be forced to play out wide to accommodate Rondon? And confirmation of Tottenham v Arsenal being off. Manchester United thrashed Birmingham in the WSL earlier. Wolves are giving a debut to Tote Gomes. He is a 22-year-old defender from Guinea Bissau who has represented Portugal at youth level. He has first team experience from two loan spells at Grasshoppers Zurich. Phil Coutinho is back in the Premier League. Why did it all go so wrong in Spain? Kevin De Bruyne’s goal has put City 13 points clear at the top of the table. Is the title race over? On the upside we have football today and Nick Ames will get tomorrow off, so everyone wins. Apart from the supporters of both clubs. It looks like tomorrow’s north London derby between Tottenham and Arsenal is off. Watford have made six changes for their trip to Newcastle which is a sign of a manager who is unsure of his strongest team. I am currently researching who Kamara, Gomes and Kayembe are. Look out for these things. Wolves: Sa, Gomes, Ait-Nouri, Kilman, Coady, Semedo, Dendoncker, Moutinho, Trincao, Jimenez, Podence Subs: Moulden, Ruddy, Jordao, Silva, Giles, Sanderson, Traore, Cundle, Campbell Southampton: Forster, Bednarek, Perraud, Lyanco, Salisu, Tella, Romeu, Ward-Prowse, Diallo, Redmond, Broja Subs: Caballero, Walker-Peters, Stephens, Long, Armstrong, Adams, Small, Armstrong, Valery Newcastle: Dubravka, Trippier, Lascelles, Schar, Dummett, Shelvey, Joelinton, Longstaff, Fraser, Saint-Maximin, Wood. Subs: Darlow, Gillespie, Ritchie, Lewis, Krafth, Murphy, Almiron, Willock, Anderson. Watford: Foster, Ngakia, Samir, Cathcart, Kamara, Sissoko, Dennis, Kucka, Kayembe, King, Pedro, Subs: Bachmann, Cleverley, Sema, Tufan, Femenia, Kabasele, Hernandez, Sierralta, Morris. Norwich: Krul, Aarons, Gibson, Hanley, Williams, Sorensen, Lees-Melou, Rashica, Pukki, Sargent, Idah. Subs: Gunn, Byram, Dowell, Placheta, Cantwell, Kabak, Tzolis, Giannoulis, Rowe. Everton: Pickford, Coleman, Keane, Godfrey, Mykolenko, Gomes, Doucoure, Gordon, Gray, Rondon, Calvert-Lewin. Subs: Begovic, Kenny, Patterson, Holgate, Mina, Richarlison, Townsend, Gbamin, El Ghazi. The main game is Newcastle v Watford. Louise Taylor talks you through it. Another Saturday has arrived and there is still three matches on in the Premier League. Only Burnley v Leicester has fallen foul of Covid, which is good news for the Clarets as they are missing any semblance of an attacking threat following Chris Wood’s departure. Speaking of the New Zealand striker, he is set to make his debut for Newcastle against Watford in a key relegation clash. Kieran Tripper could also make his first Premier League appearance for the club following his return to England from Spain. A win for the hosts at St James’ Park could kickstart their season after spending a few quid already this month. Everton travel to Norwich in the hope of increasing the points gap between them and the bottom three. They have lost Lucas Digne this week and signed Anwar El Ghazi which is not an obvious swap but an indication of what Rafa Benitez wants to do at Goodison Park. Now he just needs some points to alleviate the pressure he is feeling from fans. The other 3pm kick-off sees Wolves host Southampton in what looks like a glorious mid-table clash for the ages. I am not saying we shouldn’t get excited about this fixture but there have only been five goals in Wolves’ past five games - five have finished 1-0 and the other three goalless. We but live in hope, though. Let’s get excited!Back in February 2013, a young footballer in Sierra Leone generated a brief ripple of acclaim on social media. The footage was slightly grainy but clear enough to see Mustapha Bundu taking the ball to the byline and, as a tackle flew in, chipping the Promising Stars Under-18s goalkeeper with an improbably angled rabona that swerved, floated and dropped into the far corner. There was a fleeting pause while those watching absorbed what they had witnessed; Bundu assured his coaches at the Craig Bellamy Foundation that he had meant it and they knew his oeuvre well enough to believe him. Internet sensations come and go with dizzying frequency nowadays but Bundu, who was 15 at the time, has lasted the course. On Sunday he will start on the right wing for Sierra Leone against Ivory Coast in a match that could seal his team’s place in the Africa Cup of Nations knockout stage. That is a remarkable billing in itself: Sierra Leone had not qualified for the tournament since 1996 with conflict, ebola and chaotic governance all intervening to varying degrees. But they held the champions, Algeria, to a deserved goalless draw in their opener and there is no reason to think the Elephants cannot at least be similarly troubled in Douala. “We all received hundreds of videos of people back home celebrating,” Bundu says of the reaction to Monday’s game. “People expected us to lose 4-0 or 5-0 but we went and stood up against them. Our goal is to be here, compete and cause an upset, not just to take part. A lot of people probably didn’t know about us but now they can see we have talented footballers.” An eclectic squad all have stories to tell. The goalkeeper Mohamed Kamara, named man of the match against Algeria, plays for East End Lions in the impoverished local league and cried upon receiving his award. A London-born contingent includes the ex-Chelsea scholar Kevin Wright, Osman Kakay of QPR, Wycombe’s Sullay Kaikai and their biggest-name recruit, the one-time Tottenham defender Steven Caulker, who made his debut in the Algeria game. Sierra Leone had played only 15 games in the past five years before this tournament and this year’s selection, coached by the former Walsall player John Keister, have had scant time together. Bundu’s path has been unique. The son of a successful local coach, he came through “six or seven trials” to be one of the initial 16-strong intake at the Craig Bellamy Foundation’s academy, which was set up by the former Wales international after he visited the country and was affected by its struggle to recover from the civil war that caused horrific grief during the 1990s and beyond. “It was a massive four years in my life,” Bundu says of his time there under the guidance of Johnny McKinstry, who would later manage the national team, and a group of young British coaches including Tom Legg and Paul Westren. “Not only football-wise: we were taught how to be proper human beings.” One of Bundu’s coaches remembers how, as he prepared to travel home from Sierra Leone, he found the player had got up at 3am to see him off. Another recalls that, after a poor week of training, a frustrated Bundu insisted on being given the captain’s armband and subsequently scored six goals in his next game. His nickname was “Baller”: a gentle, caring giant whose unassuming nature belied the steely edge required to progress. The 2014 ebola outbreak caused football in Sierra Leone to shut down and it brought about the academy’s demise, too. It closed in 2016 and its finances were later investigated, but that had nothing to do with the work undertaken on the ground. Bellamy was not in it for profit: he had genuinely been trying to help and the national team is reaping the benefits. Mohamed Buya Turay, who starts on the opposite flank from Bundu, also spent time at the academy while 11 of the squad worked under McKinstry at some level. Bundu left for England in September 2014, beginning a scholarship at Hartpury college in Gloucestershire, and quickly blazed a trail through the university football scene. He had not realised that he would be allowed to play senior football, too, but discovered that his work permit accommodated a stint in 2015-16 at Hereford FC, who had formed the year before after the demise of Hereford United and were in the ninth tier. A 26-goal season followed and so did an appearance at Wembley in the FA Vase final. It was far from Tombo, the village where he had caused jaws to drop with that flash of YouTube-friendly inspiration. “It was special, crazy,” he says. “I like Manchester United and, the day before, I’d watched them beat Crystal Palace in the FA Cup final on TV with all those big stars. The next moment I was walking out there. I wouldn’t change the experience for anything.” Among the flood of post-match congratulations on Monday were WhatsApp messages from friends made during that spell. Bundu has since forged a successful early career in Denmark with AGF Aarhus, where he is now back on loan from Anderlecht, but his time at Edgar Street left a firm legacy. Hereford Sierra Leone, an academy set up in the capital city Freetown, was formed in 2017 with help from dedicated volunteers connected to his old club and continues to thrive. “There’s so much talent in the country and hopefully they can get spotted and change their lives as well,” he says. “I’m happy with what I’ve achieved so far as a footballer and hopefully I can make the next step, but the main goal is always to give back to Sierra Leone and the kids there, to find opportunities for them so they can experience the things I have. “We want people to see the positives in our nation, football-wise but also in other areas of life, so that when you talk about Sierra Leone you aren’t just mentioning war or ebola. The aim is to get more people playing in the top leagues, the Premier League or La Liga, and I think that will come.” Rabonas or not, a repeat performance against Ivory Coast would bring that prospect closer to fruition.I use coconut water instead of wine, chicken stock or water in curries, stews, braising pots, stir-frys and sauces, and in desserts – jellies, sorbets, rice pudding, smoothies. I also use it to deglaze pans. Coconut water is common in Vietnamese cooking because there is such an abundance of it. It brings so much depth of flavour, and instead of sugar I can balance sweetness with coconut water, which is good because I don’t want my daughter to eat loads of sweets. You can use it to poach prawns, it makes them utterly delicious. Bring the coconut water to the boil, and drop in your shelled or whole prawns. When you eat them in a salad, you can suck the shell, it’s so sweet and pairs well with the meat of the prawns. That’s a really common dish in Vietnamese restaurants. My cousins are always ordering prawns when I go to Vietnam. Uyen Luu is a food writer and author of Vietnamese: Simple Vietnamese Food to Cook at Home (Hardie Grant)A man in Maryland has been given a pig’s heart as a transplant (genetically modified, phew), and the old chestnut rolls out again: won’t that maybe somehow make him … piggy? The rationalists laugh, and the surgeons reassure: it’s just a muscle! A pump! Physically, they may be right (the heart is complex and still not fully understood), but culturally they couldn’t be more wrong. Over millennia and across the world, the heart has also been a house, a book, a rose, a pine cone, a pomegranate, a bunch of grapes, a pincushion, a wheel, a fountain, a picnic spot, a cup, a harp, a map. It flies, sinks, grows, breaks, rejoices, flutters, burns. It’s wounded with blades, sacrificed, given, stolen, swept, polished, eaten. Frida Kahlo painted it, as a pile of paint. The heart is the only human organ other than the penis to move beyond our control, and we’ve never got over it. Imagine being stone-age: you feel it beat faster when you’re angry, scared or lustful, when you hunt; you know to shoot for the heart to kill. But you don’t know how it works. Dead, it’s just a flesh whoopie cushion. No wonder magic and religion settled in. Followed by love, courage, honesty and the rest. In Gilgamesh, the oldest written story, the hero’s heart beats with pride. In an Egyptian poem, at least 3,000 years old, a woman says: “My heart flutters hastily when I think of my love for you; it lets me not act sensibly, it leaps from its place.” Be still my beating heart … After death, the Egyptian heart was weighed against the Feather of Truth before a panel of deities: models of scarab beetles carried lengthy prayers beseeching the heart not to speak out against its owner. The true heart would go west across the Nile to spend eternity eating cake with Osiris; the impure heart was itself eaten, by Ammit, a chimaera of crocodile, hippo and lion. As Hank Williams wrote centuries later: “Your cheatin’ heart will tell on you.” Heart symbolism emerged naturally and seeped inexorably into all religions. Plato described the heart as two-sided, with chambers, which is echoed in the two tablets of the Ten Commandments in the Old Testament, where law is written in the heart. In the Qur’an it’s made of glass, for God to see your thoughts: it must be kept clean, to reflect God back clearly. That may not have been Debbie Harry’s point, but it was her image. It was in love songs long before the Song of Solomon’s “Set me as a seal on thy heart”. The Hindu gods Sita and Rama lived in the heart of the monkey god Hanuman 9,000 years ago. It makes a noise. It’s a drum, obviously. Long ago, air was believed to pass through it: in Sufi poetry it’s the reed flute, the ney. It has strings – the anatomical cordae tendinneae. By the 17th century, emblems – illustrations of religious points for the illiterate – showed a Cupid-like little Jesus playing it as a harp. They showed hearts with wings, with eyes, even being circumcised. In some, little Jesus sweeps demons and sins out of a heart-shaped house. Chambers, right? The logic is literal. A 10th-century Chinese heart sutra is written in the form of a pagoda. Nuns in Germany embroidered dear little heart chalets in which Jesus receives a drink, while the lamb of God sits on the chimney – neatly representing the aorta. Steps up are labelled with the virtues that must be shown in order to get there. Christ’s heart-house, speared open on the cross, is open to us. (In another strand, the sacrament of his blood – the love – flowed into the Holy Grail, associating the heart with cups: “copas” was the original suit in cards which became hearts.) In Mexico, the best-looking young Aztec men were treated as gods for a year – fine food, musicians following them around, girls – before their hearts were fed to the Eagle of the Sun. (The oldest known sculptural representation of the heart is a 4,000-year-old Olmec ceramic, with two chambers, sprouting blood-vessels, and a head.) Many tribal societies would eat the heart of the enemy to acquire their strength (medieval French troubadours sang of husbands serving the wife with her lover’s heart, and Mike Tyson was still threatening to eat Lennox Lewis’s in 2000). Mexico City is founded where a magician’s heart sprouted into a prickly pear. All that syncretised neatly with Catholicism, linking back into the heart as edible fruit: the pomegranate, which represented Christ’s passion in Renaissance Europe (echoing Persephone, who also rose from the dead in spring), the grapevine that Jesus had to be (because otherwise how could his blood be wine?), even the apple that Eve tasted, discovering self-knowledge. The heart of Mary, meanwhile, was a rose – except where speared with the arrows of her seven sorrows. How the symbol skips and hops through cultures and times, echoing and shifting. In 10th-century China, a map of the feelings of the heart; in 16th-century Europe, Mercator using the shape as a projection for a map of the world. And where did that shape come from, with the scalloped top and pointy bottom? Until the 1300s, it was represented pine-cone shaped, pointy end up. Galen said it had “in medio fovum” – “in the middle a ditch or pit”. Made visible, the ditch emphasises the broken heart – open to new knowledge, to let God, or love, in, or out. As Leonard Cohen sang: “There’s a crack in everything, it’s how the light gets in.” So yes, it’s a pump. But not only. Louisa Young’s new novel, Twelve Months And A Day, will be published by Borough Press in MayIsabel Allende’s books have been translated into more than 42 languages and sold some 75m copies globally. Her career spans fiction and nonfiction, and she’s also created the Isabel Allende Foundation in memory of her daughter (who died in 1992), working to empower women and girls around the world. Her new novel, Violeta, spans 100 years and recounts the turbulent life and times of its South American heroine. Allende, 79, who was born in Peru and raised in Chile, spoke from the study of her home in California, where she writes daily. How did Violeta begin? The idea started when my mother died, right before the current pandemic hit. She was born in 1920 when the influenza pandemic reached Latin America, so it was almost natural to have the two bookends of the novel be pandemics. When I write, I don’t have a plan and I don’t have a message – I just want people to come with me, to let me tell them a story. Is its eponymous heroine based on your mother? Violeta is born in my mother’s social class, in the same time, in a place that many readers will identify as Chile. My mother was like her in the sense that she was beautiful, talented, visionary, but my mother was dependent. Violeta is someone who can make a living, and that makes such a huge difference. I’ve always said that there’s no feminism if you cannot support yourself and your children, because if you depend, then somebody else gives the orders. Violeta is an epistolary novel, and your debut, The House of Spirits, sprang from a letter to your grandfather. Are you a great letter-writer? I used to write to my mum, and she would write to me, every single day for decades. My son hired a company to digitise the letters, and they calculated that there are about 24,000. Everything is there, my mother’s whole life, and also my life. But now that I don’t have my mum, I don’t have a daily record of the life I have lived each day, and I realise that my days go very fast. How have you found the pandemic? I have been able to do a lot. In two years, I have published a feminist nonfiction book [The Soul of a Woman], I wrote Violeta, and then I wrote another novel about refugees that is being translated and published in 2023 probably. I have three things that all writers want: silence, solitude and time. But because of the work my foundation does with people at risk, I’ve been very aware that there is despair and violence and poverty. The first to lose their jobs were women, migrants. You say in The Soul of a Woman that you were a feminist even before you knew the word. I was aware very young that it was not to my advantage to be born a female, but also I was very aware of social injustice. I was furious because the world was not fair. Does injustice still make you as irate? Of course! I have the same rage I had then. I try to be as calm as possible and to meditate – it doesn’t work at all. What is the feminist movement’s biggest unfinished task? The main unfinished task is to replace the patriarchy. We are chipping away pieces – too slowly in my opinion, because I won’t see it, but it will happen. How do you feel about the recent election in Chile? Happy. The new president says all the things I want to hear about inclusion, diversity, justice. He’s 35 years old – he could be my grandson, and that is fantastic because it’s a new generation taking over finally. What is it like to live largely in English and write in Spanish? You know, I find that I forget how to talk in Spanish, because there are certain things that I only say in English. I can write nonfiction in English, but fiction, no, because fiction flows in a very organic way. It happens more in the belly than in the brain. What is the main difference between love off the page and on? In real life, all the inconveniences are sometimes greater than the conveniences. If you marry so late in life, as I’ve done, there is a lot of baggage that one carries around, but also a sense of urgency which makes the relationship, and every day, very precious. Your recent marriage is your third. Did you expect that? Do you think that anybody expects to marry at 77? No! But then this man heard me on the radio and fell in love with me. The only reason we got married is because for him it was really important. The last straw was when his granddaughter, who was seven years old at the time, went to the librarian at school and said “Have you heard of Isabel Allende?” And the librarian said: “Yes, yes, I’ve read some of her books.” There was a pause, and then Anna said: “She’s sleeping with my grandfather.” Tell me about the decision to start writing all your books on 8 January… It was a superstition in the beginning but then my life got very complicated and now it’s discipline. I burn some sage, light my candles and spend my day with the door closed. Usually when I get out people have sent flowers and emails and boxes of orange peel covered with dark chocolate. That gives me strength and joy. What books are on your bedside table? I am reading in print Anthony Doerr’s book Cloud Cuckoo Land. I’m listening on audio to Alice Hoffman’s The Marriage of Opposites. And then I have in my Kindle a book that I should have read a couple of years ago called The Winter Soldier by Daniel Mason. It’s a war story and I don’t like war stories but this one is extraordinary. How do you organise your books? I don’t. I give them away. Every book? The only book that I have kept is the first gift that my stepfather gave me when I was 10 years old, The Complete Works of Shakespeare. I read it like a story and have had it ever since. Is there a classic you’re ashamed of not having read? Probably The Brothers Karamazov. I got bored. What kind of reader were you as a child? I belong to a generation where there was no television, the radio was forbidden by my grandfather because he said it had vulgar ideas, and we never went to the movies, so I was always a very good reader. In my teenage years, when I was so lonely and so enraged, my way of escaping from everything and myself was reading. Has any title in particular stuck with you? I remember vividly when I was around 13 and we were living in Lebanon. Girls didn’t go anywhere – school and home, that was it. To give you an idea, I heard about Elvis Presley when he was already fat, so I skipped all that rock’n’roll and everything else. But my stepfather had an armoire that he kept locked because there he had whisky, chocolates, and I think Playboy. My brothers and I would open it; my brothers would eat whole layers of chocolates and I would go directly to four volumes of One Thousand and One Nights, kept there because it was supposed to be erotic. It was erotic, but I didn’t get it because everything was a metaphor and I didn’t know the basics. But I enjoyed so much that forbidden reading in the armoire – one day I will have to write about it. Violeta by Isabel Allende (translated by Frances Riddle) is published by Bloomsbury (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA group of political activists will make one desperate last attempt this month to save the bitterly divided French left from an electoral catastrophe in the presidential election with a “people’s primary” to designate a single candidate. The Primaire Populaire was initiated by young people dismayed by the fractures that could mean no leftwing or socialist figure will reach the second round of the election in April. So far, 300,000 people have joined the group that is calling for leftwing candidates to sign up to a “Common Ground” charter of 10 measures centred on the environment, social justice and democratic reforms. This is around 40% of all members of leftwing parties in France. More than a third have registered to take part in a popular vote to be held online between 27-30 January. Although widely dismissed as a futile exercise, the movement is gathering support. On Saturday, the influential socialist mayor of Marseille, Benoît Payan, said he would back whoever won the primary. The French left is fielding four main candidates: Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo for the Parti Socialiste (PS); Green party leader Yannick Jadot; the 70-year-old hard-left revolutionary Jean-Luc Mélenchon; and the former justice minister Christiane Taubira, who announced her decision to stand on Saturday and take part in the people’s primary. Polls show none stand a chance of reaching the second round in April. Calls for unity have been ignored, with analysts blaming candidates’ egos and “irreconcilable” policy stances. Mélenchon and Jadot have dismissed the people’s primary and said they would not take part. Hidalgo initially said she would, then rowed back, while Taubira said she would support the vote result and programme. Mathilde Imer, spokesperson for the Primaire Populaire, said: “This isn’t a classic primary election but a citizens’ nomination. We, the voters, will ourselves designate the person we think is the best placed to unite and win. It’s in the hands of the people. The vote will happen with or without the agreement of the candidates.” Samuel Grzybowski, another of the group’s representatives, added: “The candidates could have organised this among themselves, but now it’s up to us, the citizens, to choose.” To limit the possibility of voting fraud, those who have registered to vote must give credit card details and pay a symbolic €1. Émeric Bréhier, director of the Observatoire de la vie politique of the left-leaning Jean-Jaurès Foundation and lecturer at the Bordeaux Institute of Political Studies, does not hold out much hope for the people’s primary. “Even if 200,000 people sign up and vote for a candidate, it won’t speak to the wider voting population. And the idea that even if you don’t want to be a candidate in the vote you are one anyway seems a strange way of doing things.” Bréhier believes the 2022 election is lost to the left, and particularly the PS. Hidalgo, who unveiled her programme last week, is lagging well behind five other candidates at less than 4% of voting intentions, behind Jadot and Mélenchon. Polls indicate that, if united, the total leftwing vote could add up to 25% – not enough to outweigh that for rightwing candidates, but enough to make them count. “It’s too late for the party to make a mark on this election. Each candidate, on the left, is swimming in their own lane and none wants to budge an inch,” Bréhier told the Observer. “The Socialist party is in trouble and has been for several years. I can’t see at this stage how we can get out of that. “The most important question now is what happens after 2022. The left needs to establish a basic ideology which is something that has been nonexistent in the last few years. “Lots of socialist voters today say they’ll vote for [Emmanuel] Macron or Mélenchon or Taubira, but not Hidalgo. Socialist voters still exist and the passion for core principles, like equality, have not disappeared. But we have to have a strategy. There is no magic wand. It will be a long, slow and complicated reconstruction.” An electoral catastrophe would also come at a heavy financial cost for the PS: Hidalgo needs at least 5% of the vote in the first round for her campaign costs to be reimbursed by the taxpayer. In 2017, PS presidential candidate Benoît Hamon polled a historic low of just under 6.4%, leaving the party’s finances parlous and forcing the sale of its Paris headquarters. Macron came to power five years ago on a centrist programme designed to break France’s traditional two-party system. The opposition right, Les Républicains, have since resurrected their election hopes with Valérie Pécresse, while the PS remains in the stalls.A minister has said Boris Johnson needs to “change his ways” as he recalled how, in the same month when some in No 10 were “not behaving appropriately”, he was not able to support his children before they died. Guy Opperman, the pensions minister and MP for Hexham, said Johnson should stay in his post, but was critical of the rule-breaking. Johnson has continued to face criticism, including from those on his frontbench, after admitting to attending a “bring your own booze” garden party in No 10 on 20 May 2020, which he says he understood to be a “work event”. Opperman and his wife Flora’s newborn twin boys, Teddy and Rafe, died the following month. Speaking to BBC’s Politics North programme, the Tory MP said: “I feel pretty emotional about this because in May 2020 my wife and kids were unwell and they went to hospital. I was not able to go there to support them. And I’ve got constituents who couldn’t go to the care homes, to funerals, who were obviously obeying the rules, and quite clearly in No 10 at that time there were a number of people not behaving appropriately. I feel pretty emotional that I wasn’t able to support my wife and kids.” Another Tory MP, Ian Levy, said he had been unable to see his relative due to the restrictions. The Blyth Valley MP said in a statement online: “My own family was affected by this – unable to see my wife’s mother when she was dying in a nursing home. “I understand the real anger at reports that those in power were not abiding by the rules. The public deserves better than this.”Virat Kohli has left the building. India’s most vocal captain, on and off the field, signed off from his Test leadership position via social media. A day earlier Kohli had addressed the media after India’s loss to South Africa in the Cape Town Test that gave the home team the series 2-1 but did not hint at stepping down. There was no intimation from the Board of Control for Cricket in India, not so much as a tweet or a media release. When he thought the time was right, Kohli called it. In his time as Test captain Kohli led India in 68 Tests, winning 40 and losing only 17. Statistically he is India’s most successful captain. Globally, too, he stands tall. Only South Africa’s Graeme Smith (53 wins) and Australia’s Ricky Ponting (48) and Steve Waugh (41) have a better record as skipper. Kohli has built a legacy that will probably live on long after him. This is of an Indian team that can and will win overseas, in any and all conditions. When he took over as captain, Kohli’s vision was of a side that could win in Australia and England. He achieved both by building a fast-bowling infrastructure that was previously absent in Indian cricket. Kohli did not settle for one or two fast bowlers. He demanded he had a half-dozen at his disposal to choose from at any point, with any and all being able to win him matches. This school of thought needed the National Cricket Academy in Bengaluru to work with the India A set up, advised by the Indian team’s coaching staff, to work together. That this happened was a miracle of sorts but it was non-negotiable to Kohli. Once he had the resources, he deployed them. Even when it was not the most prudent move, at times when it might have cost India, Kohli played five specialist bowlers. This allowed the bowlers in that group to grow individually and as a pack that hunted together. But it also meant India’s batsmen were perpetually put on notice. The top order had to score or there would be hell to pay for. What effect this had on Cheteshwar Pujara and Ajinkya Rahane, whose careers seem in terminal decline, only time will tell. For now Kohli the batsman comes to the fore. Even children on the street in India know it has been two years and 15 Tests since Kohli last scored a Test hundred. Kohli made 136 against Bangladesh in a pink-ball Test in Kolkata but has not since been able to keep up the high standards he set. To add to the intrigue, Kohli announced last September that he would give up the captaincy of the Twenty20 International team, also via social media, to allow himself some much-needed mental space. When he did so, Kohli said that he looked forward to leading the Indian team in the 2023 50-over World Cup at home. In December last year India’s selectors chose to unify the white-ball captaincy, which meant relieving Kohli of the 50-over leadership and handing it to Rohit Sharma. If he did not see the writing on the wall then, the most powerful man in Indian cricket, and by extension world cricket, seemed to have finally got the memo after India’s 2-1 loss to South Africa. “It’s been seven years of hard work, toil and relentless perseverance every day to take the team in the right direction,” Kohli posted in his retirement statement. “I’ve done the job with absolute honesty and left nothing out there. Everything has to come to a halt at some stage and for me as Test captain of India, it’s now.” “There have been many ups and also some downs along the journey, but never has there been a lack of effort or lack of belief,” he added. “I have always believed in giving my 120% in everything I do and, if I can’t do that, I know it’s not the right thing to do. I have absolutely clarity in my heart and I cannot be dishonest to my team.” At 34, Sharma is not the obvious choice as the inheritor of Kohli’s legacy but this is just as well as he is his own man. A batsman of excellence in his own right, Sharma now has the mantle he was probably best suited to years ago. He is an exceptional leader of men, as five Indian Premier League titles demonstrate, but even when he has been called upon to step in for India he has been creative and efficient. What this means for Kohli is less clear. In all his career he has been the alpha, the top dog, the one running the team. It will be a challenge for him to adjust to life as a mere player, one batsman among many, even if a special one. Once again in his cricketing life, Kohli will have to take instruction from someone else. How he deals with that will define his legacy, as much as his wins and losses as captain of the team.Australia is the ultimate canvas for architecture that boasts wide open spaces and rooms flooded with light. While urban centres play with streetscapes and how to maximise space in terrace-lined streets, bush architecture is embracing the land, and booming. Two years into the pandemic, people around the world have been forced to reassess their way of life and the importance of the space they inhabit. Covid-19 has also placed limits on people’s ability to travel, reset and come back refreshed and ready for a sleep in their own bed. Instead we have sought refuge in our homes and set new sights on comfortable, adaptable ways of living. Increasing regional treechange numbers have renewed appreciation for architecture after lockdowns. Many Australians are deciding to take their lives out of city centres or neighbouring suburbs, and go bush. The resurgence means a new era for modern bush architecture and a burgeoning interest in sustainability. “Architecture is going through a good phase at the moment,” says the award-winning architect Virginia Kerridge. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter “Covid has made a big difference because people aren’t able to escape to their favourite destinations overseas. They are doing more full-time living in the country and realising they can work from home remotely from anywhere.” With this new chapter, the perception of rural architecture is moving beyond shed makeovers and converted shipping containers. Kerridge says the enjoyment of getting to know rural destinations around Australia intimately in her work helps tailor each building to their unique location. Her designs, including Escarpment House, nested among subtropical rainforest, Contemplation House, with views of Byron Bay, and 2010 Australian House of the Year, House in Country New South Wales, all pay tribute to their sites and are geared towards maximising outlook, light, fresh air and access to the landscape. Be it a grand homestead or a humble country house built to cater to sustainable living, for architects, rural architecture and the influence of country surroundings comes with unrivalled opportunities for creativity and freedom. “What I love about working in rural areas is architecture’s relationship to built form,” says Kerridge. “It takes you out of the urban context and into the rural context, and you can be a bit looser and more open to play with materials.” The architect Fergus Scott also embraces the cues of Australia’s raw elements and diverse environment. “I like the challenge of getting to know a landscape site and gaining a better understanding of its patterns – the flora and fauna, the geology, previous inhabitation and the climate,” says Scott. “Those things help you as an architect and inform your design decisions, allowing you to produce a building that is tailored as a response to the environment.” Scott’s buildings in NSW include Quorrobolong House, Southern House and Jilliby House, with their elongated structures, “operable” facades and central atriums. He sees architecture as a response to the land increasingly coming to the fore. “Clients now have a great appreciation for the land they have acquired out of the city and are eager to create a building that connects to and feels part of the place they’re living in,” says Scott. “I think people realise that Australia has a lot more to offer than the vibrancy of life in the city.” One prime example of how the bush architecture movement comes back to the simplest of things is Box House, by the architect Nicholas Murcutt. On a one-and-a- half-acre block on the south coast of NSW, surrounded by gum trees, Box House is contained in four walls. Its owner, Elizabeth Charles, has always lived regionally and is happiest in the country. She and her partner, Martin, both artists, commissioned Box House principally for their family of three as a humble holiday retreat, but it changed the way they wanted to live. “When you bring nature and beauty into your life, you are so enriched by it,” says Charles. “Not only that, it is the modesty of your living. When things do become simpler, it frees you up for other interests and pursuits.” Built from solid hardwood, the craftsmanship of the six-metre cube has attracted national and international attention, as both a structure of power and beauty, and a simple reimagining of a tent. “We wanted a house that was modest, that had a light footprint and met our most basic needs. We had been camping and enjoyed the land through that process, so we were keen to have a house in that spirit.” Box House, which runs on solar and a small amount of gas, is mostly self-sustainable. Conceived almost 25 years ago on a shoestring budget, it is easily liveable and has little ongoing cost. It also has an enduring legacy as a sculptural piece of architecture and one that treats its inhabitants to a well-designed space flooded with light. “If there is a storm outside, to witness that from the comfort and security of the house, gives us such perspective,” says Charles. “That is what I love most about Box House, that connection. It is uplifting, and in that respect the legacy of the house is a real gift from the architect.” That gift is set to live on, with Box House to open to the public as a short stay, in the hope that more people can experience the house and the value of its design. Such minimalism, like in Box House, is continuing to be embraced, even as bush architecture moves away from the knocked-up tin shed. “What is interesting about building in the bush is that, if it was the perfect climate, you’d hardly need a building at all,” Fergus Scott says. “You’d just be making a garden.” An analysis of what the land can offer is important as modern bush architecture moves to embrace the practical and the aesthetic, in a bid to create buildings with a light footprint. “I have seen clients take positive steps to rehabilitate the land and understand previous vegetation patterns, which is great to see,” says Scott. “People are thinking about it not just as, ‘What can we take from the land?’ but ‘What can we give and when we leave it, how can we leave it in a better place?’” This is reflected in the trend of prefabricated houses too, where there is good and bad to be had in fusing design and utility. “The advantage is that the house can be brought in with minimal impact on the land on which it is placed,” says Scott. “But the disadvantage is that sometimes prefab houses don’t open up to the outside that well, and feel internalised.” Long after seminal buildings such as Richard Leplastrier’s Palm Garden House and Gabriel Poole’s Lake Weyba House started to define bush architecture, a treechange is leading modern rural buildings to prominence. “Now it is more than a romantic idea of living in a little shed for a while when life gets too busy,” says Scott, who admits he would like to have his own house in the country. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityAs a child, Yenny Seo often surprised her mother by pointing out a stranger in the grocery store, remarking it was the same person they passed on the street a few weeks earlier. Likewise, when they watched a movie together, Seo would often recognise “extras” who’d appeared fleetingly in other films. Her mother never thought this was “anything special”, Seo says, and simply assumed she had a particularly observant daughter. Seo too was unaware that others didn’t share her love of the private game she played, where she’d spot a person on a bus or the street and then flick through the vast catalogue of faces she kept in her head, trying to place where she’d seen them before. “It’s always been quite fun for me,” she says. “Especially as a child. I remember just really enjoying looking at different faces.” It was only as she got older and started using social media that Seo became self-conscious of her skill. “I would start a new class in uni or I would meet people through social gatherings and I would remember visually what kind of photos I’d seen them in. I’d already be so familiar with them and I’d know in my head: ‘Oh, you are that person’s sibling, or you used to date so-and-so,’” she says. “But I also knew it’d be really creepy if I said that out loud, so I’d keep it on the down low and just say: ‘Oh, nice to meet you.’” Once, while working at a part-time job at a clothing store when she was at uni, Seo had cause to show her skill. Staff were shown grainy, hard-to-decipher CCTV footage of a habitual shoplifter; the next time this person entered the shop, Seo instantly recognised them, and alerted the security guard. “I knew I must have some kind of skill, but I still didn’t think it was anything special, because I just had so many instances like that happen.” Until the early 2000s, little scientific attention was paid to whether all humans possess the same ability to recognise faces. According to Dr David White, now a lead investigator at the Face Research Lab at the University of New South Wales (UNSW), “I think intuitively people believe that the way they see the world is the same as others. And I think that scientists had that intuition as well.” White first became interested in the field while studying a rare condition called prosopagnosia – when a brain injury leaves someone unable to recognise faces. He was intrigued that while people with this condition couldn’t recognise the face of a loved one, they could still recognise other objects – evidence, he says, that our brains are organised to perform different tasks, “like an app on your smartphone”. Along with other researchers, White started examining people without brain injury, discovering there is “tremendous variation” in facial recognition ability. At the very upper end of the performance scale, a cohort of just 1-2% of the population are “super-recognisers” – people who can memorise and recall unfamiliar faces, even after the briefest glimpse. The underlying cause is still not entirely clear – it’s a new field, with only around 20 scientific papers studying super-recognisers. However, it is suspected genetics plays a role because identical twins show similar performance, and it has been shown that cortical thickness – the amount of neurons – in the part of the brain that supports face recognition is a predictor of superior ability. Recently, White conducted an experiment where he used eye-tracking technology to study how super-recognisers look at faces, discovering they are “spreading their gaze more around the face, which suggests they might be painting a more elaborate picture of the face in their mind’s eye”. Because it’s such a rare phenomenon, in 2017 White and his colleagues at UNSW designed a publicly available online screening tool to try to unearth the world’s best super-recognisers. Seo, then in her mid-20s, gave it a go – and her score was so high, White invited her to come to Sydney for more testing. With more than 100,000 people now tested, Seo still ranks in the top 50. Over the past decade, security and law enforcement agencies around the world have started recruiting people with superior facial recognition capabilities. London’s metropolitan police has a special team who examine CCTV footage from crime scenes – they were used in the investigation into the poisoning of a former Russian spy with the nerve agent Novichok in Salisbury – and several years ago Queensland police started identifying super-recognisers in its ranks. A proliferation of private agencies has also sprung up, offering the services of super-recognisers. Seo has no interest in repeating her “one crime-fighting moment” from her uni days – she’s happy with her job as a technician at a pathology lab. She still enjoys looking at faces – the use of face masks during the pandemic is providing a fun challenge. Most of the time she can still recognise a person even if they’re wearing one – and the diagnosis has given her “confidence in my abilities”. “It made me realise: oh yeah, it’s not crazy – I must have been right the whole time. It’s not that I’m creepy, but my brain is just wired that way.”For most Australians, mention of the Yarra River likely brings to mind the opaque sludge that wends its way through Melbourne’s central business district. But the river didn’t always look like that, and if you follow it upstream towards its source in the Yarra Ranges national park, the vista is one of verdant bush, clean air and bubbling cold rapids. This is the part of the Yarra on which we are going tubing – that is, rolling down the river on little more than a tyre tube. We’re on the outskirts of the lush green bush town of Warburton, and our hosts are Richard and Simone, who run the Warburton Motel. They bought it pre-pandemic and renovated the tired old country motor inn to a spruced up, activity-oriented getaway with a community vibe, and gorgeously restored 1966 bathrooms. The adventure arm of their business, Bike and Hike, is literally run out of their garage. The key conceit is that it’s more enjoyable to take a long walk, ride a long way – or, in our case, float down the river in one direction – than it is to hike there and back again, or repeat the same section of river over and over, lugging your tubes back up the dusty bank when you want another go. Of course, you could go tubing on your own. While driving us upriver in his van, Richard points out intrepid children doing precisely that: pushing off from the bank behind a row of tents in the riverside camping ground and tumbling down the rapids. Getting set up to go tubing yourself could be as simple as getting your hands on an old truck tyre, but if you were going to fork out for some specialised kit, you’d be looking at about $120 for the heavy duty tube, at least $60 for a paddle, and between $40 and $100 for a life jacket, if you want to wear one. The advantage of doing it with a company like Bike and Hike, though, is not simply that they have all the equipment so the cost is lower for a one-off ($47.50 per head), they’ll also do the leg work of driving you a solid way upstream, so you can just focus on the fun bit: paddling downriver. Pushing off from our launch point (a nondescript clearing near the river road) I quickly realise that steering is going to be a challenge. The current catches me and immediately pulls me downstream, but reclining in a bouncy rubber raft is not the best posture for paddling – a lesson I learn after accidentally splashing cold water in my own lap and crashing straight through some overhanging, cobweb-covered branches. Whoops. It takes me about half the ride to get the knack of it, paddling on one side of the tube and making strategic use of spinning in circles in order to manoeuvre around obstacles. Once I can direct myself away from the snags and overhanging branches without completely spinning out, I’m able to start appreciating the beauty of the river itself. And it is lovely. The trees are huge and majestic. My companion points out a sacred kingfisher, diving in the rushing water for prey. A little further on, a pair of rufous fantails start swooping around us, snapping up insects. And then I have to start frantically paddling again, lest I crash into a fallen tree. (My advice: wear shoes.) We’re on the water for about an hour and 20 minutes, though the time flies. We’re happy, drenched and buzzing with adrenaline when we climb out – twice, in my case, once unsuccessfully. With Warburton only 90 minutes from home, we could have driven up and back in a day, but we decided to spend the night instead. The town has a range of pub-style accommodation at the also recently renovated Alpine Retreat Hotel (from $176 p/n). It’s not a huge town, but for those who aren’t particularly water-oriented, there is a beautiful bike trail that starts off the main drag and runs all the way to Lilydale following the old train line, and a gentle riverside walk for the less energetic. For the drive back the next morning, Silva Coffee Roasters does a coffee tasting (like wine tasting, but instead of putting you to sleep it makes you really wired). The town is also full of quirky vintage and trash-and-treasure stores that haven’t yet been totally picked over. I browse through, eyes peeled for old truck tyres. • Guardian Australia was a guest of Visit Victoria, Bike and Hike/Warburton Motel and the Alpine Retreat Hotel, Warburton. • This article was amended on 17 January 2022. The Yarra River’s source is in the Yarra Ranges national park, not the Dandenong Ranges as an earlier version said.Home ownership is a much-revered Australian milestone, a marker of adulthood independence and a key to economic security. However, today, the big Australian dream of owning a house in your 20s is not for all. I used to look at soaring house prices in blinking horror; now, I don’t look. Even lockdown couldn’t slow the pace. Dwelling prices continued to skyrocket beyond our reach, further dimming the home aspirations of young Australians. Home ownership rates have been plummeting since the 1980s in a nation that used to boast of being an egalitarian society. With the intergenerational shrinkage of stable income and a spike in debt-to-income ratio, young people and those with a modest income have been gradually locked out of the real estate market. Consequently, many young adults are sharing rental homes or boomeranging to parental homes out of economic necessity. Home ownership is increasingly becoming hereditary; something that used to be attained is more likely to be inherited by those who come from money. A global pandemic exacerbated matters. With closed borders and strict lockdowns, the concept of “home” stretched to include work, school and all other aspects of society. The increasing significance of a well-spaced house provided a boost to an already upward-surging property market. As a result, more of us are renting in droves and heavily sighing at the diminished prospect of ever owning a house. Perhaps a few years ago there was a time when the “stop buying smashed avocado for $19 and four coffees at $4 each” advice would inch a young person closer to a house deposit. Now, it will take us more years of sacrifice for that advice to be fruitful. Notably though, not every young person can afford avocado toast in a hipster cafe. The housing affordability crisis is mostly causing housing stress among low-income-earning youth – the real losers. High housing costs such as rent payments limit spending on other essentials – food, healthcare and education – and take away disposable income from many aspects of wellbeing. But what’s causing the real estate frenzy? Last year, house prices rose by a whopping 24% in some parts of the country. There are multiple reasons why. First, easy borrowing and low interest or mortgage rates in a limited supply market have produced a very high demand for dwellings. Second, investment incentives such as capital gains tax discounts and negative gearing concentrates more homes in the hands of investors and fewer in the hands of first-time owner-occupiers. Third, the property market has been incredibly resilient to Covid-induced economic disruptions because of stay-at-home orders during protracted lockdowns and Australians investing within impermeable borders. Together, high demand and low sells have increased competition, further fuelling asset prices. Competitive spirits and Fomo sentiments among able buyers have also pushed dwelling prices to unapologetic heights, especially in Sydney’s inner suburbs. Why is the housing market a complex code to crack? The answer is simple: politicians believe rising house prices produce more economic winners than losers among their voters. Indeed, treasurer Josh Frydenberg remarked back in June that the rise is good for the economy. The federal government extended lukewarm sympathies for those who are struggling to get a foot in the property door for the first time, while merrily pointing out that many households are gaining from continued property price inflation. Therefore, price hikes are here to stay because simple solutions – such as building more houses and properly taxing property investments – are not as politically sound. That’s the reality of things: those with power and money impact the market more than those without. That’s why the winners become fatter winners and the losers continue to lose. What we are facing today is not an unsolvable crisis, but there is a lack of willingness to solve it among those in a position to do so. Two things we can do: investments + elections Economist Saul Eslake predicts the 2021 home ownership rate among Australians in their 20s and mid-30s will be lower than in the 1947 census. Demand for new houses, scarce supply and increase in vacant land prices will continue to put upward pressure on house prices in the years ahead. Prices are expected to climb, despite RBA’s interest rate corrections and a drop in housing sentiment among property professionals. It appears younger generations are succumbing to a natural sense of fatalism and reluctantly submitting to this intergenerational theft. Very few in their 20s and early 30s are actively planning their housing futures while the majority of Australian voters believe price surges will be bad for the next generation. There are two things we can do. The first is a personal solution, while the second entails collective action. Investing, or making profit by putting money into financial schemes, is another way of building the deposit nest egg and/or yielding “rent” money. Although making informed investments is a tough row to hoe as understanding the market and choosing the right stocks take time, diligent research is increasingly leading millennials towards conservative investment into mutual funds (ETFs) while a handful are exploring the highly volatile but tremendously lucrative digital currency world. The second (and somewhat blunt) solution is to make informed economic voting decisions. In order to do so, it’s important to follow political parties’ and candidates’ policy spiels to understand how their policies affect our financial futures. For instance, in the 2019 election, Liberals campaigned against the “housing tax” – a policy that the Labor party dropped after losing the election. Labor wants to reduce tax incentives for investors, which the Greens want to abolish altogether. But changes to investment policies won’t be a silver bullet. On the other hand, it’s important to seek out what financial schemes are in place to help young people both with the housing affordability and home ownership crises. We know that first homebuyer schemes aren’t enough and despite the federal government’s home loan guarantee, houses continue to creep out of reach of first-homebuyers. All in all, the upcoming 2022 election is a crucial one to act in. Taken together, the most important thing is to try to understand why the property market is skyrocketing and what it means for us in the short and long terms. That will help us plan and act accordingly to minimise economic stresses. It may appear to be a complex minefield, but passive acquiescence, or worse political apathy, will not help us. Intifar Chowdhury is a PhD candidate studying youth politics at The Australian National University’s School of Politics and International Relations and a data archivist at the Australian Data ArchiveWidely mocked plans to establish a tropical haven for cryptocurrency enthusiasts have run into trouble after a contract to buy an island in Fiji for US$12m fell through. A group of crypto-evangelists, led by Max Olivier and Helena Lopez, outlined plans for the island, Nananu-i-cake, in a lavishly animated YouTube video, featuring a wide-eyed crypto bro named Christopher landing by helicopter and being given a guided tour by a talking coin called Connie. The full YouTube clip has been taken down, but cached copies show it touted the island as “an international hub for the community to come live, work and have fun and enjoy a first-class crypto lifestyle”, boasting “a complete ecosystem that represents the blooming crypto space” that was “a paradise made by crypto enthusiasts for crypto enthusiasts”. Areas planned included Cryptoland Bay, Crypto Beach, House of Dao – a reference to decentralised autonomous organisations, a form of non-corporate structure promoted by crypto enthusiasts as an alternative to companies – and the members-only Vladimir Club, another crypto in-joke that refers to people who hold 0.01% of a given cryptocurrency. Also on offer were 60 plots of land on what the video describes as “the Blockchain Hills” (Nananu-i-cake has only one hill). These were to be sold to “Cryptolander Kings” via non-fungible tokens – unique tokens that use the same blockchain technology underpinning cryptocurrencies like bitcoin. The project has been compared to the collapsed Fyre festival and the 18-minute video was greeted with scoffing on social media. There was also controversy after the Cryptoland Twitter account responded to a question asking what the age of consent would be on the island with a now-hidden tweet saying: “Mental maturity should be more than enough! ;)”. The actual age of consent in Fiji is 16. Cryptoland apologised for the tweet, saying it was a misunderstanding due to the fact its Twitter account was run by several people, not all of whom “spoke English as a first language”, and they thought the question was about age requirements to visit the island. But the project appears to have hit a bigger hurdle than bad publicity. The real estate agent selling Nananu-i-cake, Rick Kermode, of New Zealand firm Bayleys, told Guardian Australia that the contract to sell it to Cryptoland’s backers fell through this week and the island was back on the market. “We’re telling people that it was under contract during the period of time that they had the contract but it has come back on the market,” he said. The 220ha (550-acre) Nananu-i-cake sits about 1km off the northern coast of Viti Levu, one of Fiji’s two main islands, about 2.5 hours drive from the international airport. According to Kermode’s listing, it offers a jetty, five beaches and a luxury villa (with a pool) that sits on one of the island’s highest points “with magnificent 360-degree views, most particularly to the west over neighbouring Nananu-i-ra and the south Pacific Ocean”. Kermode said it was a fantastic site for tourist development because it was on the eastern side of the island that gets the least rainfall and is available for sale on freehold title, which is rare in Fiji. Tourism development on Fiji had been hit hard by the Covid-19 pandemic, he said. “It’ll probably start to happen again, hopefully when tourism starts to regenerate itself,” Kermode said. “Covid has been a big problem for everybody.” Guardian Australia could not reach Olivier or Lopez through Bradley Robinson, whom Cryptoland describes on its website as its project manager. However, during a YouTube interview with crypto-evangelist Kyle Chasse, who claims to have bought one of the island’s plots of land, Olivier said Cryptoland made the animated promotional extravaganza because “it’s the only way you can feel what Cryptoland is”. “We tried to explain to people the vision but you realise that words just get so limited,” he said in the video, which was uploaded on 15 November. Speaking about the process of buying the island and transferring plots to “King Cryptolanders”, he said: “In the coming weeks it will require to do some paperwork, of course, transferring ownership.” Robinson said the company where he is chief executive, Raffe Hotels and Resorts, had “expressed interest in being involved in the Cryptoland project”. “To date, I have been involved in an advisory capacity during the master planning process, assisting the founders and architects with concept development,” he said. “At this stage I have not formalised any arrangements with the developer to play an ongoing role, however I am continuing to discuss various project management scenarios with them.”The oil came without warning. One morning in September 2009 it was there, coating Daniel Sanda’s modest seaweed farm on the Indonesian island of Rote: a dark sheen across the water, waxy yellow-grey blocks floating in the sea. Within days, the crop his family depended on for its livelihood turned white and died. It has still not fully recovered. The oil came swiftly, but Sanda’s fight for justice has been grindingly slow. And he is far from alone. More than a decade after the catastrophic oil spill, thousands of farmers who say they are victims of one of Australia’s worst environmental disasters are still seeking acknowledgment and compensation. In 2010 an Australian government inquiry found that the Montara oil spill was no misfortune, but the result of corporate neglect: “an accident waiting to happen”. The commission found that the Australian subsidiary of the Thai oil company PTTEP was negligent in its operation of the Montara oilwell, 250km off the coast of Western Australia, which exploded in August 2009. The federal court would later find that it had spewed more than 2,500 barrels of oil into the Timor Sea every day for 74 days. The resulting slick killed seaweed crops, destroyed fishing grounds and polluted waters over more than 90,000 sq km, an area larger than Tasmania. In March 2021, the federal court ordered the Australian subsidiary PTTEP Australasia (PTTEPAA) to pay Sanda a little over A$34,000 in damages. So far he has not received anything. In December, the company lodged an appeal, arguing there was insufficient evidence of Montara oil in the coastal areas of Rote and Kupang. The company and Sanda’s representatives have been ordered to undertake mediation. Since 2016, Sanda has been the lead plaintiff of a class action, the representative of 15,483 seaweed farmers seeking compensation for lost livelihoods and opportunities. But there are thousands more outside this group who say they have been affected by the spill – fishers, farmers and families – and who have received no apology or compensation. Ferdi Tanoni, the chairman of West Timor Care Foundation, says people are still suffering, from islands as far afield as Sabu, East Flores, Lembata and Sumba. The federal court’s decision in Sanda’s case was limited to the regions of Rote and Kupang, and PTTEP denies oil from the spill reached Indonesia. Tanoni has spent years crisscrossing the islands in the east of the Indonesian archipelago, advocating on behalf of those who claim they were affected. “It is over 100,000 people who have been affected. In some places, the crops they get are now maybe 10%, 15% of [what they were getting] before [the disaster]. There are many, many schoolchildren who don’t go to school any more because there isn’t any money. “It’s not like it used to be. It’s a very, very hard life now.” In December, Tanoni travelled to Jakarta for a meeting of the Montara taskforce, the beginning, he hoped, of potential negotiations over a settlement. At the last minute, the meeting was postponed; progress stalled again. Seaweed built houses, met bills In January 2009, PTTEPAA chose to plug one of four wells in its newly drilled Montara oilfield in the Timor Sea, 700km from Darwin and 240km from the Indonesian island of Rote. The 2010 inquiry found the job was done carelessly and incompetently: the company did not come “within a ‘bull’s roar’ of sensible oilfield practice”. Three control barriers used to cap the well had not been tested, all were deficient and one had not been properly installed. “The blowout was not a reflection of one unfortunate incident, or of bad luck. What happened with the H1 Well was an accident waiting to happen; the company’s systems and processes were so deficient and its key personnel so lacking in basic competence, that the blowout can properly be said to have been an event waiting to occur,” the inquiry found. The blowout sent uncontrolled plumes of oil rushing into the sea. The company claimed the leak was equivalent to 400 barrels of oil a day – the actual figure, the federal court found in its decision in Sanda’s case, was more than 2,500 barrels each day. By the time the blowout was arrested, after 74 days, oil had spread over more than 90,000 sq km. Eighty-one villages on Rote Island and around the city of Kupang on Timor were hit by the slick. It was a month after the Montara blowout when the oil arrived in the waters off Rote, late in September 2009 – yellow-grey blocks about the size of golf balls floating in a once-clear sea that was now glossy and dark. The sea smelled pungently of oil and was filled with dead fish. In three days, Sanda’s seaweed crop turned white and died. Seaweed farming was a critical industry for thousands in the region. Since 2000, Indonesia had emerged as the world’s dominant source of raw, dried seaweed, and the eastern islands of the archipelago were a key source. The industry had proved an economic boon to villages along thousands of kilometres of coastline. Families who had previously eked out a subsistence existence through farming and fishing found economic stability through a growing global demand for their product. Indonesian seaweed was used in food, fertilisers, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics. More than half the households in the region relied exclusively on seaweed farming for income. Seaweed built houses, met hospital bills, put children through school. The farmers who gave evidence in Sanda’s case said the oil that arrived after the Montara spill killed it all and that, although now growing again, the seaweed has never fully recovered. Sanda told the court he had been introduced to seaweed farming by the local bupati – government official – who encouraged him to mark out a plot at Inggurae Beach on Rote Island, growing seaweed from seed on long ropes in the water. The income he earned paid for Sanda to add brick walls and a kitchen to his home, to buy furniture and a motorbike, and to send his children to university. He donated money to his church. All over his village, families rode the wave of economic development. “Before the oil came, my seaweed crops were rich and healthy, and the income from seaweed harvesting was good,” Sanda says. “In 2009, after the oil came, my seaweed became white and weak, then fell down and was washed away by the current.” ‘Accurate and honest accounts’ Justice David Yates of the federal court said Sanda had suffered “a very significant loss” that devastated his income and destroyed his family’s way of life for years. The company accepted it had been negligent in its operation of the well, but argued the oil lost did not reach Indonesian waters and, if it did, its concentration was not toxic enough to destroy the seaweed crops. The company also denied it owed a duty of care to the farmers. Its lawyers argued the farmers’ evidence was unreliable, saying their memories had been contaminated by “consensus” versions of the facts they had discussed with one another. This was rejected by Yates, who said the seaweed farmers had given “accurate and honest accounts”. “I am left in no doubt that all witnesses observed a single, strikingly unusual and unique event in that region at that time,” the judge said. In 2012, PTTEPAA was fined $510,000 in the Darwin local court for breaches of the Offshore Petroleum Act. The company has previously said it has spent more than $40m on the clean-up. The company conducted a 2013 environmental monitoring survey that found “no oil reached the Indonesian coast”, and that 98.6% of the spilled oil remained within Australian territorial waters. The company was not given permission to survey any Indonesian islands. PTTEPAA sold Montara in 2018. A spokesperson for PTTEPAA says the company “remains disappointed” by the federal court’s decision. The spokesperson says the court’s judgment related only to Sanda’s claim and that the other 15,482 claimants were “statute-barred and must be determined separately”. “The court’s decision does not negate the requirement for individuals to demonstrate their actual loss and damage,” the company says. At a court hearing on 21 December lawyers for the farmers said that to individually determine more than 15,000 claims could take “60 years of full-time judicial attention”. The company’s appeal documents argue, among other things, that the original decision wrongly dismissed or placed insufficient weight on evidence from some experts that said it was likely oil from the Montara spill never reached Sanda’s island. The company argues the decision in Sanda’s favour was flawed, and that the judge “should have instead found that Sanda failed to prove on the balance of probabilities that Montara oil reached the coastal areas of Rote and Kupang in a sufficient quantity or concentration to cause damage to seaweed crops”. Lawyers for the company argued before the court that seaweed crops may have been affected by “ice-ice” disease, caused by rising sea temperatures and climate change. The judge said he was “not persuaded” there was evidence to support this. ‘We have to keep going’ Ben Slade, a managing principal at the law firm Maurice Blackburn, has run the class action since 2016. Slade says the right to exploit natural resources carries with it serious responsibilities, including a duty of care to those affected by careless management of those resources. “PTTEPAA was supremely careless. Its management of the Montara well didn’t come within a bull’s roar of competence and the consequence of that failure was that almost fifteen and a half thousand seaweed farmers suffered devastating economic loss. The Australian courts have found they should be compensated for that,” he says. “The company has denied responsibility in the Australian courts aggressively and has resisted every step of the way. It has taken years and years of working tirelessly to get this case towards a conclusion, when we’ve been right all along.” Emily Mitchell, the research director at Jubilee Australia Research Centre, says tens of thousands more people may have been affected. “No study has ever been funded by PTTEP Australasia in Indonesia into the impacts of the Montara oil disaster,” she says. “In East Nusa Tenggara, 12 years after the spill, people still do not have answers about the extent of the damage, let alone how that damage can be fixed. How will the mangroves grow back? How will fish stocks improve? That is completely unacceptable.” Mitchell says the transnational nature of the oil spill has complicated the effort to hold the company to account. She says environmental impacts in Prince William Sound, Alaska, were still being felt a quarter of a century after the 1989 Exxon Valdez spill. “We are now at the halfway point of that timeline, yet there has still never been any comprehensive assessment funded by the company to assess the damage in Indonesia,” she says. Ferdi Tanoni keeps travelling, keeps talking. He says the company must accept its fault, and that the governments of Australia and Indonesia must “have the courage” to ensure justice is done. “People keep calling me and I say to them, ‘keep on praying and we will win’. We cannot do anything else. We have to keep going.”Summer holidaymakers continue to roll through the glitter strip at Surfers Paradise, even as the Gold Coast’s Omicron outbreak increases. It’s quiet for January, but tourists are still here, wandering between the hotels, the restaurants and the beach. A few streets back from the surf, the diminished workforce at the Paradise Resort is paddling furiously beneath the surface. Last week, the resort’s sales and marketing team were cleaning rooms and turning down beds. Reservations staff were making coffees. Human resources employees have been shifted to the kitchen to clean tables. “There’s no such thing as a normal week at the moment,” says David Brook, the general manager of the Paradise Resort. In December, as tourism businesses on the Gold Coast prepared for the New South Wales-Queensland border reopening, bookings were strong. Brook says about 96% of available rooms were reserved. Cancellations due to the Omicron outbreak mean the hotel is only at about three-quarters capacity; most of the cancelled rooms have been shut off, due to staffing concerns. There are now more than 21,000 Covid cases on the Gold Coast, in addition to thousands more close contacts required to isolate, and the city’s tourism workforce has been seriously affected. “We’ve reached a cycle stage. Staff have got Covid or become a close contact, they’ve had to be off for five days and they’re returning as others go off. It’s been really tough, but we’re getting through it,” says Brook. “Anything where there are high labour costs – and that’s our industry – it’s being affected a huge amount. That’s especially true for the small tour operators, surf classes, jetski places. If they lose two or three staff, that’s their business shut down.” Some of the larger hotels on the Gold Coast have had trouble getting fresh linen, as workers at third-party contractors who wash and replace bedding have been affected by the Covid wave. At the Big4 Gold Coast Holiday Park, the general manager, Andrew Hewitt, has been doing shifts in the kitchen. Last week he made the “previously unspeakable” decision to close the cafe for dinner service. “We’re in the second year of this now. We’ve done a lot of things that were unprecedented in the last 24 months,” Hewitt says. He says tourism operators had been aware of the challenge Covid outbreaks could pose once the state borders opened. “If anyone thought this season was going to be a walk in the park, of course it wasn’t. I told my family: ‘Do not expect to see me home over Christmas’. “Housekeeping was my biggest concern and still is. If you’ve got no one to make the beds, how can you sell a room? “We had people answering reservation calls from home [but] one day we just had to say the phones aren’t going to go online until 9am. We didn’t even have somebody to take messages. “Just when you think you’re going good, all of a sudden a staff member goes down. Then two go down.” ‘We had high hopes’ North Queensland’s tourist market has been hit harder than most during the pandemic. The local industry’s umbrella group estimates businesses have lost $5.3bn in potential revenue while international and many domestic tourists were locked out due to border closures. Prior to 2020, the Cairns area had about 2,500 tours and other “products” to entertain travellers. Of those, more than 600 are no longer operating. Christmas period bookings in Cairns had been strong – an increase compared with the last real summer, in December 2019. But the reality has been 50% worse than the initial forecast and “millions of dollars of cancellations”, says the Tourism Tropical North Queensland chief executive, Mark Olsen. “We had high hopes,” he says. “We saw a flurry of businesses reopening when the borders reopened. For many of them this will be the hardest time. They’ve reopened at what was going to be the boom time. They’ve scaled up and they’re ready and the customers just aren’t there. They’re the ones we worry about the most. “This was supposed to be the turning point, a domestic boom that would push us through … and it’s just been a fizzer.” Olsen says staff, linen and produce shortages had become a particular concern. Many hotels were locking rooms – not offering them to tourists – because of the shortages. “What we’re seeing is a lot of our frontline staff have left the industry or left the region. A lot of staff who were coming to help during the peak season couldn’t leave home, caught up in the Covid circus,” he says. “It’s exacerbated the problem and we’re now starting to see those supply chain issues coming through. Businesses are now losing really experienced people because the cashflow is so tight.” The chief executive of Destination Gold Coast, Patricia O’Callaghan, says the area had been banking on a $280m summer. “Things are still solid, but the challenge is that there’s a lot of businesses operating at reduced capacity or closed,” O’Callaghan says. “I would say, as a whole, tourism and hospitality is facing some of the most difficult operating conditions since the pandemic took hold. “We’ve lost so many businesses and we will continue to until these conditions improve. But we do feel like we’re moving forward. We’re seeing policy changes that are trying to ease restrictions. We’re in a phase where case numbers are increasing and trying to ride it as best as possible.” Looking to Easter Having invested so much in the restart of domestic tourism, businesses are now looking to Easter as the next realistic chance to boost their markets – and the confidence of travellers. In Cairns, forward bookings for Easter have been encouraging. But uncertainty remains in the minds of many would-be holidaymakers. Some are already planning to ride the waves of Surfers’ famous break. Others remain unwilling to lock in their next trip, for fear it will coincide with another Covid wave. “From January to the end of March, bookings have gone backwards, not forward,” says Brook. “There’s a lot of uncertainty. We were really hoping we wouldn’t be going through this two years later.”The Chinese Communist party appears utterly deluded. Hasn’t it learned in its 100-year history that some politicians aren’t worth buying? Wasting its money, or rather the money of the subjugated Chinese people, on Barry Gardiner, of all MPs, seems more silly than sinister. Why bother? If you’ve never heard of him, Gardiner is an unremarkable Corbynista, who has continued the far left’s tradition of excusing anti-western dictatorships. The Labour MP took £420,000, a large whack even by the lax standards of Westminster, from Christine Ching Kui Lee, an influence-peddler MI5 said had “established links” for Beijing with British politicians. Suddenly, Gardiner had to find excuses for himself rather than a regime that is terrorising the Uyghur people, occupying Tibet and crushing democracy in Hong Kong. He said he didn’t know Lee had links to a hostile foreign power – presumably, he thought she was rewarding his stand on renationalising the railways. And in any case he had been “critical of the Chinese government on many occasions”. This was news to the journalists who recorded the revolting moment when Gardiner was in Corbyn’s shadow cabinet and deplored on the BBC, “the escalation of violence between protesters in Hong Kong and ordinary people in Hong Kong”, as if the threat to “ordinary people” is not a dictatorial superpower that stamps their rights into the dust. But when Gardiner said he was a “very poor investment” from a Chinese point of view, he was right, and he brought back my original question: why bother? The answer is that, as Xi Jinping turns China from a one-party state into a one-man imperium, everything matters. No detail is too small to sweat. No sympathetic politician too obscure to ignore. With opponents, Xi demands a gangster’s respect by unleashing retaliation out of all proportion to the original offence. China explodes at trivial examples of opposition a stable superpower would have the self-confidence to ignore. If you want to know why Muslim countries stay silent about the persecution of fellow Muslims in Xinjiang or why scientists were so quick to dismiss the theory that the Covid pandemic began with a leak from a Wuhan lab, look at China’s willingness to use overweening force to secure conformity with the party line. Filippa Lentzos, of the Centre for Science and Security Studies at King’s College, London, was describing Covid scientists when she said they did not talk about lab leaks “because they feared for their careers [and] their grants”. But she might have been describing businesses and governments, too. Last year, I heard the Czech politician Zdeněk Hřib explain to the leaders of European cities how he had learned the hard way why they should not allow Chinese technology in their infrastructure or have any dealings with the organs of the Chinese state. He discovered when he became mayor of Prague in 2018 that the city had committed itself to supporting Xi’s one-China policy, as part of an apparently harmless twinning agreement with Beijing. Hřib abandoned the policy because he was a liberal who did not agree with forcing Taiwanese people into a communist state against their wishes. In any event, he thought it ridiculous for a central European city to take a position on conflicts in the far east. China reacted as if he had declared war. It banned cultural contacts. Czech oligarchs with Chinese interests hired hack journalists and PR shills to attack him. Miloš Zeman, who was then the Czech republic’s Trumpian president, warned him and Prague of “unpleasant consequences”. Today it is Lithuania’s turn. China is blocking imports and threatening multinationals with punishments if they do business with the tiny Baltic country, solely because it trades with Taiwan. We should bother, not out of admiration for this government’s apparent policy of committing British forces to fight alongside the US in a war over Taiwan, but because of what China is doing to Britain. The Chinese embassy showed why when it responded to the spying claims by accusing the security service of “smearing and intimidation against the Chinese community in the UK”. Muslims, Jews, Chinese people and others undoubtedly worry about blowback when global politics turns national attention towards minorities. But in this instance there is no greater intimidatory threat to Chinese people in the UK than the Chinese Communist party. Or, for that matter, to Chinese people in China. Within hours of the Gardiner story breaking, a contact who works for the pro-democracy movement told me that, even after they have found asylum in the UK, Hong Kong activists communicate through encrypted apps because they worry about what could happen to them here and to their families in China. Just before Christmas, two activists who dared to speak publicly described their “never-ending fear” to the New Statesman. You could see why they were frightened. Anonymous spies had offered £10,000 on the Chinese social media platform WeChat for their work or home addresses. Meanwhile, universities, so quick to atone for the slavery of the past, show little concern for modern-day slavery in Xinjiang as they hoover up Chinese money. They say they want safe spaces to protect students from the tiniest of micro-aggressions, and yet allow the Chinese state, via its on-campus Confucius Institutes, to keep tabs on Chinese students and their teachers. The government should close them, as the Swedish government has, and act to build the UK’s resilience against dictatorial enemies. But there’s the rub. It’s not just that the collapsing Johnson administration is incapable of taking serious measures. Even when the Tories were in their pomp, they showed no inclination to damn the sources of corruption. Honourable MPs and whistleblowers have warned for years that the openness of the City, the libel law, estate agency and indeed the Conservative party to dubious Russian money undermined national security. Last summer, I wrote that all the professional services a dictatorship could want was on open sale in the capital, and warned that if Putin’s allies did not worry ministers, they “should reflect on what will happen when the Chinese Communist party realises what London has to offer”. No worthwhile reforms followed, for a reason I should have grasped at the time. Worthwhile reform is impossible for as long as the Conservatives remain in power. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistInside my iPhone is a cornucopia of Irish men. “It’s currently clear and 25 degrees,” Colin Farrell replies when I ask him the weather. “A 7.45am alarm is now off,” says Michael Fassbender when I beg him for some extra sleep. “Here’s what I found on Google,” Domnhall Gleeson cheerily answers when I screech: “I have spilt coffee all over my stovetop – how to clean white shirt and kitchen bench?” I feel like he is negging me – or playing hard to get, perhaps. Changing my iPhone’s Siri voice to that of an Irish man has been an exercise in self-soothing. Generic American register begone; now I have a generic Irish lilt – or, if I suspend my disbelief hard enough, the rapturous musings of Colin, Michael, Domnhall, or Jamie Dornan, Cillian Murphy and Kenneth Branagh. Niall Horan was (obviously) my preferred One Direction member as a boyband-crazy teen. As everyone swooned for Paul Mescal and his chain-sporting ways last year, I finally felt vindicated. Good old Pauly had been telling me the forecast for years. Of course, being Irish is not the only virtue of these men. They also have great faces – which you, too, can conjure up at a moment’s notice by navigating the labyrinth of settings on your phone. The payoff is well worth it; with each gentle instruction from your personal Irish smooth-talker, you may feel your cortisol levels declining. (Your doctor may disagree.) There are more tangible psychological ramifications to be found: a 2019 study by the United Nations revealed that the female voices of digital assistants – like Siri and Alexa – were entrenching gender stereotypes. “The speech of most voice assistants … sends a signal that women are obliging, docile and eager-to-please helpers,” the study found. By altering your Siri’s voice setting, you are training your brain to unlearn the coded biases within its subconscious – or at least that’s what you can tell yourself. No more women doing your bidding. Just make Ronan Keating do it instead.The first things that fell out of Alexander Downer’s suitcase were some fishnets. In late 2015, when Downer was UK high commissioner and living in London with his wife, Nicky, they decided to sell his late parents’ South Australian mansion, Martinsell, and auction all the contents. Mahogany furniture, silver, crystal, a rare Hans Heysen painting, all went under the hammer. Heysen’s Gums in the Mist fetched $24,000, according to the Advertiser. A Ming Dynasty jar went for $800. Among the pile of stuff on the auction website the following year was a stack of six suitcases. I was moving house and wanted some hipster-type storage. I had previously bought a marvellous old steamer trunk that belonged to Montgomery Clift (or so I was told), and was thinking some vintage suitcases for old papers and photos and mixtapes would be just the ticket. I bought them for $300, a motley collection of mostly old brown leather luggage. One had a tag that read “Fly TAA the Friendly Way”, with “Alexander Downer: Department of Foreign Affairs” scrawled under it. Another had an Ansett tag; yet another, old shipping stickers. Another was embossed with his mother’s name: Lady Mary Downer. Unfortunately, the auction lot did not include his famous and loyal bright yellow suitcase. That one, bought by his wife to stand out on a carousel, was crushed by baggage handlers. I had assumed the cases would be empty. I thought I’d just chuck a bunch of old tax returns in them, and stack them up in an appealingly shabby way in a corner somewhere. They were not empty. When they arrived, I found they were overflowing with quaint old dress-up clothes. Or were they real clothes, for tiny people? Beautifully made shoes and jackets. One cute naval jacket with “Georgina” scrawled inside the lapel. There were dolls. A veritable bevy of creepy dolls in various states of disrepair. Was that … real human hair? One of them had eyes that seemed to follow you. Well, one eye anyway. Another was bald, with mildew stubble. There were letters and brochures, but no secret cabinet documents. No minutes from that meeting with George Papadopoulos, former Donald Trump adviser. Most of the stuff in there, Downer says, probably belonged to his sister, Una. The cases looked as though they had been used – as I had planned to use them – for storage. The suitcase equivalent of junk drawers. Martinsell, an hour out of Adelaide in the Barossa valley, was Sir Alick and Lady Mary Downer’s country home. Downer says the family decided on a clearance auction after his mother died, but that mistakes were made. A book Sir Alick had written during the second world war, when he was a prisoner of war at Changi, was accidentally scooped up with other “valueless” books. Sir Alick was a lawyer before the war, and a politician after it, and was the first Downer to become a UK high commissioner. “We wanted to keep [the book] in the family archives, but because of the mistake, for which we are responsible, there’s nothing legally we can do about it,” Alexander Downer said at the time. On the phone this month from London, Downer says it ended up at the National War Memorial, a good home. (He is now the executive chairman of King’s College London’s international school for government.) The bag with the TAA tag probably goes back to the 1970s, he says, when he was a Dfat junior officer. I recently donated the cases to a charity auction. They were good dinner party patter, but those dolls were a little creepy, and I didn’t really have the room for my hipster suitcase tower. Spruiking the wares, I hinted that the suitcases may have contained a certain type of stocking. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The buyer may be disappointed that it turned out they weren’t the fishnets he famously wore in a charity photoshoot, a decision he lived to regret. Rather, they were dainty and durable fingerless fishnet gloves. Another story, maybe, from another time.During a sunny afternoon on the last Thursday in December, the women’s final of the Afghan National Cup was played on a state-of-the-art Sydney football field in front of a rapturous crowd. The soccer tournament has become an institution for the more than 70,000 members of the Afghan Australian community, serving as a bookend to the year for the past 15 years. This time the cup drew about 650 players representing 34 teams, following qualifiers in major cities including Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Adelaide, and spectators from across the country. But the huge community event was marred by fighting, leading to the cancellation of the entire tournament on the third day after a man threatened to self-harm in protest at an opposing side fielding an unregistered player. Police were called and the event was in disarray after brawls on the field spilled into the car park of the Western Sydney Wanderers’ training grounds. Organisers scrambled to salvage the final day, getting the Wanderers to agree to host the games of the women’s side, and arranging an ad-hoc finale for the men. Players and spectators who spoke to Guardian Australia supported their decisions, saying the spirit of the event transcended the controversy. “I think football is a very, very big thing in our community,” says Nilofar Faveqi, captain of Sydney United, which lost the women’s final. “It’s something that we are very passionate about. And when it comes to things that we are passionate about, we are very vocal as well. Everyone wants to win. Everyone wants to be the best state. They’re passionate about winning. It is what it is.” It is a common refrain. People care deeply about this cup – more than any other competition, more than anything they watched on TV, more than anything else all year. “Every team wants to win this, it’s really big among the Afghans,” says Wahid Hamayoun, star player for Azadi, one of the Sydney men’s teams. “So many people come down, thousands of people. There are people that don’t even play, they travel interstate just to watch. “If you saw when this tournament first started, they only had 10 teams. Now they need to hold qualifiers in each state, it’s just huge.” In December, teams come together for a group stage and knockout competition in a chosen host city. This year Sydney organisers partnered with the Wanderers to hold the event at their training facilities. Teams have to fund their own travel and accommodation, but that doesn’t stop players bringing their friends and family, packing out the stands and making their presence felt during the matches. The tournament’s approximately 650 players were spread across 26 teams on the men’s side, and eight teams on the women’s side. According to the 2016 census, approximately 70,000 Australians were born in Afghanistan, with community numbers swelling in the time since. The first day felt like a celebration, with up to four games being played concurrently across the men’s and women’s sides of the tournament. The facility was flooded with young people, their fresh haircuts and shimmering sneakers gleaming in the sun, chanting songs about their team and their rivals. Coming after a turbulent year for the community, with many participants hailing from suburbs in Sydney or Melbourne that were hardest hit by the Delta wave, and with the fall of Kabul still fresh in the memories, it initially appeared to be a release valve for pent up emotions. But participants shrugged when asked if any of these issues played a part in the tournament’s popularity and the passion people had for it. Mohsen Hasani, a player for Melbourne FC and recent migrant himself, said it was far more about belonging and finding a safe space as a minority, a product of a diaspora creating and valuing their own spaces. “When you come to a country like Australia, as great as it is, there is heaps of obstacles as well. “But when you come to a tournament like this, and you see there is a lot of people that you can connect with, that have been through the same thing you’ve been through, it helps a lot.” Players spoke of their pride at winning in front of their community, how much it meant to be considered the best among the diaspora, how important it was that their own community witness their greatness. Hussain Ramazani, the tournament’s organiser, explained that identity and community were central to the tournament, intertwined with their collective experience of migration. “We’re here for the youth, firstly, but to also respect our culture and what it means to be Afghan. We celebrate our freedom, and we want the youth to understand what their background means. “We work for the young people, actually,” he continues. “They come to understand their background, to understand the value of their community. We’re here to know ourselves, and that is how we become an active, positive community here.” He explains the tournament’s profile has skyrocketed over time, with bragging rights growing along with its reach. Battle lines are drawn along state borders, almost arbitrary in their relevance, but enough of a difference to drive rivalries to extreme heights. Going into the event this year, Sydney team Azadi were the favourites on the men’s side. In the second group game, they won 4-0 against the Brisbane All Stars, easing into the knockout rounds. In the fallout of the game, and especially when it became obvious Brisbane would not be making the knockouts, the team complained that Azadi had fielded an unregistered player. Brisbane wanted the result made void, and for Azadi to be thrown out of the competition. The player was a reserve goalkeeper who took to the field for minutes, before the team was notified he wasn’t registered and took him off. But Brisbane wanted more, citing the rules they signed at the outset of the tournament, stipulating a team was disqualified if it fielded an unregistered player. Ramazani was left in a difficult position, initially agreeing that Azadi should be disqualified. But the decision sparked protests, pushing and shoving between teams and extensive diplomacy, with Ramazani then retracting the decision and deciding instead to have a replay. Brisbane were livid, refusing to back down from demanding Azadi be disqualified. In the car park, between brawls and debates, one man threatened to harm himself if the decision wasn’t reversed. Seeing the chaos and violence, the Wanderers pulled the plug, with police called to send everyone home. Ramazani says he spent the night in endless meetings, attempting to broker peace between the teams, and a resolution for the tournament. Azadi was ultimately ejected from the competition, with no replay ordered. It was decided the women’s side of the tournament would continue at the Wanderers facility, and that the men would hold an “unofficial” final day at a suburban ground, to crown a winner before the interstate teams had to head home. Teams from Melbourne won both the men’s and women’s side of the tournament, much to the chagrin of the Sydney contingent. The women’s final was resolved after a dramatic penalty shootout, while the mens final was won 2-1 by Melbourne United. The final for the women was the last “official” match of the tournament. Although spectators were restricted to just the families of the players, the crowd swelled as the game wore on, bringing out traditional drums and chanting for their team under a glorious Sydney sunset. It was almost like nothing had happened. And to many, the drama was just part and parcel of the event, an understanding of what was at stake. “We did this for ourselves, no one else,” Nooria Mohamed-Zia, captain of winners Melbourne United, says. “We lost the final for three years in a row, we’ve been thinking about this moment for three years and we finally did it. Nothing else matters.”Dancing to the Wiggles was one of the things that helped Clare Fletcher get through isolation with a baby to look after. Water play on the balcony, reading books and horsing around all helped too, although the Sydney mother of Dorothy (Dot, 20 months) said a week in a two-bedroom apartment was harder than she expected. Fletcher and her husband, David Dewey, (both 37, both double vaccinated) went to the US for Christmas so Dewey’s family could meet Dot. After having a “bit of a shock” at testing delays here, eventually they got hold of rapid antigen tests and found they were positive. Dot was coughing, too. Australians have had plenty of experience with lockdowns (some more than others), but until recently, only relatively few have had to isolate because they have Covid or are close contacts of someone who does. This week more than 640,000 people have tested positive. That surge coincides with supply shortages across the nation, as supermarket shelves are emptied of chicken, fresh fruit and vegetables and other essentials. Rapid antigen tests, paracetamol and other Covid-related health goods are also hard to find. Fletcher counts herself lucky. The family had only mild illnesses, and friends pitched in when they started running out of things. “I’d put in an order for nappies and baby stuff – that went unfilled for a week,” she says. “It just sat in processing. We were about to run out, but I did a callout to my Mums’ WhatsApp group. “I hope I can pay that forward to anyone else in the group if they are in that situation.” Then there are the trials and tribulations of looking after a small child while confined. “It was good to have two parents at home,” she says. “But I would say for anyone in the same situation, don’t expect to be able to work.” Coming up with isolation solutions With even some politicians saying “we’re all going to get” Covid, Australians who have not already experienced isolation are preparing for their stint. There is clear guidance from GPs on how to look after yourself at home after a positive diagnosis. The federal health department has advice on how to manage isolation in a shared house. But advice from authorities often fails to take shortages into account, and cannot account for the diversity of human habitats. The health department’s advice suggests people who share a house with an infected person should stay elsewhere if possible and use a separate bathroom if available – options that are clearly not viable for many people. That leaves households trying to come up with their own solutions. In the UK, the first minister of Wales, Mark Drakeford, took himself off to what sounds like his garden shed. A Melbourne man confined to his room had to use a bucket for a toilet. Some are using tents to remove an infected person from a household. South Australia’s health department came under fire for using tents to house Aboriginal homeless people who were close contacts in an outbreak. On the other hand, even before Omicron, doctors were warning that overcrowding in regional Aboriginal communities was a “massive problem” and that tents could be part of the solution. Communities that are themselves isolated are hard to isolate in. There are plenty of examples of uninfected people leaving plates of food at the bedroom door of someone who’s isolating. In India, people were forced to isolate in treehouses. Performer Paul McDermott was among those who took issue with advice that presumed people were privileged enough to be able to easily keep separate, after he was advised to use a different toilet. Space and supplies a luxury Former politician Dr Jane Lomax-Smith has thought ahead to what isolation would look like in her Adelaide home. She says she has a “respectful and informed relationship to major diseases and death”. “Two years ago I repurposed a long-gone son’s bedroom and adjacent bathroom as the ‘quarantine station’ with an oximeter, thermometer and basic drugs. “Should we become sick, the phone charger and basics will be ready to go. This week I replaced batteries in all the devices and added a pack of spares to the supplies.” She says she’s lucky to have the space. “I can’t imagine how one could manage with a large household and a couple of essential workers.” Disability advocate Sam Paior, who set up The Growing Space in SA, has been working with her sons Ben, who has Down’s syndrome, and Bailey to organise home kits for people with disabilities who contract Covid. They have been driving all over the state trying to source oximeters, thermometers, and other gear to go in a pack with masks, electrolytes, sanitiser and so on. The plan was to sell some kits to fund others for people with disabilities, who may not be able to source their own isolation necessities. The shortages have made that plan tough. “If we could do this again, what I’d do is have everyone who wants a kit pay for one, then the minute someone is positive, they get it delivered. Pay in advance so we can get them together and send them out as they’re needed, and when this shit is over, if you didn’t need one, you’ll get your money back. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “I’m pleased we can help those who really need it – those who physically can’t get out there, and those who can’t afford it.” Much of the advice out there agrees on one thing: it’s critical to plan ahead and stock up on essential items – if you can get them.A little over a month ago, the prime minister told the House of Commons that he shared the anger of a nation at seeing a video of his Number 10 staff making light of lockdown measures and joking about Christmas parties. We were supposed to believe that a culture of impunity and disregard for rules at the heart of government had absolutely nothing to do with Boris Johnson; that he was as shocked by the hypocrisy as the rest of us. It was always a ludicrous contention that the prime minister had no idea what was going on in his own office, part of the same complex as his own residence. And in the last week the full extent of the sheer gall of a leader prepared to throw his staff under a bus to evade accountability for the worst sort of political hypocrisy has been exposed. Revelation after revelation has emerged since the start of the year – as Johnson must have known they inevitably would – that rubbishes that statement he made to MPs last month. We now know that in May 2020, Johnson was giving a speech at a social gathering, with drink and food, in the Downing Street garden the very same evening ministers were warning the public at a press conference that they could only meet one other person outside. That his staff were throwing not one, but two, raucous parties that reportedly left items in the garden damaged the night before Prince Philip’s funeral. And that Downing Street staff regularly held drinks parties on Fridays that Johnson would often drop into, giving them the prime ministerial seal of approval. Contempt for parliament and public The Observer has long believed Johnson to be a man of little integrity, but even so, it is hard not to be shocked at the level of contempt in which he so clearly holds parliament and the public. Imagine the consequences if he had misled a court under oath in this way. But to him, it is just the Commons, just the way he approaches politics and every other aspect of his professional life. It is clear that the view of the Covid rules as optional rather than mandatory, as they were for everyone else in the country, did not stop at the doors of No 10. There were parties and leaving drinks at other government departments. But there is no doubt where this culture emanated from: it started from the very top, with the prime minister. It is extraordinary that those who wrote the law and the guidance flouted it, as almost everyone else, including the Queen, observed it for the sake of public health, even while mourning. For those who did not, there were hefty fines, even for people with far more sympathetic stories than those working in No 10. One teenager was fined hundreds of pounds for organising an outdoor balloon release for his friend who had died and had to go to court to contest a further £10,000 fine issued in error by Durham constabulary. Two weeks into the new year, Johnson’s authority has been comprehensively shredded. He cannot stay in post. But the Conservative party cannot wipe the slate clean by electing a new leader. Everything about Johnson’s dreadful premiership has been entirely predictable, a reflection of the man he so clearly was long before he became prime minister. He was sacked from a job in journalism in the 1980s for fabricating quotes for a newspaper story and from the Conservative shadow frontbench in the early 2000s for lying about an affair. As chair of the Leave campaign, he was complicit in its false claims that leaving the EU would free up £350m a week for the NHS – later ruled a misuse of official statistics by the UK Statistics Authority – and that a vote to remain in the EU was a vote to share a border with Iraq and Syria. As mayor of London, he failed to declare his personal interests, including his relationship with Jennifer Arcuri, whose company received thousands of pounds of public money. It was patently obvious what sort of prime minister he would be; no one could credibly argue that there was a senior Tory less well suited to govern Britain. Yet Conservative MPs still crowned him leader in 2019. Enough of them thought he cared too little about the union, allowing him to ruthlessly pursue a hard Brexit and that his loose-with-the-truth style of campaigning could win them a general election in the same way it did the EU referendum. An incompetent, corrupt and rotten prime minister was the bargain they were prepared to make, the cost they were all too willing to impose on the whole country. Thousands of avoidable deaths What a heavy price Britain has paid. On Covid, the government is trying to use the success of the vaccine programme to detract from the growing political crisis in which it finds itself. It is true that the UK has had a more successful vaccine rollout than many other countries, and that the government, particularly Kate Bingham, who chaired the taskforce, deserves credit for the early investment in vaccine technology. But the government’s overall record on Covid is grim: time and again, during the first 15 months of the pandemic, Johnson failed to learn from previous mistakes and acted to introduce restrictions too slowly, undoubtedly resulting in thousands of avoidable deaths and more economic pain. First, the government’s hapless approach to education during a pandemic means that far too little has been done to mitigate its impact on children. The effects of this will be felt long into the future. Second, on Brexit, Johnson achieved the hard Brexit the ideological crusaders from his party’s right flank wanted. But it has come at a huge cost: a long-term economic cost, which will depress Britain’s growth prospects for many years to come, but also a perilous risk to the integrity of the union that cannot be measured in pounds and pence and which may mean that within a couple of decades the United Kingdom may no longer even exist. Who cares if the hardest of Brexits offers succour to the cause of Scottish independence? And faced with the irresolvable conundrum of Brexit – that there can be no clean break from the EU while avoiding the need for a customs border either on the island of Ireland or down the Irish Sea – Johnson has chosen simply to pretend this problem does not exist, rather than confront the fact that he or his successor will have to choose between rejecting regulatory alignment between the EU and parts of the UK or stability in Northern Ireland. The disregard for the union permeates everything this government does, extending to ministers such as Jacob Rees-Mogg insulting Scottish Conservatives in a way that only plays into the independence campaign’s hands. Third, all over Britain, families are suffering as a result of this government’s policies. Johnson won his majority by promising not only to get Brexit done, but to “level up” the country. That was just empty rhetoric: his chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has continued the approach of his predecessors since 2010, introducing the biggest ever one-off benefit cut, on top of the last decade’s tax credit cuts that have seen some low-income parents lose thousands of pounds a year even as more affluent families have had their tax bills reduced. Refugees fleeing war zones and human rights abuses have found themselves at the sharp end of a culture war with Priti Patel’s Home Office. Finally, the last few weeks of revelations about Johnson’s hypocrisy on Covid do not just damage the Conservative party. Like the expenses scandal more than a decade ago, it undermines public trust in all politicians and the legitimacy of our democratic institutions. It makes a mockery of the rule of law when ordinary citizens are punished for breaking the law, but senior politicians, political aides and civil servants appear to neatly sidestep the consequences. From electoral asset to liability Every day Johnson continues as prime minister, the damage he does grows. As his evolution from electoral asset to electoral liability dawns on his party, it is looking increasingly likely that they will not allow him to continue in office for much longer. But Britain’s political crisis will not be over. The choice of the next prime minister would fall to Conservative MPs and party members. Johnson’s likely successors are all complicit in the government’s dreadful track record. The only hope lies in a renewed Labour party winning the next general election. Keir Starmer has emerged from recent weeks as a man of competence, integrity and values. Labour still has a long way to go in addressing the reasons why it lost voters in 2019 and communicating what a Starmer premiership would achieve for Britain, but they are advancing from the terrible defeat Jeremy Corbyn led them to then. Prime minister Boris Johnson is a creation of the modern Conservative party. Tory MPs propelled this charlatan to No 10 entirely because it suited their narrow interests, with no regard for the consequences for the country. It is extraordinary how little contrition many of those who backed him have shown. Johnson’s resignation is not enough: the Conservative party itself must be held accountable for his disastrous premiership.Pep Guardiola watched his Manchester City team take a firm stride towards the Premier League title with a 1-0 home win over Chelsea but said they had already given him something more priceless – a remorseless dedication to succeed in every game. Kevin De Bruyne scored the winning goal with a curler from distance and it meant that City moved 13 points clear of their second-placed opponents. Liverpool are 14 points back in third with two matches in hand and go to the Etihad Stadium on 9 April. Guardiola was at pains to stress that a fourth title in five seasons was not yet secure but he was delighted at how his team were able to clear the latest obstacle in front of them. “I don’t know what is going to happen this season,” he said. “I don’t care. What I care about is that after winning what we have won in the last years, still these guys in every single game give everything for this club. This is so difficult to find in modern life, in modern football. “We are humble enough to run without the ball, to try to do our best in every single game. This is my – and our – biggest achievement as a club and as a team by far. To win and win and win for years and still being there all the time, in this country and in this league. This is the biggest title I have and will have when I leave Manchester.” Guardiola denied that complacency could become a problem for City. “I know my players, we are together for six seasons – [I know] how they celebrate the good moments and suffer in the bad ones, so they are going to listen that it is not true when the people say it is over. In January it is impossible it is over.” The Chelsea manager, Thomas Tuchel, was unhappy at the performance of his attacking players, including the club’s record signing, Romelu Lukaku, who missed a one-on-one chance early in the second half. Chelsea were wasteful with their final pass, particularly in the first quarter of the game. “Sometimes he needs to do the service,” Tuchel said. “He had many ball losses without any pressure, many ball losses in very promising circumstances, without any pressure. He had a huge chance so he is included in this. “We want to serve him but he is part of the team and the performance up front. Especially in the first half we can do much, much better and we need to do much, much better. We had a lot of transition chances in the first half.”Aston Villa’s pulsating comeback was decorated by Philippe Coutinho’s first Premier League goal – the 82nd-minute equaliser – since Boxing Day 2017. Manchester United should be furious at how they allowed the strike five minutes after Jacob Ramsey’s finish gave Steven Gerrard’s team a lifeline, Diogo Dalot, Victor Lindelöf and Raphaël Varane all caught ball-watching. Bruno Fernandes had earlier delighted United’s travelling support with two goals that seemed to point to an invaluable victory, the captain giving his best display of the campaign. Yet this fact underlines how off-colour Fernandes has been, like too many other United players. The visitors did not lose but this was a concerning surrender from Ralf Rangnick’s still-too-shaky side. The German’s bid to build something in his interim tenure was hardly aided by Anthony Martial’s absence, with the interim manager naming only eight substitutes, and claiming after the game that the Frenchman did not want to be included. “When you are 2-0 up and throw away two valuable points, it almost feels like a defeat, but we have to look ahead and take the best out of it,” Rangnick said. “In spells, it was a very good performance.” Gerrard was understandably delighted by the debut as a substitute of his former Liverpool teammate. “Phil gave me exactly what I wanted from the bench. It is only a matter of time before he is better,” said the manager. “There is still room for him to get fitter and stronger.” United went ahead in the sixth minute when Alex Telles touched a free-kick on the left to Fernandes who, striding forward, blazed a shot at Emiliano Martínez. The goalkeeper fumbled badly and in rolled the opener. With Cristiano Ronaldo out again due to a hip flexor problem, and Marcus Rashford having a dead leg, Rangnick turned to Anthony Elanga, rather than Jadon Sancho in what was a 4-2-3-1, not the usual 4-2-2-2. Gerrard, who started his new signing Lucas Digne, endured a frustrating first half, with United being far better than in Monday’s FA Cup encounter when Villa were unlucky to be eliminated. It took 31 minutes for Ollie Watkins, finally, to test David de Gea and United’s upturn could be traced to Fernandes being far more influential than in recent matches. A theory runs that he is stifled by Ronaldo, though they occupy different spaces and roles. The way he dropped deep to find Dalot’s run along the right showed him in a whirring, effervescent mode, the quality here opposite to that exhibited moments later by Fred when he belted a pass into touch. Villa did threaten when Digne’s corner was thudded goalward by Emiliano Buendía’s head and De Gea’s reflexes protected United’s lead. Then the Spaniard’s knees saved Digne’s point-blank attempt. The bright Elanga had Martínez beating a shot out early in the second half and while United maybe lacked fluidity they were half a yard faster and closer to their opponents than recently. Nonetheless De Gea had to save low to his right from Ramsey then Matty Cash failed to make the most of a ball swung over by Digne. The contest was invigorating entertainment in a crackling atmosphere. United were hemmed in by the Villa surge but then Elanga shot wide and Mason Greenwood rolled the ball marginally past the right post, leaving Rangnick with his head in his hands. The German was far happier when, after Morgan Sanson’s mistake, Fred’s simple touch allowed Fernandes to smash the ball home. Then, with 22 minutes left, on came Coutinho. First he created Ramsey’s strike, the Brazilian’s pass pin-balling off Fred. Next, Villa Park was lit up by the little magician, whose equaliser benefited from the comedy of United defensive errors. Donny van de Beek might have grabbed glory with a late chance but failed. Gerrard said: “When we went two down in the second half we had a choice whether to feel sorry for ourselves and go under or carry on believing.”At least one could actually see the teams from the stands this time, unlike in the fog-bound reverse fixture at Scotstoun last month. It was also infinitely prettier viewing for Exeter’s supporters, who can now look forward to their side featuring in the last 16 of the Champions Cup after this ultimately thumping eight-try victory. With a hat-trick for Tom O’Flaherty, a brace for the prolific Sam Simmonds and Luke Cowan-Dickie, Jack Nowell and Dave Ewers also on the scoresheet, the previously dogged Warriors were blown away by 38 points in 26 second-half minutes as Exeter found the extra gear that had previously eluded them. Glasgow can still qualify if they beat La Rochelle at home next Saturday but their head coach, Danny Wilson, admitted his side “collapsed” and described the final 30 minutes as “unacceptable”. It was also an instructive night for the England coaching staff who had travelled en masse to Devon. In theory they were running the rule over Nowell, Simmonds, Cowan-Dickie, Henry Slade and maybe even Ewers and Jack Maunder. But mostly they were scouting the opposition, who fielded a good sprinkling of the Scotland side set to feature in next month’s Calcutta Cup encounter. At least half of this Warriors starting XV stand a decent chance of facing England at Murrayfield and Eddie Jones, Richard Cockerill, Martin Gleeson and Matt Proudfoot clearly felt there was tactical mileage to be had in studying one or two individuals at first hand. As it turned out, the most eye-catching Scottish presence was probably the the 21-year-old flanker Rory Darge who is unlikely to dislodge Hamish Watson or Jamie Ritchie from the starting back row. From Exeter’s perspective it was all highly satisfactory, particularly as the home pack lacked the injured Jonny Hill, Jonny Gray and Harry Williams and the suspended Alec Hepburn. Last time Exeter entertained Glasgow in this competition it ended in a 42-0 thrashing but in the buildup there had been genuine visiting optimism. Exeter did not start particularly well here either, having been led out by the ever-reliable Ewers, playing his 200th game for the club. Glasgow initially looked the livelier side and deservedly took an early lead through a penalty from the outside-half, Ross Thompson. Exeter needed something to kickstart some momentum and finally found it when a slickly executed first-phase backline move put the nippy O’Flaherty over for his first. With Glasgow brows still furrowed, Exeter scored again with Simmonds proving impossible to stop from close range. Suddenly it was 14-3 and, not unlike the visiting fans who had their bagpipes confiscated as they entered the stadium, Glasgow had to revisit their carefully laid plans. It was a welcome bonus, then, when the lock Kiran McDonald forced his way over for his first European try and Darge further enhanced his reputation with a fine ruck turnover at the expense of his national captain, Stuart Hogg. The interval scoreline of 14-10 was a pretty fair reflection of a stop-start first 40 minutes on an unusually still January evening. Glasgow, though, still had a flicker or two of life in them. Upfield they surged and a clever flat cut-out pass from Ali Price put Matt Fagerson into enough space to storm impressively to the line. Now it was a proper European ding-dong, with Slade enjoying a slice of luck when his overhit kick to the corner was touched in flight by Cole Forbes to give Exeter another useful platform. After Ewers had been held up initially, Simmonds drove over for his second to regain the lead and the conversion from his brother, Joe, compounded visiting frustration. The rest was as clearcut as the reverse fixture was famously murky. O’Flaherty has a knack of scoring tries in big games and his hat-trick here deservedly won the winger the man of the match award. The energetic Simmonds looked in very decent pre-Six Nations nick and Nowell’s improving fitness was also conspicuous. The fit-again England winger scooted over for a deserved final try, Exeter’s sixth of the second half, and, with Jones due to announce England’s Six Nations squad on Tuesday, is looking slimmer and purposeful. Murrayfield could still prove tricky next month but for now it is the Scots who must head homewards to think again.Tory MPs will be ready in sufficient numbers to force Boris Johnson out of Downing Street within weeks if he tries to dodge responsibility for rule-breaking parties at No 10, the Observer has been told. While most Conservative MPs say they are waiting for a report into so-called “partygate” by the senior civil servant Sue Gray before deciding the prime minister’s fate, large numbers admit privately that their minds are effectively made up and that they are merely observing “due process”. What has convinced many Tory MPs to act against Johnson if he or the Downing Street operation is criticised directly or indirectly by Gray – and he then tries to fight on – has been the furious reaction from their constituents to new revelations of partying, including two events late into the night at No 10, on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral last April when such gatherings were forbidden. An Opinium poll for the Observer will spread further alarm in Conservative ranks. It shows Labour taking a 10-point lead over the Tories, with Johnson’s personal ratings collapsing to levels equivalent to Theresa May at her lowest ebb. It also shows that 46% of Leave voters who backed the Conservatives at the 2019 election say Johnson should resign, suggesting the coalition he put together to win an 80-strong majority in parliament is fracturing. The Tory MP Tobias Ellwood, a former foreign office minister, said that Johnson had to demonstrate within days that he could end the chaos for good and demonstrate a new kind of leadership. “But if he tries to spin his way out of a critical report, he will lose my support,” he said. Tim Loughton, Conservative MP for East Worthing and Shoreham, wrote on Twitter: “I have regretfully come to the conclusion that Boris Johnson’s position is now untenable, that his resignation is the only way to bring this whole unfortunate episode to an end, and I am working with colleagues to impress that view on No 10.” So far only a handful of Tory MPs have called publicly for Johnson to go. To trigger a vote of confidence in him, 54 MPs or more need to write to the chair of the influential 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers asking for one. If Johnson were to lose such a vote, he has to step down. Another senior figure in the party said MPs were in a holding pattern. The Tory MP for Waveney in Suffolk, Peter Aldous, said he was close to calling for Johnson’s head though he would wait for the Gray report, adding that many pro-Brexit voters in his constituency were among those who were outraged at what had been going on. “An awful lot people who voted Brexit do feel very badly let down,” he said, pointing out that this was not because of the effects of Brexit but because of Johnson’s personal behaviour. Another Tory MP said that he had been confronted by local Tory councillors on Friday who had voted for Johnson as leader and backed Brexit before voting Conservative in 2019, but were now insisting en masse that Johnson had to go. “I can say my councillors are very pissed off,” he said. A senior Whitehall figure in regular touch with Gray, who is expected to publish her findings by the end of this week, said she was “disappointed in what she is finding but personally she is robust”. It is understood she had no idea of the latest revelations about parties and only found about them in the media. The source added that Gray had her reputation for independence and integrity to protect but was also studiously fair. “She will give it both barrels to whoever deserves it, whether that is a special adviser or civil servant or the politicos. “We will get the unvarnished truth. If she sees direct responsibility, she will be clear. That is why I think this is going to be uncomfortable for everyone. Everyone is going to take their share of the blame.” Professor Robert Ford of Manchester University said the Opinium poll should be seriously worrying for the Tories and Johnson. “Johnson himself has shifted from the party’s biggest asset, with a Brexit-fuelled appeal separate to the Conservative brand, to its biggest liability, as the revelations of Downing Street revelry in lockdown render him personally toxic with the same voters. “The Conservatives may now be damned if they do and damned if they don’t. Sticking with Johnson risks further contaminating the party brand if the scandals continue and voter fury intensifies.” Separately, a panel of Tory activists assembled by the ConservativeHome website found 53% believed Johnson should resign immediately. The former Tory MP and editor of the website, Paul Goodman, said: “That over half of party members want the prime minister out, if this return is representative, is a humiliating result for him, and shows a loss of confidence that may not be reversed.” Opinium put Labour on 41%, the Tories on 31%, the Lib Dems on 9% and the Greens on 6%. On the partygate scandal, 78% of voters think that Downing Street staff did break lockdown rules, against 8% who say they did not. Some 76% think Johnson himself broke lockdown rules, against 8% who believe he did not. Just 13% think Johnson is telling the truth about what happened, against 64% who do not. Some 67% believe the police should investigate what happened.Janny Sikazwe made a mistake and ended up blowing for full time after 85 minutes of Wednesday’s Africa Cup of Nations meeting between Mali and Tunisia. Forgetting to stop the watch during a water break (if that is what happened) is an understandable error – particularly given he was subsequently taken to hospital suffering from heatstroke – and one that could easily have been rectified. As it was, though, Sikazwe, an experienced referee who took charge of the 2017 Cup of Nations final as well as Belgium v Panama and Japan v Poland at the 2018 World Cup, looked rattled. He sent off Mali’s El Bilal Touré for an innocuous foul, sticking with his original decision even after VAR asked him to review it, and then blew for full time again after 89 minutes and 47 seconds. Tunisia then refused an attempt to restart the game half an hour later, and it remains to be seen what the fallout will be. Much of the discussion has centred on how embarrassing the incident was for the tournament (very, not because European referees haven’t also made mistakes in high-profile games, but because it confirms the negative impression many already have of the Cup of Nations), but it also raises wider issues about refereeing: the issue was less Sikazwe’s mistake than his reaction to it. Imagine he had seen the surprise of the players at the game being stopped, checked with the fourth official, reset the watch, apologised and moved on with some combination of clarity and humility. It might have taken a minute, but essentially it would have been a quickly forgotten oddity. Instead he failed properly to reset the time and it is hard to believe his flustered state (which may have been in part the result of his heatstroke) didn’t contribute to the red card. Refereeing is not just about getting decisions right, but also about the projection of authority – which doesn’t necessarily mean being dictatorial; it means persuading the players you’re in control and doing your best. The thought occurred also during Manchester City’s win at Arsenal, when Stuart Attwell found himself widely condemned for getting a series of decisions right. Ederson’s foul on Martin Ødegaard was apparent only from one camera angle; Attwell can hardly be blamed for not seeing it, and it was equally understandable that VAR should not deem that a clear and obvious error. Gabriel deserved both his yellow cards, while the only way Attwell could have avoided giving a penalty for Granit Xhaka’s shirt pull on Bernardo Silva would have been to penalise Bernardo for simulation, but given he was going down having fallen over Xhaka’s leg that would have been absurd. But part of the issue was that Attwell simply looks so beleaguered. Attitude matters. Pierluigi Collina or the similarly wild-eyed Gambian official Bakary Gassama he is not. Rather Attwell gives off the air of a hen-pecked husband struggling to make the payments on the over-fancy car he was persuaded to buy. Add images of him looking stressed to television’s insistence his decisions were controversial – a debate largely generated by its own coverage – and the result was furore. That scrutiny is another major part of the problem, undermining any attitude of control. The way decisions are analysed creates controversy and doubt, particularly when there is rarely any acknowledgement that some decisions are almost impossible to make at speed from a single angle, or that in some cases there probably is no definitive “right” answer. That has created a community of snitches and zealots, constantly peering through the net curtain, determined to find faults to punish. With every nudge on a shoulder, every brush of ball on arm, the question has become not: “Was there an attempt to cheat?” but: “Can we penalise this?” Rather than asking if there was a foul, we ask whether there was contact. Having arms has become a defender’s original sin. The Premier League is far from perfect but it at least seems to have come up with a workable definition of handball so that the arms have to be carelessly extended from the body for a penalty to be given. Other leagues and the Cup of Nations are working on strict liability: the penalties given against Mali, Tunisia and Zimbabwe in their first fixtures all involved balls being hammered into arms from relatively close range. Perhaps Zimbabwe’s Kelvin Wilbert’s arm was slightly extended from his body as he hurled himself into the path of the ball but is the game really better if defenders are discouraged from attempting blocks like that? If matches are going to be decided on such moments of randomness, then for all the football merit involved we may as well hide gold rings randomly round the pitch and award a goal for every one found. Similarly, an over-literal interpretation of the offside law now means a player trying to intercept a pass can play onside a forward who was offside when the pass he is trying to stop was played. It happened for Joe Ironside’s goal for Cambridge against Newcastle and it happened for Kylian Mbappé for France against Spain in the Nations League final. Clearly that is absurd: what sense does it make that a goal stands if the pass brushes the defender’s foot but not if he misses it entirely? That’s not how the law was ever meant to be applied. As with handball at the Cup of Nations, there has been an inversion, as though the laws, rather than shaping and controlling a game that predates them, have become a sacred text from which the game derives. Since David Elleray became technical director for the law-making International Football Association Board, a puritanical fundamentalism has taken hold. And that is not just bad for the shape and rhythm and basic fairness of the game; it’s bad for referees, undermining and dehumanising them. When the law is so cold and so inflexible, it makes errors such as Sikazwe’s far harder to tolerate, makes it far harder for referees to build the consent that lends them authority.Jamie Jackson was at Villa Park tonight, and his report has landed. You know what to do: clickity click. Thanks for reading this MBM. Stay safe and warm, everyone. Nighty night! Steven Gerrard’s turn. “Second half, we improved a lot, but it took some honesty at half time. For the first 25 minutes we were second best, we didn’t commit to what we wanted to do. We’d prepared in a positive way and wanted to jump on Manchester United, but credit to them, they were better than us throughout the first half. But the first goal came as a result of us being passive, giving corners away and silly fouls. I expected a reaction. It got worse at 2-0 but we rolled our sleeves up, we won duels and it was much more like how I want Aston Villa to play. If you don’t take the handbrake off, you’ll get picked off.” Ralf Rangnick talks to Sky. “It is very difficult to find some positives. We had spells when I felt it was our best game since I came here. We dominated the game in the first 30 minutes. We could have scored two or three goals. We saw that we have taken some steps forward but still have to do better. When you are 2-0 up you have to defend it better. We gave away too many balls at times and were not compact. It feels like a defeat, to be honest. The team is very disappointed with the result, it feels like two points lost.” Bruno Fernandes speaks to Sky. “We were in the perfect position to score even more goals and finish the game. But we don’t take our chances in the counter and our runs were not perfect. But they are a good team, they score and draw the game. It’s a tough one to take because the game was under control. The performance was better than the result. We probably had more control. But the main thing is to win games and points. We deserved more. But we have to improve. Performance and result together. I am happy to score but I prefer to win the game. Today, my goals make no sense, because we got just one point.” Philippe Coutinho speaks to Sky. “I missed these games, I missed the Premier League. I am very happy to be here with my new team-mates. We had a good game, we kept believing. We didn’t lose, and we move on. I was a little bit nervous. I don’t speak English very well, I prefer to play, to be on the pitch, than keep talking. I want to work hard and improve, and be in better shape. I want to do a good job.” Jacob Ramsey is by his side, and he explains how he felt scoring his first goal at Villa Park: “The Holte End, singing your name! Coming through the academy, that’s what dreams are made of. When the ball hit the back of the net, I was buzzing.” Both players scored a goal and contributed an assist, so that’s a pair of feelgood interviews, right there. That was a pulsating second half. Great entertainment. It looked as though two-goal Bruno Fernandes would be the story and the hero, but after a four-minute burst of creativity from debutant Philippe Coutinho, it’s all about Villa’s new playmaker. Jack who? United will be sick at letting a two-goal lead slip late on, but there were signs of some Rangnickian green shoots in their first-half performance, so it’s not all bad. Villa’s point moves them above Brentford into 13th, while United remain in seventh. The Premier League welcomes back a top talent in Philippe Coutinho. Supporters of Manchester United are permitted to demur. 90 min +6: The ball breaks to De Beek, who doesn’t quite catch a shot that’s deflected wide left for a corner. Villa clear the set piece. 90 min +5: The first lull of the evening. How much extra time is left? 90 min +4: For a minute, it looks as though former Manchester United captain Ashley Young will get a run out against his old mates. But Buendia is cleared to continue playing. 90 min +3: Buendia is back up but looking groggy. With the game still to restart, Sky co-commentator Andy Hinchcliffe names Jacob Ramsey man of the match. That may be so, but Philippe Coutinho is the story. 90 min +2: Buendia is still getting attention. Steven Gerrard isn’t happy about the challenge, and makes his feelings known to the fourth official. 90 min +1: Matic comes through the back of Buendia, elbow meeting ear. That could easily have been a second yellow. He’s really in the last-chance saloon now. Fortunately there’s only a couple of minutes of stoppage time to go. 90 min: There will be four bonus minutes. 89 min: United make a double change. Greenwood and Fernandes are replaced by Lingard and De Beek. 87 min: Coutinho latches onto a loose ball on the edge of the United D and bobbles a shot straight at De Gea. Had his own man Ramsey not got in Coutinho’s way, United would have been in a world of trouble. 86 min: Chukwuemeka strips Fernandes in midfield and launches an attack. It comes to nothing, but the 18-year-old has looked confident and impressive since coming on. 84 min: Fred’s boot connects with Bundeia’s shoulder, but like Luiz on Fernandes earlier, it looked unintentional, if rather painful. Bundeia is soon back up on his feet. 82 min: A debut goal plus an assist: thirteen minutes that took Coutinho. Coutinho is back, baby. Buendia slips a perfectly weighted pass down the inside-left channel to release Ramsey into the box. Ramsey spots Coutinho haring in from the right. He rolls across the face of goal, past a haplessly sliding Varane, teeing Coutinho up at the far stick. He knocks into an unguarded net from a couple of yards, and that’s an assist and a goal on debut! 80 min: That’s the least Villa deserve for their second-half display, and it hasn’t taken long for Coutinho to reacclimatise himself to the Premier League. Cash meanwhile suffers a rush of blood and blooters a weird ball deep into the Holte End from distance. 78 min: With the game suddenly back on, Elanga is replaced by Sancho. Chukwuemeka’s first act is to exchange passes with Coutinho, who busies in from the left. Coutinho dribbles into the crowded box and slips infield for Ramsey, who slots into the top right from the penalty spot. A fine goal, and Villa are back in it! 77 min: Ings is replaced by Chukwuemeka. 76 min: Cash and Ramsey one-two down the right. Cash tears towards the byline, and flashes a cross through the box. Watkins can’t get much purchase on a header, and the ball sails out to the left. 74 min: A free kick for Villa, 35 yards out, just to the left of centre. Everyone lines up on the edge of the United box. The set piece is worked wide to Cash on the right, who crosses into the mixer. The ball nearly breaks to Coutinho, who is denied a dream start in a Villa shirt when Matic pokes the ball away from him, launching it at speed to De Gea, who kicks away. The ball’s swung back in again, Watkins eyebrowing a header wide left from close range. Villa have been much improved since the restart, but it doesn’t looks as though it’s going to be their night. 72 min: Digne drives down the left and earns a corner off Dalot. Coutinho races across to take the corner ... and scuffs it straight to Fernandes at the near post. 70 min: Greenwood nearly races clear down the inside-right, but is ushered away from danger by Mings, and is denied the opportunity to shoot. That’s fine defending. 69 min: Sanson sets about a pile of water bottles as he storms off, kicking them hither and yon, then plonks himself down on the bench with a face on. 68 min: That’s Sanson’s last contribution. He’s replaced by Coutinho, who returns to the Premier League after a four-year hiatus. Fernandes takes out his frustration on the ball, and how! Sanson’s poor pass back down the United right wing is snaffled by Fred, who shuttles infield for Fernandes. He takes a touch and lashes an unstoppable shot into the top right. A bad mistake by Sanson, but how Fernandes made him pay! 65 min: Fernandes falls to the floor. Luiz then stands on the back of his leg. It looked accidental, the Villa man’s gaze elsewhere, but that’s clearly not the opinion of the United captain, who has been on a rolling boil for a while. 63 min: Buendia slips Watkins into the Villa box down the right. Watkins tries to pill back for Ings in the middle, but can’t force the pass through. It’s a fun, open game, this. 62 min: Ramsey weaves his way down the middle, past Fred and Matic, and is crudely bodychecked on the edge of the United box. The referee contentiously waves play on, which, with the denizens of Villa Park furious, may then explain why he declines to book Luiz for a fairly obvious tug on Fernandes. 61 min: Fred slips Greenwood away down the right. Greenwood enters the box, reaches the right-hand corner of the six-yard box, and drags a shot across the face of goal and out for a goal kick. After a sluggish start to the second half, United are beginning to find their higher gears. 60 min: Cash carelessly gives away the ball on the edge of his own box. Elanga snaffles it, shifts it right to left, and sends a forensic low drive inches wide of the left-hand post. Martinez was beaten. 59 min: Greenwood glides in from the right and has a crack from distance. The ball takes a flick off the back of Mings and out for a corner on the left. Fernandes takes, swinging it viciously towards the near post. Watkins clears. 57 min: Just as the United press worried Villa in the first half, the home side are hassling the visitors in the second. United are making mistakes they weren’t making earlier. A loose pass in midfield allows Villa to swarm and counter, Buendia slipping Digne into acres down the left, Digne lashing an ambitious shot into the side netting. 55 min: Digne skins Dalot down the left and cuts back for Buendia, who meets the ball first time and aims for the top left from the edge of the box. He doesn’t quite catch it, and it’s an easy claim for De Gea. 54 min: Villa have enjoyed 75 percent of possession since the restart. They’ve notably upped the tempo. 52 min: Watkins accidentally catches Fernandes, who goes down dramatically. Watkins attempts to lift his opponent back up. Fernandes takes offence and a brief tussle breaks out. It’s all over as quickly as it starts. Fernandes isn’t happy, though. He was caught, but it didn’t look malicious. 50 min: Fernandes sends Greenwood into acres down the right. Mings does very well to slow Greenwood down. Greenwood eventually tries to slip Fred free but it’s a difficult pass and Martinez comes out to claim. 49 min: Ramsey sashays in from the left flank, exchanges passes with Sanson, and fires towards the bottom left. De Gea gets a strong hand to it and tips away. 48 min: Matic, already on a booking, clips Buendia to the floor. It’s not enough for a second yellow, but the United midfielder is walking a tightrope now. 47 min: The impressive Elanga enters the Villa box from the left and pearls a shot towards the near post. Martinez parries well and Villa clear. The 19-year old Swede looks the real deal. 46 min: Fernandes slides in ludicrously on Sanson and goes into the book. A completely pointless challenge, on the halfway line, his opponent going nowhere. Villa get the ball rolling for the second half. Poor Konsa hasn’t been able to continue; he had a quick runout during half time and went straight back down the tunnel, shaking his head sadly and holding his side. He’s replaced by Hause. Half-time advertisement. There’s some hot Afcon action tonight, as Guinea-Bissau take on Egypt. Open up a second tab and fill your boots. United started well, and took the lead through Bruno Fernandes, whose shot went straight through Emiliano Martínez, a shocker for the ages. Villa improved as the half went on, but they’re missing the artistry of John McGinn. Will we see Philippe Coutinho in the second half? 45 min +5: Telles romps down the left into acres of space. He pulls back to nobody, and Ramsey hacks clear. 45 min +4: Elanga’s low drive is deflected wide left of the Villa goal for a corner. Villa deal with the set piece easily enough. 45 min +2: Konsa is up again, but still doesn’t look happy. Villa will wait until the break to make a decision on whether to sub him off or not. 45 min: Konsa is still down. There will be at least three added minutes. 44 min: Elanga dribbles in from the left. He enters the box and takes a heavy touch, allowing Konsa to slash clear. Konsa immediately crumples to the floor, that hip still bothering him. 43 min: Cash curls in low and hard from the right. The ball goes all the way through to Digne, bombing in from the opposite flank. Digne hits it first time, and creams it, but straight at De Gea. 42 min: Now Elanga whacks Konsa on the hip. No booking for that, either, though the challenge was less egregious than Cash’s. Nevertheless, Konsa felt that, and takes a while to get back up, still holding his side. 41 min: Cash comes through the back of Elanga but for some reason avoids censure. He’s very fortunate not to go in the book. 39 min: Digne crosses dangerously from the left. Varane clears under intense pressure. Buendia nearly releases Cash down the right with a first-time flick. Not quite. Then another phase, as Ramsey, Digne, Ings and Luiz combine cutely down the left. Some crisp passing, but nothing opens up. A clear improvement on what’s gone before, though the bar was set low. 37 min: Villa pin United back for the first time this evening. Bundeia orchestrating much of their play. United hold firm, but this is much better from the home side. 36 min: ... Buendia meets the ball at the near post, flashing a header straight at De Gea, who nevertheless reacts well to block. Villa have finally turned up. 35 min: Villa win their first corner of the evening, out on the left. That leads to a corner on the right, and from that ... 33 min: Greenwood romps into the Villa box down the left and has a dig from a tight angle. Martinez parries, the ball looping up to Elanga, who can’t get purchase on a header. It’s a fairly hefty caveat, but Martinez has been very good apart from the monumental howler. 32 min: Villa take a touch in the United box! Cavani’s mistake allows the home side to counter, and Watkins is found in a bit of space down the left, just inside the area. He lines it up carefully, and aims a curler towards the bottom right. The telegraphed effort is easily gathered by De Gea. 31 min: Ings drops a shoulder to beat Matic down the right. Matic cynically clips him, and that’s a booking. Luiz takes the free kick, sending it into the mixer. It’s nowhere near any of his team-mates, though, and Fred traps and clears. Villa still haven’t had a touch in the United box. 30 min: Villa haven’t had a touch in the United box yet. “Fernandes looks exceedingly more confident with Ronaldo out of the team,” opines Ciarán Brennan. “I imagine he’ll be even more confident next year when Ronaldo won’t be in the country.” 28 min: Telles whips the free kick straight at Martinez, testing the keeper’s mettle. Martinez parries clear, but only to Greenwood, who whistles a low drive inches wide of the right-hand post. Not sure Martinez was getting to that, had it been on target. 27 min: Dalot checks in from the right wing and is scythed to the floor by Digne’s ludicrously late slide. A booking, and a free kick just to the right of the Villa box. 25 min: United are snapping into the press, and it’s making Villa extremely nervous. The Rangnick way beginning to bear fruit? 23 min: Elanga dribbles at speed down the left and enters the Villa box. He goes over with Sanson nearby, and claims a penalty. He’s not getting one. Cavani is quickest to the loose ball and flashes a shot-cum-cross through the six-yard box. Villa are all over the shop here. 22 min: Some sterile possession for Villa. Baby steps, small acorns, all that. 20 min: Nothing comes of the corner, and Cavani trots back onto the field of play, good to continue right now. 19 min: Before the corner can be taken, Cavani requires some treatment. He looks to have twisted his knee while lunging for that cross. He hobbles off the pitch, but there’s no sub. He’s going to try to run it off. 18 min: Villa stroke it around the back, with a view to settling down at last. There’s not much movement up front, though, and eventually possession is shipped in a jittery style. United pour forward, Telles crossing from the left. Cavani can’t connect in the middle, ten yards out, but the ball bounces further on for Greenwood, in plenty of space. Martinez redeems himself by racing out to Greenwood’s feet and winning the one-on-one battle. He parries out for a corner. Stunning save. 16 min: Mings plays a simple five-yard pass out of play. Villa are rattled. They looked slightly unsure of themselves even before Martinez’s howler. Very strange, given how well they played in patches at Old Trafford last Monday. 14 min: United are in complete control right now, pinging the ball around with calm confidence in their sky blue shirts. Squint and you could be watching Pep’s City. 12 min: Fred curls one in from the right. Elanga rises above Cash at the near post, and heads into the side netting. He should have done better, with Martinez, his head presumably swimming, out of position and flapping a little. 10 min: Villa try to respond to the shock of that farcical goal. Buendia runs at a slightly disorganised United back line, but over-elaborates in his efforts to release Watkins. 8 min: That’s quietened the home crowd considerably. An awful error, one for the ages. Martinez, consumed with embarrassment, claims Telles didn’t touch the ball at the free kick before Fernandes ran off with it, but the referee’s quite rightly not having any of it. Telles takes a feather-light touch, allowing Fernandes to shift the ball infield. He takes a couple of touches, tees himself up, and sends a shot towards the bottom left. It should be an easy gather for Martinez, but he lets the ball slip through his hands and between his legs. It rolls apologetically into the net, and that’s a huge howler by the Villa keeper. Shades of Massimo Taibi and Matt Le Tissier, all those years ago. 5 min: Another free kick for United, Telles barged to the floor by Sanson as he makes off down the left. Before it can be taken, the referee takes time out to deliver a rollocking to everyone in the box. A lot of pushing and shoving going on. 4 min: Telles swings a free kick in from the left and it’s only half hacked clear by Watkins. A slightly nervous start by Villa, who can’t get out of their half, or retain any possession. 3 min: This one - United’s 101st of the campaign so far - doesn’t beat the first man. United still haven’t scored from a corner kick this season yet. 2 min: Dalot strokes a long pass down the left wing where the presence of Elanga forces the first corner of the game. Fernandes takes. Digne’s first act in a Villa shirt is to head behind for another. Fernandes to take again. United get the ball rolling ... but only after everyone takes the knee. Villa Park fills with appreciative applause. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out. Villa wear their famous claret and blue, while United sport their ersatz early 90s light blue away strip. Philippe Coutinho has taken a bow, applauding the fans in all four corners of Villa Park. A rare old atmosphere in this famous old stadium, with the hosts looking for their first home victory in the Premier League over United since August 1995. You can’t win anything with kids. We’ll be off in a minute. Steven Gerrard speaks to Sky. “Philippe Coutinho is on the back of a Covid situation, he was only training at home. We need to build his match sharpness up. But he has trained with us for the last three days with no problems, he’s looking sharp, further on than we thought, so if the game needs him, I’d have no problem with putting him out there.” Ralf Rangnick adds: “Cristiano Ronaldo still had problems with his hip. We decided not to train him yesterday. It doesn’t make sense to play him today. Hopefully he can play on Wednesday.” Some pre-match reading. The 3pm kick-offs have finished. Newcastle 1-1 Watford, Norwich 2-1 Everton, Wolves 3-1 Southampton. All of which means the Premier League now looks like this ... ... and so a Villa win tonight will whisk them up to 11th (tenth if they win by four goals or more) while United would move up to sixth should they take all three points. Lucas Digne makes his Aston Villa debut this evening. Philippe Coutinho could eventually make his too, though he’ll have to come off the bench. John McGinn is suspended, so Morgan Sanson takes his place in midfield. Manchester United make three changes to the side that put Villa out of the FA Cup on Monday evening. Luke Shaw and Scott McTominay are both suspended, so in come Alex Telles and Nemanja Matic. Marcus Rashford, out of sorts recently, has been given a rest, so Anthony Elanga takes his place in the attack. There’s still no Cristiano Ronaldo, but Harry Maguire is back from injury and takes a spot on the bench. Aston Villa: Martinez, Cash, Konsa, Mings, Digne, Sanson, Luiz, Ramsey, Watkins, Ings, Buendia. Subs: Targett, Steer, Young, Coutinho, Hause, Chukwuemeka, Archer, Iroegbunam, Kesler. Manchester United: de Gea, Dalot, Lindelof, Varane, Telles, Fred, Matic, Greenwood, Fernandes, Elanga, Cavani. Subs: Jones, Maguire, Mata, Lingard, Heaton, Sancho, Henderson, van de Beek. Referee: David Coote (Nottinghamshire). In which Aston Villa try to pay Manchester United back for their FA Cup defeat last Monday. Kick off is at 5.30pm. It’s on!In February 2021, Dr Craig Spencer wrote in a Medium post that he was as “eager as anyone to see the end of this pandemic. Thankfully, that may be in sight”. “Covid cases and hospitalizations are dropping,” wrote Spencer, director of Global Health in Emergency Medicine at New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center. “Vaccines are getting into arms. So, what happens next?” Next was, of course, more Covid-19. So – almost a year later – while Spencer is encouraged by the fact that the growth in the number of new Covid cases has slowed in parts of the country, he has been humbled by earlier waves and is not ready to celebrate the beginning of the end of the pandemic. “It’s not like you get to the top of Everest, have a small party and then start your ascent down and take off your oxygen mask,” Spencer said. “There is still risk when you start your descent, and I think it’s important for all of us to continue to be wary and aware of that.” While the United States has over the last month broken records for Covid hospitalizations and cases due to the highly contagious Omicron variant, the Northeast has seen a decrease in the number of daily new Covid cases or a slowing down of the rate of increase, prompting predictions that the worst of the pandemic will soon be over. But infectious disease experts say that’s premature because of how unpredictable the virus has been and the fact that it is still surging and overwhelming hospitals in parts of the country. “Yes, particularly in places like New York City, Omicron is peaking, but I think we have to be very careful not to confuse peaking with a low,” said Dr Celine Gounder, an infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist at New York University. “That means people who are going out and about, living their normal lives need to be careful to still make use of mitigation measures like wearing higher-quality masks and doing as much outdoors as possible.” In the Northeast, the number of daily new cases has started to decline in the last week, according to data from the New York Times, but other places continue to experience a spike in cases. For example, 10 states saw a more than 300% increase in cases over the last two weeks. Across the United States, there has been a 133% increase in cases and a 79% increase in Covid hospitalizations over that period. “I think it’s very possible that we may be at a peak, and certainly that would be in line with a lot of modeling results in terms of timing, which projected peaks in mid to late January, but at the same until we see a few more days of consistent downward trends and start to see that reflected in hospitalizations as well, I would be cautious,” said Justin Lessler, an epidemiology professor at the University of North Carolina. Despite the slowing down of the surge, when Spencer worked a shift earlier this week in the emergency room at Columbia in New York, “it was just as chaotic for me as it was for my colleagues around the city”, he said. That’s because the emergency room was filled with patients who were very sick with Covid in addition to people coming for heart attacks, appendicitis or other ailments, as compared to the start of the pandemic when almost all the patients in emergency rooms were there because of Covid, Spencer said. There is also a significant number of providers who are unable to work because they tested positive for Covid. “Emergency rooms have always been adaptable, but the issue we are dealing with now is not just more patients and more Covid but also fewer providers and fewer places to put [patients],” said Spencer. In Oklahoma, a 363% increase over the past two weeks has overwhelmed hospitals. Three hospital systems reported that they had no intensive care unit beds available, according to KFOR-TV. At OU Health in Oklahoma City, the spike in Covid cases poses a challenge for providers treating patients with the virus but also for non-Covid patients because the hospital must take additional measures to protect them from the virus, said Dr Dale Bratzler, the hospital’s chief Covid officer. There are also 250 staff members who are unable to work because they are isolating due to the virus, he said. While Bratzler hopes that the state could reach its Omicron peak in the next week, he is concerned that the decline could be slower than in other states because only 54% of the population is fully vaccinated, whereas in New York the number is 73%. “I am much more worried that we will have a substantial increase in hospitalizations over the next few weeks. We are already stretched in our systems, and since unvaccinated people are driving hospitalizations, I am very worried about that,” said Bratzler. Still, Aaron Wendelboe, an OU epidemiologist, said that he is “a bit encouraged by what is happening in other states”. But like other epidemiologists, Wendelboe said he is not ready to declare that we won’t see another surge like Omicron because the virus continues to mutate. “I feel like I am a slower learner,” he said, “because I would not have predicted this big of a surge so quickly but Covid continues to surprise us.”Election officials in the Texas county that includes the state capital, Austin, have rejected about half of applications for mail-in ballots, following new voting restrictions brought in by Republicans. The voter identification rules have led to the rejection of about half of the 700 mail-in ballots requested in Travis county for primary elections in March, according to the county’s clerk. The denied ballots in Travis county follow a similar trend across Texas, with officials in Harris county, which includes the city of Houston, and Bexar county, which includes San Antonio, also turning down a substantial number of mail-in ballot applications. Republicans in several states have sought to impose voting restrictions in the wake of baseless allegations of voter fraud by Donald Trump, the twice-impeached former president who has struggled to accept the reality that he was beaten fairly by Joe Biden in last year’s presidential election. In Texas, state Republicans last year enacted new voting laws that require absentee voters to include their driver’s license number, state ID number or the last four digits of their social security number on their applications. Counties then have to match this information with voter profiles to approve them for a mail-in ballot. The new rules also ban drive-through and 24-hour voting and allow more access to partisan poll watchers. The Biden administration has decried the wave of voting restrictions around the country as undemocratic and the US justice department has filed a lawsuit claiming that Texas’ new laws disenfranchised eligible voters contrary to their civil rights. The Travis county clerk’s office said it had not received enough information from the Texas secretary of state to help voters provide the correct information. “Many other counties are experiencing the same high rejection rate,” the office told the Washington Post. “We have not received instructions from the state outlining what our office can do to assist voters in submitting a completed application.” The secretary of state, however, said he was “surprised” by the high rejection rate in Travis county and called on officials to revisit the ballots. “We anxiously await the results of their re-processing of these mail ballot applications,” said John Scott, a Republican. “We urge all county election officials to contact the Texas secretary of state’s office to seek advice and assistance on the correct method of processing mail-in ballot applications.” Biden has sought to confront Republicans on voting rights restrictions, stating in a speech in Atlanta last week that “they want chaos to reign. We want the people to rule.” The president lent his weight to a push to drop the filibuster in an evenly-divided US Senate to allow for a new voting rights act to pass, only to be stymied by the opposition of the centrist Democrats Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin. Civil rights leaders are continuing to call for change, however, ahead of a federal holiday on Monday to mark the birthday of Martin Luther King Jr. Members of the civil rights titan’s family will be in Arizona, another state to clamp down on voting rights, for the holiday to mobilize support for the stalled bill. Martin Luther King III, the civil rights leader’s oldest son, told the Guardian: “We’re gonna continue to push to get something done. Because to me, it’s fundamental to the foundation of our democracy. It’s those on the other side who seem to have lost the perception of what democracy is.”Mohamed Salah scored his first goal in six matches for Egypt to earn them a narrow 1-0 victory in Garoua, but the Pharoahs had VAR to thank after Guinea-Bissau’s late equaliser was controversially ruled out. Salah volleyed home from a narrow angle in the 69th minute effort to finish a flowing team move but Egypt, who lost their opening group game to Nigeria, looked to be in real trouble when Mama Baldé scored a superb equaliser for the West African minnows. Baldé cut in from the left and fired an unstoppable shot into the far corner, but the VAR ordered the referee to consult the pitchside monitor, and Baldé was penalised for a foul on an Egyptian defender. Egypt are second in Group D with three points and face neighbours Sudan in their final group game on Wednesday. Thank you very much for joining me. Until we meet again! Egypt were the better team throughout but are very lucky to come away with the win. Only Salah’s brilliance separated the sides in the end. Guinea-Bissau’s disallowed goal was a cruel blow to a team who worked very hard to stay in the game. I think the referee got it wrong on that one. 90+2 mins: Egypt play a dreadful short corner which is easily cleared but Kamal curtails the breakaway. 90 mins: Four minutes added on. Despite the lengthy VAR delay we only have an extra four minutes. 88 mins: Teixeira is sent on for Camara. 84 mins: The Egypt players are fuming that Balde was not penalised for a foul. The referee goes over to look at the monitor, it shows Balde made contact with Kamal’s neck but it is certainly not a clear and obvious error. The referee overturns the decision and awards a free-kick. I think the referee has bottled it. Egypt still lead. Holy moly! Balde gets the better of Kamal on the left touchline, before driving into the area and firing a fantastic shot across the goalkeeper and into the corner. 81 mins: Jorginho is the first to sting El-Shenawy’s palms. He receives a pass 20 yards from goal, spins and fires his shot but it is straight at the goalkeeper. 79 mins: Egypt make their own double substitution as Sherif and Fathi come on. 77 mins: Guinea-Bissau send on Leonel and Mendy to liven things up. 75 mins: Kamal dinks in a lovely cross for Zizo to volley at goal but he can only find the base of the post with his instep. 73 mins: Guinea-Bissau have not threatened the Egypt goal at any point, so they need to change something in order to get back into the match, I think. Here is the goal ... 71 mins: The goalkeeper will feel he should have done better for the goal but he was surprised how good the shot was and could not react quick enough. Can Guinea-Bissau get back into this? What a volley! Elsulya chips a ball over the defence to Salah who is moving away from goal, jumps off the ground and volleys a shot back at goal and under the goalkeeper. 67 mins: Guinea-Bissau move the ball at pace to the edge of the box but then shift it wide for a poor cross to be sent behind. 65 mins: Balde gets a rare touch of the ball in the final third, he does a lovely piece of skill to beat the defender but then barely makes a connection with his pass and it is intercepted. Down the other end, Zizo gets the ball on the edge of the box, he makes room for a shot but then whacks a rising shot over the bar. 63 mins: Egypt are not much of a threat in the opponent’s box. Why on earth did Quieroz leave Ahmed ‘Kouka’ Hassan out of the squad? Mindboggling. 61 mins: Jorginho replaces Ambri for Guinea-Bissau. 59 mins: Trezeguet and Zizo on for Egypt. Off goes Said and Mostafa. 57 mins: Cande takes control of the free-kick on the edge of the box but he curls it over. 55 mins: Guinea-Bissau cut through Egypt but the move ends with Cassama being cleared out by an Ashraf bodycheck on the end of the box. 53 mins: Kamal sprints down the right and just about gets to the ball just in time to lift a cross into the box but it is headed clear at the near post. 51 mins: Elneny dives in on Cassama and gets a booking for catching his opponent just above the ankle. 49 mins: Egypt are very much on top in the opening stages. They are patiently building up as they look to break down Guinea-Bissau. The latest attack ends with Mostafa heading Kamal’s cross well over the bar. 47 mins: Egypt have brought on Abdel-Moneim for El-Wensh. Here we go again! What happened earlier ... Guinea-Bissau have done little more than hold on in the latter stages of the half. Egypt have been on top for the entire 45 minutes but have failed to find a breakthrough. 45 mins: Two minutes added on. 44 mins: Elsulya surprises everyone by pinging a shot from 35 yards; it takes a deflection and goes just past a sprawling Mendes and the post. The resulting corner ends up with Salah in the box; he finds space to shoot and smartly Mendes turns it behind. 42 mins: Salah sends in a corner from the right for Mendes to punch clear from underneath his crossbar. The goalkeeper it very much a puncher rather than a catcher. 40 mins: Marmoush dribbles and ends up getting himself dizzy in the process, judging by him whacking a shot so wide it almost goes out for a throw. A few moments later Kamal sends in another dangerous cross from the right for Mostafa to attack but Sangante gets there first to flick it clear. 38 mins: Mostafa takes aim from 30 yards but his zipping drive is straight at the keeper. The noise in the stands has been unrelenting since kick-off. It’s nice that they’re making an effort but it is a tedious sound. Very vuvuzela-esque. 36 mins: Kamal sends in a fine cross from the right but Mostafa gets underneath it and heads the ball straight up in the air and over. 34 mins: After a VAR check for the red (it is not changed), Egypt take a tapped free-kick which is whacked into the wall. The ball eventually makes its way to Salah but he pings it high and wide from the edge of the box. 32 mins: Encada pulls down Marmoush when both chasing a ball over the top that neither will catch. The Egypt players surround the ref to demand a red card but he only shows a yellow. The Guinea-Bissau players surround Encada to call him an idiot for doing something so utterly pointless. 30 mins: Marmoush flashes a dipping shot just over the bar from about 25 yards out. A solid sign of intent from the Stuttgart man. 28 mins: Guinea-Bissau enjoy a decent spell of possession as they build up slowly before a deep cross is easily caught by El-Shenawy. 26 mins: Silva goes in the book for catching Kamal with his arm. 24 mins: Guinea-Bissau are working very hard and keeping a disciplined shape to keep Egypt at bay. When they do get the ball, they look to use it quickly and get it forward to their attackers. 22 mins: Peter Oh emails: “The population of Guinea-Bissau numbers approximately 2 million, compared to Egypt’s 102 million. “With a Mane on the pitch and a Pele on the bench, however, they may take full advantage of the power of nominative determinism to help them overcome the odds.” Thank God one of us has done some research. 20 mins: Cassama spends plenty of time on the deck after an arm in the face from Salah. He really overplayed it to get the Liverpool man in trouble but the referee has no interest in the complaints. 18 mins: Egypt hit the post again! They find their way into the box thanks to a fine chip from Salah, which is kept in thanks to a deft touch and then the ball is laid off to Mostafa who sidefoots his shot against the post. 16 mins: Egypt get a corner on the left. It is taken short and the attack ends with a foul from Marmoush, the original corner taker. What a waste. 14 mins: Egypt’s passing has been ruddy awful thus far. They have hit about five long-range passes straight out of play already. 12 mins: Ambri is taken down by Said around 20 yards goal to give Guinea-Bissau a free-kick in a dangerous area. Cande decides to take on the shot - he strikes it well, but it goes just over the bar. 10 mins: Ambri decides it is time Guinea-Bissau have a shot, so he pings one from about 30 yards out but it goes a long way over the bar. 8 mins: Kamal gets down the right but puts in a dreadful cross which goes over everyone and out for a throw-in on the left. 6 mins: Salah pings a crossfield ball straight out of play. Egypt might need something more dynamic from their skipper. 4 mins: It is quite an open game already as both teams need to win. Egypt currently look the more capable of taking advantage of the nature of the game. 2 mins: Salah is operating from the right, a change from the opener when Quieroz used him down the middle but he seems to think he might be more effective operate in the role he plays for Liverpool. He hits the post with his first involvement of the match, cutting in from the right and pinging it against the base of the goal. Peep! Peep! Peep! Here we go! Nigeria recorded a comfortable 3-1 win over Sudan in Garoua to stay top of Group D, ensuring that they progress to the knockout phase with a second successive victory. An early goal from Samuel Chukwueze provided a positive start and Taiwo Awoniyi netted their second on the stroke of half-time. It took Moses Simon just 30 seconds of the second half to add a third, but Sudan pulled a goal back with a fortuitous penalty, converted by Walieldin Khedr with 20 minutes left. This only Panutche Camara second appearance for Guinea-Bissau after making his debut against Sudan in their Afcon opener. The Plymouth man tweeted after first cap: “9 minutes 9 minutes! 01/11/2022 the most special day for me as a football player. “The day that I debut for the first time for my country, the country where I was born and raised, I just have to thank God for this moment and all of you for the messages of support thank you!” The 24-year-old has represented Dulwich Hamlet, Crawley and Plymouth in England. Liverpool are certainly missing Salah. Jonathan Wilson explains why Afcon deserves the Premier League’s respect. Plymouth’s Panutche Camara starts for Guinea-Bissau, while Liverpool’s Mohamed Salah and Arsenal’s Mohamed Elneny play for Egypt. It might be an early indication of which team is the favourite to win. Guinea Bissau: Jonas Menes, Encada, Cande, Bura, Sori Mane, Sangante, Cassama, Camara, Ambri, Piqueti, Mama Balde Egypt: El-Shenawy, Kamal, El-Wensh, Hegazi, Ayman, Elsulya, Elneny, Elsaid, Salah, Marmoush, Mostafa Some fine Afcon content from your main man Nick Ames. Egypt need a win after losing their opening Afcon fixture to Nigeria. Mohamed Salah is, needless to say, the key man for his team and he will be looking to improve on what he showed against Nigeria. Guinea-Bissau fared slightly better by earning a point against Sudan but they feel they should have taken the maximum. They have some issues relating to Covid with goalkeeper Maurice Gomis ruled out but fellow custodian Jonas Mendes is back after recovering from the virus. They will be missing coach Baciro Cande and forward Joseph Mendes after they tested positive. Egypt lost both full-backs against Nigeria, leaving Carlos Quieroz with a headache or two going into this match. On the upside, he will have Amr El-Sulaya available following his calf injury, which is a boost to the Egypt midfield. The former Manchester United assistant is under plenty of pressure already, so needs a win here. Let’s hope for a cracker.Counter-terrorism officials and police are increasingly concerned over the trajectory of the UK’s anti-vaxxer movement as it evolves towards violent extremism and the formation of US-style militias. Boris Johnson is among those receiving direct security updates on individuals prepared to “undermine national health security”. The movement’s more extreme elements are recruiting and strategising over the encrypted social media messaging app Telegram, with one UK anti-vaxxer channel asking for “men of integrity” to “fight for our children’s future”. Anti-vaxxers have targeted scores of schools and recently stormed a Covid testing site. They were led by Britain’s most visible activist, Piers Corbyn, who subsequently urged people to burn down the offices of MPs who backed new restrictions. Health experts warn that their false claims have had an impact on the vaccination programme, with Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, blaming “misinformation” for vaccine hesitancy. Among the government organisations now mobilised to monitor the anti-vaxx movement are the Home Office’s office for security and counter-terrorism (OSCT) and its research, information and communications unit (Ricu) which covers public safety issues, including counter-terrorism. Also tasked with documenting the anti-vaxx threat is the Home Office’s counter-extremism analysis and insight (CEAI) programme, whose work informs strategic and operational decisions, as does its extremism analysis unit (EAU), and the counter-disinformation unit, which is part of the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. Latest intelligence assessments describe the anti-vaxxer movement as ostensibly a conveyor belt, delivering fresh recruits to extremist groups, including racially and ethnically motivated violent extremist organisations. “It’s a growing concern and it is being monitored at the highest level,” said the Whitehall source. “No 10 is among those getting the reports direct: the PM is seeing them in his inbox. The consensus is that we didn’t win [the disinformation war] as cleanly as we need to do next time.” Of chief concern is that Britain’s anti-vaxx conspiracists are moving offline, with the UK-based Alpha Men Assemble (AMA) group organising military-style training in preparation for what it has termed a “war” on the government and its Covid policies. Recent posts from the AMA’s official Telegram channel, which has 7,000 subscribers, encourage members to adopt anti-surveillance techniques by using “burner phones” and advise people to “communicate off line” with CB and ham radios. Other posts seen by the Observer promise supporters that “you will be taught self-defence at each AMA meeting” with “professional men” and told to “aquire [sic] a black style uniform”. Ciaran O’Connor, analyst at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue (ISD), a London-based thinktank studying extremism, said AMA had many similarities with US anti-government militia groups and it was clear it hoped to create a type of paramilitary force. Last Thursday, the leader of a US extremist militia, the Oath Keepers, was charged with seditious conspiracy over the 6 January Capitol attack. The AMA is also openly seeking UK veterans, an approach that overlaps with US militia activities. Telegram messages suggest a number of ex-service personnel have already joined. One, referencing a scene from the dystopian film The Matrix, calls himself a “red pilled veteran”. Another states: “I’m English. Ex RAF. My mission statement was a ‘force for good’. I believed in that.” Another group, Veterans 4 Freedom, and which is understood to have around 200 members, has hosted Telegram conversations referring to a violent insurrection in which vaccination centres are targeted. Milo Comerford, ISD’s head of research and policy, added: “Governments across Europe and North America are struggling with the growing prominence of a set of highly ideologically eclectic movements emerging at the intersection of Covid conspiracy and extremism. “Traditional counter-extremism policy paradigms are geared towards threats from organised groups with clear political objectives. However, these loose online conspiracy movements represent a much more ‘hybridised’ challenge, not just to public safety, but also to rights and democratic institutions.” Imran Ahmed, chief executive of the Center for Countering Digital Hate, which briefs UK officials on the evolving anti-vaxx threat, said: “We’re seeing the convergence of anti-vaxxers into other fringe movements. “They’re adopting what they have learned about marketing strategies and communications, when they have sought new markets and how to converge their audiences and hybridise their ideologies, similar to the way the ‘great reset’ has replaced QAnon as the cohering conspiracy narrative for fringe elements.” Comerford cited recent data from Prevent, the UK government’s counter-extremism programme, that reveals one of the fastest-growing extremism challenges in the UK are “mixed, unclear and unstable” (MUU) threats, ideological drivers of extremist violence beyond the traditional categories of far-right and Islamist extremism. Ahmed added that the prominence of figures such as Piers Corbyn at UK anti-vaxxer and anti-lockdown rallies alongside far-right supporters articulated the coming together of traditionally opposed ideologies. Despite their attempts to quash online coronavirus disinformation, Whitehall officials are dismayed that prominent anti-vaxxers are still hosted on platforms such as Instagram, Facebook and Telegram, reaching almost 1.5 million people. The most popular use the name of David Icke, a high-profile British conspiracy theorist who promotes the false belief that coronavirus is spread by 5G. Internationally, protests and demonstrations against coronavirus lockdowns, so-called health passports and vaccine mandates have turned violent. Throughout Europe, an anti-vaxx ecosystem has prompted real-world violence. In Italy, anti-vaxxers linked up with far-right gangs to plan an attack involving explosives. Last month, German police foiled a plot that involved anti-vaxxer violent extremists allegedly targeting a high-profile politician. The Home Office has been contacted for comment.Pioneering Italian fashion designer Nino Cerruti has died at the age of 91, a source in the fashion industry confirmed to AFP on Saturday. Cerruti was one of the leading figures in men’s ready-to-wear fashion in the 20th century, with a style that was at once elegant and relaxed. His Cerruti 1881 brand became renowned and in his heyday he dressed many a Hollywood star. He died at the Vercelli hospital in the north-west region of Piedmont, where he had been admitted for a hip operation, the Italian daily Corriere della Sera reported on its website. “A giant among Italian entrepreneurs has left us,” said Gilberto Pichetto, deputy minister for economic development. Tall and slim, he always insisted he be the first to try on his creations, many of which were kept at the textile factory his grandfather founded in the northern town of Biella in 1881. “I have always dressed the same person: myself,” he once said. Born in 1930 in Biella, Cerruti dreamed of becoming a journalist. But after his father died when he was 20, he was pressured into giving up his philosophy studies to take over the family textile factory. He came to international attention in 1957 with his men’s collection Hitman, considered revolutionary at the time. Cerruti opened his first eponymous boutique a decade later in Place de la Madeleine in Paris, where he later moved his company’s offices to be close to the beating heart of fashion. In time, his fashion house expanded to include luxury lines and fragrances, grouped under his Cerruti 1881 brand. The year came from the date on which Cerruti’s grandfather founded a textile mill in Biella. He also hired future fashion icon Giorgio Armani, who worked for Cerruti for six years in the 1960s before going on to found his own famous company in 1975. Cerruti’s ranges could be seen in cinema, where he designed clothes for films including Bonnie and Clyde, Pretty Woman and Basic Instinct. Leading figures in cinema such as Michael Douglas, Sharon Stone, Julia Roberts and Harrison Ford were seen wearing Cerruti items. He later took on the role of official designer for Ferrari in the mid-1990s. His work won accolades including two Cutty Sark menswear awards, the Munich fashion week award in 1981, and an Italian Pitti Uomo award in 1986. Reflecting on changes in his more than 40 years in fashion before retiring in 2000, he told the Observer: “The environment was very different then. When I started working, it was still a traditional culture with less individuality, more social correctness. “This has quickly moved on into a society in which there is more freedom, more originality and more incorrectness. It was a national, industrial society when I began; now it’s a global communications society.” In 2000, he sold a controlling stake in the company to Fin.Part, an Italian industrial group. Less than a year later it bought the rest of the company, and Cerruti departed.Today’s Opinium poll for the Observer is grim reading for Boris Johnson and his party. Johnson’s personal approvals fall below the worst figures ever recorded by Theresa May; and his party sinks to its worst vote share since the general election, 10 points behind Labour. Majorities of practically every political and demographic group believe Johnson and his colleagues have broken the rules and lied about it, and say Johnson should resign. Until recently, the wobbly wing of the Conservative coalition looked to be better off Remainers in the South of England. Yet today’s poll adds to growing evidence that the “partygate” scandal is jeopardising the party’s support from “red wall” Leavers too. Such voters have long felt disaffected from and distrustful of a political class they felt ignored their concerns and lived by its own rules. The resentments once mobilised against the EU by the promise to “Take Back Control” now have a new target – an out of touch Downing Street team who partied while the Queen mourned. Johnson himself has shifted from the party’s biggest asset, with a Brexit-fuelled appeal separate to the Conservative brand to its biggest liability, as the revelations of Downing Street revelry in lockdown render him personally toxic with the same voters. The Conservatives may now be damned if they do and damned if they don’t. Sticking with Johnson risks further contaminating the party brand if the scandals continue and voter fury intensifies. Party veterans with memories of the 1990s will recall how hard renewal can become once their party is toxic. Yet replacing Johnson brings its own risks, as none of the front runners for the succession looks likely to replicate his unique appeal with voters otherwise suspicious of the Conservatives. The geography of the electoral battlefield intensifies this dilemma. The voters who switched to the Conservatives in 2019 were clustered in the crucial swing seats, while Labour’s post-Brexit base of young graduates and ethnic minorities was concentrated in seats the party already held. The current scandal-driven collapse could throw the same dynamic into reverse as the voters most angered by shameless rule breaking and barely credible excuse-making flock together in the battleground seats likely to decide the next election. Yet there is little comfort for Johnson’s party in the more traditional Tory strongholds either. The Conservatives are losing even more ground among the better-off, Remain-leaning voters who formed the pre-Brexit base of the party, and whose suspicions of Johnson were only over-ridden in 2019 by fear of a Corbyn government. A slump in both new and old heartlands would be a dire scenario indeed, but one which must be taken seriously in an era where partisan loyalties are weak and voters more volatile than ever. Mid-term blues are common. The Conservatives have trailed Labour badly before only to rebound at election time. But the comeback wins in 2015 and 2019 were both fuelled by recruiting nationalist Eurosceptics from Nigel Farage, and by exploiting voter distrust of unpopular Labour opponents. There is no Farage party to squeeze today, and Keir Starmer’s personal ratings, though mediocre, are better than his predecessor and improving. The Conservatives’ hopes may now rest on whether voters’ longstanding reservations about Labour outweigh their growing anger at a prime minister now widely seen as a liar and a law-breaker unfit for office. A slender reed indeed. Robert Ford is professor of political science at Manchester University.An undersea volcano erupted in spectacular fashion on Saturday near the Pacific nation of Tonga, sending tsunami waves crashing across the shore and people rushing to higher ground. Tsunami advisories were issued for other Pacific islands, the Australian east coast, Hawaii, Alaska and the US Pacific coast. There were no immediate reports of injuries or on the extent of the damage because all internet connectivity with Tonga was lost at about 6.40pm local time. The Fiji-based Islands Business news site reported that a convoy of police and military troops evacuated King Tupou VI from his palace near the shore. He was among the many residents who headed for higher ground. On Tonga, home to about 105,000 people, video posted to social media showed large waves washing ashore in coastal areas, swirling around homes, a church and other buildings. Satellite images showed a huge eruption, with a plume of ash, steam and gas rising like a mushroom above the blue Pacific waters. Authorities in the nearby island nations of Fiji and Samoa also issued warnings, telling people to avoid the shoreline due to strong currents and dangerous waves. In New Zealand, officials warned of possible storm surges from the eruption. New Zealand’s private forecaster, Weather Watch, tweeted that people as far away as Southland, the country’s southernmost region, reported hearing sonic booms from the eruption. Others reported that many boats were damaged by a tsunami that hit a marina in Whangarei, in the Northland region. Earlier, the Matangi Tonga news site reported that scientists observed massive explosions, thunder and lightning near the volcano after it started erupting early on Friday. Satellite images showed a 5km-wide plume rising into the air to about 20km. The Hunga Tonga Hunga Ha’apai volcano is about 64km north of the capital, Nuku’alofa. In late 2014 and early 2015, a series of eruptions in the area created a small new island and disrupted international air travel to the Pacific archipelago for several days. The Tonga Meteorological Services said a tsunami warning was declared for all of the archipelago, and data from the Pacific tsunami centre said waves of 80cm (2.7ft) were detected. A Twitter user identified as Dr Faka’iloatonga Taumoefolau posted video showing waves crashing ashore. “Can literally hear the volcano eruption, sounds pretty violent,” he wrote, adding in a later post: “Raining ash and tiny pebbles, darkness blanketing the sky.” The explosion of the Hunga Tonga Hunga Ha’apai volcano was the latest in a series of dramatic eruptions. Earth imaging company Planet Labs PBC had watched the island in recent days after a new volcanic vent there began erupting in late December. Satellite images captured by the company show how drastically the volcano had shaped the area, creating a growing island off Tonga. “The surface area of the island appears to have expanded by nearly 45% due to ashfall,” Planet Labs said days before the latest activity. Following Saturday’s eruption, residents in Hawaii, Alaska and along the US Pacific coast were advised to move away from the coastline to higher ground and to pay attention to specific instructions from their local emergency management officials, said Dave Snider, tsunami warning coordinator for the National Tsunami Warning Centre in Palmer, Alaska. “We don’t issue an advisory for this length of coastline as we’ve done – I’m not sure when the last time was – but it really isn’t an everyday experience,” Snider said. He said the waves slamming ashore in Hawaii were just under the criteria for a more serious tsunami warning. “It looks like everything will stay below the warning level, but it’s difficult to predict because this is a volcanic eruption, and we’re set up to measure earthquake or seismic-driven sea waves,” Snider said. Australia’s Bureau of Meteorology issued an evacuation order for Lord Howe Island, 780km north-east of Sydney, and warnings for a huge stretch of the mainland’s east coast. Sydney’s Bondi beach was evacuated overnight, and a marine threat warning remained in place on Sunday morning Australian time. The Bureau of Meteorology said a tsunami wave height of 1.27m was observed on Norfolk Island, 900 kilometres from Lord Howe Island, at 9pm AEDT and an 82cm wave was registered on Queensland’s Gold Coast at 10.54pm AEDT on Saturday. It said 1.10m-high waves were recorded at Ned’s Beach on Lord Howe Island about 11pm AEDT and a 50cm surge was observed at Hobart’s Derwent Park about 11.44pm AEDT. On Sunday morning, however, the bureau cancelled its tsunami alert for Queensland, which takes in the northern part of the country’s east coast. In New South Wales to the south, the state emergency service just urged residents to stay out of the water. It said “an initial land tsunami warning for low-lying coastal areas of Lord Howe Island has since been downgraded to a marine tsunami warning” on Sunday. Smaller waves were recorded in Hawaii, Alaska and California. Beaches and piers were closed across southern California as a precaution. The National Weather Service tweeted there were “no significant concerns about inundation”. Strong rip currents were possible, however, and officials warned people to stay out of the water.Jürgen Klopp has urged Liverpool to summon the spirit of their glorious comeback against Barcelona to score goals in the absence of Sadio Mané and Mohamed Salah, the Premier League’s top scorer. Liverpool, who mustered a solitary shot on target in their Carabao Cup stalemate with 10-man Arsenal on Thursday, will play a first league game without either forward since the Egyptian’s 2017 arrival against Brentford on Sunday. Naby Keïta, Mané and Salah, who are at the African Cup of Nations, are responsible for half of their 52 top-flight goals, but while Takumi Minamino spurned a golden chance against Arsenal, Klopp believes the responsibility to find the net does not just lie with their direct replacements as he called for everyone else to chip in and compensate for the absences. He drew inspiration from their recent past and three wins when one or more of his usual front three was missing. Divock Origi and Gini Wijnaldum shared the goals in 2019’s 4-0 Champions League semi-final thrashing of Barcelona, when they overturned a 3-0 first-leg deficit, and Klopp said: “We played one of the biggest games in our history here without Bobby [Roberto Firmino] and Mo.” Liverpool also registered their record away league victory, 7-0 at Selhurst Park in 2020, when Salah began on the bench and their biggest win at Old Trafford, 5-0 in October, when Mané was confined to an irrelevant 14-minute cameo. “We got a result at Crystal Palace and Mo didn’t start,” he said. “We won at Manchester United and Sadio didn’t start. Now both are out and that’s not cool but it’s not like: ‘You have to be like him.’ We have to find solutions, which we always do, not constantly talk about problems. It is about playing football. It doesn’t depend on who is playing, it is always about how you are playing. Everybody can step up. Everybody is absolutely invited to score a goal. We have to go through this period and make the best of it.” Without Salah and Mané, Diogo Jota and Firmino are the only Liverpool players with more than two league goals. Firmino’s four all came against promoted clubs, which may bode badly for Brentford, but he has not scored in the top flight at Anfield since 2020 as he has sacrificed himself to help his fellow forwards. Klopp denied the Brazilian has to be more selfish now. “Bobby doesn’t have to change,” he said. “Bobby is a very smart player and it is about using your teammates in the way you can use them.” There may be an added opportunity for Curtis Jones, who was a bright substitute against Arsenal but who has scored only two league goals ever. The versatile Liverpudlian’s career has stalled in a stop-start season when he has had a freak eye injury and Covid, and a concerned Klopp has met with Jones in a bid to help him kick on. “I had a long talk last week with Curtis,” he said. “He has had a tricky time. You have these kind of conversations when you are not 100% happy with the moment but he’s very young. I love the boy and his potential is incredible, so we have to find a way to show that much more often. We have to really make the next steps and make sure he fulfils the potential he has.”Hundreds of people gathered in London on Saturday for a vigil to remember Ashling Murphy, a primary school teacher murdered while she was on an afternoon run in Ireland last week, and call for an end to violence against women. Murphy, a talented amateur musician and athlete, was attacked on the banks of the Grand Canal in Tullamore, County Offaly. The area is known as Fiona’s Way, in memory of another local woman who disappeared 25 years ago, while seven months pregnant. Her death has renewed debate about women’s safety, in Ireland and beyond. “We are here to support her family, and because we could all be in the same situation,” said Caitlin O’Shea, 31, who had joined the vigil with many of her friends. The crowd gathered outside the Irish Centre in Camden, at 4pm, the time Murphy was attacked days before, to hear music and observe a minute’s silence. Organisers said they had only expected a handful of people, but hundreds blocked the street and spilled across a nearby junction. “We have come together in solidarity with women of Ireland and women of the world who are angry, distressed and heartbroken,” Anna Johnston, one of the vigil organisers, told the crowd. “Today we remember Aisling, we remember all the women who had their lives stolen through gender-based violence. We shouldn’t be here, and Ashling should be.” The killing comes barely three months after Wayne Couzens was sentenced to life imprisonment for the kidnap, rape and murder of Sarah Everard, a 33-year-old marketing executive who was abducted by the serving Met police officer while walking home, which provoked a national reckoning in the UK on male violence against women. “It’s so difficult, it happens again and again,” said Claire Fahy, who had travelled from Harrow for the vigil, with roses to lay in memory of Murphy, who was at college with some of her friends. “I’m here to show respect, and for her family.” In Ireland thousands also gathered to mourn Murphy over the weekend. Her parents, siblings and boyfriend walked to the canal on Friday evening for a candlelit vigil, and her father later performed her favourite song “Sweet Sixteen” on his banjo. On Saturday runners paused in the morning to remember the 23 year-old. The director of the National Women’s Council of Ireland, Orla O’Connor, said: “We’re angry that another woman’s life has been taken. The death of Ashling Murphy must be a watershed moment to end violence against women.” Police say they are still investigating the crime. A 40-year-old who was being questioned has been released after police said he was no longer a suspect.Here’s a round up of this evening’s events. Iran has reported its first three deaths from the Omicron variant. The country, which has been the hardest hit by Covid-19 in the Middle East, with more than 132,000 dying. Peru’s health minister has asked vaccine companies to extend expiration dates beyond the current three month period to reduce the risk of losing doses. Covax, the global scheme to share vaccines, has now delivered 1bn Covid doses. Gavi, one of the organisations which manages it alongside the World Health Organization (WHO) said in the last quarter shipments have exponentially increased. Brazil has reported another 48,520 Covid-19 cases, according to its health ministry. The figure means it has had a total of 22,975,723 infections during the pandemic with more than 659,000 deaths. France has reported another 324,580 new Covid infections, on a day of protest in the country against more restrictions for unjabbed people (see 18:11). The level is a slight drop compared to Friday’s 329,371. Another 148 people have died from the virus, bringing the death toll to 126,869. Staff working for Apple in the US will have to get a Covid-19 booster jab, according to an internal email reported by The Verge. Store and corporate employees will have four weeks to comply once they are eligible for the jab from 15 February. The fallout from parties in Downing Street continues as the Observer has been told Conservative party MPs will be ready to force UK prime minister Boris Johnson out if he tries to avoid taking responsibility. Johnson’s wife, Carrie, has been photographed breaking social distancing rules in September 2020 at a London private members club, according to the Sunday Telegraph. A new daily record number of Covid cases has been confirmed in Mexico, after it reported 47,113 new infections on Saturday. The total number of cases during the pandemic now stands at 4,349,182. A new daily record number of Covid cases has been confirmed in Mexico, after it recorded 47,113 new infections on Saturday. The country’s previous record was set on Friday, with more than 44,000 new infections. The total now stands at 4,349,182. Another 227 deaths were confirmed, bringing the official death toll during the pandemic to 301,334. Tennis star Novak Djokovic is currently fighting in court for the right to stay in Australia and defend his Australian Open title – over coronavirus rules. Australia’s immigration minister, Alex Hawke, personally cancelled the unvaccinated world No 1’s visa, arguing his presence in Australia could incite “civil unrest” and encourage others to eschew vaccination against Covid-19. My colleagues in Australia are covering the hearing, which you can follow here: Carrie Johnson, the wife of the UK prime minister Boris Johnson, has been accused of breaking social distancing rules at an exclusive London club in September 2020. The Sunday Telegraph has printed a photo of Carrie with her arms around a friend while they were out celebrating a friend’s engagement at a private members’ club in the West End. The photograph is purported to have been taken days after the prime minister, her husband, had warned people it was “critical” to follow guidance in order to stop the spread of Covid-19. Guidance at the time included remaining two metres apart from people in other households, or one metre with extra precautions including meeting outdoors. A spokesman for Carrie told the Sunday Telegraph. “Mrs Johnson was one of a group of six seated outside celebrating a friends’ engagement. “Mrs Johnson regrets the momentary lapse in judgement in briefly hugging her friend for a photograph.” Brazil has reported another 48,520 Covid-19 cases, according to its health ministry. The figure means it has had a total of 22,975,723 infections during the pandemic. The South American country recorded another 175 deaths from the virus, bringing its death toll to within 66 of 660,000. The fallout from parties in Downing Street continues as the Observer has been told Conservative party MPs will be ready to force UK prime minister Boris Johnson out if he tries to avoid taking responsibility. While most Conservative MPs say they are waiting for a report into so-called “partygate” by the senior civil servant Sue Gray before deciding the prime minister’s fate, large numbers admit privately that their minds are effectively made up and that they are merely observing “due process”. In latest polling, the Labour party has taken a 10-point lead over the Tories, with Johnson’s personals ratings also taking a hit. Read more: Covax, the global scheme to share vaccines has now delivered 1 billion Covid doses. Gavi, one of the organisations which manages it alongside the World Health Organization (WHO) said in the last quarter shipments have exponentially increased, meaning 1 billion doses had been delivered to 144 countries. The programme was launched in 2020 with the aim of delivering 2 billion shots by the end of 2021, but was stymied by wealthier states initially hoarding jabs, export restrictions and changes within its own organisation. It meant that wealthier nations initially had a larger share of doses from December 2020 when they became available. Covax began delivering jabs in February 2021. One in three have been donated by rich nations, according to Reuters. In Australia, people have been sharing their experience of self isolating amid supply shortages and shared housing. Tory Shepherd has more. Dancing to the Wiggles was one of the things that helped Clare Fletcher get through isolation with a baby to look after. Water play on the balcony, reading books and horsing around all helped too, although the Sydney mother of Dorothy (Dot, 20 months) said a week in a two-bedroom apartment was harder than she expected. Fletcher and her husband, David Dewey, (both 37, both double vaccinated) went to the US for Christmas so Dewey’s family could meet Dot. After having a “bit of a shock” at testing delays here, eventually they got hold of rapid antigen tests and found they were positive. Dot was coughing, too. Peru’s health minister has asked vaccine companies to extend expiration dates beyond the current three month period to reduce the risk of losing doses. In a telephone interview reported by Reuters on Saturday, Hernando Cevallos said it had asked one of the laboratories that supplies vaccines to deliver them with expirations of up to six months, but the lab refused. Peru has one of the highest per-capita Covid mortality rates in the world. It has signed contracts with China’s Sinopharm, US firm Moderna and Pfizer, as well as UK-based AstraZeneca. “The situation that the affected countries are facing must be understood, particularly in Latin America, due to the economic difficulties we’re going through,” Cevallos added. Three people are reported to have died from the Omicron variant of Covid-19 in Iran, according to its health ministry. Speaking to state broadcaster IRIB, spokesman Mohammad Hashemi said: “The number of patients with Omicron in the country has reached 1,162 and ... one death has been reported due to Omicron in each of the cities of Tabriz, Yazd and Shahrekord, and one critically ill patient is hospitalised in Ahvaz.” More than 132,000 people have died from the virus in the country hardest hit by the pandemic in the Middle East. 18 people died on Saturday, a 22-month low, according to Reuters. This week Iran lifted restrictions on land travel to and from neighbouring countries and some European countries, but kept a ban on arrivals from France, Britain and eight countries in southern Africa. France has reported another 324,580 new Covid infections, on a day of protest in the country against more restrictions for unjabbed people in the country (see 18:11). The level is a slight drop compared to Friday’s 329,371, but higher than the average of 297,021 in the last week. Another 148 people have died from the virus, bringing the death toll to 126,869. Staff working for Apple in the US will have to get a Covid-19 booster jab, according to an internal email. The Verge, a technology website in the US, has seen an internal email to store and corporate employees saying that once they are eligble to get the follow-up injection they will have four weeks to comply, otherwise they will need to take regular tests to enter a store or office from 15 February. The tech giant will require unvaccinated employees to provide negative tests before entering their workplace from 24 January. Another member of the UK government has criticised double standards in Downing Street as the furore around parties during lockdowns continues. A government minister has said Boris Johnson needs to “change his ways” as he recalled how, in the same month when some in No 10 were “not behaving appropriately”, he was not able to support his children before they died. Guy Opperman, the pensions minister, said Johnson should stay in his post, but was critical of the rule-breaking. Johnson has continued to face criticism, including from those on his frontbench, after admitting to attending a “bring your own booze” garden party in No 10 on 20 May 2020, which he says he understood to be a “work event”. Read more: Good evening, Harry Taylor here bringing you the latest coronavirus updates from the UK and around the world for the rest of tonight. If you have any comments, tips or suggestions – drop me an email or get in touch via Twitter @HarryTaylr where my DMs are open. Thousands of people demonstrated in cities across France on Saturday against tighter restrictions for the unvaccinated, as parliamentary wrangling continued over the draft law. In Paris, the largest single gathering set off from near the Eiffel Tower, called by fringe anti-EU presidential candidate Florian Philippot, AFP reports, while there were further gatherings in major cities like Bordeaux, Toulouse and Lille. People in the crowd chanted “no to the vaccine” or “freedom for Djokovic”, in reference to the case of world tennis number one Novak Djokovic, who travelled to compete in the Australian Open despite having chosen to remain unvaccinated and is now fighting the Australian government over the cancellation of his visa. A measure came into force on Saturday that will deactivate the government-issued “health pass” for tens of thousands of people who have not received a booster jab within seven months of their first course of shots. The pass - which grants access to public spaces like bars and restaurants - will be transformed into a “vaccine pass” under a law currently being debated in parliament, meaning proof of having the jab will be required. So far people have been able to keep their pass valid with negative coronavirus tests. Two demonstrators, Laurence and Claire, told AFP they were vaccinated “but we’re against the pass for teenagers, we don’t see why they’re being vaccinated because they aren’t in danger”. While officials had not published an estimate of nationwide turnout by late afternoon, police or local authorities counted around 1,000 each in Lyon, Nantes, Bordeaux and Marseille. Demonstrators were hoping to outstrip the 105,000 who hit the streets last weekend - some possibly mobilised by Macron’s declaration in a newspaper interview that he wanted to “piss off” the unvaccinated with new restrictions until they got inoculated. On Friday, 330,000 new Covid-19 cases were confirmed in France, with an average of almost 300,000 over the preceding week. On Saturday, France reported that the number of Covid-19 patients in intensive care units had fallen for the third day in a row, with 3,852 Covid patients in intensive care units on Saturday, 43 fewer than Friday. Infections are also increasing in Chile, with 5,241 new cases reported on average every day. That’s 51% of the peak - the highest daily average reported on 17 June - according to the Reuters Covid-19 Tracker. On Saturday, Chile posted 9,284 new daily cases, the second highest daily figure recorded since the start of the pandemic, and possibly the actual record, since a record of 13,990 cases logged on 6 June 2020 looks like a statistical anomaly due to a backlog. The average number of new infections reported each day in Chile rose by more than 4,000 over the last 3 weeks, 38% of its previous peak. Earlier this week, Chile became the first Latin American country to start administering fourth doses of Covid-19 vaccines. 88.33% of the Chilean population are fully vaccinated, according to the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Centre. Chile has recorded 1,857,764 infections and 39,355 coronavirus-related deaths since the pandemic began. Argentina on Saturday reported 139,853 new cases, its largest daily increase since the start of the pandemic. Infections in the country have now reached the highest daily average reported, with now 113,876 new infections reported on average each day. There have been 6,932,972 infections and 117,901 coronavirus-related deaths reported in the country since the pandemic began. Daily average infections in Mexico and Peru have now also peaked, with 31,278 new infections reported each day in Mexico, and 24,319 new infections reported each day in Peru, according to the Reuters Covid-19 Tracker. The Philippines has reported a new record number of daily infections for the third straight day, with 39,004 new cases reported on Saturday and number of active cases at 280,813. Metro Manila’s Covid-19 case growth rate is steadily declining however, Octa research fellow Guido David reported on Saturday. The rate dropped to 3% from 5% on Friday based on its seven-day moving average. But on Saturday the Department of Health confirmed that there is already community transmission of the Omicron variant in Metro Manila. The nationwide death toll climbed to 52,858 with 43 new fatalities, CNN Philippines reported. Israeli finance minister Avigdor Lieberman said on Saturday that he had tested positive for Covid-19 and would self-isolate but continue working from home. “I feel good and will isolate in the next few days,” Lieberman, 63, said on Twitter. Foreign minister Yair Lapid tested positive on Monday. On 10 January, Lieberman posted a photo of himself receiving a fourth Covid-19 vaccination dose. The health ministry says that a first booster increases protection seven days after the shot, but has not yet released data on the effectiveness of a fourth dose, Reuters reports. Israel began administering fourth jabs to people with compromised immune systems in late December, expanding that booster campaign to over-60s and medical staff in January. Israel hit a three-month high in severe Covid cases on Friday amid a stubborn fifth wave of infections, with 306 patients in a serious condition, Haaretz reported. According to health ministry data, 125 of the patients in a serious condition are not vaccinated at all and 32 did not receive a booster shot or are otherwise not considered fully vaccinated. Israel, with a population of 9.4 million, has confirmed about 1.7 million coronavirus cases since the start of the pandemic and more than 8,000 deaths. Italy reported 180,426 Covid-related cases on Saturday, after 186,253 the day before, the health ministry said, while the number of deaths fell to 308, from 360. A week ago, the country reported 197,535 new cases and 223 deaths. Italy has registered 140,856 deaths linked to Covid-19 since the beginning of the pandemic, the second highest toll in Europe after the UK’s and the ninth highest in the world. The UK reported 81,713 new cases of Covid-19 on Saturday, a near 33% decline on the previous week. The British government reported 287 deaths of people who had tested positive for the disease within the previous 28 days. The seven-day total for deaths was up 45% on the week before, following a record spike in infections in recent weeks. Hello, this is Jedidajah Otte again picking up from my colleague Lucy Campbell. As always, if you have anything to flag you think is relevant for our coverage, feel free to contact me on Twitter @JedySays or via email. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: The Chinese capital, Beijing, reported its first locally transmitted infection of the Omicron variant, according to state media, just weeks ahead of its staging of the Olympic Winter Games. Lab testing found “mutations specific to the Omicron variant”, Pang Xinghuo, the deputy director of the Beijing Municipal Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, told a news briefing. Officials have sealed up the infected person’s residential compound and workplace, and collected 2,430 samples for testing from people linked to the two locations, a Haidian district official said. The detection of the Omicron variant in Beijing comes as cities across the country ratchet up viral vigilance in the run-up to the Winter Olympics, due to start on 4 February. [see 2.21pm.]. Indonesia reported its highest daily Covid caseload in three months, as the government braces for a new wave driven by the Omicron variant. [see 1.31pm.]. Coronavirus cases appear to be “plateauing” in parts of the UK, a government health adviser said. Dr Susan Hopkins, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) chief medical adviser, said the number of infections were flattening in London and the south-east and east of England. Dr Hopkins told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme cases were still relatively high, with one in 15 people in England infected and one in 20 elsewhere in the UK, but that there was a “slowdown” in hospital admissions. Keir Starmer ramped up the pressure on Boris Johnson as the prime minister fights to save his job, arguing that the stream of explosive allegations of Downing Street parties has left him “unable to lead”. The Labour leader said Johnson must resign in the national interest. Story here. It comes as senior Tory MP Tobias Ellwood, the chair of the defence select committee, said that “we need leadership” and Johnson must “lead or step aside”. Andrew Bridgen, the MP for North West Leicestershire and a former Johnson ally, repeated his calls for the PM to resign. He told Sky News his position as prime minister was “untenable” and there was a “pattern of behaviour that the inner circle can do what they want and the rest of us have to do what we are told”. Tennis star Novak Djokovic is spending the night in immigration detention before seeking a court ruling to stop his deportation and keep alive his bid for a record 21st major title at the Australian Open. [see 8.47am.]. Thousands of people took to the streets of Austria’s capital on Saturday to protest against government plans to introduce mandatory Covid vaccinations for all next month, Reuters reports. “The government must go!” crowds chanted at one rally in central Vienna in what has become a routine Saturday event. Parliament is scheduled to vote next week on the issue, which has polarised the country as coronavirus cases surge. In November, the government announced a fourth national lockdown and said it would make vaccinations compulsory for all Austrians, the first European Union country to do so. A poll for Profil magazine found 51% of those surveyed oppose making jabs mandatory from February, of whom 34% were against compulsory vaccination in general and 17% wanted to wait. The survey found 45% of Austrians favoured compulsory vaccination starting in February. The poll showed chancellor Karl Nehammer’s conservatives and the opposition Social Democrats in a dead heat for first place at 25%, followed by the right-wing Freedom party, a strident critic of government policy, at 20%. The Greens, junior partner in the coalition, were even with the liberal Neos on 11%, while the vaccine-sceptical MFG party scored 6%. Health authorities have reported more than 1.4 million infections and nearly 14,000 deaths from Covid since the pandemic began. A mother whose baby was stillborn while she was seriously ill in hospital with Covid-19 has urged people to get their vaccine to save themselves the “agony” of becoming severely unwell, PA reports. Rachel, 38, whose surname was not given, was so ill she did not realise she had given birth to her son Jaxon, at 24 weeks, in August. She had gone to get her vaccine while pregnant last year, but said there had still been uncertainty from experts at that early stage in the rollout over whether expectant women should have it. She said she and her family were “devastated” by their loss, and urged people to take up the offer of jabs. She said: I did initially go to get the vaccine, but at the time the advice was not to have it. I thought I’d have the vaccine when I’d had the baby, but it wasn’t meant to be. As more data has emerged showing the vaccine to be safe, there have been repeated calls for pregnant women to get jabbed. Earlier this week, the Department of Health and Social Care cited statistics from the UK Obstetric Surveillance System which it said showed 96.3% of pregnant women admitted to hospital with Covid symptoms between May and October were unvaccinated, a third of whom required respiratory support. Rachel, from Bilston in Wolverhampton, was in a coma and in hospital for three and a half months after contracting the virus. She said she would encourage everyone eligible to get vaccinated. I would say take it - it’s a two-minute thing that can save months of agony if you end up like I was. Speaking about her loss, she said: I didn’t actually know I had given birth. I was on drugs so they wanted to tell me when I wasn’t sedated, and the obstetrician informed me a few days later. My emotions were disbelief - one minute you’re having a scan and a gender reveal, naming the baby and getting excited, and then there was this sudden loss. I was only able to see him once. Normally I’d have been able to spend a lot more time with him and to hold him. But I didn’t get to do that because of the circumstances. She said things have been difficult for her partner and her 18-year-old son. “We’re all devastated at our loss,” she said. “We were all very excited at this new life then we were left with nothing.” Rachel thanked staff at both New Cross hospital’s integrated critical care unit (ICCU) and Glenfield hospital in Leicester, for their care. The Chinese capital, Beijing, has reported its first locally transmitted infection of the Omicron variant, according to state media, just weeks ahead of its staging of the Olympic Winter Games. Lab testing found “mutations specific to the Omicron variant”, Pang Xinghuo, deputy director of the Beijing Municipal Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, told a news briefing. Officials have sealed up the infected person’s residential compound and workplace, and collected 2,430 samples for testing from people linked to the two locations, a Haidian district official said. The detection of the Omicron variant in Beijing comes as cities across the country ratchet up viral vigilance in the run-up to the Winter Olympics, due to start on 4 February. Authorities have also warned that Omicron adds to the increased risk of Covid transmission as more people travel across the country and return to China from overseas for the lunar new year holiday starting at the end of the month. Many local governments have advised residents not to leave town unnecessarily during the holiday, while dozens of international and domestic flights have been suspended. Aside from Beijing, China has reported locally transmitted infections of the Omicron variant in at least four other provinces and municipalities – in the northern city of Tianjin, the central province of Henan, the southern province of Guangdong and the northeastern province of Liaoning. However, the total number Omicron cases remains unclear. He Qinghua, an official at the National Health Commission (NHC), said in a briefing earlier on Saturday that the Omicron variant was also detected in Shanghai, without specifying the case count. He did not say whether the variant had been found locally or among travellers from overseas. He said 14 provincial areas in China had found the Omicron variant in infected individuals arriving from overseas, without naming the regions. In a statement on Saturday, the NHC reported 165 new confirmed coronavirus cases for 14 January, down from 201 a day earlier. Of the new infections, 104 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the NHC, compared with 143 a day earlier. The new locally transmitted cases were in Henan, Tianjin, Guangdong, Shaanxi and Zhejiang. China also reported 25 new asymptomatic cases for 14 January, down from 42 infections a day earlier. China classifies asymptomatic cases separately from confirmed cases. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. As of 14 January, mainland China had 104,745 confirmed cases. The actor Jamie Dornan has revealed he was stuck in hotel quarantine in Australia when he received the news that his father, Jim, had died from Covid after being admitted to hospital for a routine knee operation. Dornan, 39, most famous for the film Fifty Shades of Grey and the crime drama television series The Fall, found himself on the other side of the world with four days of his quarantine remaining when his father died last March, and was unable to travel back to his native Northern Ireland. Dornan was required to isolate in Australia before filming BBC drama The Tourist, in which he plays a man who has no idea who he is and why he has been left stranded in Australia’s outback. Losing his father made 2021 “the worst year … and the hardest” of his life, Dornan told the Sun. “It’s been a brutal time for lots of reasons and for lots of people. We’re all just trying to ride it out and come out the other side – and hope we’ve got our heads intact,” he said. A renowned obstetrician and gynaecologist at the Royal Victoria hospital in Belfast, Jim supported his son’s pursuit of an acting career and helped him navigate the loss of his mother, Lorna, from pancreatic cancer when he was 16, telling him: “Don’t let this be the thing that defines you.” “I’ve been subjected, early on in my life and now, to a lot of pain and loss,” Dornan said. The full piece is here: Jamie Dornan was stuck in Australian quarantine when dad died of Covid My colleague Clea Skopeliti has this round-up of the Conservative MPs who have so far called for Boris Johnson to resign, including the senior Tory MP Tobias Ellwood, who said this morning the prime minister must “lead or step aside”. A quick snap from Reuters reporting that Turkey will no longer require unvaccinated individuals to take a PCR test before using planes, buses or other transportation, or before attending events such as concerts, plays or movies. Citing the interior ministry, the state-owned Anadolu Agency said on Saturday that unvaccinated civil servants, private-sector employees and school personnel will also not be required to take a PCR test. Turkish Airlines CEO, Bilal Ekşi, said separately on Twitter that the carrier will not require PCR tests on domestic flights. Indonesia reported 1,054 new Covid-19 cases on Saturday, the highest daily increase in three months, as the government braces for a new wave driven by the Omicron variant. The world’s fourth most populous country, which started its vaccine booster programme for the general public this week, had a devastating second wave of infections in July, when the Delta variant was spreading rapidly. Daily case numbers dropped to around 200 by December, before rising this month amid reports of local transmission of the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. “Local transmission has been found and Jakarta has become an infection cluster,” health minister Budi Gunadi Sadikin said in a statement on Saturday. “We need to coordinate with regional government to tighten mobility and strengthen health protocols, (give) booster vaccine shots and strengthen health facilities.” He did not elaborate on what restrictions local authorities might impose. Officials usually review pandemic-related measures each Monday. Indonesia detected its first case of the more contagious Omicron variant on 16 December, with officials saying infection rates could peak in February. Although Covid infections in Denmark are at their peak currently, the number of patients in intensive care in the country fell to the lowest level in over a month on Friday. As of Friday morning, 60 Covid patients in Denmark were admitted to intensive care wards, according to official data from the State Serum Institute (SSI). The number is the lowest since 11 December. Daily totals for new infections have ranged between 22,000 and 25,000 this week after a dip in numbers last weekend, The Local reported. At the end of December, Denmark’s daily infection tallies exceeded 15,000 for the first time. According to the Reuters Covid-19 Tracker, the daily average of infections in the country is higher than ever and still rising, with currently 18,955 new infections reported on average each day. Denmark has recorded 3,468 coronavirus-related deaths since the pandemic began. According to the Danish Health Authority, as of Friday morning 80% of the population have had at least two Covid-19 vaccines, and 55.8% a third jab. Coronavirus cases appear to be “plateauing” in parts of the UK, a government health advisor has said. Dr Susan Hopkins, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) chief medical adviser, said the number of infections were flattening in London, the south-east and east of England. Dr Hopkins told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme cases were still relatively high, with one in 15 people in England infected and one in 20 elsewhere in the UK, but that there was a “slowdown” in hospital admissions. She said: We see that infections are plateauing in the community, which is good, in London and the south-east and the east of England. There are still risings, but much slower in the northern parts of the country. All of that means we are seeing a slowdown in the number of admissions to hospital but they are slowing down rather than reversing at the moment, so there are still more than 2,000 admissions to hospital across the UK, and nearly 2,500 yesterday. Hopkins said hospitals had been able to discharge patients “faster” due to Omicron being milder than previous variants but that, with around 15,500 people in hospital last week, the NHS remains under “a lot of pressure”, with some trusts “unable to do much of their elective care”, a situation exacerbated by staff absences. Hi all, I’m taking over for the next hour or so, if there’s anything you’d like to flag feel free to contact me on Twitter @JedySays or via email. Prof Linda Bauld, a professor of public health at the University of Edinburgh and chief social policy adviser to the Scottish government, has said Omicron cases appear to be “stabilising”, PA reports. She told BBC Breakfast on Saturday: The cases, if we look at them, are going down by over 20%. In fact, yesterday I think was the last day, the first day for a while we’ve had less than 100,000 cases so things seem to moving in the right direction. However, she added that the number of patients in hospitals was still “very high” and will need to wait for an accurate picture. Prof Bauld explained that while there had been a rise in Covid deaths in the last week, the figure was a “lagging indicator” and hoped they would continue to decline. She said: I think we’ve got more data this week that suggests more optimism, and let’s hope, as we continue, that trajectory will be consistent and we can feel we’ve got through what’s been a really, really tough period. Dr Chris Smith, a consultant virologist and lecturer based at Cambridge University, said current coronavirus data gives him “great cause for optimism”, PA Media reports. Smith told BBC Breakfast: The number of people who are going into intensive care or are on mechanical ventilation beds is actually dropping. It has remained flat. Now that could be because Omicron hasn’t had a chance to bite yet and there will be an uptick later. On the other hand, it may be that we are following the trajectory of South Africa, which we seem to be so far, which is they saw a much fewer translation of hospital cases into intensive care beds cases. So let’s hope that carries on. This gives me great cause for optimism because I think we are getting to a point now where thanks to vaccination, where 96% of the country we’re told now have antibodies against the coronavirus, thanks to vaccinations thanks to infection rate reinforcing our immunity we are getting to a point where the population have sufficient immunity that we can fend off the infection when we get it much better than we could previously. So we don’t see that strong connection of cases turning into consequences. If it is a political truism that a cabinet is all smiles when the ruling party is well ahead in the polls, it is equally the case that nothing highlights ministerial ambitions more than a vulnerable prime minister, write Peter Walker and Heather Stewart. With Boris Johnson on the ropes over lockdown party allegations, all eyes are now on his cabinet colleagues and other senior Tories. Most have offered him lukewarm support – so far. But will any break cover over the weekend, particularly if there are any new revelations? From Rishi Sunak to Michael Gove, the Guardian looks at the senior Tories to watch: Which of Johnson’s colleagues will be first to publicly withdraw support? The southern Chinese city of Zhuhai suspended public bus routes on Saturday after announcing it had detected at least seven cases of the Omicron variant and warning residents not to leave the city, AFP reports. The coastal city of Zhuhai, which borders the gambling hub Macau, said late on Friday that Omicron had been detected in one mildly ill and six asymptomatic patients, after launching mass testing due to a case in a neighbouring city. China is battling a spate of coronavirus outbreaks, including several from the highly transmissible Omicron variant, as the country steps up vigilance against the virus ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics next month. Millions of people across the country have been ordered to stay at home in recent weeks, with scores of domestic flights cancelled and factories shut down. Zhuhai officials have asked residents to avoid leaving the city “unless necessary”, with those who are required to show negative Covid test results within the past 24 hours. The city had launched mass testing for its population of 2.4 million people on Friday after a Covid case was detected in neighbouring Zhongshan earlier in the week. Businesses including beauty salons, card rooms, gyms and cinemas were ordered to close on Thursday, with officials announcing the suspension of public bus routes in parts of the city. China has kept Covid cases relatively low throughout the pandemic with its zero-tolerance strategy of immediately ordering mass testing and strict lockdowns when infections are detected. But the fast-spreading Omicron has tested that strategy in recent weeks, appearing in the port city of Tianjin close to Beijing before spreading to the central city of Anyang. National Health Commission spokesman Mi Feng told reporters on Saturday that the country faced a “twofold challenge” from both the Delta and Omicron variants. He warned that regions that had not yet seen outbreaks “must not relax” their prevention measures and “strengthen risk auditing”. The country reported 104 domestically transmitted Covid cases on Saturday. Keir Starmer has ramped up the pressure on Boris Johnson as the prime minister fights to save his job, arguing that the stream of explosive allegations of Downing Street parties has left him “unable to lead”. In a speech to the Fabian Society conference, the Labour leader accused the Conservatives of running the NHS into the ground because they are “too preoccupied defending his rule breaking”. Stressing that “waiting times were the shortest on record” when Labour left government 12 years ago, he said: Rather than concentrating on getting through the pandemic and bringing down waiting lists, this self-indulgent Tory party is instead having a fight about a leader who they should have known from the start is not fit for office. We are witnessing the broken spectacle of a prime minister mired in deceit and deception, unable to lead. The opposition is not alone in calling for Johnson to step down over rule-breaking following his public apology to the Queen on Friday for the parties that took place on the eve of her husband’s funeral. On Saturday Tobias Ellwood, the chair of the defence select committee, said that “we need leadership” and Johnson must “lead or step aside”. And Andrew Bridgen, the MP for North West Leicestershire and a former Johnson ally, repeated his calls for the PM to resign. He told Sky News his position as prime minister was “untenable” and there was a “pattern of behaviour that the inner circle can do what they want and the rest of us have to what we are told”. The prime minister needs to do the honourable thing and call it a day for the good of the country. The full story is here: Boris Johnson ‘mired in deceit’ and unable to lead, says Keir Starmer The Conservative backbencher Andrew Bridgen has said Boris Johnson has “lost the moral authority to lead” after presiding over a culture in No 10 of “one rule for them and the rest of us do as we’re told”, PA Media reports. The North West Leicestershire MP, who became the fifth Tory MP to publicly call for Johnson’s resignation this week, told BBC Breakfast: [This is] not about one isolated incident, what we are seeing with these continued revelations coming out about what’s been going on at No 10 is a pattern of behaviour, and ultimately the buck stops with Boris Johnson. What I’ve seen, to me it looks like Boris Johnson and those in his inner circle can do what they want and the rest of us have to do as we are told - that’s not acceptable to me, it is not acceptable to my constituents or, I believe, most people in the country. And what that certainly isn’t is ‘levelling up’ in my book. Bridgen said he did “not need to see what Sue Gray says to know that for me Boris Johnson has lost the moral authority to lead the country”. Asked about reports of “wine-time Friday” sessions in Downing Street during the lockdown months [see 8.37am.], the Tory said the claims were a “surprise” to him, adding: It doesn’t matter, quite honestly, if the prime minister was present or not present - ultimately, he is responsible for what goes on in government, he is responsible for the culture in No 10 and what we’re seeing is a culture where it is one rule for them and the rest of us do as we’re told, and that’s just not acceptable. I’m not sure that any apology is going to put that right. A new Covid-19 vaccine is being developed by Texas scientists using a decades-old conventional method that will make the production and distribution cheaper and more accessible for countries most affected by the pandemic and where new variants are likely to originate due to low inoculation rates. The team, led by Drs Peter Hotez and Maria Bottazzi from the Texas Children’s Hospital Center for Vaccine Development at Baylor College of Medicine, has been developing vaccine prototypes for Sars and Mers since 2011, which they reconstructed to create the new Covid vaccine, dubbed Corbevax, or “the world’s Covid-19 vaccine”. Although more than 60 other vaccines are in development using the same technology, Bottazzi said their vaccine is unique because they do not intend to patent it, allowing anyone with the capacity to reproduce it. “Pretty much anybody that can make hepatitis B vaccines or has the capacity to produce microbial-based protein like bacteria or yeast, can replicate what we do,” Bottazzi said. Patent wars over mRNA vaccines have recently heated up. Moderna and the National Institutes of Health are in a dispute over who should get credit for specific discoveries that led to a Covid-19 vaccine which has been delivered to more than 73 million Americans. If Moderna is found to have infringed on the federal government’s patent, it could be forced to pay more than $1bn. At the same time, activists have called for Pfizer and Moderna to share the technology and knowhow for producing their vaccines, including taking the fight to the World Trade Organization. Low-income countries, which have few vaccine research and production facilities, have vaccinated just one in nine people, according to the World Health Organization. The US has fully vaccinated 67% of the population and provided a third vaccine dose to more than one-third. Corbevax’s clinical trial data has yet to be released due to resource constraints, but Texas Children’s hospital said the vaccine was over 90% effective against the original Covid-19 strain and over 80% effective against the Delta variant. The vaccine’s efficacy against the Omicron variant is currently being tested. The process to create the vaccine involves the use of yeast – the same method by which hepatitis B vaccines are produced. Read the full story here: Texas scientists’ new Covid-19 vaccine is cheaper, easier to make and patent-free Boris Johnson has been warned by cabinet ministers that he is in the “last chance saloon” after Downing Street had to apologise to the Queen over parties held at No 10 on the eve of Prince Philip’s funeral, the Times (paywall) reports. The paper also reports that Sue Gray, the senior civil servant overseeing an investigation into the Whitehall partygate allegations, felt “completely blind-sided” by the revelations and felt Downing Street staff were hiding information about parties held there. Cabinet ministers who publicly backed Johnson after his apology on Wednesday told the paper that it was increasingly difficult to justify their support for him or to defend him. “This is the last chance saloon. More revelations of parties, and a pummelling at the local elections, and the party will rise up,” said one. “If Boris is going to survive, like an alcoholic he has to admit that he has a problem and go into serious therapy. It’s beyond my comprehension how stupid they can be.” Another told the Times the prime minister must take the “opportunity” to clear out his team and reset his government. “He needs a complete clear-out,” they said. “He’s being served very poorly.” Three cabinet ministers said that Dan Rosenfield, his chief of staff, needed to go, the paper also reported. As the United States’s Covid peak seems to near, with hospitalisations and cases seemingly subsiding in states with high vaccination rates, experts have cautioned against letting our guard down and celebrating too soon. Eric Berger has this report: As Covid-19 peak seems to near, experts warn against letting guard down The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on Friday revised its guidance on wearing masks to protect against Covid, recommending people use “the most protective mask you can” while stopping short of advocating nationwide usage of N95 respirators, Reuters reports. The CDC, an agency critics have accused of offering shifting and confusing guidance amid the pandemic, clarified on its website “that people can choose respirators such as N95s and KN95s, including removing concerns related to supply shortages for N95s”. Americans should “wear the most protective mask you can that fits well and that you will wear consistently”, the CDC added. The United States leads the world in Covid deaths - roughly 850,000 - even as it battles a surge of cases involving the fast-spreading Omicron variant. Complicating matters is the refusal of some Americans to get vaccinated. The president, Joe Biden, said on Thursday that the federal government planned to make “high-quality masks” available to Americans for free. In another step, the White House on Friday said the government will begin shipping 500 million Covid tests to Americans later this month without charge. The CDC said it wants to encourage Americans to wear masks rather than push them to wear the highest-grade face protection, but also explicitly said that respirators provide the best level of protection. It said that “loosely woven cloth products provide the least protection”. “Masking is a critical public health tool to prevent the spread of Covid-19, and it is important to remember that any mask is better than no mask,” the CDC added. The CDC said the revised recommendations “reflect the science on masking, including what we have learned in the past two years”, since the start of the pandemic. More Americans have been recently opting for higher-grade protection amid the surge in cases. The US is tallying about 1,800 Covid deaths and 780,000 new infections daily - the most in the world - as well as record levels of hospitalised patients. The CDC last May announced that fully vaccinated people could shed their face coverings, as Covid cases were then on the decline. But in July, the CDC said fully vaccinated people should wear masks in indoor public places in regions where Covid was spreading rapidly. The CDC said this week 99.5% of US counties currently are covered by the mask recommendation. Los Angeles County, the nation’s most populous, on Monday will require some employers to provide “medical-grade” masks - surgical masks, KF94, KN95s or N95s - to workers at high risk of Covid infection on the job. Masks remain polarising. Biden, a Democrat, this week again urged people to wear masks and noted that about a third of Americans report they do not wear a mask at all. Many Republican-leaning states have no mask requirements. Some Democratic-governed states such as California have reimposed indoor mask mandates. Tennis star Novak Djokovic will spend Saturday night in immigration detention before seeking a court ruling to stop his deportation and keep alive his bid for a record 21st major title at the Australian Open, Reuters reports. The world number one arrived at Melbourne’s Park Hotel, the same immigration detention hotel where he was held last week, just before 3.30pm, according to a Reuters witness. About a dozen refugee activists chanted “stop the torture... let them out” as Djokovic and Border Force guards drove into the underground garage of the hotel, which is also being used to hold 33 asylum seekers and travellers in Covid quarantine. A man cycling past the hotel shouted: “Go home, Novak!” It will be a second stint in detention for Djokovic, who spent his first four nights in Australia in hotel detention before a judge freed him on Monday after finding a decision to cancel his visa on arrival had been unreasonable. The immigration minister, Alex Hawke, decided to cancel the Serbian star’s visa because his presence could foster opposition to Covid vaccination in Australia, court documents released after an initial hearing in the Federal Court on Saturday showed. Hawke said in a letter to Djokovic and his legal team: Although I ... accept that Mr Djokovic poses a negligible individual risk of transmitting Covid-19 to other persons, I nonetheless consider that his presence may be a risk to the health of the Australian community. This explanation in Djokovic’s affidavit is more detailed than the brief statement Hawke released on Friday, which said his decision was based on “health and good order grounds”. Justice David O’Callaghan set a hearing on Djokovic’s appeal for 9.30am on Sunday, with the question of whether it would be held before a single judge or a full court still to be determined. Djokovic’s lawyers said on Friday they would argue deportation would only further fan anti-vaccine sentiment and would be as much a threat to disorder and public health as letting him stay and exempting him from Australia’s requirement that all visitors be vaccinated. A court order on Friday night had required the 34-year-old to surrender to immigration officials for an interview on Saturday morning, before he would be taken to his lawyers’ officers for the preliminary hearing. After leaving his lawyers, he was to be taken into immigration detention. Border Force and the immigration minister’s office did not immediately respond to requests for comment on whether Djokovic had attended the interview. The government has said it would not deport Djokovic until his appeal has been heard. Djokovic wants to be able defend his title at the Australian Open, which begins on Monday. Related: Novak Djokovic visa: Australian minister Alex Hawke says risk of ‘civil unrest’ behind cancellation Australia has most likely neared the peak of its Omicron wave, authorities said on Saturday, but warned daily infections would linger near record levels for “the next few weeks” after more than 100,000 cases were reported for a fourth straight day. Reuters reports that having limited the spread of Covid through tough restrictions earlier in the pandemic, Australia is now suffering record caseloads from the Omicron variant. Most parts of the country have shifted to a strategy of living with the virus as they reached higher vaccination rates. More than 1.2 million infections have been recorded this year, compared with 200,000 for 2020 and 2021 combined. “We are not through it yet and I think there are still going to be large number of cases diagnosed in Australia over the next few weeks,” the chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, told a news briefing, referring to the Omicron outbreak. But modelling from some states “leads me to believe that we are close to the peak of this wave in terms of cases,” he said. Infections have dipped over the last three days while the rise in hospitalisations in worst-hit New South Wales, Australia’s most populous state, has slowed slightly, official data showed. Most states are battling record hospitalisations during the Omicron wave, with authorities saying unvaccinated younger people forming a “significant number” of admissions in Australia. “We are seeing an epidemic of the unvaccinated in young people, we are seeing that in intensive care admissions,” Kelly said. Australia is among the most heavily vaccinated countries against Covid, with more than 92% of people above 16 double-dosed, and with a booster drive picking up pace. Boris Johnson is under mounting pressure amid fresh allegations in the “partygate” scandal that has engulfed No 10 after it was claimed that staff in Downing Street have held regular drinking sessions throughout the pandemic known as “wine-time Fridays”. The Daily Mirror reported that the prime minister often witnessed the events and encouraged aides to “let off steam”, even when indoor mixing was prohibited under lockdown rules. “Wine-time Fridays”, a tradition that predated the pandemic but continued throughout it, were scheduled into the electronic calendars of around 50 No 10 staff between 4pm and 7pm every week, the paper reported. Number 10 did not deny the claims but pointed to Sue Gray’s ongoing Whitehall investigation into multiple allegations of Covid breaches in Downing Street and other government buildings during the pandemic. The paper published a photo of what it reported was a £142 drinks fridge being delivered through Downing Street’s back entrance on 11 December 2020. At this time, London was under tier 2 restrictions, which banned indoor mixing, as well as outdoor socialising with more than six people from different households. The Mirror reported that the Friday gatherings occasionally went on as late as midnight, with up to two dozen aides drinking wine and beer and playing games such as Pictionary. It also claimed Johnson was present at an event on 13 November 2020, when England was in its second national lockdown. One source told the paper: “Boris used to stop by for a chat while they had a drink. It was on the way up to his flat and the door was usually open. He knew about it and encouraged it.” It follows the toughest week of Johnson’s premiership, bookended by No 10 issuing an apology to the Queen on Friday over two parties held in Downing Street on the eve of Prince Philip’s socially distanced funeral. Gray is expected to publish the findings of her investigation into lockdown-busting parties in Westminster next week at the earliest. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_