Scientists have developed a blood test that could help detect cancer in people with nonspecific symptoms such as unexplained weight loss or fatigue. If validated, the test could enable cancer patients to be identified earlier, when they are more likely to respond to treatment, and help flag up who could benefit from early access to drugs designed to tackle metastatic cancer. The test can also tell if the disease has spread. There is currently no clear route through which someone with nonspecific symptoms that could be cancer is referred for further investigation. NHS rapid diagnostic centres are being set up to support faster and earlier cancer diagnosis, but often patients will be examined by their GP, and if they can’t identify an obvious cause of their symptoms then the patient will simply be told to come back if they get worse. “The problem we’ve had in the past is that if they do have cancer, that cancer is growing all the time, and when they come back the cancers are often quite advanced,” said Dr James Larkin, of the University of Oxford, who was involved in the research. Although it is difficult to know precisely how many individuals fall into this category, “it is likely to be tens of thousands of patients across the UK,” Larkin said. “We’re hoping to capture these patients when they come to the GP, to give them an immediate referral option. “The moment you can say ‘you have a cancer’, it provides a strong incentive to send that patient for an imaging investigation to see if you can find that cancer.” The new test utilises a technology called nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, which profiles levels of small molecules called metabolites in the blood. Healthy individuals have different metabolic “fingerprints” to those with localised or metastatic cancer. In a study published in the journal Clinical Cancer Research, Larkin and colleagues analysed samples from 300 patients with nonspecific but concerning symptoms of cancer, such as fatigue and weight loss, and found that the test correctly detected cancer in 19 out of every 20 of those with the disease. It cannot yet pinpoint the type of tumour they have, but this is the ultimate goal. The test could also distinguish between patients with localised or metastatic cancer with 94% accuracy, making this the first blood test to be able to detect if a person’s cancer has spread without knowing type of tumour they have. “Such information changes how you treat patients,” Larkin said. For instance, certain immunotherapies have been shown to increase survival rates among people with metastatic cancer, but they are expensive and have side-effects. “We don’t want to prescribe them to everyone, but there are patients out there that would absolutely benefit if you could only identify them early enough. A different type of blood test that aims to detect circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) is being trialled in the NHS, but metabolic changes may be detectable earlier, while ctDNA technology also requires you to know which mutations to look for when finding a tumour. The next step is to confirm the accuracy of the test in 2,000 to 3000 British patients with nonspecific symptoms, which Larkin hopes could happen within the next two years. This data would then be submitted to national regulatory agencies responsible for authorising such tests.Late Monday, Verizon and AT&amp;T agreed to a two-week delay rolling out their new 5G technology. The technology was slated to launch on Wednesday, but in response to fears that the 5G service will impair airline safety – and amid threats from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to ground or divert flights at a time when the travel industry is already playing catch-up from recent weather and Covid-related flight disruptions – the telecom companies agreed to a pause. Here’s what you need to know about the controversy: What is 5G? 5G is the newest generation of cellular network, following 4G, which was introduced in late 2009 and is used on most US cellphones today. Nearly every 10 years since 1980, a new generation network has arrived, offering faster speeds and expanded capabilities. At the simplest level, 1G allowed for phone calls, 2G brought messaging, and 3G provided internet access. Today, on 4G, users can download apps, stream video, and more, with relative ease and speed. The fifth generation is expected to offer new levels of speed – making it possible, for example, to download a movie to one’s phone in seconds – and allow more devices to be connected to a network at once. The latter is increasingly important in our crowded cellular landscape. (Ever been in a concert or stadium unable to send messages?) “Those types of data rates could enable virtual reality applications or autonomous driving cars,” Harish Krishnaswamy, an associate professor of electrical engineering at Columbia University, told Live Science. Why is the US airline industry concerned about 5G? To execute the upgrade, cellular networks plan to move operations on to a new band of radio frequencies called the C-Band. Last year, Verizon and AT&amp;T spent a combined $67bn acquiring the C-Band spectrum licenses needed to upgrade their networks to 5G, according to Forbes. But some aircraft regulators worry that planes’ radio altimeters, which measure how far above ground a plane is to help pilots land their crafts in low-visibility situations and also operate on C-Band frequencies, could be disturbed by 5G. Can 5G and the aviation industry coexist? The Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the FAA and telecom carriers all agree that 5G and airline travel can exist together. In fact, they already do in nearly 40 countries. The telecom companies have pointed out that there have not been any accidents in other countries where 5G is operational and American airlines regularly fly to those countries. The FAA, too, has said that “5G and aviation have safely coexisted in other countries”. That’s because in those regions, “power levels have been reduced around airports and the industries have worked together prior to deployment”, the agency said in a 3 January statement. So what’s the problem in the US? The discussions over how the transition should take place in the US, however, have been brewing for years and intensified in recent months. Verizon and AT&amp;T had initially planned to launch 5G in December and until last week, appeared unwilling to postpone it further. But amid pushes from both Steve Dickson, the head of the FAA, and the transportation secretary, Pete Buttigieg, to delay the rollout to allow for further coordination, they relented on Monday. Both companies have proposed several measures to mitigate the possible impact of the switch to 5G, including reducing the strength of their 5G around airports and helipads, and operating 5G service at lower power levels nationwide for the first six months. The FAA has thanked the companies for those proposals, but said the pause remained necessary to create “additional time and space to reduce flight disruptions associated with this 5G deployment”. It remains unclear what specific actions will be taken in the two-week period. “At Secretary Buttigieg’s request, we have voluntarily agreed to one additional two-week delay of our deployment of C-Band 5G services,” an AT&amp;T spokesperson said by email. “We also remain committed to the six-month protection zone mitigations we outlined in our letter. We know aviation safety and 5G can coexist and we are confident further collaboration and technical assessment will allay any issues.” “While the airline industry faces many challenges, 5G is not one of them,” Hans Vestberg, chairman and CEO of Verizon, said in an email to employees today. “In November, we agreed to pause activation until January to give the FAA more time for their analysis. We also voluntarily offered to implement a number of temporary proactive protective measures, including reducing 5G power levels near airports and directing 5G nodes away from airports … Despite our efforts and the overwhelming scientific data, the FAA still has not resolved all of its questions.”In an open letter, the Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Jalen Hurts has called on the NFL and the Washington Football Team to improve safety measures at FedExField after a railing collapsed at the stadium on Sunday. In a video that circulated on social media, Hurts was seen walking off the field after the game in Landover, Maryland. Visiting Eagles fans reaching out for a high five were sent tumbling to the ground after a barrier gave way. Hurts has now asked “what follow-up action is being considered” after the incident. “Many individuals, including fans, media personnel, and myself, were placed in a dangerous situation when portions of the FedExField tunnel collapsed,” Hurts wrote. “Although I was able to prevent the barrier from crashing onto me, that was not the same for others who could be suffering from lingering injuries.” “Through the initial shock, my first reaction was to assist those involved,” the 23-year-old added. “I understand the severity of what happened and am extremely concerned for the well-being of the fans and media.” “I would like to know what safeguards the NFL and the Washington Football Team are implementing to prevent this from ever occurring in the future,” Hurts continued. “What happened on Sunday put both fans and players unnecessarily at risk.” A spokesperson for Washington has said the team president, Jason Wright, has responded to Hurts’ letter. In a statement released after the incident took place, the team said: “to our knowledge, everyone involved was offered onsite medical evaluation and left the stadium of their own accord. “We’re very glad no one appears to have been seriously injured,” the statement added. “The safety of our fans and guests is of the utmost importance and we are looking into what occurred.” However, some of the fans involved have disputed WFT’s claim that they were offered a medical evaluation. On Tuesday, the NFL did not immediately respond to a request for comment from Reuters after Hurts’ letter. The Eagles won Sunday’s game at FedExField by 20-16, helping clinch their spot in the playoffs.Joe Biden met with the White House Covid-19 response team amid the surge from the Omicron variant, and urged Americans get vaccinated. “There’s no excuse for anyone being unvaccinated,” he said and emphasized the importance of schools remaining open. Meanwhile, more than 1.08 million people across the country tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday – a global daily record. And Greg Abbott, the governor of Texas, has announced that he will sue the Biden administration over the vaccine mandate for the National Guard. Senator Tim Kaine was stuck in his car on Interstate 95 in Virginia for 27 hours, one of the thousands stranded by yesterday’s snowstorm. The snow delays caused the Senate to cancel votes for the second day in a row, with senators unable to reach Washington because of canceled flights. The 6 January committee is seeking information from Fox News’s Sean Hannity. The House select committee investigating the 6 January insurrection last month revealed that Hannity had messaged former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows during the riot at the Capitol. Donald Trump has canceled a scheduled press conference on 6 January, blaming the House committee investigating the insurrection.“In light of the total bias and dishonesty of the January 6th Unselect Committee of Democrats, two failed Republicans, and the Fake News Media, I am canceling the January 6th Press Conference at Mar-a-Lago,” Trump said. – Vivian Ho, Maanvi Singh, Guardian staff Donald Trump has canceled a scheduled press conference on 6 January, blaming the House committee investigating the insurrection. “In light of the total bias and dishonesty of the January 6th Unselect Committee of Democrats, two failed Republicans, and the Fake News Media, I am canceling the January 6th Press Conference at Mar-a-Lago,” Trump said. The cancellation comes as the House select committee investigating the attack on the US Capitol on 6 January 2021 homes in on Trump’s inner circle, today requesting the cooperation of Trump adviser and Fox News host, Sean Hannity. As Republicans spread a revisionist history of the insurrection, its perpetrators are celebrated and even elected to public office. Nick Robins-Early reports: It’s been one year since a mob of Donald Trump supporters stormed the United States Capitol, as the “stop the steal” rally demanding to overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election turned into a deadly insurrection. After the attack, the Department of Justice and Federal Bureau of Investigation mobilized one of the largest criminal investigations in American history. Those efforts have so far resulted in more than 700 federal cases and counting, with more suspects expected to be charged. But for all that we have learned about the insurrection and the people who took part in it, crucial questions remain about the fallout of the attack for the far right and what it means to hold its perpetrators accountable. Federal prosecutors want the arrests and convictions of those responsible to act as a deterrent against extremism and future attempts to undermine democracy, experts say, but despite more than 150 guilty pleas so far, the legacy of 6 January is already contentious. A judicial debate has emerged over the appropriate sentencing for rioters, while trials in the coming months will test whether prosecutors can secure convictions on more serious charges facing far-right extremists. The fundamental understanding of what happened on 6 January is also being increasingly contested, as Republican lawmakers and rightwing media attempt to whitewash the events and reframe the insurrection as an act of justified political protest. More than any court case, researchers say, this revisionist narrative may have long-lasting implications for the far right and for political violence in America. Read more: The 6 January committee is seeking information from Fox News’s Sean Hannity, the group’s chair Bennie Thompson and vice-chair Liz Cheney have announced. In a letter to Hannity, they wrote: The Select Committee now has information in its possession, as outlined in part below, indicating that you had advance knowledge regarding President Trump’s and his legal team’s planning for January 6th. It also appears that you were expressing concerns and providing advice to the President and certain White House staff regarding that planning. You also had relevant communications while the riot was underway, and in the days thereafter. These communications make you a fact witness in our investigation. The House select committee investigating the 6 January insurrection last month revealed that Hannity had messaged former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows during the riot at the Capitol. Hannity has been a major supporter of Trump on his Fox show, as well as an adviser to the former president. During the attack on the Capitol, records show that Hannity texted Meadows: “Can he make a statement? Ask people to leave the Capitol?” But the anchor has never publicly blamed Trump for riling up the crowd that went on to riot. Alexandra Villarreal and Samantha Lock report: More than 1.08 million people across the country tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday – a global daily record, data from Johns Hopkins University revealed. The deluge of infections is forcing government officials, employers and citizens to weigh their risk tolerance as Americans enter year three of a devastating pandemic that has upended lives and livelihoods. Although evidence suggests Omicron is generally more mild and less lethal than other strains, the volume of new cases has been followed by an increase in hospitalizations, threatening to once again overwhelm beleaguered hospitals. Medical experts are sounding the alarm that the Omicron wave could be particularly harmful to children, as pediatric admissions of patients with Covid-19 reach record highs. “This narrative that it’s just a mild virus is not accurate,” Peter Hotez, dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine and professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine, told CNN. “We’ve just done a terrible job vaccinating our kids across the country. So even though there’s a lot of happy talk about the Omicron variant, less severe disease, when you add up all the factors … we’ve got a very serious situation facing us in this country, especially for the kids.” Monday’s number of new cases was almost double the previous record of about 590,000, set four days before. While delays in reporting over the holiday period may have played a role, the new record could be a significant underestimate. Many Americans are relying on tests taken at home with results not reported to authorities. Amid the deepening crisis, schools and businesses are facing difficult decisions. Classrooms in cities including Detroit, Los Angeles, Newark, Milwaukee, Cleveland and Atlanta are closing as infections soar, opting for virtual learning or delaying students’ return. Read more: Joe Biden met with the White House Covid-19 response team amid the surge from the Omicron variant, and had strong words for the American people: “There’s no excuse for anyone being unvaccinated.” He said he supported schools staying open, even for the children who cannot be vaccinated, because the ones getting vaccinated should provide protection enough to keep them safe. A record 4.5 million Americans quit or left their jobs in the month of November, yet another sign of the impact the pandemic has had on the economy. Greg Abbott, the governor of Texas, has announced that he will sue the Biden administration over the vaccine mandate for the National Guard. Senator Tim Kaine was stuck in his car on the Interstate 95 in Virginia for 27 hours, one of thousands stranded by yesterday’s snowstorm. The snow delays caused the Senate to cancel votes for a second day in a row, with senators unable to reach Washington because of canceled flights. In a surprise to no one, Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell has objections to the Democrats and their plan to change the filibuster rules. Reminder that the filibuster is a much-beloved parliamentarian tactic, used often by the Republicans to stymie the Democrats’ legislation. Senate Republicans used it repeatedly to block legislation on voter rights protections, which is why Democrats are looking to change it now – before or on 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, according to senate majority leader Chuck Schumer. A Capitol police officer and two Metropolitan police officers who responded to the 6 January attack on the US Capitol have sued former president Donald Trump, seeking damages for their physical and emotional injuries, Politico is reporting. With the one-year anniversary approaching, Capitol police officer Marcus Moore, a 10-year veteran of the force, is one of hundreds of officers who say they were traumatized by the attack and blame Trump for the actions of the rioters. He said the explosions inside and outside the building left him with tinnitus. Bobby Tabron and DeDivine Carter, the Metropolitan police officers, said they were assaulted with poles, pepper spray and other projectiles while responding to the west front of the Capitol. “Officer Tabron was fighting for his life and felt certain he would not survive to make it home alive to his wife or see his family again,” the lawsuit reads. “He wondered when gunfire would erupt and how such a battle, if started, would end.” This Friday, the supreme court is holding a special session over the Biden administration’s nationwide Covid-19 vaccine mandate for large businesses. Thankfully it appears many others had similar questions about the awful situation that Senator Tim Kaine and thousands of others found themselves in on Interstate 95 in Virginia after yesterday’s snowstorm left them stranded. Update! Senator Tim Kaine is still stuck in traffic, 27 hours after hitting the road in the middle of yesterday’s snowstorm, and with that the Senate has canceled votes for a second day in a row because of snow delays. But more on Tim Kaine - we have questions. What is happening out there? How is his car still running? How does his phone still have battery? What is he doing about bathroom breaks? Has he slept? Does he have heat? Does he have car snacks? On Sunday, defense secretary Lloyd Austin said he tested positive for coronavirus. The Pentagon provided an update today, saying he continues to exhibit mild symptoms as he works from home: “The president absolutely wants to get Build back Better done and is committed to getting Build Back Better done,” said White House press secretary Jen Psaki. But she would not answer whether Joe Biden was going to negotiate on the child tax credit, one of the main points that moderate senator Joe Manchin refuses to be swayed on - she said the president was having discussions with a number of senators about the Build Back Better Act. White House press secretary Jen Psaki has taken the podium for the White House press briefing. She said we could expect Joe Biden to speak of the historical significance of 6 January on the anniversary later this week, of how it was an “unprecedented assault on our democracy” - and the work that must still be done to reject the hatred and lies that allowed the attack to take place. Joe Biden urged Americans today to once again get vaccinated against Covid-19 and get their booster shots, saying that at this point in time there’s “no excuse for anyone being unvaccinated”. “We have in hand all the vaccines we need to get every American fully vaccinated, including the booster shot,” he said. “There’s no excuse for anyone being unvaccinated. This continues to be a pandemic of the unvaccinated so we need to make more progress.” “Folks, I know we’re all tired and frustrated by the pandemic,” Joe Biden ended his address. “We’re going to get through this. We have the tools to protect people from severe illness from Omicron if people use the tools.” Biden once again urged those who were eligible to get vaccinated and boosted. “There’s a lot to be hopeful for in 2022,” he said. “For God’s sake, please take advantage of what’s available.” Joe Biden admitted that coronavirus testing has been frustrating, but “we’re making improvements”. “The last two weeks, we set up federal testing sites all over the country and we’re adding more each and every day,” he said. He pushed for Americans to pick up free at-home tests and to sign up for programs to have at-home tests sent to their homes for free. Joe Biden briefly addressed the public ahead of his meeting with the White House Covid-19 response team. He said schools should remain open because at this point, experts don’t know if the Omicron variant will be worse for children than the other variants. More than 70 million Americans have received booster shots so far, Biden said. Greg Abbott, the governor of Texas, sent a letter Tuesday announcing his intention to the Biden administration for its Covid-19 vaccine mandate for National Guard members. “As the commander-in-chief of Texas’s militia, I have issued a straightforward order to every member of the Texas National Guard within my chain of command: Do not punish any guardsman for choosing not to receive a Covid-19 vaccine,” reads the letter. “Unless President Biden federalizes the Texas National Guard in accordance with Title 10 of the U.S. Code, he is not your commander-in-chief under our federal or state Constitutions. And as long as I am your commander-in-chief, I will not tolerate efforts to compel receipt of a Covid-19 vaccine.” “Let me be crystal clear: It is the federal government that has put Texas’s guardsmen in this difficult position,” the letter continued. “As your commander-in-chief, I will fight on your behalf. That is why I am suing the Biden administration over its latest unconstitutional vaccine mandate.” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has issued a notice about some of the events planned at the US Capitol on Thursday to mark the anniversary of the insurrection last January by extremist supporters of Donald Trump intent on violently breaking in and stopping the certification of Joe Biden’s election victory. The mob succeeded in the former, forcibly breaking and entering the Capitol after overwhelming inadequate police numbers and barricades, but failed in the latter - Biden’s presidential victory was formally certified by the reconvened US Congress in the early hours of January 7. This Thursday, Biden and the vice president, Kamala Harris, will both remarks in an event at 9am ET in National Statuary Hall, the historic space in the bowels of the Capitol, located just south of the central rotunda. Pelosi will lead a moment of reflection at 10am ET on the House floor, which was overrun by insurrectionists just moments after lawmakers managed to evacuate from the chamber. There are some other things planned after that. There is no expectation at this point of a repeat of right-wing crowds gathering and attacking the Capitol. They rushed the building last year after being exhorted by Trump at a rally near the White House to “fight like hell” to prevent Congress officially certifying Biden’s victory over him in the November, 2020, election. Spinning between a massive snowstorm and the anniversary of the insurrection on January 6, 2021, by extremist supporters of Donald Trump at the US Capitol, Washington, DC is doing its best to move forward. Please stay tuned for the rest of the day’s news in American politics but, meanwhile, here’s where things stand today: What’s the state of dialogue on Joe Biden’s stalled Build Back Better flagship piece of legislation? As far as human roadblock Joe Manchin is concerned, it’s the sound of silence from the White House, apparently. Not a great sign. New York state’s Albany county district attorney said prosecutors are dropping the forcible touching case against disgraced former governor Andrew Cuomo. A record 4.5 million workers quit or changed jobs in November - a continuation of the trend of high turnover in the labor market that has been prevalent in the nearly two years since the onset of the pandemic. Joe Biden is due to meet the White House Covid-19 team of advisers at 2pm ET, following the news that the US set a global daily record on Monday with more than 1 million people diagnosed with coronavirus, amid the Omicron wave. The Guardian’s Rashida Kamal has more on what is being known as the “Great Resignation” - workers quitting or leaving their jobs at unprecedented numbers. In November, 4.5 million Americans quit their jobs, beating out the previous record of 4.4 million Americans in September. From Kamal’s piece: “The reasons for quitting or dropping out of the labor force are quite varied. The top reasons cited by experts continue to be lack of adequate childcare and health concerns about Covid, now exacerbated by Omicron. And while the framing of the Great Resignation places some emphasis on the idea that even knowledge workers are quitting from burnout or a sympathy with the budding anti-work movement, there are just as many reasons to suspect that many quit in search of better work opportunities, self employment, or, simply, higher pay. Tellingly, some industries are seeing higher rates of quitting than others – leisure and hospitality, retail and healthcare being among the most affected.” Read more here: Some more on Build Back Better: It was moderate senator Joe Manchin that famously threw a wrench in the Democrats’ plans to pass the ambitious $1.7tn social spending bill, saying he could not abide by the legislation’s child tax credit, among other things. Now it appears that since the start of the new session, no one has reached out to Manchin to discuss the matter further. The Albany county district attorney has released a statement saying that prosecutors are dropping the forcible touching case against the former governor. Cuomo was forced to resign from his position as governor in August amid findings that he sexually harassed 11 women. The criminal complaint did not name the woman who accused Cuomo of forcible touching, but she has identified herself as Brittany Commisso, one of Cuomo’s executive assistants. She said Cuomo slid his hand up her blouse and grabbed her breast when they were alone in an office at the governor’s mansion in Albany in late 2020, according to the Associated Press. Commisso “had no control over the filing or prosecution of criminal charges. She had no authority or voice in those decisions,” her lawyer, Brian Premo, said in a statement. “The only thing she has any power over is her resolution to continue to speak the truth and seek justice in an appropriate civil action, which she will do in due course,” he added. Cuomo has denied groping Commisso. Yesterday, an attorney for former New York governor Andrew Cuomo said that the Manhattan District Attorney’s office had closed the investigation into Cuomo’s handling of nursing homes during the Covid-19 pandemic and decided to file no charges. Cuomo’s Covid-19 taskforce had altered a report that omitted 9,250 of the total nursing home patients killed by the coronavirus. We have a small update on the Build Back Better Act, and the Democrats’ next move. It appears Democratic whip Dick Durbin is telling reporters that any action on Build Back Better will have to wait until the vote to change filibuster rules - which senate majority leader Chuck Schumer ambitiously said would happen before or on 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day. Nearly a year after Trump supporters stormed the US Capitol, only about four in 10 Republicans believe the 6 January riot that injured more than 100 law enforcement personnel was very or extremely violent. The insurrection shocked the world as dramatic footage showed a mob invading Congress in a last-ditch effort to stop certification of Joe Biden’s electoral victory. A new poll – conducted by the Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research in early December – finds that nearly two-thirds of Americans and the vast majority of Democrats say the siege was very or extremely violent. But Republicans largely disagree, with 32% saying the insurrection was only somewhat violent and another 29% claiming it was not very or not at all violent. Meanwhile, 57% of Americans say Donald Trump bears significant responsibility for the riot. But only 22% of Republicans believe the same and 60% claim “he had little to no responsibility”. Here’s some further reading on 6 January, from Hugo Lowell: The Washington Post is reporting that a record 4.5 million workers quit or changed jobs in November - a continuation of the trend of high turnover in the labor market that has been prevalent in the nearly two years since the onset of the pandemic. In October, the Department of Labor reported that 4.2 million had quit or changed jobs, and in September, 4.4 million - the previous record. The most significant increases in resignations or job changes took place among sectors heavily impacted by the pandemic - where workers must have person-to-person contact, putting them most at risk for infection. These include restaurant and bar workers, health-care workers, and transportation, warehousing and utilities workers. These are also industries that are now complaining about a labor shortage. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ job openings and labor turnover survey, the ones who quit or changed jobs in November make up just 3% of the workforce. With the country adding more than 500,000 jobs a month through the first 11 months of the year. there are currently about 10.6 million job openings. The extremist Republican Marjorie Taylor Greene “might be a Democrat – or just an idiot” – according to a fellow hardline conservative. Dan Crenshaw, a Texas congressman and former Navy Seal, threw the barb back at the Georgia congresswoman in a spat over his support for using the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema) to operate Covid testing sites. The US is experiencing a crippling surge of Covid cases thanks to the infectious Omicron variant, with more than 1m recorded on Monday and lack of access to testing hampering state and federal responses. Greene has consistently spread Covid conspiracy theories. On Sunday, she was permanently suspended from Twitter, for spreading misinformation. Full story: The only politician ever to beat Barack Obama will retire from Congress at the end of the year. Bobby Rush, a Democratic representative from Illinois, faced Obama in a House primary in 2000 – and beat him by more than 30 points. Obama went on to win a US Senate seat in 2004 and become the first Black president in 2009. Rush said Obama, then 38, “was blinded by his ambition” and moved too soon, against the wrong target. Obama said he had his “rear end handed to me”. Rush, 75 and first elected to Congress in 1992, is an ordained minister and social activist who co-founded the Illinois Black Panther Party and was described by Politico on Monday as “a legend in Chicago politics”. In a video obtained by the Associated Press, he said: “I have been reassigned. Actually, I’m not retiring, I’m returning home. I’m returning to my church. I’m returning to my family. I have grandchildren. I’m returning to my passion. “I will be in public life. I will be working hand in hand with someone who will replace me.” Rush’s district is solidly Democratic but political rune-readers still found worrying signs for the national party. Rush is the 24th Democrat to announce that they will not run in 2022. Only 11 Republicans have said the same. Rob Portman, the Republican senator from Ohio, has tested positive for coronavirus. “In preparation for returning to Washington DC, I took an at-home Covid test last night and it was positive,” Portman said. “I am asymptomatic and feel fine. I have been in contact with the attending physician and my personal doctor. I am following their medical advice and following CDC guidelines and isolating for the recommended five days. I will work remotely from home this week, but will not be able to be in Washington, DC for votes.” Capitol Hill, like the rest of the country, is the midst of an unprecedented surge in Covid-19 infections. Dr Brian Monahan, the attending physician at the US Capitol, advised lawmakers and staff in a letter yesterday to wear medical-grade masks rather than cloth ones, and adopt “a maximal telework posture” to reduce in-person meetings and in-office activities. It looks like Washington is still feeling the after-effects of yesterday’s massive snowstorm that knocked out power to hundreds of thousands on the eastern seaboard, snarled traffic and delayed Air Force One and took Joe Biden’s helicopter out of commission. Tim Kaine, the Democratic senator from Virginia and former running mate of Hillary Clinton, tweeted that he had been stuck in traffic from Virginia to Washington for at least 19 hours. Unsurprising, considering that Virginia state police tallied at least 559 traffic crashes and 522 disabled and stuck vehicles across the state yesterday. Still, rough. Howdy, live blog readers. Happy Tuesday. Today Joe Biden is set to meet with the White House Covid-19 response team as the Omicron variant continues to infect Americans at a rapid pace. On Monday, the US set a global daily record with more than 1 million people diagnosed with coronavirus. If you’ll recall from yesterday’s live blog, Congress is also experiencing an unprecedented uptick in infections, with the attending physician at the US Capitol reporting that the seven-day positivity rate at a congressional test site surging to 13% from just 1% in late November. A limited sample as of 15 December found that 61% of those cases were of the Omicron variant and 38% of the Delta variant. Yet there’s no stopping politics, especially after Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer threw down the deadline of 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, to hold a vote to change filibuster rules in order to push ahead with voter rights protections. Senate Democrats are holding a virtual meeting today to chat not just voting rights and filibuster reform - but the future of Build Back Better, Politico reports. With the filibuster and Build Back Better, we can expect a lot of side-eyeing of moderates Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema.Across many parts of Australia the most familiar sight over this holiday period has been queues – long lines of people waiting in line or in their cars for Covid tests. There are also the queues outside chemists and other retail outlets for rapid antigen test kits. We are now registering around 50,000 positive Covid cases a day – a direct consequence of a more virulent strain of Covid-19 coinciding with the easing of restrictions in some state governments. We want to hear about your experience of trying to get a Covid test, trying to find a RAT and what you think about the situation the country finds itself in. We plan to collate some of your experiences in a story we will publish. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.In the middle of a question and answer session at an academic symposium, an audience member wearing a Boss Baby shirt showed off the Boss Baby lunchbox he takes to work every day. “Obviously I eat cookies for lunch,” he explained, “because that’s what Boss Baby fans do.” There was polite applause. Boss Baby fans don’t just eat cookies for lunch – they also convene virtual philosophy conferences dedicated to the study of The Boss Baby, the 2017 DreamWorks animated film starring Alec Baldwin. Organised by Jaime McCaffrey of the University of Kentucky and Tore Levander of Fordham University, the first annual Boss Baby symposium, held online on Tuesday, brought together a wide range of thinkers to examine what we can learn from a movie about a baby who is also a boss. Over the course of an entire afternoon, eight academics delivered presentations centred around three themes: Situating the Boss Baby in Myth and Media; Personal and Professional Growth: Work and Play in The Boss Baby; and “Not enough love for the two of us”: Birth, Motherhood, and the Lack Thereof. They were joined at the end for an informal chat with JP Karliak, voice of Boss Baby in the Netflix television series The Boss Baby: Back in Business, and its showrunner, or “Boss Baby boss baby”, Brandon Sawyer. “Frankly, we don’t know exactly what you’ll find,” the symposium’s website admitted, “but we know it will leave you thinking, ‘Yep, that was definitely a symposium dedicated to the 2017 film titled The Boss Baby.’” It was. But why The Boss Baby? Depends on who you ask. According to one of the symposium’s presenters, it’s just the continuation of a long historical lineage of boss babies – or παῖς-ἄναξ, “child leaders”, in the ancient Greek – stretching from Astyanax from The Iliad, Hikaru Genji from The Tale of Genji, King Edward V of England and Richard of Shrewsbury, Duke of York. Regardless of why, there’s definitely a strong appeal at work. The film grossed half a billion dollars at the box office and has since been spun off into a 2021 sequel and four seasons of the Netflix television series. K-pop band BTS member Jimin learned English by watching the movie again and again. And when a Boss Baby balloon floated on to the 2021 Macy’s Parade, a transfixed crowd reverently chanted “Boss Baby” in near-religious supplication. Despite this semi-ironic popularity, The Boss Baby follows a plot that can be difficult to parse, not that that would discourage academics. “It might be thematically richer than the Bible and more confusing than Ulysses,” McCaffrey said in her opening remarks. In the movie, the suit-and-tie-wearing, briefcase-bearing Boss Baby is sent on a secret mission by Baby Corp, where all babies come from. He’s charged with protecting the world’s love of babies, now under threat due to increasing love for puppies instead. So he sets out to stop the CEO of Puppy Co from releasing the “Forever Puppy”, a new version of puppy that remains a puppy for life, which would destroy babydom as we know it and for some reason is going to be launched into the world via a rocket filled to bursting with puppies. That’s a rough summary that doesn’t even touch on things like the super secret baby formula that keeps the Boss Baby eternally young while endowing him with adult faculties. It would take a PhD just to understand how that’s supposed to work, let alone to conduct a Freudian and Marxist analysis of the milk, as two academics did for the talk The Land of Milk and Money: Lactic Capital in The Boss Baby. Perplexing as the plot may be, the first annual Boss Baby symposium urged us to not throw out the Boss Baby with the boss bathwater. By the end of the day, we’d learned about everything from intertextual references in DreamWorks movies and US attitudes towards sexuality to Erik Erikson’s stages of psychosocial development. We even sat down for a serious chat about Boss Baby’s “narcissistic and psychotic orientation”, which, to be fair, doesn’t really seem like a rare phenomenon among upper management. It was during a presentation on the French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre’s concept of play that it all twigged for me. The speaker had been arguing that an authentic existential attitude is predicated on a synthesis of facticity (boss) and transcendence (baby). I realised that the symposium itself embodied what it means to truly be both boss and baby. The presentations were both tongue-in-cheek larks for a laugh and sincere explorations of the speakers’ areas of expertise. There was genuine affection for the film, as well as a willingness to make fun of it. It was serious (boss), but it was also silly (baby). I wouldn’t go so far as to say that the answers to all of life’s questions can be found in The Boss Baby, but, like the occasional cookie for lunch, it doesn’t hurt. • This article was amended on 5 January 2022 to correct a misspelling of Jaime McCaffrey’s surname.This live blog is now closed but you can follow all the latest breaking Covid developments on our new page here. The explosive increase in coronavirus case counts is raising alarm, but some experts believe the focus should instead be on Covid-19 hospital admissions. US Chief Medical Advisor Dr Anthony Fauci said that with many infections causing few or no symptoms, “it is much more relevant to focus on the hospitalisations as opposed to the total number of cases” while other experts argue that case counts still have value. Dr Wafaa El-Sadr, director of ICAP, a global health center at Columbia University, said the case count does not appear to be the most important number now and we should be “shifting our focus, especially in an era of vaccination, to really focus on preventing illness, disability and death, and therefore counting those.” Daily case counts and their ups and downs have been one of the most closely watched barometers during the outbreak and have been a reliable early warning sign of severe disease and death in previous coronavirus waves. But they have long been considered an imperfect measure, in part because they consist of primarily of laboratory-confirmed cases of Covid-19, not the actual number of infections out there, which is almost certainly many times higher. The daily case counts are also subject to wild swings. The number of new cases recorded on Monday topped an unprecedented 1 million, a figure that may reflect cases that had been held up by reporting delays over the holiday weekend. The seven-day rolling average is considered more reliable. Now, the value of the daily case count is being called into question as never before. Case numbers seem to yield a less useful picture of the pandemic amid the spread of Omicron, which is causing lots of infections but so far does not appear to be as severe in its effects. Case counts have lost relevance, said Andrew Noymer, a public health professor at the University of California, Irvine. “Hospitalisations are where the rubber meets the road,” Noymer said. “It’s a more objective measure.” He added: “If I had to choose one metric, I would choose the hospitalisation data.” Still, health experts are not prepared to do away with case counts. “We should not abandon looking at case numbers,” said Dr Eric Topol, head of the Scripps Research Translational Institute, “but it is important to acknowledge we’re seeing only a portion of the actual number of cases.” Outrage has erupted over Novak Djokovic’s medical exemption to play in the Australian Open. The decision to grant Novak Djokovic an exemption from Covid-19 vaccination requirements to play in the Australian Open in Melbourne has been labelled “appalling”, with some players expressing surprise at the late decision. On Tuesday night, the defending Australian Open champion posted on Instagram that he was coming to Melbourne to participate in the tennis tournament with an “exemption permission”. All Australian Open participants must either be fully vaccinated or apply for and secure a medical exemption in order to enter Victoria without undertaking the mandatory 14-day quarantine. Tennis Australia said tennis players seeking an exemption went through a two-stage process, with their application first considered by a panel of experts in Tennis Australia, and then an assessment from the Victorian government. Read the full story here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog reporting from a very rainy Sydney. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The state of NSW recorded 35,054 cases and eight deaths while Victoria reported 17,636 cases and 11 deaths. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has insisted NSW will ‘get through’ the Omicron outbreak as Covid hospitalisations across the state rose to 1,491. Meanwhile, the decision to grant tennis player Novak Djokovic an exemption from Covid-19 vaccination requirements to play in the Australian Open in Melbourne has been labelled “appalling”, with some players expressing surprise at the late decision. French President Emmanuel Macron warned people not yet vaccinated against Covid that he would cause them trouble by limiting access to key aspects of life in the country, AFP reports. “As for the non-vaccinated, I really want to hassle them. And we will continue to do this, to the end. This is the strategy,” he told the Le Parisien newspaper in an interview. He added that this would mean “limiting as much as possible their access to activities in social life”. Macron’s comments came as the government seeks to push through parliament legislation that will make vaccination compulsory to enjoy cultural activities, use inter-city train travel or visit to a cafe from 15 January. No longer will it be possible to have a recent test or a recovery from Covid to qualify for the country’s Covid pass. But the government was incensed when the opposition joined forces on Monday to hold up the passage of the legislation through parliament. The United States government is finalising contracts for 500 million rapid Covid tests it plans to distribute for free to Americans who request them, spokeswoman Jen Psaki said on Tuesday. Reuters reports: The Omicron variant of the coronavirus has swiftly spread across the United States since its detection on 1 December, replacing Delta as the dominant strain and sparking a new wave of infections that pushed recorded daily cases near the 1 million mark on Monday. Psaki did not share details on how soon the tests will be available. The administration, she said, is in the process of finalising the contracts and expects the first shipment from manufacturers to come soon. The website to be used to request the free tests will be up and running later this month, she added. The Cypriot government is considering whether to introduce new Covid restrictions after recording the world’s highest infection rate per 100,000 people over the previous week. On Tuesday, Cyprus registered a daily record of 5,457 new cases in a population of around 1 million, surpassing the New Year’s Eve peak of 5,048, which topped five consecutive daily record highs, AFP reports. According to figures released prior to Tuesday’s data, Cyprus also recorded the world’s highest Covid infection rate per 100,000 people over the past seven days. It was top with 2,505 cases per 100,000, followed by Denmark (2,117), Ireland (1,946), Greece (1,762) and France (1,680). The cabinet is expected to announce any new measures on Wednesday. Further restrictions could be imposed on nightclubs and entertainment venues, which already require proof of a recent negative test or booster shot. All hospital visits have been banned, and sports stadiums are restricted to 50% capacity, down from 75%. Hospitals in Greater Manchester have paused some non-urgent surgery and appointments due to the rising impact of Covid. A statement by Greater Manchester Combined Authority said the temporary measure, implemented from Tuesday, will not affect cancer and urgent care, including cardiac surgery, vascular surgery and transplantation. Around 15% of staff are currently absent and, in some hospitals, more than one in five patients have Covid. Diagnostic services, including endoscopy, and the majority of out-patient services, will continue wherever possible. The statement reads: Staff have worked tirelessly to try to maintain services and deliver the highest quality of healthcare to local people. But Covid admissions are rising sharply (from 126 on 19 December to 359 on 2 January), as are inpatient diagnoses (193 to 738 for the same period), and in some hospitals more than one in five patients have Covid (though this is not translating into critical care pressure at present). However, the main reason is the high and rising level of staff absence, with around 15% off, either ill with Covid or isolating. There are also outbreaks in an increasing number of care homes, which is affecting how people are discharged from hospital. The bed modelling suggests these challenges may get worse, not better, in the next week or two. Patients who are not contacted should assume their treatment is continuing as planned, the statement added. The United States reported a global record of almost 1 million new Covid infections on Monday, nearly double the country’s previous peak of 505,109 cases just a week ago. The 987,856 figure includes some cases from Saturday and Sunday, according to Reuters, when many states do not report. It is the highest reported by any country in a single day throughout the pandemic. In the last week, the number of patients hospitalised with Covid has risen by nearly 50%, now exceeding 100,000, the first time that threshold has been reached since the winter surge a year ago. The average number of US deaths per day has remained steady throughout December and into early January at about 1,300, according to a Reuters tally, though deaths typically lag behind cases and hospitalisations. While Omicron appears to cause less severe illness than previous strains of the virus, public health officials have warned that the sheer volume of cases threatens to overwhelm hospitals. France reported a record-breaking 271,686 new coronavirus cases on Tuesday, as Omicron infections continue to burden hospital staff and threaten disruption to services across the country. The figure is the highest of any European country, compared to 218,274 cases in Britain and 30,561 cases in Germany on the same day. AP reports: More than 20,000 people are hospitalised with the virus in France, a number that has been rising steadily for weeks but not as sharply as the infection rates. Covid patients fill more than 72% of France’s ICU beds, and a once-renowned health care system is again showing signs of strain. Most virus patients in ICUs are not vaccinated, though 77% of the population has had at least two doses. More than 123,000 people with the virus have died in France, among the world’s higher death tolls. A growing number of people in France can’t work because they are sick or are close contact cases, which is disrupting some hospitals and forced some regional train cancellations, among other services. The French government has imposed some restrictions on crowds and re-imposed mask requirements outdoors in some places, in addition to indoor mask requirements. The surge is also forcing candidates for April presidential election to scale back campaign events. Here is a round-up of the day’s main Covid news stories from around the world: A fourth dose of Covid vaccine boosts antibodies five-fold a week after the shot is administered, the Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Tuesday, citing preliminary findings of an Israeli study. More evidence is emerging that the Omicron coronavirus variant is causing milder symptoms than previous variants and resulting in a “decoupling” in some places between soaring case numbers and low death rates, a World Health Organization official said on Tuesday. Confirmed daily Covid cases in the UK have hit another record high, with 218,724 reported in the past 24 hours. Italy reported a record 170,844 new Covid cases on Tuesday, compared with 68,052 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of coronavirus-related deaths rose to 259 from 140. Greece reported a record 50,126 Covid-related infections on Tuesday, breaking a previous high of 40,560 registered on 31 December. Sweden’s King Carl XVI Gustaf and Queen Silvia have tested positive for Covid, the palace said in a statement on Tuesday. Sweden set a new daily record for Covid cases, registering 11,507 cases on 30 December, health agency data showed on Tuesday as a fourth wave of the virus spread across the country. Tennis star Novak Djokovic looks set to play in the Australian Open after revealing he is heading to the country under a medical exemption. Germany has relaxed restrictions on travel from the UK, South Africa and seven other southern African countries that were imposed following the emergence of the Omicron coronavirus variant. Reinfections should be included in Covid figures for the UK as soon as possible, scientists have said, amid warnings that up to 15% of Omicron cases could be people who have had coronavirus before. Authorities in Greece have introduced new price limits for Covid testing following a surge in demand due to a steep rise in infections blamed on the Omicron variant. Students at Spanish schools and universities will return to class in-person when the new term begins on 10 January, the country’s health minister said on Tuesday. Puerto Rico has imposed new measures to fight a surge in Covid cases that has overwhelmed medical staff in the US territory and led to temporary shortages of testing kits. India’s capital Delhi will impose a weekend curfew to try to curb the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus as cases have risen rapidly in the past few days, its deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia told a news conference on Tuesday. A South Korean court ordered that private educational facilities, including cram schools, should be temporarily excluded from government Covid vaccine pass mandates, the health ministry said on Tuesday. Police in Germany have reported sporadic violence at demonstrations against the country’s pandemic restrictions, with one protester in the eastern town of Lichtenstein biting an officer and another attempting to steal a service weapon. Taiwan president Tsai Ing-wen on Tuesday urged vigilance against the spread of Covid after the island detected its first cases of the Omicron variant spreading in the community. The number of new Covid-19 infections in Japan rose above 1,000 on Tuesday for the first time in three months, the Jiji news agency reported. The city of Yuzhou in China’s Henan province entered lockdown Monday night after three asymptomatic Covid cases were detected on Sunday, local media reports. Well, that’s it from me, Tom Ambrose, for this evening. I will be back tomorrow morning but for now, my colleague Euan O’Byrne is taking over the global Covid blog. Keep reading for more breaking news from around the world. Goodbye. Spain’s health ministry reported a record in the national 14-day Covid infection rate on Tuesday, as the figure climbed to 2,433.9 per 100,000 people, from 2,295.8 registered the previous day. Intensive care occupancy reached 21.3% on Tuesday, a slight increase from 21.2% on Monday but still far below the peak of 45% recorded last February. The number of Covid sufferers to have died in the last seven days stands at 308, the ministry report showed. Brazil’s health ministry said on Tuesday that most participants in a public hearing on vaccinating children aged 5 to 11 for Covid disagreed with the need for a doctor’s prescription, but it will still recommend it. The government of the far-right president, Jair Bolsonaro, a vaccine denier, has opposed the vaccination of children, even though Brazil’s health regulator, Anvisa, has authorised the use of vaccines developed by Pfizer, Reuters reported. Several dozen Bolsonaro supporters demonstrated outside the hearing held at the Pan American Health Organization offices in Brasilia, protesting against the vaccination of children, accompanied by youngsters holding signs. One said: “I am not a guinea pig.” Experts told the hearing that the vaccines were not experimental and have been approved by Anvisa, which authorised the Pfizer vaccine for children on 16 December. Anvisa did not attend the hearing. Reinfections should be included in Covid figures for the UK as soon as possible, scientists have said, amid warnings that up to 15% of Omicron cases could be people who have had coronavirus before. At present, daily Covid case figures – which reflect the number of infections picked up by testing – do not include reinfections for all countries of the UK. While figures for Wales do include multiple cases for the same person, provided the positive tests are more than 42 days apart, this is not the case for England, Scotland or Northern Ireland. However, scientists have said that with the proportion of cases that are reinfections growing, such figures should be urgently updated. “The reinfection rate was fairly low with Delta, but is higher now, both because prior infection provides little protection against Omicron, and there is a bigger pool of people with prior infection,” said Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter, a statistician at the University of Cambridge. According to a report released by researchers at Imperial College London last month, the risk of reinfection with Omicron is more than five times higher than with Delta. Mauritania’s president, Mohamed Ould Ghazouani, was displaying mild symptoms of Covid on Tuesday after testing positive, the presidency said. Ghazouani, who came to power in August 2019, was found to be infected after having a fever, it said in a statement posted on Facebook, Reuters reported. Mauritania recorded 490 new coronavirus cases on Monday, its highest daily tally since the start of the pandemic. The west African country has reported 862 deaths from Covid among its 4.6 million people, while more than 2.3 million vaccine doses have been administered, according to World Health Organization data. Italy reported a record 170,844 new Covid cases on Tuesday, compared with 68,052 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of coronavirus-related deaths rose to 259 from 140. Italy has registered 138,045 deaths linked to the virus since its outbreak emerged in February 2020, and has reported 6.57 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with coronavirus – not including those in intensive care – stood at 12,912 on Tuesday, up from 12,333 a day earlier. There were 153 new admissions to intensive care units, against 103 on Monday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,392 from a previous 1,351. About 1.23 million tests for Covid were carried out in the last day, compared with a previous 445,321, the health ministry said. Confirmed daily Covid cases in the UK have hit another record high, with 218,724 reported in the past 24 hours. The latest case figures – which reflect infections picked up by testing – continue to be affected by disruptions over Christmas, with figures for Northern Ireland covering a four-day period, and for Wales covering a two-day period. However, the data shows that 148,725 cases were reported on Tuesday for England alone, up from 137,541 the day before, but below the peak of 162,572 reported on New Year’s Day. These figures do not include cases that are reinfections. Greece reported a record 50,126 Covid-related infections on Tuesday, breaking a previous high of 40,560 registered on 31 December. The number of deaths dropped to 61 from 78 on Monday. As recently as 27 December, only 9,284 new Covid cases were recorded, according to a Reuters tally. Hospitals in the north of England are experiencing more than double the growth rate in Covid patients compared with London as mounting Omicron pressure on the NHS spreads away from the capital. Health chiefs are cautiously optimistic that after weeks of rapidly increasing hospitalisations in London – the centre of the outbreak – the huge rises may be slowing and beginning to level off. However, at the same time, hospitals at the other end of the country are experiencing the fastest growth in Covid occupancy, according to an analysis of official NHS data by the Guardian. It comes as four more NHS trusts in England – all outside London – declared “critical incidents” on Tuesday, amid soaring staff absences, rising numbers of Covid patients and growing pressure on emergency services. The highest rate of growth in England is in the north-east and Yorkshire, where the number of Covid patients in hospitals has more than doubled – up 122% - in one week. There were 1,975 Covid patients in hospitals on Monday, compared with fewer than half that – 889 – the week before. Germany has relaxed restrictions on travel from the UK, South Africa and seven other southern African countries that were imposed following the emergence of the Omicron coronavirus variant. The nine nations were removed Tuesday from Germany’s list of “virus variant areas”. Airlines and others are restricted largely to transporting German citizens and residents from countries on that list. All arrivals must self-isolate for 14 days, regardless of vaccination status. Germany’s national disease control centre had announced on Thursday that it planned to downgrade the countries’ risk status but said at the time that “short-term changes” were possible. The nine countries have now been added to Germany’s list of “high-risk areas”, which carries much less onerous restrictions. People arriving from such areas who either haven’t recovered recently or been fully vaccinated have to self-isolate for 10 days, which can be cut to five with a negative test. Israel has become the first country in the world to embark on a fourth Covid-19 vaccination campaign as part of efforts to stem rapidly rising infection rates caused by the Omicron variant. People over the age of 60 and healthcare workers who received their third shot more than four months ago became eligible for a second booster of Pfizer-BioNTech on Monday, after a limited rollout began last week for elderly people and those with compromised immune systems. Officials had previously said they would wait for further data on the efficacy of a fourth shot before making it more widely available. The Israeli health ministry said on Tuesday, however, that even though it believes the threat posed by Omicron is minimal, it had been forced to act more quickly in the face of skyrocketing infection rates. Authorities in Greece have introduced new price limits for Covid testing following a surge in demand due to a steep rise in infections blamed on the Omicron variant. The country’s trade ministry said Tuesday that PCR tests at private facilities will be priced at a maximum of €47, including a €12 handling fee. The previous cap had been set at €60, the Associated Press reported. New confirmed infections have risen to record levels in the past week, as health officials say omicron is now dominating new cases. The centre-right government recently expanded its testing programme, with additional home kits made available for free, but says it does not have the capacity to implement a request by the country’s leftwing opposition to reimburse private PCR tests. US government health officials will issue a clarification on the role of Covid testing related to a shortened five-day quarantine period for those testing positive for the virus, surgeon general Vivek Murthy said on Tuesday. Murthy told CNN he expected the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to issue the clarification in the next couple of days but did not elaborate. As the super-spreading Omicron variant raged across the country, the CDC last week shortened the recommended isolation time for Americans with asymptomatic cases of Covid to five days from the previous guidance of 10 days. The quarantine period should be followed by strict mask use for an additional five days, the CDC said, but it did not recommend testing at that point in its guidelines. “They have certainly received feedback and questions about the role of testing in shortening that quarantine period and they’re actually working right now on issuing a clarification on that,” Murthy told CNN. “They’re going to speak to the role that testing can play in a situation like reducing isolation,” Murthy said. US government infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci said on Sunday that health officials were considering asking people to get tested after a five-day quarantine period. Sweden’s King Carl XVI Gustaf and Queen Silvia have tested positive for Covid, the palace said in a statement on Tuesday. “The King and Queen, who are fully vaccinated with three injections, have mild symptoms and are feeling well, given the circumstances,” the palace said in a statement. Students at Spanish schools and universities will return to class in-person when the new term begins on 10 January, the country’s health minister said on Tuesday. Cases have hit new highs since the highly contagious Omicron variant of the coronavirus was detected some two months ago, raising concerns that children would not be able to go back to school after the Christmas holidays. The Omicron variant accounted for around 43% of cases in the week before Christmas, Spanish health authorities said on Monday. But officials from the 17 Spanish regions, which set their own health policy, all voted in favour of a return to the classroom on Tuesday in a rare display of unanimity in a country riven by stark political differences. “It’s about the physical attendance of all our students from next 10 January throughout the country,” health minister Carolina Darias told reporters after the regional meeting. Masks will be mandatory at all times and schools must guarantee adequate ventilation, while regional administrations will work to cover any teacher absences due to infection, she said. Puerto Rico has imposed new measures to fight a surge in Covid cases that has overwhelmed medical staff in the US territory and led to temporary shortages of testing kits. All private businesses that cater to the public must close from midnight to 5am, no alcohol will be sold during those hours and gatherings of more than 250 people are banned. The measures will remain in place until 18 January and come as the island of 3.3 million people reports a more than 30% positivity rate, the highest since the pandemic began. The Associated Press reported: The government has reported more than 201,000 confirmed cases and more than 3,300 deaths. Officials note that a third of all cases reported since the pandemic began have occurred in the past month, with many linked to a two-day outdoor concert held in December. The number of daily cases per 100,000 reported in Puerto Rico rose from three to 225 in just three weeks, according to statistician Rafael Irizarry. More than 500 people are hospitalised. Almost 85% of people in Puerto Rico have received the first dose and more than 70% have received the second one. However, at least 40% have not received a booster shot. The increase in cases has caused temporary shortages of home testing kits, with people taking to social media to share places where they’ve run out or are still available, while some government-run testing sites have closed early after exhausting testing kits for the day. Meanwhile, the Association of Hospitals of Puerto Rico urged people to stop visiting emergency rooms to request tests because the demand was overwhelming and preventing staff from treating urgent cases. Sweden set a new daily record for Covid cases, registering 11,507 cases on 30 December, health agency data showed on Tuesday as a fourth wave of the virus spread across the country. The daily infection figures are typically revised somewhat as any delayed records of additional cases are added to the national total for a given day. The previous record of 11,376 cases was set in late December 2020. The fresh wave of cases, in part driven by the more contagious omicron variant, hit Sweden later than its Nordic neighbours, but has in recent weeks resulted in a sharp rise in cases and, increasingly, hospitalisations. More evidence is emerging that the Omicron coronavirus variant is causing milder symptoms than previous variants and resulting in a “decoupling” in some places between soaring case numbers and low death rates, a World Health Organization official said on Tuesday. “We are seeing more and more studies pointing out that Omicron is infecting the upper part of the body. Unlike other ones, the lungs who would be causing severe pneumonia,” WHO incident manager Abdi Mahamud told Geneva-based journalists. “It can be a good news, but we really require more studies to prove that.” Since the heavily mutated variant was first detected in November, WHO data shows it has spread quickly and emerged in at least 128 countries, presenting dilemmas for many nations and people seeking to reboot their economies and lives after nearly two years of Covid-related disruptions. However, while case numbers have surged to all-time records, the hospitalisation and death rates are often lower than at other phases in the pandemic. A fourth dose of Covid vaccine boosts antibodies five-fold a week after the shot is administered, the Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Tuesday, citing preliminary findings of an Israeli study. “A week into the fourth dose we know to a higher degree of certainty that the fourth dose is safe,” Bennett said at Sheba Medical Centre, which is giving second booster shots in a trial among its staff amid a nationwide surge in Omicron variant infections. “The second piece of news: we know that a week after administration of a fourth dose, we see a five-fold increase in the number of antibodies in the vaccinated person,” he told reporters. “This most likely means a significant increase against infection and ... hospitalisation and (severe) symptoms,” Bennett said in English. The French government has heavily criticised opposition MPs after parliamentary debate over the proposed introduction of a “vaccine pass” was unexpectedly suspended on Monday night after members of the Assemblée nationale voted with a show of hands to go home. The move came after seven hours of often-heated exchanges as ministers clashed with critics over the controversial measure due to be introduced on 15 January, but now postponed. Government spokesperson Gabriel Attal on Tuesday accused opposition MPs of playing politics and halting the adoption of what he said were “essential measures … in an urgent situation”. He said the government would push on with the legislation. The proposal is to turn the current “health pass” requiring either vaccination, recovery from Covid or a negative Covid test into a “vaccine pass” requiring people to be fully vaccinated if they wish to access restaurants, bars, museums, cinemas, theatres, long distance trains, hotels and many other public places. Hospitals and health establishments would not require a vaccine pass. The debate, which began on Monday afternoon, was due to continue into the early hours of Tuesday and there were more than 500 amendments still to be debated when the parliamentary session was suspended shortly before midnight. Tennis star Novak Djokovic looks set to play in the Australian Open after revealing he is heading to the country under a medical exemption. The defending champion has previously refused to reveal if he has been vaccinated against Covid-19, a requirement to play in Melbourne unless an exemption is granted. The world number one pulled out of the Serbia team competing at the ATP Cup in Sydney without explanation, adding to speculation that the nine-time champion and vaccine sceptic would not play in the season’s first grand slam. However, the Australian Open chief, Craig Tiley, revealed this week that some unvaccinated players have been granted exemptions to play, and it seems Djokovic is among them. Djokovic wrote on Instagram and Twitter: “Happy New Year, everybody! Wishing you all health, love, and happiness in every present moment and may you feel love and respect towards all beings on this wonderful planet. “I’ve spent fantastic quality time with my loved ones over the break and today I’m heading Down Under with an exemption permission. Let’s go 2022!!” A South Korean court ordered that private educational facilities, including cram schools, should be temporarily excluded from government Covid vaccine pass mandates, the health ministry said on Tuesday. The injunction is one of the first legal obstacles to South Korea’s vaccine mandates, which require passes or testing for entry to facilities including restaurants, cafes, gyms, and bars, as well as privately-run schools, Reuters reported. A Seoul administrative court ruled that the mandate at private education facilities such as tuition centres, libraries and study cafes should be blocked while it considers a legal challenge filed against the Ministry of Health by federations of private education and parents’ groups, the ministry said. The ruling said mandates effectively limit “the rights (of unvaccinated people) to use cram schools and study facilities”, said Yonhap news agency. It first reported the exemption, which the ministry confirmed. The health ministry said the mandate should be expanded to protect unvaccinated people and reduce the number of critically ill patients, and it will shortly decide whether it will appeal against the injunction in cooperation with the justice ministry. The passes are required for people aged 17 and older and there is a plan to extend the requirement to children over the age of 12, but will not apply to public schools. The number of daily Covid infections more than doubled in Romania on Tuesday following an easing of restrictions during the winter holidays, and officials estimate the fifth wave of the pandemic could result in twice as many cases as the previous one. Romania is the European Union’s second-least vaccinated state, with roughly 40% of the population fully inoculated amid distrust in state institutions and poor vaccine education, Reuters reported. New infections in the preceding 24 hours stood at 3,900, more than double Monday’s number, but still far off a record high of 18,863 daily cases seen in October, official data showed. Some 47 people died of the virus within the last 24 hours. With school children now back in class, the number of cases is expected to rise further. “We will probably witness a more rapid growth of cases around 15 January,” the health minister, Alexandru Rafila, told private television station Antena 3 on Monday. “It remains to be seen how many cases we will have in the fifth wave, we estimate a doubling of the number of cases.” Police in Germany have reported sporadic violence at demonstrations against the country’s pandemic restrictions, with one protester in the eastern town of Lichtenstein biting an officer and another attempting to steal a service weapon. Tens of thousands of people in total took to the streets in scores of German towns and cities for weekly marches that have organisers have labelled “strolls” in an attempt to bypass restrictions on public gatherings. Counter-protests were also held in towns including Rostock and Trier, the dpa news agency reported. Most of the rallies passed peacefully, though many broke rules on social distancing, prompting officers to intervene. Police in the eastern state of Saxony said the incident late on Monday in Lichtenstein, about 20km (12 miles) west of Chemnitz, occurred when officers tried to pull about 60 rowdy people out of a march to check their identities. Several of the protesters attacked police and sprayed them with chemical irritants. “One person attempted to seize an officer’s service weapon and another police officer suffered a bite wound from a participant of the gathering,” Saxony police said in a statement. In Bautzen, further east, some participants of a 600-strong march attempted to break through a police cordon. Officers responded with pepper spray and batons. In Magdeburg, the capital of neighboring Saxony-Anhalt state, protesters hurled bottles and fireworks at police. No officers were injured, police said. The protests took place before a meeting Tuesday of Germany’s pandemic expert panel, which is expected to submit new recommendations to the government for how to respond to the outbreak. A meeting of state and federal leaders is scheduled for Friday. Covid has been recorded on the death certificates of more than 5.4 million people worldwide since the pandemic began two years ago. As countries brace for further waves of infections driven by the Omicron variant, the families of 14 people who lost their lives tell of incalculable loss as they pay tribute to their loved ones. Hello. Tom Ambrose here. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid news from around the world throughout the day. We start with the news that Xi’an, a Chinese city almost two weeks into a lockdown, is demanding officials “strictly and properly” implement Covid curbs, as new local cases among its 13 million residents have started to grow at a slower pace. Xi’an, which on 23 December imposed strict curbs on travel within the city and leaving town, reported 95 domestically transmitted cases with confirmed clinical symptoms for Monday, up slightly from 90 a day earlier, official data showed on Tuesday. Monday also marked the second consecutive day for which Xi’an reported fewer than 100 local cases since 24 December, Reuters reported. “The various work that needs to be done must only be strengthened,” said Liu Guozhong, provincial head of the Communist party in Shaanxi, of which Xi’an is its capital. The epidemic control effort is at a pivotal moment, Liu said. The latest infections brings the tally of local cases to over 1,700 since 9 December in Xi’an’s latest outbreak. More evidence is emerging that the Omicron variant is affecting the upper respiratory tract, causing milder symptoms than previous variants, a World Health Organization official said on Tuesday. Asked about whether an Omicron-specific vaccine was needed, WHO incident manager Abdi Mahamud said it was too early to say but stressed that the decision required global coordination and should not be left to the commercial sector to decide alone. Pressed on whether fourth Covid vaccines were a good idea, Mahamud said the world should instead aim to reach vaccination levels of at least 70% globally. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director general of the WHO, said on Twitter on Tuesday that he looked forward to working with Karl Lauterbach, the German healthy minister, during Germany’s G7 presidency which started on 1 January, “to end the pandemic, ensure [vaccine equity] and vaccinate 70% of people in all countries by July”. However, Mahamud added that Omicron’s high transmissibility means it will become dominant within weeks in many places, posing a threat in countries where a high portion of the population remains unvaccinated. Mahamud also sounded a note of caution, calling South Africa an “outlier” whose Covid data might not be representative for other places due to its young population, among other factors. Germany’s joblessness rate fell slightly in December despite the return of pandemic restrictions to tackle a new wave of coronavirus infections, official figures published Tuesday showed. AFP reports: The seasonally adjusted rate dropped to 5.2% from 5.3% the previous month, the BA federal labour agency said, the equivalent of 23,000 fewer unemployed people. “The recovery seen in recent months continued in December,” agency head Detlef Scheele said in a statement. In raw figures, the number of unemployed sat just under 2,330,000, down around 378,000 since December 2020. Unemployment in Europe’s top economy climbed as high as six percent in the months following the rapid spread of the coronavirus through Europe in the first half of 2020. Germany has relied heavily on subsidised short-term work schemes to help businesses and workers whether the pandemic storm, with nearly 6 million Germans placed on reduced hours at the peak of the crisis in April 2020. The scheme was still supporting 710,000 people according to the latest available figures from October, the BA said. An uptick in applications made for the short-term work scheme at the end of the year showed the “uncertainty” caused by rising numbers of coronavirus cases and the emergence of the highly transmissible Omicron variant, the BA said. About 286,000 people were signed up to the programme in December, up from 104,000 the month before. The overall improvement in the job market over 12 months was “encouraging” but “the new virus variant will be a difficult test for the German economy,” said Fritzi Koehler-Geib, chief economist at public lender KfW. Taiwan president Tsai Ing-wen on Tuesday urged vigilance against the spread of Covid after the island detected its first cases of the Omicron variant spreading in the community. “With the emergence of domestic cases, everyone must stay vigilant,” Tsai said in a post on Facebook, adding that epidemic prevention measures had been tightened at the airport. “Most importantly, please get a vaccination as soon as possible.” Taiwan initially kept the pandemic well under control because of early and effective prevention, including largely closing its borders. Most cases of its cases have been imported from abroad, though the island struggled with an outbreak of domestic infections in the middle of 2021, showing the government failed to fully prepare a pandemic response or vaccination rollout. Taiwan this week reported its first two cases of the Omicron variant, both linked to a quarantine hotel, Reuters reports. Another person, a cleaner working at the island’s main international airport, was “likely” to be infected with the Omicron variant, health minister Chen Shih-chung said. Chen added the new cases had put “a lot of pressure” on the government’s efforts against the pandemic. Taiwan has vaccinated about 70% of its 23.5 million people and the government is offering incentives such as shopping coupons to boost the uptake. Thailand’s health ministry on Tuesday called on people to come forward to get booster vaccinations after reporting cases of the Omicron variant had more than doubled over the holiday period. A fourth dose will be given to medical personnel, frontline workers and risk groups three months after their third shots. Reuters reports: The south-east Asian country has recorded 2,062 cases of the Omicron variant so far, health official Supakit Sirilak told a news conference, up from 740 cases before the holidays. Health authorities have warned of the risk of a surge of infections after the holidays when people travelled home and gathered at restaurants for celebrations. Of the Omicron infections, 1,105 were among foreign arrivals with the remainder in those who had come into contact with arrivals, he said. Up to now, Thailand has vaccinated 64.1% of an estimated 72 million people in the country with two doses, government data shows, while officials said only 9.8% had received a third booster shot. [...] Alarmed by the spread of Omicron, Thailand last month suspended its “Test &amp; Go” travel scheme that allowed vaccinated tourists to skip quarantine and an official said people who had previously registered for the scheme must enter by 10 January. A so-called “sandbox” programme, which requires visitors to remain in a specific location for seven days but allows them free movement outside of their accommodation, was also suspended in all places except for the resort island of Phuket. Thailand has reported a total of 2.2 million infections and 21,750 coronavirus-related fatalities. The number of new Covid-19 infections in Japan rose above 1,000 on Tuesday for the first time in three months, the Jiji news agency reported. Japan had recorded fewer cases in recent months, but experts had warned of a potential sixth wave of infections during the winter. The number of new cases in Tokyo rose above 100 on Monday for the first time in about three months, fuelling concerns over a gradual surge in infections in Japan because of the Omicron variant. Japanese prime minister Fumio Kishida said on Tuesday he won’t be visiting the US and Australia for in-person summit talks before the start of a regular parliamentary session in mid-January and will focus on the Covid-19 response at home instead, the Kyodo news agency reports. Kishida said he had been seeking to meet with US president Joe Biden and Australian prime minister Scott Morrison in a bid to step up summit diplomacy this year. “In light of the domestic and overseas spread of the novel coronavirus, I have decided not to make overseas trips before the regular Diet session this month,” Kishida said in his new year press conference. Prof Sir Andrew Pollard added it is not yet certain that future strains of Covid-19 “will be causing mild disease”, and that more time is needed to evaluate whether the virus will become milder. He said: If indeed we do have ongoing problems with more severe disease, updated vaccines for the new variants may be one of the ways that we manage living with the virus in the future. Pollard said the UK is not yet completely over Omicron but “generally the news is relatively good from an overall perspective in that it does seem to be causing milder disease”, but that this does not mean the NHS can cope with a continuing increase in cases. Oxford University professor and director of the Oxford Vaccine Group, Sir Andrew Pollard, told Sky News there are “very large numbers of cases in the community but still very good control of severe disease as a result of vaccination”, but that the idea of giving people globally a fourth vaccine dose was “not affordable, sustainable or deliverable”. Asked if he is worried about complacency in the UK, he said: No, I don’t think we are being complacent at all, actually. Today we’re in a situation where there’s very good monitoring – much better than it was before globally – trying to understand how best to make sure that everyone in the world is protected as well as is possible, and now we’re in this new period of transition to work out, now that there’s very high levels of immunity in countries like ours, how do we transition to the situation where society is open, and we maintain protection of the vulnerable in the population? He said that has been managed so far with third doses of vaccines, adding that learning how to live with the virus is “going to be the critical next step”. Asked whether people will be vaccinated every six months, he said: Well, it’s just not – from a global perspective – affordable, sustainable or deliverable to give fourth doses to everyone on the planet every six months. Remember that, today, less than 10% of people in low-income countries have even had their first dose, so the whole idea of regular fourth doses globally is just not sensible. Now, it may be that, as the science evolves, that we can work out who the most vulnerable are in populations and target future boosters to those individuals to maintain their protection, but for the vast majority of people who are vaccinated, the risk now is extremely low of severe Covid, for those who have had three doses, and it’s likely that we’ll reach a point where we’re focusing those booster doses on those who most need them. And of course, at this moment, we don’t know what that looks like. Does that mean that we need updated vaccines each year like we do with flu? We need more data to make those decisions. India’s capital Delhi will impose a weekend curfew to try to curb the spread of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus as cases have risen rapidly in the past few days, its deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia told a news conference on Tuesday. He also said most offices would have to make half their employees work from home, including all government officials except for those engaged in essential services. Delhi has reported about 11,000 positive cases in the past eight to 10 days, of which around 350 patients are in hospital, with 124 patients need ing oxygen and seven being on a ventilator, the Times of India reports. A top UK infectious disease expert said he was “cautiously optimistic” that Covid cases are beginning to plateau in London, and that he was expecting cases to come down in regions outside of the capital within one to three weeks. Prof Neil Ferguson, who specialises in the patterns of spread of infectious disease, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: I think I’m cautiously optimistic that infection rates in London in that key 18-50 age group, which has been driving the Omicron epidemic, may possibly have plateaued. It’s too early to say whether they’re going down yet. I would say that with an epidemic which has been spreading so quickly and reaching such high numbers, it can’t sustain those numbers forever, so we would expect to see case numbers start to come down in the next week, maybe already coming down in London, but in other regions a week to three weeks. Whether they then drop precipitously or we see a pattern a bit like we saw with Delta back in July – of an initial drop and then quite a high plateau – remains to be seen, it’s just too difficult to interpret current mixing trends and what the effect of open schools again will be. Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said hospital admissions seem to have “perhaps plateaued in London or there may be a second peak after the new year now, but it’s rising across the rest of Britain”. He told Times Radio that, often, for many hospitals “the most pressing element of all” was the number of staff who are absent due to Covid. He said that even without Covid, the NHS is 100,000 staff short, “so we have a long-term failure in terms of workforce planning and resourcing”. He added: The problem with staff absence is that it is unpredictable and lumpy in the sense that you don’t know where somebody is going to get sick and, when somebody does get sick, it’s then more likely that other people in that team will get sick and hospitals and healthcare systems are complex, they’re inter-dependent, so [...] if you lose paramedics then the ambulance can’t go out, and if ambulances can’t go out then that means there’s more pressure on other services. So, those interdependencies and the unpredictability of staff absence means NHS leaders having to work around the clock just thinking about how they can deploy their resources best to deal with the most urgent and pressing needs. Even using all their imagination and creativity, it is becoming almost impossible, which is why we see hospitals declaring critical incidents. Minister for vaccines and public health Maggie Throup said she was “not sure” how many Britons were in self-isolation. She told Sky News: I’m not sure of that [actual] figure, but I think what’s shown over Christmas is that a lot of people have caught the disease, the Omicron variant is very transmissible, but what is good news, it doesn’t seem to be resulting in severe diseases as some of the other variants did. Not everybody declares that they’re self-isolating, I think that’s one important thing, that it’s something that they do because they’ve tested positive or they’ve been in contact with somebody whose tested positive, they don’t have to report that in. The vaccine is working and that’s the best way to stop the transmission, and to stop hospitalisations and for our life to get back to normal. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next few hours. If you have anything to flag you think is relevant to our coverage, you can reach me on Twitter @JedySays or via email. France’s lower house of parliament suspended debates over a bill that would require people to show proof of vaccination to go to a restaurant or cinema or take the train with discussions set to continue on Tuesday. Tense discussions of the new law, which would remove the option of showing a negative test result instead of having the inoculations, were halted after midnight on Monday after a majority of deputies voted to suspend the session. The heads of the various parliamentary groups must now set a new date for debates to resume, the vice-president of the national assembly, Annie Genevard, said. Once voted in the national assembly, the new law needs to be voted in by the senate before it comes into force on 15 January. Here’s a brief rundown of the latest Covid developments from across the world: Europe: The UK reported 157,758 new Covid cases today and 42 additional deaths.Cases rose by 50% between 28 December and 3 January compared with the week before. Deaths rose 17% during the same period compared with the previous seven days. Multiple NHS trusts have declared “critical incidents” amid soaring staff absences caused by Covid. Parts of the health service are in “crisis”, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation said. The Omicron variant is better at circumventing vaccinated people’s immunity than the Delta variant, but is very likely to be milder, according to a Danish study. France reported 67,641 new confirmed coronavirus cases on Monday, a figure much lower than a couple of days ago, when daily additional infections were over 200,000. Spain reported a new record in the national 14-day Covid infection rate on Monday, as the figure climbed to 2,295.8 per 100,000 people from 1,775.27 registered last Thursday. Asia: The city of Yuzhou in China’s Henan province entered lockdown Monday night after three asymptomatic Covid cases were detected on Sunday, local media reports. Delhi’s chief minister tested positive for Covid as India’s daily new cases hit their highest levels in months. The Philippines will expand Covid restrictions in Manila from Wednesday to include more than 11 million people living near the capital as cases surge. Hong Kong will require at least one vaccine dose against Covid-19 to enter restaurants, gyms, schools, cinemas, public leisure facilities and recreational venues before the lunar new year from 24 February. In Thailand, the government is urging people to work from home for two weeks, and the health ministry is proposing to continue suspending quarantine-free travel through the end of January, US: More than 1 million people in the US were diagnosed with Covid-19 on Monday, setting a new global daily record. Thousands of schools delayed a scheduled return to classrooms following the holiday break or switched to remote learning. President Joe Biden has urged Americans to get vaccinated, describing the process as “your patriotic duty” in a series of tweets on Monday. The US food and drug administration (FDA) has authorised the use of a third dose of Pfizer and BioNTech’s Covid vaccine for children aged 12 to 15. Oceania: Australia’s Covid cases reached a new high on Tuesday amid an Omicron surge in its two most populous states, as hospitalisations in New South Wales, home to Sydney, surpassed the record numbers hit during the Delta outbreak. New Zealand will reduce the interval between second Covid-19 vaccine doses and boosters from six months to four months from Wednesday. Middle East: Israel is also set to allow foreigners with presumed Covid-19 immunity to enter from medium-risk countries from 9 January, the health ministry said. Here is a quick visual recap of where the world stands in its fight against the coronavirus pandemic. Data is obtained from Johns Hopkins University and Our World in Data. A report by Reporters Without Borders (RSF) released last month detailed a worsening “nightmare” for journalists under the rule of Xi Jinping, with 128 known to be behind bars or disappeared. More than 70 are Uyghur journalists, and at least 10 people were arrested for reporting on the Covid outbreak and lockdown in Wuhan. Cedric Alviari, RSF’s east Asia bureau director, said the 128 detained journalists and press freedom defenders is the biggest count in five years. It includes 71 Uyghur journalists, and at least 10 who face impending death if not immediately released, according to RSF. Alviari said the crackdown is driven by Xi, who has “declared a war on independent journalism” after tightening controls on traditional media. Everything he and the CCP have been doing over the past eight years … has been to suppress independent voices. The Chinese people, like every person on earth, crave information on what’s happening around them.” Read the full story from our reporter Helen Davidson here. More than 1 million people in the US were diagnosed with Covid-19 on Monday, setting a new global daily record. A total of 1.06 million people across the US tested positive with the virus, a figure driven largely by the Omicron variant, data from Johns Hopkins University reveals. Monday’s number is almost double the previous record of about 590,000 set just four days ago in the US, which itself was a doubling from the prior week. Many Americans are relying on tests they take at home, with results that aren’t reported to official government authorities, leading some to suggest the new record is a significant under-estimate. However delays in reporting over the holidays may have also played a role in the rising rates. Two of New Zealand’s most prominent Covid experts are taking legal action against their employer, the University of Auckland, over what they say is its failure to respond adequately to “harassment from a small but venomous sector of the public” that is becoming “more extreme”. Siouxsie Wiles, an associate professor of medical science, and Shaun Hendy, a professor of physics, have filed separate complaints to the Employment Relations Authority, which last week ruled that they should proceed directly to the Employment Court due to the “high public interest” in their Covid commentary. According to the ruling, the scientists say that as a result of their work they have “suffered vitriolic, unpleasant, and deeply personalised threats and harassment” via email, social media and video sharing platforms which has had a “detrimental impact” on their physical safety as well as their mental health. Read the full story here. Fiji has reopened schools for in-person learning for students in years 8 to 11 from today with younger years set to resume on 10 January. A government statement released on Tuesday read: UNICEF and WHO have advised the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health and Medical Services that it is safe to reopen schools because the latest evidence shows that schools do not drive the spread of Covid-19 in the community. As per UNICEF Pacific Representative Jonathan Veitch, Covid-19 does not pose as high a risk to children as it does to adults, and as long as Covid-safe measures are followed in schools, children are actually more at risk of getting Covid in the community than they are in schools.” New Zealand will reduce the interval between second Covid-19 vaccine doses and boosters from six months to four months from Wednesday. People aged 18 or older who have had second shots of the vaccine at least four months ago will be eligible for a booster shot, the Ministry of Health said in a statement. A total of 4,494 booster shots were administered on Tuesday, a jump of more than 1,500 on the day before, the ministry said. Delhi’s chief minister has tested positive for Covid as India’s daily new cases hit their highest levels in months. Arvind Kejriwal, who spoke at an election rally on Monday without wearing a mask, announced the news in a Twitter post saying he is isolating at home. He also urged those who had come in contact with him in recent days to do similar and get tested for the virus. The Philippines will expand Covid restrictions in Manila from Wednesday to include more than 11 million people living near the capital as cases surge, the government has said. Daily infections have spiked to a two-month high in January as the health department warns of higher caseloads in the coming days following the detection of local cases of the Omicron variant. The provinces of Bulacan, Cavite and Rizal surrounding Manila have been placed under the third highest alert “due to a sharp increase of Covid-19 cases”, presidential spokesman Karlo Nograles said in a statement Tuesday, Agence France-Press reports. Under the tighter restrictions, which will be in place until mid-January, unvaccinated residents will need to stay at home unless buying essentials or exercising. Restaurants, parks, churches and beauty salons will operate at lower capacity while in-person classes and contact sports are suspended. The health department has deemed the entire country of 109 million at “high risk” following a spike in cases in recent days, even as hospitalisations remain under control, health undersecretary Rosario Vergeire told CNN Philippines. The Philippines has recorded over 2.8 million infections and more than 51,000 deaths. Veering all the way over to South America now as Brazil registers another 11,850 additional Covid cases and 76 deaths on Monday, according to data released by the nation’s health ministry. The South American country has now registered a total of 619,209 coronavirus deaths and 22,305,078 total confirmed cases. Back to Asia again as India reports another 37,379 new Covid-19 cases over the past 24 hours. The health ministry says it is the highest number since early September as the Omicron coronavirus variant overtakes Delta in places such as the capital New Delhi. Deaths rose by 124 to reach a total of 482,017 and total infections stand at 34.96 million. Over to Europe and Germany is reporting another 30,561 new coronavirus cases and 356 deaths, according to recently released data from the Robert Koch Institute. South Korea has just released its daily Covid report. The Asian nation recorded another 3,024 confirmed coronavirus cases in the last 24 hours, a figure much lower than recent weeks. A further 51 deaths were also recorded with 973 people in critical condition, according to the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. A total of 86.2 % of the eligible population have received at least one Covid vaccine dose and 83.1 % have received at least two. Hong Kong will require at least one vaccine dose against Covid-19 to enter restaurants, schools, public leisure facilities and recreational venues before the Lunar New Year in a bid to expand the city-state’s vaccine bubble. Cinemas, gyms, indoor sports grounds, public libraries, museums and concert halls are included in the expanded vaccine bubble, Secretary for Food and Health Sophia Chan said at a press briefing on Friday. Staff at these venues will also be required to get vaccinated, with exemptions made for those with a certified medical condition. Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam confirmed the new rules would begin 24 February during a press briefing on Tuesday. Under the new arrangement more venues will require people to receive at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccination before entering. Prof Chan said: The Government is progressively expanding the vaccine bubble to more places now. We are not saying that one dose of vaccination is enough, but we also have to be practical while we want to implement this measure, the vaccine bubble, to all these scheduled premises under Cap 599 as soon as possible.” Chan explained that the vaccine bubble scope will be expanded before Chinese New Year because people will attend gatherings during the festival. As such, she urged citizens to maintain awareness of epidemic prevention. “We want to appeal to people to be very, very vigilant about their own daily activities and also mask-wearing, and secondly, be aware of the notices that the Government is sending out so that they know whether they are one of the people who require compulsory testing or not.” In Thailand the Omicron situation continues to worsen. The government is urging people to work from home for two weeks, and the health ministry is proposing to continue suspending quarantine-free travel through the end of January, local media report. The Public Health Ministry will propose that the government continue the suspension of the Test &amp; Go entry programme for air travellers, in light of the continuing spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, public health minister Anutin Charnvirakul said on Monday. Anutin said he supported the recommendation made by health experts on Monday and will ask the Centre for Covid-19 Situation Administration (CCSA) to continue the suspension of the one-night quarantine scheme until the end of this month, the Bangkok Post reports. We have decided to propose that the reopening of Test &amp; Go should be deferred for the safety of the people in this country,” Anutin said. No applications for entry to Thailand under the Test &amp; Go scheme have been accepted since 11 December. Entry is only through the Phuket Sandbox, and its quarantine system, due to fears over the rising number of Omicron-variant Covid-19 cases worldwide. The CCSA is scheduled to review the suspension of Test &amp; Go at its meeting on Tuesday. A further 3,091 coronavirus cases and 12 deaths were recorded on Monday. The number of new infections in Tokyo and other parts of Japan has edged up in recent days, although the numbers pale beside those being reported in the US, Britain and parts of Europe. They are also lower than those that have previously prompted the government to call states of emergency that include restrictions on restaurant and bar opening hours. There is concern, however, over a sharp rise in cases in Okinawa, home to more than half the 47,000 US troops in Japan. The prefecture’s government reported 130 new cases on Monday, the first time they had exceeded 100 since late September, the Kyodo news agency said. Local officials attributed the rise in cases among the civilian community to recent outbreaks at US military bases, according to Kyodo, including a record 235 new cases among American servicemen and women reported on New Year’s Day. US military forces on the island have been criticised for sharing only patchy information about the outbreaks, while residents have complained that unmasked troops are still leaving their bases and mingling with local people. The Okinawa governor, Denny Tamaki, blamed the US military for allowing the Omicron variant to spill over into the civilian population. I am outraged because the sharp increase in the number of infections among US military personnel suggests that their management is insufficient,” Tamaki told reporters at the weekend. Tokyo has reported more than 100 new cases of Covid-19 for the first time in almost three months, while the governor of the southern Japanese island of Okinawa has blasted the US military for failing to contain a recent outbreak that has since spread to the civilian community. Tokyo confirmed 103 new infections on Monday - up from 84 the previous day - amid concern that the highly transmissible Omicron variant is fuelling a rebound in cases in the Japanese capital. After infections soared to over 5,000 a day in the summer, new cases had stayed below 100 since 9 October. The city’s governor, Yuriko Koike said 25 people had been confirmed to be infected with the Omicron strain, including 11 who had no recent history of overseas travel. Japan imposed strict border control measures late last year after Omicron was first identified in South Africa. US president Joe Biden has urged Americans to get vaccinated, describing the process as “your patriotic duty” in a series of tweets on Monday. “Get vaccinated and get boosted,” the president said. “It’s free. It’s convenient. It saves lives. And it’s your patriotic duty.” China is reporting 175 new coronavirus cases for Monday, up from 161 a day earlier, the country’s health authority said on Tuesday. Of the new infections, 108 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, down from 101 a day earlier. Most of the new local cases were in the northwestern province of Shaanxi, where the capital city Xian has been under a strict nearly two-week lockdown. Zhejiang and Henan provinces also reported new cases. China reported 54 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, compared with 35 a day earlier. There were no new fatalities, leaving the death toll unchanged at 4,636. Mainland China had 102,841 confirmed cases as of Monday. Thousands of US schools delayed a scheduled return to classrooms following the holiday break or switched to remote learning as the Omicron variant pushes Covid-19 cases to record levels. Cities including Milwaukee, Cleveland and Detroit either implemented online instruction or cancelled school altogether this week for tens of thousands of students, citing both staff shortages and Omicron concerns. In New Jersey, which has seen some of the highest case rates in recent weeks, most urban school districts have implemented virtual classes to start the new year, including Newark, the state’s biggest city. Nationally, there are more than 2,750 school closures so far this week, according to Burbio, a website that tracks school disruptions, Reuters reports. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog reporting from sunny Sydney. Let’s kick off with some news from China. The city of Yuzhou in China’s Henan Province entered lockdown Monday night after three asymptomatic Covid cases were detected on Sunday, local media reports. More than 1 million citizens are now required to stay at home while public transportation, in-person education and public gatherings have been suspended. The city’s downtown area was reportedly locked down with all personnel unable to enter or exit the area. Shops and supermarkets have been ordered to suspend all business activities except “guaranteeing the supply of daily life materials”, according to a government notice. The emergency measures follow the lockdown of 13 million in Xi’an after 127 people contracted the virus. Israel is also set to allow foreigners with presumed Covid-19 immunity to enter from medium-risk countries from 9 January, the health ministry has said. Foreign travellers from 199 “orange” countries will be admitted if they can prove they are vaccinated or have recovered from the virus. Here’s a quick rundown of the day’s key developments: Thousands of US schools delayed a scheduled return to classrooms following the holiday break or switched to remote learning as the Omicron variant pushes Covid-19 cases to record levels. In Florida, Covid-19 cases have risen by 948% in just two weeks. Mozambique’s president, Filipe Nyusi, and his wife, Isaura, have tested positive for Covid-19 and are isolating, the president’s office said on Monday. The UK reported 157,758 new Covid cases today and 42 additional deaths.Cases rose by 50% between 28 December and 3 January compared with the week before. Deaths rose 17% during the same period compared with the previous seven days. Multiple NHS trusts have declared “critical incidents” amid soaring staff absences caused by Covid. Parts of the health service are in “crisis”, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation said. Canada’s most populous province of Ontario announced new restrictions - including closing down schools and shops operating at 50% capacity - as officials warned of a “tsunami” of new Covid cases. The US food and drug administration (FDA) has authorised the use of a third dose of Pfizer and BioNTech’s Covid vaccine for children aged 12 to 15. Starbucks will require its US workers to be fully vaccinated against Covid-19 or undergo weekly testing in order to comply with new federal mandates, the company said in an update sent to employees on Monday. India vaccinated over 3.8 million 15- to 18-year-olds on Monday as the country expanded its vaccination drive. The Omicron variant is better at circumventing vaccinated people’s immunity than the Delta variant, but is very likely to be milder, according to a Danish study. Israel will allow foreigners with presumed Covid-19 immunity to enter from medium-risk countries from 9 January, the health ministry said on Monday.Jess Harwood is an illustrator who lives and works on Gadigal land, and shares her artwork @jessharwoodartA Coalition plan to give the disadvantaged small cash payments to cover the cost of rapid antigen tests has been dismissed by Labor and the unions, as the government resists pressure to make the tests freely available for everyone. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said the idea was “ridiculous” and finally called for the tests to be made freely available. “We have considered the options and it is clear that this is the simplest, most efficient, fairest and most responsible way to fix the mess that Scott Morrison has made of testing at this critical juncture of the pandemic,” Albanese said. In the lead-up to Wednesday’s meeting of national cabinet, the Morrison government floated the plan in the Australian, revealing it would use the disaster payment system to give people on low incomes, welfare recipients and pensioners the funds needed to cover the cost of up to five tests. If states and territories agreed to the proposal, the funding would increase to cover the cost of 10 tests. Rapid antigen tests are understood to cost about $3 on the wholesale market but are retailing on the private market for much more due to widespread shortages. Speaking on Wednesday morning, Morrison said essential tests for those who are close contacts and symptomatic would continue to be free. “So if you’re a close contact, if you’re symptomatic, those tests are free to all Australians,” the prime minister said. “Always have been. That has never changed.” He said the government’s proposal related to “peace of mind tests” over and above essential requirements. “I’ll be putting a proposal to the premiers and chief ministers today, how we can offset the cost for those who are on commonwealth seniors health cards and pensioners, and those on healthcare cards and things of that nature to defray the costs for those that they’re seeking to get, where other Australians are buying,” Morrison said. But the proposal has already been met with some resistance, with the Queensland premier, Annasatasia Palaszczuk, saying the new system needed to be “as easy and simple as possible”. “I haven’t seen a paper from the prime minister, I am only speaking from what I have read in the papers today, but we just need to be make it very, very simple and easy, especially to our most vulnerable people,” she said. “For our pensioners, for our health cardholders, these should be made available for free.” The cash-for-tests proposal, details of which are yet to be released, was immediately attacked as a “distraction” and an example of the prime minister again offering “too little, too late”. “Today’s attempt to distract from his ongoing failure to make rapid antigen tests free and accessible for all Australians proves that prime minister Scott Morrison still doesn’t get it,” said the Australian Council of Trade Unions acting secretary, Liam O’Brien. “Mr Morrison is planning to divide the nation by giving a small number of Australians limited access to the healthcare they need, while everyone else is left to fend for themselves. “This does nothing to help small businesses and those that work for them keep their workplaces safe and open.” The Labor deputy leader, Tanya Plibersek, also criticised the plan. “Nothing says too little, too late like Scott Morrison saying he’ll give some people a subsidy to buy rapid antigen tests (at retail prices) when you can’t find one to buy,” Plibersek said on Twitter. The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, said the state had put in place a substantial order for rapid antigen tests that would begin arriving next week, and would consider making a financial contribution towards the government’s plan. “We want to make sure those who need access to rapid antigen testing, get access to that now,” Perrottet said. “We put whatever we need in to ensure that that support is there for people right across the state. “If there’s a financial agreement that we can reach with the commonwealth government, from my perspective and the treasurer’s perspective, there is no dollar figure that we will not put on the table to ensure as we move through this next phase, rapid antigen tests are available to anybody right across the state who needs one.” When asked about providing tests free across the board, Perrottet said that would be a matter for national cabinet to consider. “Clearly, with the significant queues that we’re seeing at PCR centres, by the provision of rapid antigen tests at those centres we will see a substantial alleviation of pressure on testing, so that is something that we’re currently focused on.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He urged people to continue to be patient at state testing queues, and said there was a need to continue to adapt as the nature of the pandemic changed. “We’re in a pandemic,” he said. “There’ll be curveballs thrown at us over the course of this period of time, but … we’ve overcome those challenges over the past two years.” A growing number of experts have been calling for the tests to be made free, including the Doherty Institute head, Sharon Lewin, who told ABC on Tuesday they should be “widely accessible and free”.Bangladesh have ended New Zealand’s 17-match unbeaten run on home soil with a stunning eight-wicket victory at Mount Maunganui. The world Test champions were dismissed for 169 in their second innings, with Bangladesh knocking off the 40 runs required for victory for the loss of two wickets as the tourists beat New Zealand in a Test match for the first time. The hosts had begun day five on 147 for 5, a slender lead of 17 runs, and were quickly on the back foot as the seamer Ebadot Hossain clean-bowled Ross Taylor for 40, then removed Kyle Jamieson for a duck in his first two overs. Taskin Ahmed chipped in with the wicket of the all-rounder Rachin Ravindra for 16. The Black Caps were rocking on 160 for 8 and Bangladesh finished them off, Taskin removing Tim Southee’s middle stump before Trent Boult departed for eight as he holed out in the deep. There was a brief early wobble for the tourists when Shadman Islam was caught behind for three off Southee’s bowling. Najmul Hossain Shanto and the captain, Mominul Haque, steadied the ship and by the time Najmul was caught smartly by Taylor for 17, the finish line was in sight. Mominul, who scored 13 not out, and the experienced Mushfiqur Rahim (unbeaten on five) ushered Bangladesh to their historic triumph. Ebadot finished with second-innings figures of 6 for 46, his early wickets key to forcing a result. The former volleyball player, who is still employed by the Bangladesh Air Force, was named player of the match. “It’s a long journey, volleyball to cricket … I’m enjoying cricket now,” he said after the game. In the first innings, New Zealand had posted an impressive 328, Devon Conway top-scoring with 122, but they found themselves 130 runs behind at halfway. Bangladesh made 458 in response, with four players – Mominul (88), Liton Das (86), Mahmudul Hasan Joy (78) and Najmul (64) – reaching half-centuries. Bangladesh’s first win in any format of the game in New Zealand gives them a 1-0 lead in the two-match series, with the second Test starting in Christchurch on Sunday. The hosts will be eager to bounce back from their first home Test defeat since South Africa won at Wellington in March 2017.Newly released video footage appears to show California police officers using a law enforcement dog to severely maul an Uber driver, who fell behind on payments for the car he rented to do his job. San Ramon police stopped Ali Badr, a 42-year-old Egyptian immigrant, in December 2020 after a rental company reported his vehicle as stolen. In footage obtained by the San Francisco Chronicle, police in the Bay Area city can be seen releasing the dog on the unarmed and barefoot driver without warning within seconds of stopping him, even though Badr was not resisting. The dog clamped down on Badr’s right arm for nearly a minute, mangling him so severely that he required multiple surgeries. In a lawsuit filed last month, Badr, who was never charged, said he was left with “severe physical and psychological injuries” and has not regained full use of his arm and hand since the incident. “All of them are talking to me at one time,” Badr told the Chronicle. “They’re yelling at me, and all of them have guns out. I did what they say exactly.” The case has cast a harsh light not only on the tactics of the police department but on the rental arrangements utilized by rideshare companies such as Uber and Lyft. Badr, who was a social worker in Egypt before moving to the US, previously drove for Uber and Lyft with his own vehicle, but he could no longer afford the payments after the pandemic reduced his income, the newspaper reported. In August 2020, according to the lawsuit, he obtained a car owned by the rental rideshare startup CarMommy via a rental agreement with HyreCar, a rental car company serving gig workers. He fell behind on his payments toward the end of the contract, the Chronicle reported, but made arrangements to pay the company. CarMommy’s CEO, John Blomeke, reported the vehicle as stolen, which language in the contract Badr signed stipulated could happen if he fell behind on payments and “other criteria were met”, according to the newspaper. HyreCar declined to comment on the matter while Uber and CarMommy did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Rental agreements such as these became common as Uber and Lyft expanded across the US. Short-term car rentals through partners such as HyreCar offer fewer hoops to jump through than typical car rental arrangements, and the short-term car rentals gave Uber and Lyft access to a new pool of drivers. But some drivers have claimed that the rental arrangements can be predatory, sometimes requiring higher rental and other costs in exchange for lower pay. For some drivers like Badr, it was at times difficult to make enough to cover the monthly or weekly payments, at which point drivers were typically required to immediately return the vehicle. For many that meant losing at least one source of income and, in some cases, their temporary homes. Dash- and body-cam video shows Badr, who appears to be trying to put on his shoes, cooperating with officers’ demands during a traffic stop. But, within seconds, an officer releases the large dog who immediately bites Badr’s arm. As the dog attacks him, Badr screams and repeatedly yells “What I did? What I did?” while officers inspect the car with their guns drawn. Badr told the Chronicle that after being transported by ambulance, he was handcuffed to a hospital bed and underwent surgery for his injuries. The police department sought charges for vehicle theft and resisting arrest against Badr, but the Contra Costa district attorney in March declined to file charges due to “insufficient evidence and the interest of justice”, a DA spokesperson said. The San Ramon police department did not immediately respond to a request for comment. According to his lawsuit, Badr suffered “permanent and extensive” damage to his arm and hand, which are badly scarred, and has “undergone substantial mental health treatment and therapy”. The city of San Ramon, the police chief and officers are named in the lawsuit, along with HyreCar, CarMommy and company CEO Blomeke. US police dogs bite thousands of people each year and are often used on people who are not violent or suspected of minor crimes or in some cases no crimes at all, an investigation from the Marshall Project found. Victims of such attacks struggle to seek accountability as excessive force lawsuits involving dog bites are challenging to win, according to the outlet.Joe Biden will mark the first anniversary of the deadly assault at the US Capitol this Thursday by honoring the bravery of law enforcement on the scene, and outlining the unfinished work the nation needs to do to strengthen its democracy, the White House said in its first preview of the president’s remarks. “On Thursday, the president is going to speak to the truth of what happened, not the lies that some have spread since, and the peril it has posed to the rule of law and our system of democratic governance,” the White House spokesperson, Jen Psaki, told reporters on Tuesday afternoon. The preview came as Donald Trump announced he was cancelling his own anniversary event, a press conference at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida that had been scheduled for the evening of 6 January. Several Republicans had expressed concerns about Trump’s news conference overshadowing the somber day. The former president blasted the House committee investigating the 6 January insurrection, which continues its work and on Tuesday issued a letter seeking the cooperation of the Fox New host Sean Hannity, who exchanged messages with Trump and his chief of staff, Mark Meadows, in the days leading up to the attack. In a statement, Trump said that he was cancelling his conference “in light of the total bias and dishonesty of the January 6th Unselect Committee of Democrats, two failed Republicans, and the Fake News Media”, and would address the issue instead at a rally on 15 January. Biden and Kamala Harris will speak on Thursday morning at the US Capitol, one year after a mob loyal to Trump raided the complex in a failed attempt to stop the counting of electoral college votes that officially delivered Biden’s election victory. Trump, fellow Republicans and rightwing media personalities have pushed false and misleading accounts to downplay the attack, calling it a non-violent protest or blaming leftwing activists. Four people died on the day of the riot, and one Capitol police officer died the day after defending Congress. Dozens of police were injured during the multi-hour onslaught by Trump supporters, and four officers have since taken their own lives. Biden will put an extra spotlight on the role of Capitol police and others on the scene, Psaki said. “Because of their efforts, our democracy withstood an attack from a mob, and the will of more than 150 million people who voted in the presidential election was ultimately registered by Congress,” Psaki said. Psaki was asked what the president’s message will be to the many Republicans who believe Biden stole the election from Trump, despite overwhelming contrary evidence. “What he’s going to continue to do is speak to everyone in the country. Those who didn’t vote for him, those who may not believe he is the legitimate president, about what he wants to do to make their lives better,” Psaki said.North Korea fired a suspected ballistic missile early on Wednesday, the first such test by Pyongyang of the new year, drawing condemnation from Japan and calls for talks from South Korea. The South Korean Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) and the Japanese coast guard said the projectile “appears” to be a ballistic missile, with South Korea saying it landed in the East Sea, also known as the Sea of Japan. The land-based missile was launched from the east coast of North Korea and flew about 500 km (310 miles) before landing in waters outside Japan’s exclusive economic zone, Japan’s defence ministry said. The JCS said South Korean and US intelligence authorities were trying to gather more information about the launch. “Our military is maintaining readiness posture in preparation for a possible additional launch while closely monitoring the situation in close cooperation with the United States,” the JCS said in a statement. Speaking hours after the launch, the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, called for the North to engage in dialogue, voicing concern that the test would raise tensions and damage inter-Korean relations. “We should not give up the hope for dialogue in order to fundamentally overcome this situation,” Moon said at a groundbreaking ceremony for a rail line he hopes will eventually connect South and North Korea. “If both Koreas work together and build trust, peace will be achieved one day.” Moon described the rail line, in the eastern coastal city of Goseong near the North Korean border, as a “stepping stone for peace and regional balance” on the divided Korean peninsula. Wednesday’s apparent ballistic missile test is the first since October and comes at a precarious time for the North Korean regime. The country is battling food shortages and an economic crisis stemming from the long closure of its border with China during the coronavirus pandemic, while there are no signs of a resurrection of long-stalled nuclear talks with Washington. Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, condemned the launch. “We find it truly regrettable that North Korea has continued to fire missiles from last year,” he told reporters. Kishida said other details were not immediately available, including where the suspected missile landed and whether it had caused any damage. He said he had ordered officials to confirm the safety of ships and planes in the area where the suspected missile likely flew and fell. South Korea’s National Security Council convened an emergency meeting, expressing concern that the launch “came at a time when internal and external stability is extremely important” and calling on North Korea to return to talks on dismantling its nuclear arsenal. While recent North Korean test launches have featured two or more missiles, Wednesday’s test appears to have involved a single projectile. The regime has tested multiple missiles in recent years, despite UN security council resolutions banning all missile and nuclear tests, and sanctions designed to weaken its ability to develop weapons of mass destruction. Its arsenal is believed to include long-range missiles capable of striking parts of the US mainland, while last year the North claimed it had successfully tested a new type of submarine-launched ballistic missile; a long-range cruise missile; a train-launched weapon; and what it described as a hypersonic warhead. North Korea has not tested an intercontinental ballistic missile since 2017, apparently to avoid inviting further sanctions, but appears determined to apply pressure on Washington with launches of smaller missiles. In addition, the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un, did not publicly appear at any missile tests or military drills last year – the first time he has been absent during his decade in power. The latest test comes as North Korea remains silent on US appeals for talks. At a key meeting of the North’s ruling party last week, Kim – who has overseen rapid progress in military technology – vowed to continue to bolster its military capabilities but did not refer to the US. The two countries have not has held denuclearisation talks since the collapse in 2019 of the dialogue between Kim and the then US president, Donald Trump. Under Joe Biden, the US has repeatedly said it is willing to meet North Korean representatives without preconditions, but insists it will not give up on denuclearisation. But Pyongyang has so far dismissed the offer, accusing Washington of pursuing “hostile” policies, including joint military drills with the South it regards as rehearsals for an invasion. “Rather than expressing willingness for denuclearisation talks or interest in an end-of-war declaration, North Korea is signalling that neither the Omicron variant nor domestic food shortages will stop its aggressive missile development,” said Leif-Eric Easley, a professor at Ewha University in Seoul. According to a statement released on Tuesday night, the US Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff called South Korea’s Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman, General Lee Sun Jin, to express their “ironclad commitment to the US-Republic of Korea alliance” while also discussing military response options. Japan’s foreign minister, Yoshimasa Hayashi, and its defence minister, Nobuo Kishi, will hold talks with US Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Secretary of Defence Lloyd Austin via video link on Friday, the foreign ministry said in a statement. Discussions will centre on the overall security situation faced by the allies as well as those concerning “a free and open Indo-Pacific,” it added. In a report released last month, the US government’s Congressional Research Service concluded that North Korea was continuing to advance its nuclear weapons and missile programmes despite UN sanctions and diplomatic efforts. “Recent ballistic missile tests and military parades suggest that North Korea is continuing to build a nuclear war-fighting capability designed to evade regional ballistic missile defences,” the report said.Japan’s government is poised to declare a quasi-state of emergency on the southern island of Okinawa, media reports said, after a Covid-19 outbreak traced to US military bases spread to the civilian population. The prime minister, Fumio Kishida, could announce the measures this week, the Mainichi newspaper said, after Okinawa officials reported 225 new cases on Tuesday, including 47 of the Omicron strain. Tokyo, by comparison, registered 151 new infections. The Okinawa figures do not include 164 new infections discovered at US bases on the island, bringing the total of American military infections in the latest outbreak to more than 1,000. The governor of Okinawa, Denny Tamaki, has publicly criticised US forces for failing to contain an outbreak at a base last month that quickly spread to other military facilities on the island. The first Omicron case among civilians has been traced to a local man who is employed at a US base. The emergency measures, which could include limits on bar and restaurant opening hours, would be the first of their kind in Japan since late September, when the government lifted emergency restrictions that had been in place in parts of the country for much of the year. While cases in Japan are low compared with those in the US, Britain and parts of Europe, the number have crept up in recent days as evidence emerged of community transmission of the Omicron variant. Japan reported 1,268 new infections on Tuesday, the first time for three months that the country of 125 million people has had more than 1,000 cases a day. Tamaki told reporters that the island, which hosts more than half of the 47,000 US troops based in Japan, had entered a “sixth wave” of infections. The 225 virus cases reported on Tuesday were Okinawa’s highest in more than three months, Tamaki said, adding that infections at local US bases continued to rise. The Mainichi said Tamaki had told the chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, that he was considering asking the central government to call a quasi-state of emergency.A popular prime minister of Burundi, Prince Louis Rwagasore, was shot dead just over 60 years ago with the complicity of Belgium, the departing colonial power, a researcher has claimed. The Belgian state has an “overwhelming responsibility” for the assassination of Rwagasore, according to Ludo De Witte, a Flemish sociologist who has spent five years investigating the killing. His previous work on the assassination of Congo’s first elected prime minister, Patrice Lumumba, led to a parliamentary inquiry that concluded Belgium had a “moral responsibility” for the death of the charismatic leader. His new book, Murder in Burundi, explores unseen documents from archives in Brussels and London that expose Belgium’s hand in Rwagasore’s assassination, an event that shattered peace between ethnic groups, leading to decades of war and instability in the landlocked central African country. The story unfolds on the terrace of the restaurant Tanganyika in Bujumbura on Friday 13 October 1961, where Rwagasore was dining with ministers and allies. The 29-year-old son of one of Burundi’s last kings had been swept to power barely three weeks earlier in a landslide victory that had stunned the Belgian elite. A conservative aristocrat and a democrat with a knack for political organising, Rwagasore wanted to unite Burundi’s different ethnic groups – the Hutus, Tutsi and Gangwas – in true independence from Belgium, the colonial power since 1918. His plans were never realised. He had been prime minister for only 16 days when he was shot. The killer and his accomplices were quickly caught and tried. The man who pulled the trigger, Jean Kageorgis, a Greek national, was executed on 30 June 1962, the day before Burundi’s independence. Five accomplices were put to death six months later. De Witte argues that the role of the Belgian state was never properly examined, not by the Belgian colonial court, the newly independent government of Burundi, or the United Nations, which all conducted inquiries into the killing. De Witte sees differences in the culpability of the Belgian elite in the two assassinations he has investigated. In the case of Lumumba, killed also in 1961, the Belgian elite had “a direct and concrete responsibility in the assassination”, De Witte said. In the case of Rwagasore, events were orchestrated by Belgian officials in Burundi while Brussels turned a blind eye. Rwagasore’s life was in danger after his Uprona party won a crushing victory over the Christian Democrat party (CDC), which was seen as more friendly to Belgian interests. Two days after the Uprona landslide, Roberto Régnier, the Belgian resident (governor), convened a crisis meeting of senior Belgian officials and CDC allies, where he delivered a chilling message. “Rwagasore must be killed,” he said. His words were taken as an invitation by the CDC. Régnier’s words were confirmed by four participants in a 1962 investigation by the crown prosecutor of Brussels. But that report was never published and was left gathering dust until De Witte came across it. The first clue of the report’s existence was found in a dispatch from Britain’s then ambassador to Burundi, James Murray. Writing in 1962, Murray told London that some senior Belgians had had “an almost pathological hatred” of Rwagasore, who they believed would harm Belgian-Burundian relations. He recalled Régnier’s “words which go very far in the direction of incitement to murder”. Also accused is one of Belgium’s most admired diplomats, Paul-Henri Spaak, the then foreign minister who is now celebrated as a founding father of the European project, who De Witte believes turned a blind eye to what was happening. “Spaak knew that Régnier and his aides were on a war footing with Rwagasore, that they were rebelling against the United Nations decision to order free elections with the participation of Rwagasore,” he says. He also describes how King Baudouin, one of Belgium’s most popular monarchs, sought to help the assassins. He “moved heaven and earth” to commute the death sentence of the assassin to imprisonment. While some might suggest Baudouin was motivated by opposition to the death penalty, De Witte contends that the young king was heavily influenced by the ultra-conservative Catholic circle at the palace that took a pitiless attitude to anyone advocating real independence. But the picture remains incomplete. When De Witte went to examine Spaak’s archive, he found only a few document relating to Burundi for 1961. And a document he found in the African Archives in 2013 had disappeared when he went to look at it again a few years later, he says. The sources may be new but the conclusions do not surprise Burundian-Belgians. “We have known for a long time there was a crime committed by the Belgian state,” said Libérat Ntibashirakandi, a mathematics professor in Brussels who founded the Burundian Diaspora of Belgium group. “The book brings new elements of proof that Belgium was implicated in this assassination.” Belgian parliamentarians have been calling for greater access to archives since the inquiry into Lumumba’s death nearly 20 years ago. Experts repeated the “paramount importance” of declassifying the archives in October 2021 when a special commission handed over a report examining Belgium’s colonial past in Congo, Rwanda and Burundi, a project triggered by Black Lives Matter protests across Belgium. The experts acknowledged that their 689-page report paid “limited attention” to Rwanda and Burundi and called for further investigation into both countries, including Rwagasore’s assassination. After two decades studying the darkest pages of Belgium’s history, De Witte is not optimistic the commission will change much. “Among the Belgian elite there is a reticence, a real distance to confront the reality, the destructive consequences of colonisation and decolonisation,” he says. A spokesperson for Belgium’s foreign ministry did not respond directly to the charges in the book, but said: “The debate over historical reality is never over. It is perfectly legitimate, even necessary and desirable, that the historic colonial project be treated in a critical manner.” The spokesperson said the government was waiting on recommendations from the special parliamentary commission on colonisation before taking another position. Ntibashirakandi said the Belgian federal parliament needed to investigate the murder of Rwagasore, whom he sees as national hero who could have led Burundi to a very different future. “It’s important for Burundi to know the truth and for all of Belgium to recognise the mistakes of the past.”The 200-year-old secrets of the child mummies of the Capuchin Catacombs of Palermo in northern Sicily are to be revealed by a British-led team of scientists using X-ray technology. Dr Kirsty Squires, of Staffordshire University, will head a first attempt to tell the stories of some of the 163 children whose remains lie within the corridors and crypts of the famous underground tomb. The Catacombs contain 1,284 mummified and skeletonised bodies, the largest collection of mummies in Europe. While many of the children contained there are now skeletal, others have been described as appearing as if they are sleeping. The two-year investigation will focus on the children who died between 1787 and 1880 and, initially, on 41 bodies residing within a bespoke “child chapel”. None of the children’s identity, cause of death and medical history is known, and descriptive tags attached to them have long eroded away. It is hoped that a better picture about the children’s lives and passing will be revealed by cross-referencing the anatomical findings with archival records, including two books containing names and years of death. “We are going in January to carry out our fieldwork,” Squires said. “We will take a portable X-ray unit and take hundreds of images of the children from different angles. “We are hoping to better understand their development, health and identity, comparing the biological fundings with the more cultural kind of things: the way the individuals have been mummified and the clothes they are wearing as well.” The catacombs, once solely for the deceased friars of the Capuchin order, have become a popular, if macabre, tourist attraction, with every niche and crevice bearing bodies on open display. The preserved dead were often dressed in their finery and would be visited by their relatives. The friars first established themselves at the church of Santa Maria della Pace in 1534. They created a mass grave for their dead which opened like a tank under an altar but, when that became full, the deceased were held in a vault, or charnel house, while a new crypt was dug. When it came to relocate the bodies from the overfull vault, 45 of the deceased friars exhumed were found to have been naturally mummified, with their faces recognisable, a development that was taken to be an act of God. Rather than bury the remains, the bodies were displayed as relics, propped in niches along the walls of the first corridor of the new cemetery. In 1787, a letter was published stating that everyone, including children, in the region had the right to be accommodated in the catacombs after death. Almost all the research until today has been on the adult mummies, excepting a headline-grabbing examination of Rosalia Lombardo, who died of pneumonia a week shy of her second birthday on 6 December 1920. Her startlingly complete preservation was investigated a decade ago by Dr Dario Piombino-Mascali, who is working with Squires on the latest project at the catacombs. He said: “Many of the mummies are a result of natural dehydration. Other mummies were chemically treated. Those chemically treated are normally better preserved. “Some of them are superbly preserved. Some really look like sleeping children. They are darkened by the time but some of them have got even fake eyes so they seem to be looking at you. They look like tiny little dolls. “Of course you want to do something to preserve them and to make sure their stories are told and give a sense that they are children. It is very upsetting when you deal with children in anthropology.” Radiographic images – 14 per mummy, from head-to-toe – will be taken and examined by Dr Robert Loynes, a retired orthopaedic surgeon who has previously investigated ancient Egyptian mummies. Piombino-Mascali said it was vital that the work on the fragile corpses was “non invasive”. Images will be drawn by an artist from Los Angeles, Eduardo Hernandez, who will produce illustrations for use in educational leaflets for handing out at the catacombs and elsewhere. The project has received over £70,000 in funding from the UK’s Arts and Humanities Research Council. The last bodies interned in the catacombs died in the early 20th century.Michele Rech is uncomfortable with success. The shy 38-year-old comic book artist, who works from a modest apartment on the outskirts of Rome, does not use the word “fame” but refers instead to his rise to national prominence as a “thing” he struggles to manage. In the art world, he is known as Zerocalcare and is the cartoonist’s equivalent of Hunter S Thompson. Rech’s graphic novels are a form of gonzo journalism – inspired by his own adventures as a protester on the frontlines of police violence in Italy, and in Syria, where he was embedded with Kurdish forces. This year, Netflix released an adaptation of his most well-loved cartoons, in which Rech struggles with grief and job insecurity, all while a giant armadillo represents his imaginary conscience. Last month, the series topped the streaming charts in Italy, ahead of South Korea’s hit show Squid Game. Rech’s career began in 2001 when he chronicled the bloody riots during the Genoa G8 summit in which the Italian police severely beat anti-globalism protesters. He was just 17 at the time and was among the demonstrators. “That experience was overwhelming,” says Rech. “I sensed that anyone with a uniform wanted to kill us all. A year later they arrested 25 protesters who were accused of vandalism. The brutality wasn’t enough; they wanted to put behind bars those who took part in the protests. I needed to tell what happened. That’s where it all started.” The aim of Rech’s first short comic book, La Nostra Storia alla Sbarra (Our Story in the Dock), was to use proceeds from its sales to offset the legal costs of the young Italians arrested during the turmoil in Genoa. He used for the first time his pen name, Zerocalcare, meaning “zero limescale”, inspired by a catchy jingle for a TV commercial for a descaler solution. He chose the name in a rush – it was the first thing that came to mind. “I never thought that being a comic artist could be my main source of income,” said Rech, who used to work as an after-school tutor. “Also because many people told me I didn’t have enough talent to become a cartoonist.” In 2010, Rech began working on his debut graphic novel, The Armadillo’s Prophecy. In it, Zerocalcare recounts mourning the death of a classmate, interspersed with Italian cultural stereotypes, in the presence of the giant armadillo. It was turned down by dozens of publishers but one startup company, Bao, believed in the concept and in 2012, 500 copies were printed. The book went on to be reprinted 24 times and has sold more than 150,000 copies. It was Rech’s first step toward renown among Italian cartoonists. The second was a 3,600km journey, when in 2014, Islamic State launched an attack in northern Syria. Rech, who was supportive of the Kurdish cause, made several trips to the city of Kobani in northern Syria to recount the resistance of the female fighters against IS. The result of those experiences culminated in his 2015 book, Kobane calling: Greetings from Northern Syria. His success has continued to build and now on Netflix there is his offbeat animated series, Tear Along the Dotted Line, which follows the existential vicissitudes of a socially awkward cartoonist (Rech’s own avatar) with his armadillo-cum-conscience reflecting on his life’s path. “I was obsessed with the idea of creating an animated series,” says Rech. “First of all, for the music. I had always mentioned my musical suggestions in my comics, but I knew many people would never listen to them. So I wanted people to listen to my things. I sent Netflix hundreds of emails, until they finally caved in. They allowed me free rein to decide the content as I pleased.” The series, in which Rech performs the voiceover for all his characters, except for the armadillo, which is performed by the Italian actor Valerio Mastandrea, has become the most-watched show on Netflix in Italy. The Turkish didn’t like the inclusion in the series of the PKK Kurdish flag, deemed outrageous by Ankara, which considers the organisation a terrorist group. “Those are the flags of the people who liberated northern Syria from IS,” says Rech, “of those who gave their lives to fight Islamic fundamentalism.” Today Zerocalcare is one of the most trending hashtags on Italian social media. The crowds that gather at his book signings resemble the queues outside concerts and can last hours. “The last time I signed copies of my comic books it lasted 14 hours,” he says. “It’s extenuating, but I want my relationship with readers to be as transparent as possible. Some people say I should hire an agent who says ‘no’, and that I should only sign the first 40 copies. I’d feel like I’d be delegating dirty work to someone else. But it would be an injustice and I’d feel guilty.” Rech follows a strict subculture of hardcore punk called “straight edge”, whose adherents refrain from using alcohol, tobacco and drugs, and says it helps him to deal with the recent barrage of success. He is glad things are going well but adds, “I just have to learn that things aren’t the way they were a month ago. And maybe it’s not easy for someone like me.” For a good understanding of Rech’s personality, there is a scene in the TV series that represents the artist’s philosophy of life. Returning home after a night with his would-be-love, Zerocalcare finds the armadillo, his alter ego, sitting on a chair while sipping a herbal tea. Before Zero closes the door, the armadillo asks him if he has had sex. “No,” answers the protagonist. The armadillo replies: “You’re a black belt at dodging life.’’Scott Morrison’s bloody-minded refusal to fund rapid Covid-19 tests is misguided, expensive and dangerous. It is just one more example of the Liberal leader putting his own crude political interests ahead of public safety. There are no silver bullets to end a pandemic. The public understand that. Vaccines are an important weapon. But only because they let us move from the blunt instrument of citywide lockdowns to a combination of other, more targeted and inter-locking public health measures. This includes an effective regime of testing, tracing, isolation and quarantine. All these elements must work together. Morrison’s dereliction of leadership responsibility for Australia’s testing regime, with queues snaking through city streets and rapid antigen tests being hawked online at extortionate prices, is one more addition to the many errors that have come before it. At every stage of the pandemic, Morrison has had to be dragged into half-hearted action – with catastrophic consequences. Morrison has been obsessed with picking political fights instead of his government’s core responsibilities like quarantine and aged care. Almost 1,000 Australians have now died in commonwealth-regulated aged care homes that were meant to keep them safe. In this pivotal stage of the pandemic, it is in everyone’s interest to ensure every Australian, regardless of their income, has access to free at-home rapid antigen test kits. This is because every time a positive case is identified, it provides the chance to staunch a chain of infection and keep bending the curve so that our hospitals aren’t overrun. Morrison’s myriad arguments against free rapid tests range from the hypocritical to the obscene. First, Morrison insists the Treasury cannot afford it. This is patently ridiculous. Let’s not forget how Morrison wasted an eye-watering $40bn in JobKeeper payments to companies that didn’t need it – enough to buy every Australian household a dozen tests every month into 2024! Morrison’s position on rapid tests is ultimately a false economy because mass-testing saves money in the long run. Public hospitals can easily spend more than $100,000 invasively ventilating an intensive care patient, or the chain of infection can be detected and halted weeks earlier using a cheap rapid test. Second, Morrison points to conventional PCR laboratory tests as fully subsidised alternative. Apart from the mammoth queues to access a PCR test, these tests are much more expensive to taxpayers. For every PCR test conducted by a private laboratory, Medicare is charged $85; by comparison, rapid tests generally cost about $10 (even less when the government is buying millions of units in bulk). Put another way, for every rapid test that displaces a PCR test, taxpayers would save at least $70. Third, Morrison draws a distinction between medicine, which he says should be funded, and tests, which he says shouldn’t. This is hogwash. Since 1991, successive federal governments have funded free breast and cervical cancer screenings. John Howard expanded on these programs by including at-home bowel cancer tests. The fact that Morrison’s own government is conducting a feasibility study on free lung cancer screenings suggests he has no objection. Australia’s world-leading response to HIV/Aids also hinged on providing vulnerable groups with free testing, treatment, condoms and clean needles. Fourth, the government warns it cannot possibly meet Australians’ insatiable appetite for free tests – a statement that is grounded in a deeply elitist perspective on public health behaviours by lower income Australians. Federal health minister, Greg Hunt, and Morrison talk down to Australians as though they are either hypochondriacs addicted to shoving cotton swabs up their nostrils, or charlatans determined to cheat government programs. They suddenly insist on price signals to ensure people don’t seek help unless they are truly desperate. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Morrison might find this hard to imagine, but not every household has an extra $25 saved for a rapid test when they need it. This is a recipe for massive undetected spread among those Australians least able to pay. Finally, Morrison says he won’t “undercut” businesses trying to make a buck out of these tests. This is a total abrogation of responsibility, leaving public health at the mercy of price-gouging companies who – unlike Morrison – listened to experts’ warnings of a looming spike in demand. The fundamental principle of Medicare is that Australians deserve access to healthcare based on their needs, not their ability to fulfil the needs of the market. If Morrison wants to ensure Australians can find rapid tests at their local shops, that’s good; he should involve those businesses in delivering publicly funded testing kits. But since Morrison’s stated motivation is to avoid “undercutting” their profits, it seems he’s forgotten who he works for. One of the few things that unites most Australians is our revulsion at the hideous inequities of the American health system; Morrison’s apparent fondness for mingling business with healthcare suggests he doesn’t share that view. Why then has Morrison taken this hypocritical and unsustainable position? I suspect three reasons. Morrison may be trying to ease fears ahead of the election. Australians are watching rising case numbers with trepidation and soaring positive test rates – now more than 20% in most states – suggest there are many more cases lurking beneath the surface. If Morrison cannot reduce the numbers in reality, he can reduce the numbers that are announced in the media each day. As Donald Trump once claimed, “if you don’t test, you won’t have any cases”. Morrison also knows voters have now seen through the myth of Liberals being superior economic managers. Morrison is now the biggest-spending postwar prime minister with record debt and record deficit. National debt is set to reach $1.3tn – more than seven-times the Labor government’s supposed “debt bomb” of $189bn in 2013 – equivalent to 55% of GDP, compared with 12% when we left office. Morrison’s performative austerity on rapid tests is a feeble attempt to regain some fiscal credibility. Finally, Morrison now stakes this public position on a thread-bare ideology of “personal responsibility”. He’s borrowed this from his British counterpart, Boris Johnson, who thought he could politically skate through the latest UK debacle. But it’s also political code language for a Darwinian survival-of-the-fittest contest in which the weak, the poor and the vulnerable are cast aside. Perhaps that’s what Morrison really meant when he said of rapid tests, “someone’s always going to pay for it, and it’s going to be you”. Once we had Medicare. Now we have MorrisonCare. Kevin Rudd is a former prime minister of AustraliaI’m standing near the cliff edge, on a narrow strip of wild, unmanaged grassland and scrub, with a light, onshore breeze in my face. Beyond the precipice lies the North Sea, calm today. To the south, ships at anchor waiting for a berth, offshore wind turbines and industrial Teesside. To the north, the conurbations of Seaham, Sunderland and South Tyneside. Behind me, agriculture, the coastal railway and a quarry. It’s high tide, bringing from far below the soporific sound of waves slapping against rocks. Fulmars, stiff-winged and silent, glide past the cliff edge, almost level with my head, giving me a sideways glance as they pass, as if to say: “I bet you wish you could do this.” And I do: it looks so effortless, so pleasurable. Turning away with a few shallow wingbeats, around they go again, out to sea, then back towards the cliff face, lowering their feet as air brakes at the last moment as they rise to ride the updraught once more. They pass so close that I can see turbulent airflow ruffling small feathers over the top of their long, slender wings, generating lift. Around the headland is an impenetrable wall of wind-sculpted blackthorn, which suddenly opens on to another vertiginous, grassy slope, revealing the tiny bay called Hawthorn Hive. The rock face is magnesian limestone; soft, fast-weathering, prone to landslips. Eventually, storms and sea level rise will send this narrow remnant of wilderness crashing down on to the shore. Every winter, waves chew away at the raised beach that protects the cliffs. A flicker of wings catches my eye: two small birds, flitting skywards to catch flies. They are hard to identify with the sun in my eyes and lead me a merry dance as I try to get closer. Following them back along the path, I finally see that they are stonechats. The male’s breast feathers are the colour of a glowing ember. It’s perhaps just as well that knee-high brambles, as daunting as a barbed-wire entanglement, prevent me from getting any closer to their cliff-edge perch. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe new head of an investigation into alleged rule-breaking Downing Street parties has not “started from scratch” and is unlikely to re-interview all government staff who have already been spoken to about their knowledge of the gatherings, the Guardian has been told. Sources said that Sue Gray, who took over the probe after cabinet secretary Simon Case recused himself when a Christmas event in his own office was revealed, would more likely “pick up” the existing work and look for “holes” in the testimony provided so far. In addition, Gray’s attention will have to turn to more gatherings that came to light since the initial probe led by Case began. Among them was an event revealed by the Guardian attended by prime minister Boris Johnson, his wife and 17 others. Attendees were pictured with cheese and wine in the No 10 garden in spring 2020, when socialising in groups was banned. The prime minister has insisted it was a “work meeting”. One insider with knowledge of the investigation said they did not expect everyone already interviewed to have to go through the process again. They characterised the inquiry as “same team, different leader”. A second government source said Gray was unlikely to “discount anything the team has gathered before”, but that given the final report will be in her name, she would probably go through existing witness evidence to check for “holes” and seek further clarification from some people. They said Gray was not expected to re-interview everyone for the sake of it, explaining: “She won’t do things by default, she’ll be pragmatic.” The source added that “a different leader can make a team do different things”. It was initially hoped the parties probe would be concluded by Christmas. However, Case’s decision to step back from his role in it delayed the publication of its findings. Given there are more gatherings than the three included in the initial remit of investigators, Gray was said to have “a lot more on her plate than Case started with” so she would not have “started from scratch”. The result of her inquiry is expected to take several more weeks, however it will be made public. No 10 said the investigation was continuing, but stressed it was an “independent piece of work”. Asked if Gray would pick up where Case left off, the prime minister’s spokesperson said on Tuesday: “The work was led … through the propriety and ethics team.... She has picked up that and has been briefed by them.” The Cabinet Office declined to comment, but pointed to the original terms of reference laid down when Case ran the inquiry, which said investigators would “be able to speak to members of staff” and that ministers, special advisers, and civil servants “will be expected to cooperate”. Gray has a fearsome reputation as a “Whitehall enforcer” and her appointment to lead the probe was seen by many as making it less likely ministers would be able to evade scrutiny over the issue of potentially rule-breaking parties. However another Whitehall probe into the funding of refurbishments to Johnson’s Downing Street flat is reportedly set to clear him of breaching the ministerial code, fuelling claims of a “whitewash”. Johnson has denied personally breaking any Covid rules and said the inquiry into the gatherings would be released “as soon as we reasonably can”.This year, my new year resolution is to finish the first draft of a novel. It’s a realistic goal – I’m not saying it has to make money, or even be any good. I just want the words on the page, even if all they do then is languish for ever in a folder. Well, I say that’s what I want – but of course finishing a draft was my new year resolution last year, and the year before that, and before that. In truth, I’ve been pushing back this particular ambition since 2017. Maybe for you, it’s running a marathon – or a 5k. It might be losing a particular amount of weight, or completing a course in yoga or a foreign language. It could be a time-intensive project such as making a quilt or researching your family history. Many of us have these mid- to long-term goals that are ambitious, but (in theory) achievable with the requisite investment of time and effort. I’m going to guess that many other people also have not made a start – even if last year’s lockdowns meant that they, like me, had endless hours to fill. So why do we put off these goals, and how can we make 2022 the year we finally attain them? I spoke to experts to find out. Focus on the process – not perfection “It’s a very human problem,” says Fuschia Sirois when I describe my situation. A professor of psychology at the University of Sheffield, Sirois studies procrastination and perfectionism – and their toll on wellbeing. She says both factor into our failure to get started on projects. “When you’re working towards something and you’re not quite there, anything is possible; you can imagine how successful it will be,” says Sirois. “But we know that’s not what happens in real life.” In other words, just taking a step towards my goal will be a sobering reminder of the long road ahead. The story I’m capable of writing may not be bad, but it will, inevitably, be unlike how I have imagined it, and that realisation alone can throw us off, says Sirois. “We preserve that goal when we never get started – it just becomes that abstract thing, out there.” So willpower and a plan are not necessarily enough. Sirois’s research shows that we procrastinate on a task to avoid difficult emotions. “We are not rational beings. Our fears, anxieties, personal internal struggles, the negative scripts we have about ourselves, our self-esteem – all these things come into motion.” Procrastinating can then add another layer of self-criticism – while perfectionism can trick us into thinking that there’s an optimum time to start. The paralysis Sirois describes is painfully familiar. I couldn’t count the number of weeknights and weekends that I’ve felt ambient guilt for not writing, even though I had not planned to do so. Sirois suggests, instead, that I try drilling down into these emotional blocks. For instance, they could represent my being critical of myself, which I can meet with self-compassion – or my uncertainty about the task, calling for research. “It’s easy to blame the plan. It’s much harder to say: ‘I don’t know how to manage my emotions’,” says Sirois. Part of the problem, she says, is that we find it hard to accurately forecast our emotional states, meaning we can overstate the struggle of working towards our goal or the satisfaction we will feel achieving it – or both. “What we learn about ourselves along those longer journeys such as running a marathon or writing a novel, how we build our skills, the relationships we make and strengthen: that is actually what makes the experience much more rich and rewarding than we could ever imagine – but we tend to forget these things.” The solution, says Sirois, is to seek meaning from the process, not the outcome. A recent study showed that people who thought about why their goal was important to them spent much less time procrastinating than those who only thought about how good it would feel to achieve it. If I thought my latest chapter was bad, she suggests that I could reframe it to myself as “I’m becoming a better writer”. Someone training for a marathon might focus on keeping fit, spending time with friends, or following in family members’ footsteps. “You can look at the struggles you’re experiencing in a broader perspective, to see what it means in terms of your own personal growth,” says Sirois. But it’s tough, even for the experts. When she was on deadline for her recent audiobook, Do It Now: Overcoming Proscrastination, Sirois says, “it took me for ever to get started”. Pay yourself Katy Milkman, a behavioural scientist at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and author of How to Change, suggests the barrier to making progress is often our bias towards feeling good now. “It may not be that pleasant, in the moment, to achieve that long-term goal,” she says. “You know you should, you know that you will be glad when you have – but each time you sit down, there’s something more tempting or proximate that is taking your attention away.” One way to overcome this is by linking the task to something pleasurable – for instance, restricting our favourite snacks or tea to writing sessions or watching TV only when on the treadmill. Milkman mentions a student who let herself light a scented candle only when she was working on her dissertation. It would have to be a pretty special scented candle, I say. “I agree,” says Milkman. “That’s not the thing for me.” Instead, she has beloved audiobooks that she uses to motivate herself for workouts. Another way is to use cash. Milkman recently conducted a “megastudy” of more than 60,000 US gym members, which found that this worked. Awarding reward points (equivalent to only 9¢ or about 6½p) to people who returned to the gym after missing a planned workout increased visits by about 16% compared with the baseline offering. Extending a bigger reward (points worth $1.75) for every workout was almost as effective, increasing visits by about 14%. So, if you want to run a marathon, try paying yourself a pound for every day you stick to your training plan. That strategy can be applied as the stick, not just the carrot, says Milkman: ask a loved one to charge you for every run you miss. That also adds an extra layer of accountability. If you don’t want to burden friends with this, there are services that automate it. Beeminder.com, for instance, plots your progress towards a quantifiable goal on a graph. When you cross to the wrong side of your trend line, Beeminder charges you. StickK.com likewise leverages the “psychological power of loss aversion” to drive behaviour change, charging you when you break the terms of your “commitment contract”. According to Beeminder, you might find this strategy effective if there is “anything you know you should do, you really do want to do, you know for certain you can do, yet that, historically, you don’t do”. Also, if you are a “nerdy, lifehacking data freak”. Sounds like me. I stop short of signing up, for now, but I think this would work better for me than a scented candle. Stop daydreaming One of the most common strategies for success is to visualise it – picturing yourself crossing the finish line with a personal best, or seeing your bestseller on shelves. But, says Gabriele Oettingen – a professor of psychology at New York University and the University of Hamburg, and author of Rethinking Positive Thinking: Inside the New Science of Motivation – this could actually be counterproductive. Over many studies, her research has established an unexpected but powerful correlation between positive thinking and poor performance. “The more positive a daydream about the future, the less I put in effort to actually realise it,” Oettingen explains over Zoom from New York. In other words, fantasising about our goals makes us feel good in the short term – to the point of lowering our blood pressure – but it saps us of the energy we need to take action. “People feel accomplished,” says Oettingen. “Like they’re already there.” Worryingly, Oettingen suggests, this inaction could over time even lead to depression, with a correlative link established between fantasising about the future and a more negative mood. So, instead of simply visualising, Oettingen advocates what she calls “mental contrasting”: not just fantasising about success but comparing your daydream with reality to reveal what, specifically, is holding you back from achieving it. Once you understand clearly the obstacles standing in your way, you can plan to overcome them with an “if it’s this then I do that” plan. For example, my issue is that I prioritise work over writing my novel. So I could resolve to write fiction first thing in the morning, before I check my work email. Or if my goal was to jog in the evenings, but I lacked the motivation at the end of the workday, I could start small by putting on my running shoes before I clocked off – helping me over the first hurdle. Oettingen dubs this approach “Woop” – wish, outcome, obstacle, plan – and says it works for just about any behaviour change, from creating healthy habits to improving relationships and academic performance. (There are free resources at woopmylife.org, and an app.) Once you have nailed down what is holding you back, you will find that you are energised to work towards your goal – or that you aren’t as invested in it as you thought. In that case, Oettingen says, you can let go of this dream without guilt. You could well find out that your goal was something you thought you should achieve, she says, because it is socially desirable or something your family and friends want. “By really looking at the obstacle, I will understand what to do to overcome it – I will also understand if the obstacle is too costly, there is not enough time, or it is simply not surmountable,” she says. “And then, with good conscience and full consciousness, I will simply get out and devote myself to more promising, feasible futures … Mental contrasting is a way to clean up your life.” And with that, Oettingen articulates the uneasy thought I have every time another new year rolls around without a draft done: how much can I really want to write this novel, if I still haven’t finished it? Test your goals Dave Evans was an early employee at Apple under Steve Jobs, and led the design of its first mouse. Now – as co-leader of Stanford University’s Designing Your Life course, and as co-author (with his boss Bill Burnett) of the bestseller of the same name – he teaches a practical approach to problem-solving. “We’re the get-you-unstuck guys,” he says cheerfully over Zoom from his office in sunny California. What I am grappling with, Evans tells me, is known as an “anchor problem” – in other words I am stuck on only one solution to my goal, which makes it “either impossible, or incredibly difficult to reach”.. Evans suggests a spot of reverse engineering – that I try reframing my problem by picturing myself six months after I’ve finished my draft. Why, specifically, am I happy? How is my life different, or better? “The first thing you have to do is be really empathetic with yourself, and with the person you think you’re trying to be.” From there, he says, you can work backwards. It might be that what future Elle wants, more than a finished draft, is to have a regular practice of fiction-writing – and I (she?) can work towards that without needing 80,000 words to show for it, Evans points out. “Give yourself a chance at succeeding,” he says. “One of the biggest problems psychologically with the grand goal is unattainability. It’s incredibly de-energising – people give up. So set the bar low: ‘What if I wrote for a week? I’m not writing a novel, I’m writing a chapter.’ Then do it again. Give yourself a chance at succeeding,” says Evans. He calls this prototyping: exploring different paths and possibilities through defined experiments. “Before you run a marathon, try a couple of 10ks,” he suggests. Not just for practice, but because you may find that achievement is enough, or that you don’t enjoy running enough to do a full marathon. The flexibility helps to ground your goal in reality, Evans says – to connect with your actual motivation, and confront the inevitable cost of pursuing it at the expense of other goals. “Many people who have this goal – the book, the marathon, the peak, ‘gotta lose 50lb’ – have almost no idea at all what’s involved.” Some may even be in a “long-term, nostalgic relationship” with their fantasy, says Evans. “But design always starts with reality.” If you revisit your goal and find it is no longer relevant, you can still honour it as something that was significant to your past self, which has steered you this far and from which you can now move on. People who test their “grand goal” report feeling two things, says Evans: “They feel more hopeful – and they feel it’s doable.” I assure him that I’ll check back in next year. Then, that night, I write a scene: messy, not beautiful, but words on a page.The Mail on Sunday will pay the Duchess of Sussex just £1 in damages for invading her privacy by publishing a private letter she had sent to her father. The nominal sum is set out in court documents that also formally confirm that the newspaper – and its sister website MailOnline – has accepted defeat and will not be taking the long-running case to a supreme court appeal. The outlet will also pay an unspecified sum for the separate case of infringing Meghan’s copyright by publishing large parts of the letter. Mark Stephens, a media lawyer, said the nominal settlement for the privacy aspect suggested a weakness in that aspect of Meghan’s case: “Normally for that kind of invasion of privacy you would expect £75,000 to £125,000. It does show that the curation of her reputation was an area where she had effectively invaded her own privacy.” The newspaper’s publisher has also agreed to pay a confidential sum in damages for copyright infringement. The Mail on Sunday also faces having to cover a substantial part of Meghan’s legal costs, which could be more than £1m. The duchess had always said that her three-year legal battle against Associated Newspapers, the publisher of the Mail on Sunday and sister website MailOnline, was more about principles than money. Her spokesperson said the court victories demonstrated the strength of both claims and the financial remedies would be based on Meghan’s right to an account of the newspaper’s profits following her win. The spokesperson described the payment as substantial and said it would be donated to charity. As part of the court settlement, the Mail outlets have also been ordered to avoid disclosing the names of five of Meghan’s friends who anonymously spoke to People magazine for a 2018 article about the royal. The newspaper had previously sought to name the individuals in legal proceedings. The Mail on Sunday and MailOnline were also ordered to carry front page and homepage declarations that they had lost the legal case, with the courts even specifying in which font the statements should appear. The outlets chose to do that on Boxing Day, one of the quietest news days of the year. Associated Newspapers had argued that Meghan’s case should have gone to trial but judges concluded otherwise. A ruling at the start of December said the duchess had a “reasonable expectation” of privacy regarding the contents of the letter to her father, Thomas Markle. “Those contents were personal, private and not matters of legitimate public interest,” said the appeal judge Sir Geoffrey Vos. Meghan celebrated that victory by calling for a reshaping of the tabloid industry and spoke of how she had been patient in the face of “deception, intimidation, and calculated attacks” and criticised a “tabloid industry that conditions people to be cruel, and profits from the lies and pain that they create”. At the time Associated Newspapers claimed it was willing to take the case to the supreme court but this turned out to be an empty threat. Focus is now likely to turn to the actions of the duchess’s husband, Prince Harry, who is suing both Rupert Murdoch’s News UK and Daily Mirror publisher Reach over phone-hacking claims in a case that could be heard later this year.The last of Britain’s glaciers melted 10,000 years ago, but the way they shaped the landscape still affects our lives today. Locations of towns and cities have been determined by which direction those giant rivers of ice flowed; tourists flock to see the picturesque lakes and hills sculpted by their brute force, and gardeners curse soils with an overabundance of glacial clay. Now those ancient ice sheets are reminding us of their existence out at sea too, influencing which locations are suitable for offshore windfarms. Gareth Carter, a marine geoscientist at the British Geological Survey, has been using subsurface imagery to map the land under the North Sea and advising engineers where to site their foundations for the huge Dogger Bank Wind Farm, 80 miles (130km) off the north-east coast of England. “Glacial sediments are highly variable, ranging from layered soft silts and clays, deposited in a lake formed by meltwater in front of the melting ice sheet, through to incredibly hard, chaotic and contorted deposits, dumped by a departing ice sheet,” he says. As windfarms move to ever deeper waters and rely on innovative anchor technologies to hold floating turbines in place, Carter and his colleagues are finding themselves in ever more demand, helping engineers to avoid troublesome boulders and identify suitable ground for foundations.Flooding over the past 14 years has caused major disruption to towns and cities, schools, hospitals and care homes, a study reveals. The analysis shows towns and cities have been hit by flash flooding 51 times. Fifteen hospitals and 68 schools have also suffered from rising flood waters, which have caused major disruption to patients and to children. The analysis, carried out by the Conservative-leaning thinktank Bright Blue, says that with increased flooding due to the climate emergency, the government must do more to improve the resilience of communities, businesses, and other infrastructure. Using a form of artificial intelligence called Natural Language Processing (NLP), the data was collected by analysing archives of thousands of local, regional and national newspapers. The report comes after the devastation caused by Storm Arwen last October, when members of the public were left without power for more than a week. Storm Arwen was one of the worst in a generation. Electricity poles snapped and wires came down across large swathes of the country. The north-east of England, the Wye Valley, the Lake District, Aberdeenshire and Perthshire were among some of the worst-hit areas. The analysis shows that the impact on essential services such as power, which was dramatically highlighted by Arwen, is a threat linked to flooding for the last 14 years and will continue to be to in future as climate impacts increase extreme weather events. Since 2007, according to the analysis, there have been at least 12 instances of flooded electricity substations, in at least one case leading to power cuts that were problematic for emergency response and community resilience, and at least five instances of damage to gas pipelines due to the bridges supporting them collapsing. Working with the NGO ClimateNode, the authors produced the data in an interactive map of storm impacts. Bright Blue said the analysis revealed that the UK was not adequately prepared for the increasing risk posed by flooding as the climate changes. Particular areas of concern are: Urban drainage: heavy rainfall puts drainage and sewerage infrastructure under strain, even exceeding their limits, and contributing to flooding in some cases. Hospitals: at least 15 experienced flooding causing disruption or imminent risk of disruption to patient services or hospital support services, Schools: a least 68 schools have suffered sufficient water entering buildings to disrupt lessons, or school transport; 22 suffered at least significant damage and seven severe damage and Care homes: nine care homes and four retirement complexes have been flooded. Major disruptions to social care included carers unable to reach elderly people in rural areas; loss of power, hot water and heating in care homes. Helen Jackson, associate fellow at Bright Blue and the report’s author, said: “The disruption caused by Storm Arwen highlights the need to make our infrastructure resilient to extreme weather, and be more preventive and less reactive. “Many towns and cities in the UK are seeing repeat episodes of flash flooding affecting households, businesses, and transport systems. We need to recognise this trend and do much more to ensure our urban drainage and sewer systems can cope with heavy rainfall as the climate changes. This should include limiting the spread of impermeable surfaces in our cities and ensuring basic measures like drain cleaning are not overlooked.” The report called for the government to support and fund an ongoing programme of research to identify and monitor risks associated with extreme rainfall in urban areas. It also said government should conduct a civil resilience exercise for an extreme rainfall event in a major UK urban area, incorporating significant infrastructure failure. Ryan Shorthouse, the chief executive of Bright Blue, said: “Flooding is one of the most serious climate-related challenges that this country is facing and will continue to face as the climate changes further in the coming years. “The impact of flooding is already being felt deeply in communities across the UK. The UK government can and must do much more to better improve the resilience of local communities, businesses, public services, and critical infrastructure to flooding.”From Brookside’s bodies under the patio through the Emmerdale plane crash to Luke Morgan’s rape in Hollyoaks, Phil Redmond has always known how to frame a story. Sitting in his home office, flowing grey locks now thinning a little, the 72-year-old scouser who masterminded them all is gesturing over Zoom to a wall where a 2019 Daily Star front page hangs: “Bring Grange Hill Back to Save Britain.” Next to it is a print of the comic-strip opening credits still so revered that, in May, Richard Osman got “the Grange Hill sausage” (which appeared, to consternation, in one frame of them) trending on Twitter. Two sheets of paper, but testament to the series’ enduring popularity 13 years after its cancellation – hence why Redmond has just finished the script for a Grange Hill film due in late 2022. “It’s astonishing how many people tell me it was their favourite programme. Especially politicians,” says Redmond, before roaring with laughter. “David Cameron told me his favourite character was [school bully] Gripper Stebson. It breaks the ice when you’re trying to get them to do things.” Redmond – Sir Phil since last October – has spent much of his time since selling his production company Mersey Television in 2005 as a media studies professor at Liverpool John Moores, and chair of National Museums Liverpool and the UK City of Culture Expert Advisory Panel. But the urge to tell stories never deserted him: Highbridge, the first in a proposed trilogy of state-of-the-nation novels, emerged in 2016 but only partially scratched the itch. And so he returned to his first, greatest creation. Irritated by an article speculating – inaccurately, in his view – on the likely careers of Grange Hill alumni including Zammo McGuire (Lee MacDonald) and Tucker Jenkins (Todd Carty), but thrilled by the show’s second life on social media (a meme splicing Beyoncé’s Single Ladies video to the theme tune went viral), he reconvened with former collaborators last February to consider what had really happened to the school, its current intake and former pupils. Casting will begin soon and he hopes members of the old guard will return to play parents and grandparents alongside a new generation of pupils. “We’ve been through four school-rebuilding programmes in my lifetime, but it’s not about bricks and mortar, it’s about getting the best out of every pupil. How will ripping schools out of communities solve anything? Or making catchment areas so big that kids have to travel miles to be with their friends? That’s the thesis of the movie: it’s decided the school is costing too much to maintain so it should be knocked down, the land sold and proceeds used to build a new one and replenish local coffers.” The battle between parsimonious authorities and students troubled by the school’s uncertain future allows Redmond to voice long-held concerns about left-behind communities clinging to schools as rare hubs not yet underfunded into extinction. The film will also show how children handle grief (it will be set in a post-Covid Britain, with many students having lost elderly relatives), discuss social media and the purpose of education itself, as the ageing head fights a losing battle against a deputy eyeing up a promotion to run the proposed “superschool”. How would a new generation of Grange Hill students react to all this? “I’ve always had a strand about kids having the same emotions and fears, aspirations and phobias as everybody else. They only lack the life experience. Rather than riots in the dining hall, this time their voices are heard through social media, a rebuttal unit run by the school geek against council propaganda.” Redmond is cagey about further specifics, but promises the film will reflect the canny balance of knockabout humour and serious, issue-led drama that made the show work. Putting it on television, though, was never an option: TV has “lost its wide ambition”, with the prospect likely too thorny for traditional broadcasters (although the BBC is reviving another school drama, Waterloo Road, next year) and too parochial for streaming services. Will Grange Hill still reflect the concerns of children today. “I’ll give the same answer I gave when I got asked that at 29: I used to be one! Childhood doesn’t really change. What changes are fashion, haircuts and slang. Once you’ve got the theme and the tone, it’s all about casting – the actors bring you what’s right at the time, you’ve just got to let them be natural.” This commitment to naturalism underpinned the appeal of Grange Hill: the relationships between children and teenagers were written with frankness and honesty, told literally from the kids’ viewpoint (cameras filmed from the children’s eyeline) and performed by working-class, comprehensive schoolchildren using their own accents. The approach was as groundbreaking as the issues it tackled when Redmond worked alongside script editor Anthony Minghella during the programme’s mid-80s pomp. Alongside stories of smoking and sexual awakening, there was social commentary. Benny Green’s (Terry Sue-Patt) footballing talents couldn’t cover for the scruffy uniform his family could barely afford. Gripper Stebson (Mark Savage) picked on a Sikh student and mixed with skinheads. Above all, there was Zammo’s descent into drug addiction, which provoked questions in the House of Commons and tabloid headlines warning of potential copycats; it also took the cast to the White House to meet Nancy Reagan and into the Top 5 with tie-in single Just Say No. The show retained its edge into the 90s: comedian Francesca Martinez played a character with cerebral palsy who refused to be treated differently to her peers; homophobia, teenage motherhood and suicidal thoughts were also addressed with care and conviction, before it lost its way and audiences dwindled. Grange Hill’s present-day descendants are legion. Series from Ackley Bridge and Jamie Johnson to Sex Education and Skins owe it a considerable debt for redefining how ambitious, bold and relatable television for younger viewers could be. “The difference is, those shows look at the characters in the precinct, not the influence of the wider community,” Redmond says. Born and raised in the Liverpool suburb of Huyton, the son of a cleaner and a bus driver, Redmond drew on his own disappointing experiences at St Kevin’s, one of Liverpool’s biggest comprehensives, for the resolutely unsentimental Grange Hill. Having studied sociology at Liverpool University, he took up screenwriting in his early 20s after a spell as a quantity surveyor that, a decade later, would give him the financial and logistical nous to buy and kit out the cul-de-sac that became Brookside Close. Redmond has always been about the long game: Zammo’s heroin storyline took two years to resolve, the Jordaches’ domestic violence storyline on Brookside, three. And while he’s happy to rib Cameron, he’s too canny to pass judgment on someone he will surely have to deal with – even Nadine Dorries, now DCMS Secretary and not, I venture, the greatest advert for Merseyside. “I think you’re being slightly unfair,” he says, laughing. “She’s an unknown quantity in that position – maybe she’s making the right noises, but not in the way people want them to be said.” He has already written to her about Channel 4, which he still resents for the shabbily handled demise of Brookside in 2003. Dorries’s grasp of C4’s funding may have seemed shaky at a recent select committee, but Redmond is well informed and opinionated enough for the both of them. “What the hell’s Channel 4 for now? It serves no purpose, but rather than flog it off for a devalued price, why not retain the remit, sweep out the costs of transmission, management and buildings and give the ad revenue to the BBC so we have one big, sustainable public service broadcaster?” He has thoughts, too, on the BBC. “It belongs to the people, so you need to keep them on board and willing to pay for it. The licence fee should be replaced by more of a cultural precept on every landline and mobile phone contract: the more you use online content, the more you’ll be contributing to the BBC.” Dorries can expect a pugnacious encounter with a man whose disillusionment with central government is total: the phrase “levelling up” prompts a derisive snort. “I’ve been in the levelling up agenda since I came into television – it’s why I set Brookside in Liverpool. Like the ‘big society’, it’s a great idea with a crap slogan. There’s no north-south divide, it’s just London versus everybody else. People in Cornwall or Hereford have the same fundamental issues as people in the big conurbations, but they can’t get a hearing and communities are dying. Most people didn’t believe in HS2, but they reacted to the cancellation of the north-east leg because at least it had been something. You can’t be surprised when people lose faith.” Perhaps Grange Hill – the Movie will reach out across the regions and generations. I ask about the legacy of the series. He mentions a recent Guardian interview with Garbage’s Shirley Manson, who credits it with saving her life when school bullying drove her to self-harm. “She was saying what I used to say during all the big controversies,” says Redmond. “Grange Hill never claimed it would solve your problem, but it was a touchstone – something to guide people through rites of passage and say: ‘You’re not alone.’” Grange Hill – the Movie will be released later this year.Charles Darwin created the most successful theory in the history of biology: the theory of evolution. He was also responsible for another grand theory: the theory of emotion, which dominated his field for more than a century. That theory was dead wrong. The most important tenet of his theory was that the mind consists of two competing forces, the rational and the emotional. He believed emotions played a constructive role in the lives of non-human animals, but in humans emotions were a vestige whose usefulness had been largely superseded by the evolution of reason. We now know that, on the contrary, emotions enhance our process of reasoning and aid our decision-making. In fact, we can’t make decisions, or even think, without being influenced by our emotions. Consider a pioneering 2010 study in which researchers analysed the work of 118 professional traders in stocks, bonds and derivatives at four investment banks. Some were highly successful, but many were not. The researchers’ goal was to understand what differentiated the two groups. Their conclusion? They had different attitudes toward the role of emotion in their job. The relatively less successful traders for the most part denied that emotion played a significant role. They tried to suppress their emotions, while at the same time denying that emotions had an effect on their decision-making. The most successful traders, in contrast, had a different attitude. They showed a great willingness to reflect on their emotion-driven behaviour. They recognised that emotion and good decision-making were inextricably linked. Accepting that emotions were necessary for high performance, they “tended to reflect critically about the origin of their intuitions and the role of emotion”. Though the successful traders embraced the positive and essential role emotions played, they understood that when emotions become too intense it is useful to know how to tone them down. The issue for them was not how to avoid emotion, but how to regulate and harness it. Today, it has become common for hedge funds and financial firms to employ “psychology coaches” to meet traders on a one-on-one basis, as portrayed in the television series Billions. If emotions aid rational reasoning, how does that work? Perhaps the most important discovery regarding the role of emotion is that even when you believe you are exercising cold, logical reason, you aren’t. People aren’t usually aware of it, but the very framework of their thought process is highly influenced by what they’re feeling at the time – sometimes subtly, sometimes not. As the Caltech neuroscientist Ralph Adolphs puts it: “Each emotion is a functional state of the mind that puts your brain in a particular mode of operation that adjusts your goals, directs your attention, and modifies the weights you assign to various factors as you do mental calculations.” Think of an iPhone. In its normal mode of operation, the phone’s goal is to always be ready to serve you. To best accomplish that, the iPhone is constantly at work, doing things like “listening” for you to yell “Hey, Siri”, checking to see if there are new emails to download, and updating your apps even if you are not currently using them. In low-power mode, the priorities are changed. Energy conservation is important, so these actions are reduced or stopped altogether. Though enormously more complex, the human brain is like an iPhone in that it constantly carries out computations. It evolved to compute what actions would be most likely to nurture your health, prevent premature death and increase the probability that you will successfully reproduce. And like the iPhone, our brains possess a number of specialised programs, each tailored to solving a problem. Some of our programs apply to practical issues such as foraging, mate choice, facial recognition, sleep management and energy allocation. Others handle cognitive issues such as learning, memory, goal selection and so on. Just as the iPhone adjusts its programming when in low-power mode, a biological brain can run in various modes, each with different characteristics. An emotion – both in humans and animals – is a functional backdrop that orchestrates and coordinates those many programs in a manner tuned to the type of situation you are in. Consider anger, for example. Backed by the threat of aggression, anger creates incentives for others to appease the angry individual. Your mental calculus inflates the importance you place on your own welfare and goals at the expense of those of others. Coaches tap into anger as a motivational tool because the focus on self encourages athletes to push themselves to achieve their goals. Anger also causes you to perceive less risk, exacerbating risk-seeking. That can produce better judgments in situations where risk-aversion is inappropriate, as when you are analysing stocks, or playing poker. The new view of emotion may not correspond to the way Darwin saw it, but it does support one of the basic conclusions of his theory of evolution: humans are not as different from non-human animals as people believed. What can we learn from this? The first and most crucial step is self-awareness. Studies show that those with high levels of emotional intelligence fare better in their personal and professional lives. By learning about our emotions we can read others better and communicate more effectively. And by understanding how emotions affect our thoughts and reasoning, we can learn to recognise and monitor them. Then, once we’re in touch with our true feelings, we can take steps to manage them whenever that would be of benefit. Leonard Mlodinow is a physicist and author of EMOTIONAL: The New Thinking about FeelingsCare operators are facing acute staffing shortages caused by Omicron with more than 90 declaring a “red” alert, which means staffing ratios have been breached. Over 11,000 care home workers are off for Covid reasons, according to internal health system staffing data seen by the Guardian. One of the UK’s largest private operators, Barchester, is dealing with outbreaks in 105 of its 250 homes. It said that rules meaning homes with Covid cannot accept hospital discharges will cause backlogs in the already struggling NHS. Across England, 9.4% of care home staff are off work, according to government live data, with close to 3% absent because of Covid. The figures, which may be an underestimate because of the festive break, are drawn from submissions by thousands of care providers. The worst affected areas appear to be in the north-east, north-west and parts of London, where combined Covid and non-Covid absence rates ranged from 16% to 22%. Experts said care standards could suffer as absences rose and councils were braced to redeploy staff from services such as libraries to help backfill threadbare rotas. “The spread of Omicron across the country will bring more care homes into outbreak, put huge pressure on the already compromised staff group and mean those who need care do not get it,” said Vic Rayner, chief executive of the National Care Forum. Many care operators said delays in getting PCR test results back were a key frustration, meaning workers who may not be infected were isolating longer than necessary. At one Barchester home in Shrewsbury 17 staff are off and 22 residents have tested positive while at a home in east London 27 staff are off and 20 residents have tested positive. HC-One, the UK’s largest private care home provider, said 869 staff are off with Covid or awaiting results – close to 5% of the workforce. However, the virus is not causing widespread serious illness and death among residents, with 10 fatalities involving Covid in recent weeks across the chain, according to Pete Calveley, chief executive of Barchester, who said many residents “have only minor or cold-like symptoms”. But up to 15% of staff are off work at the chain’s worst affected homes and the struggle to find replacements has seen care agencies quoting £80 an hour for staff – quadruple the normal rate – and a new practice of “gazumping”, with homes losing already booked staff at the last minute to operators willing to pay more. Mike Padgham, a care operator in Yorkshire, on Tuesday urged the health secretary, Sajid Javid, urgently to establish a “volunteer army” of retired nurses, doctors, and carers who could fill shifts. In Wales, Mario Kreft, chair of Care Forum Wales, described the situation as “hugely serious”, with large groups of staff testing positive after the Christmas break. He said that in the worst cases operators have had three-quarters of their staff off. Eight staff at one of his homes in north Wales reported positive tests on Tuesday morning. “It’s a war footing,” he said. “We are trying to get everyone to the frontline and it is very, very difficult. We are appealing for understanding.” Stephen Chandler, president of the Association of Directors of Social Services, said councils were braced for calls for help from care operators and said “the care that people experience will be affected”. In his county, Oxfordshire, a call has gone out for help from volunteers who work in libraries and at heritage sites. Sanjiv Joshi, who runs 14 care homes in south Wales, said in one home over Christmas there were only half the staff needed to cover shifts, meaning that new recruits going through training had to be hurried into frontline roles. “We are 20% down [on staff],” he said. “I know of other providers who say they are 30% to 50% down. Our biggest worry is the infection rates are so high it’s not going to spare anyone. We need an effective lockdown or control measures so that we don’t let the infections spiral out of control.” A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “Protecting care staff and people who use social care services continues to be a priority, especially as cases surge and Omicron spreads rapidly across the country. “Throughout the pandemic, we have made almost £2.4bn in specific funding available for adult social care and this week we announced an extra £60m to keep people in care homes safe over January.’’The dean of the University of Pennsylvania’s law school has condemned one of his school’s own professors for making racist remarks about Asians, saying that their recent comments were “xenophobic and white supremacist”. Professor Amy Wax, who specializes in social welfare law and labor and family economics law, appeared as a guest on economist Glenn Loury’s podcast when she called the influx of “Asian elites” into the United States problematic and made other racist statements, including a call for less immigration from Asian countries. In a scathing response, Dean Theodore Ruger acknowledged that while Wax’s comments were protected by freedom of speech and she held tenure at the college, they were “diametrically opposed to the policies and ethos of this institution”. “They serve as a persistent and tangible reminder that racism, sexism and xenophobia are not theoretical abstractions but are real and insidious beliefs in this country and in our building,” Ruger said of Wax’s comments. In the podcast Wax asserted that most Asian Americans are Democrats and questioned whether or not “the spirit of liberty beat in their breast”. “As long as most Asians support Democrats and help to advance their positions, I think the United States is better off with fewer Asians and less Asian immigration,” Wax said. She went on to criticize diversity and inclusion initiatives and said immigrants should be “abjectly grateful” rather than critical of the United States. Of diversity as a general concept, Wax said she was not convinced there were no downsides. Wax has come under fire before for previous arguments she made at the National Conservatism Conference in 2019 for “cultural distance” or “taking the position that our country will be better off with more whites and fewer non-whites”. In 2017, Penn law school alumni petitioned Ruger to take action against Wax for inaccurate statements that Black students didn’t graduate at the top quarter of their class and rarely graduated in the top half. Despite the condemnation, Wax maintains her employment at the university. Ruger said Wax will only be teaching elective classes in future and will no longer teach required courses.The wife of an Ohio man fatally shot by police minutes into the new year has said he had been firing an assault-style rifle to celebrate the arrival of 2022 when an officer opened fire without warning. Marquetta Williams told the Repository newspaper her 46-year-old husband, James, was using an AR-15 rifle that belonged to her to fire celebratory shots early on Saturday outside their home in Canton. That night, James, a stay-at-home father or stepfather of six girls, was at home with his wife, three of their daughters and two other family members. Marquetta Williams said the gunfire was an annual tradition in their neighborhood, with many neighbors also firing shots. She also said James was behind a 6ft fence, adding: “You can’t see in. You can’t see out.” James Williams came back inside the house, his wife said, then decided to go back outside and shoot some more. His wife said he fired four shots into the air and turned to follow her inside, then told her: “I’ve been shot.” “I could see the blood splattering across his shirt,” Marquetta Williams said. “He collapsed in the living room.” Referring to the police officer who shot him, she said: “His life was in danger, because you didn’t announce yourself. That’s cold-blooded and I’m not going to rest until he does get justice, period.” Marquetta Williams called 911. When she opened her door, she said, “There were 30-something officers with guns pointing at us, telling us to get down and come out of the house with our hands up.” She told Cleveland 19 News protests and a vigil were planned. In a statement, the Canton police chief, Jack Angelo, said officers were investigating reports of gunfire when an officer who was outside his vehicle confronted someone who began shooting a firearm. Angelo said the officer feared for his safety and fired his duty weapon at the person, striking him. The department has declined further comment. Marquetta Williams said no officers identified themselves before the shooting occurred around 12.05am. James Williams was taken to a hospital but was pronounced dead a short time later. “Out of the blue, he said he got shot, he got hit,” she said. “I don’t know where it came from. Nobody said anything. They didn’t say, ‘Police.’ They didn’t say, ‘Freeze.’ They didn’t say, ‘Drop your weapon.’ They just shot him.” The Ohio bureau of criminal investigation was investigating and all evidence including body-camera images and firearms had been turned over to the agency, police said. The officer involved was placed on administrative duty, standard procedure in shootings involving police. His name was not immediately released. No officers were injured.It is clear from the opening minutes of The Lost Daughter, Maggie Gyllenhaal’s melancholic, bristly directorial debut on Netflix, that a dark secret stalks the sunny Mediterranean vacation of Leda Caruso, (a luminous Olivia Colman), a 48-year-old English professor of comparative literature. Her “working holiday” at a Greek island is immediately beset by increasingly ominous intrusions: a spectral foghorn, a bowl of rotting fruit, a shrill cicada, a boisterous Italian American family from Queens who disrupt her beachside reading. Memories pull at her focus; when the young daughter of Nina (Dakota Johnson), a beautiful, languid member of the Queens bunch who immediately catches Leda’s attention, goes briefly missing, Nina’s panic elides with a flashback to twentysomething Leda’s (Jessie Buckley) frantic search for her daughter Bianca at a beach. It’s a familiar language of buried secrets, sinister subtext and unspooling memories – the building blocks of suspense – but the landmines in The Lost Daughter aren’t the usual culprits of dark revelation: unspeakable trauma or abuse, evil spirits, suppressed desires, the ravages of capitalism or greed. Instead, the molten core of The Lost Daughter is one of our culture’s most enduring and least touchable taboos: the selfish, uncaring, “unnatural” mother – one who doesn’t shift easily to care-taking, who does not relish her role, who not only begrudges but resents her children. The Lost Daughter, adapted (and anglicized) from the short novel of the same name by Elena Ferrante, is a masterclass in imbuing ostensibly low stakes with spellbinding tension. The book is written entirely in Leda’s internal monologue, which Gyllenhaal, aided by Colman and Buckley’s fluid performances, conveys through taut dialogue and flashback sequences. The action is relatively mundane – Leda goes to the beach, eats dinner alone, and observes an exhausted Nina fielding the demands of her restless daughter Elena, who is lost for all of a few minutes. The most significant transgression is Leda’s impulsive and childish theft of Elena’s beloved doll. The film’s climactic reveal is not an act of abuse or searing trauma, as the prevalence of the trauma plot in film, TV and literature has taught us to expect, but an absence: for three years, Leda, desperate for reprieve and recognition, forfeited her role as mother, and left her daughters with her husband (Jack Farthing). The stakes of The Lost Daughter feel so weighty, the viewing experience so unsettling and transgressive, because the myth Leda’s recollections deftly unravel – that motherhood will come to women naturally, that it will give something without taking something irreparable and valuable away – is so deeply woven into our culture as to be almost invisible. It is everywhere and nowhere, the idea of motherhood as an identity of tenderness, sacrifice, fulfillment and, above all, selflessness. It’s in commonly heard descriptions of motherhood as “my life completely changed”; “I became a different person”; “I found my purpose”; “I met myself”. (Which may be true for some people!) It shapes the image of mom-fluencers and so-called mommy blogs, informs the constant pressure for mothers to optimize every facet of their child’s life, and underpins the norms that, in the US, justify women as the de facto social safety net. The Lost Daughter, as in several of Ferrante’s other works (fans will note themes further explored in her bestselling Neapolitan novels), dares to posit that for some, motherhood might not actualize the self but plunder it, especially if, like Leda, she becomes one while still barely an adult herself (doing the math, Leda was 23 when she had her first child, 25 for her second). Leda’s ambivalence toward motherhood – magnetic, vulgar, revelatory, repulsive – is a posture still rarely explored on screen. There are anti-mothering villains in films and television (Psycho, Carrie, the horror films Hereditary and The Lodge) but few examples of women who struggle with the expectations of the role in good faith, fewer still those who reject it. Crucially, The Lost Daughter is not a portrait of regret, for either having children or leaving them. Leda never says the word, nor does she appear to feel in isolation from other emotions such as guilt, anguish, pride, love. Gyllenhaal takes pains to portray Leda as anything but an uncaring person. She comforts Nina, meets her confessions with serrated vulnerability, offers up her apartment as a hideaway for the young mother’s nascent affair. She glows reminiscing about her 20s over dinner, comforts a frightened, lost Elena on the beach. In flashback sequences, Leda can be withholding, vindictive, unreasonable with her daughters; she is also doting, curious, radiant, expressive as she teaches her children to read, to play, or just holds them. Watching the scenes of her failures and abandonment – rebuffing her daughters, lashing out at them, leaving them – is an uncomfortable experience. Self-absorption is often indistinguishable from self-preservation, and neither are pretty. I resent Leda for ignoring her children, and I can imagine the language through which they’ll later describe their abandonment, perhaps estrangement. (For what it’s worth, I write this as a 28-year-old woman both drawn to and terrified by the prospect of having kids.) But Gyllenhaal’s unwavering focus on Leda’s battered interiority, and Colman and Buckley’s equal expressiveness, refuse to allow you to condemn her. Leda is a woman under siege – in the past, from the constant barrages of motherhood upon her body, sleep, time, academic career, her identity, sexiness, professional opportunities. She has no outlet for herself, no recourse for the pressure and little help from her clueless husband. In the present, from the memories of exhaustion, the hauntings of failure, the ghosts of condemnation. Motherhood, she delicately tells a pregnant member of the Queens family, is “a crushing responsibility”. The Lost Daughter sits with a woman who escaped its suffocation, however temporarily; the women who experience it disjointedly, and for whom there is no peace. The Lost Daughter is now available on NetflixMandy 10pm, BBC Two After a festive special, Diane Morgan brings back hapless Mandy for a welcome second season – and the job hunt continues. This time, she tries her hand at being a tour guide at Brompton Hall and ends up accidentally serving nibbles at a cult gathering. Michelle Greenidge and Tom Basden also star in this 15-minute dose of silly (read: secretly very clever) fun. Hollie Richardson The Repair Shop 8pm, BBC One Usually, Jay Blades and the team carefully strip down heirlooms before building them back better. Tonight, a grandfather clock arrives already in bits, requiring a lot of TLC from the horologist Steve Fletcher. Other items getting a painstaking glow-up include a pair of speedway boots and a kaput 60s electric organ. Graeme Virtue Kirstie and Phil’s Love It Or List It 8pm, Channel 4 Tonight, a couple in Lincoln are at loggerheads over how best to find more space for their growing family. Luckily, the property gods Kirstie Allsopp and Phil Spencer are on hand to try to settle a five-year debate and advise on whether Eric and Carly should extend their bungalow or move. HR Paul O’Grady: For the Love of Dogs 8pm, ITV In need of a pick-me-up on the year’s first Wednesday? Paul O’Grady and the staff of Battersea Dogs &amp; Cats Home are on hand to give us plenty of furry faces to coo at – including eight-year-old Paul, a shih-tzu with an extreme case of bladder stones, and a feisty chihuahua not easily charmed by the host. HR Inside the Factory 9pm, BBC Two Gregg Wallace shows no signs of dropping off our screens in 2022, as Inside the Factory rumbles on. Tonight, he and the historian Ruth Goodman dig deep into all things malt loaf – the squidgy cake that, apparently, Britons eat about 130m times a year. HR Britain’s Most Expensive Houses 9pm, Channel 4 Lee the broker is tasked with selling off one of the jewels of Hampstead: the £17.5m Huxley House on The Bishops Avenue (AKA “Billionaire’s Row”). But the really romantic draw tonight is a 100ft double-decked houseboat, the Flamant Rose, once owned by Edith Piaf; it was the site of her liaisons with a French professional boxer. Ali CatterallStrict lockdowns in the Chinese cities of Xi’an and Yuzhou are taking their toll on the population and healthcare systems, according to residents, with complaints of food shortages and dangerous delays in accessing medical care. Xi’an, a city of 13 million people, has been under a strict lockdown for nearly two weeks, while Yuzhou’s 1.2 million residents have been ordered to stay inside since Monday evening, after three asymptomatic cases were discovered. Public transport, the use of private motor vehicles, and operation of all shops and venues not supplying daily necessities have all been suspended. On China’s strictly monitored and regulated social media platforms, a significant number of residents have posted about their concerns and anxieties, despite generally broad support for authorities’ swift response to outbreaks. Local media has reported concerning delays in the cities’ major hospitals, which require negative tests from patients before they can be admitted. A screenshot of one post which went viral before being deleted claimed a man and his sick father were turned away from a Xi’an hospital because they were from an area designated as higher risk. The post said the man’s father was having a heart attack but died by the time he was admitted for treatment. In another account posted to social media, a woman in labour lost her baby after she was prevented from entering a Xi’an hospital. In a since-deleted post, a relative described calling emergency services on the night of 1 January for their aunt after she started feeling pain, but the phone rang out. Instead they sent her to hospital at around 8pm but “the front door security wouldn’t let us in, because the nucleic acid test result had been more than four hours ago”, they said. “While she was waiting outside, I saw the video her husband sent me, she was holding the chair, struggling to sit on it, and her blood streamed down the chair and her pants.” They said hospital staff saw and brought her inside and to the operating room, but the child died. A spokeswoman for the state-linked Shaanxi women’s federation, said they had talked to authorities about the incident. “They should be learning about the incident now. Because the epidemic in Xi’an is quite serious now, there definitely should be a solution.” Reports of food shortages in Xi’an have also flourished on social media despite promises by authorities to deliver supplies to homes, and claims of neighbours bartering cigarettes and personal belongings for food. “I have only received free vegetables once so far, and one package per household,” said one resident. “The price of food in the city is very high, and there is no one to regulate it. There is no take-away service for daily necessities, and the errand fee is about 100 yuan ($15) before someone takes the order.” The strict rules have also prevented people from coming and going. Sixth Tone reported authorities had arrested several people trying to evade the blockades and return to villages without quarantining, including a man who cycled 100km (60 miles) through mountains, and another who swam across an icy river. Authorities have conceded there have been issues, including poorly prepared centralised quarantine facilities where tens of thousands of people have been sent. Local officials are often punished or fired for alleged failures in outbreak prevention, including two senior Communist party officials in Xi’an who were removed from their posts over their “insufficient rigour in preventing and controlling the outbreak”. On Monday, Xi’an officials said the city had spent about $1m on assisting people in need, and had housed about 200 stranded people in temporary shelters. They also promised to set up hotlines and further assistance services. Xi’an is the centre of the current outbreak, China’s worst since the early months of the pandemic. More than 1,700 cases have been recorded in the city since early December – a relatively low number compared with global figures as China continues to implement the zero-Covid strategy which has kept infections at low levels for much of the past 18 months. With the Olympics around the corner and a central government commitment vowing to stamp out the virus, local officials have enacted increasingly strict responses, resulting in lockdowns reminiscent of Wuhan’s in early 2020. Other urban hubs where clusters have been detected now also face restrictions including a new partial lockdown in the city of Zhengzhou over the discovery of four cases. On Tuesday, China reported 41 new symptomatic community cases, including 35 in Xi’an. On Wednesday, officials said the city’s outbreak had been largely “brought under control” after the lockdown. Ma Guanghui, deputy director of Shaanxi health commission, told a press conference the outbreak was “showing a downward trend”. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian Zhu and agenciesTop story: PM admits parts of NHS may be overwhelmed Good morning, I’m Virginia Harrison and here is what’s making news this Wednesday morning. Care operators are facing acute staffing shortages caused by the Omicron variant with more than 90 declaring a “red alert”, meaning staffing ratios have been breached. More than 11,000 care home workers are off for Covid reasons, according to internal health system staffing data seen by the Guardian. Government data shows that 9.4% of care home staff are off work across England, with close to 3% absent because of Covid. The figures, which may be an underestimate because of the festive break, are drawn from submissions by thousands of care providers. The worst-affected areas appear to be in the north-east, north-west and parts of London. As Robert Booth reports, many care operators say delays in getting PCR test results back were a key frustration, meaning workers who may not be infected were isolating longer than necessary. The extent of the strain in care homes comes as Boris Johnson admitted for the first time that parts of the NHS may be overwhelmed in the coming weeks and insisted England can “ride out” its biggest ever Covid wave “without shutting down our country once again”. With frontline worker absences fuelled by a record 218,000 new confirmed UK cases of Covid on Tuesday, Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical adviser, said the NHS faced “very substantial pressure over the next couple of weeks” – though there was not yet a “surge in mortality” seen with other waves by this stage. You can find all our coronavirus coverage here or follow live updates here. * * * No 10 party pooper – The new head of an investigation into alleged rule-breaking Downing Street parties has not “started from scratch” and is unlikely to re-interview all government staff who have already been spoken to about their knowledge of the gatherings, the Guardian has been told. Sources said that Sue Gray, who took over the probe after cabinet secretary Simon Case recused himself when a Christmas event in his own office was revealed, would more likely “pick up” the existing work and look for “holes” in the testimony provided so far. Gray’s attention will also have to turn to more gatherings that have come to light since the initial probe led by Case began, including an event revealed by the Guardian attended by Johnson, his wife and 17 others. Gray’s inquiry is expected to take several more weeks and will be made public. Here’s Aubrey Allegretti’s full report. * * * Mail to pay Meghan £1 – The Mail on Sunday will pay the Duchess of Sussex just £1 in damages for invading her privacy by publishing a private letter she had sent to her father. The nominal sum is set out in court documents that also formally confirm that the newspaper – and its sister website MailOnline – has accepted defeat and will not be taking the long-running case to a supreme court appeal. The outlet will also pay an unspecified sum for the separate case of infringing Meghan’s copyright by publishing large chunks of the letter. The duchess had always said that her three-year legal battle against Associated Newspapers, the publisher of the Mail on Sunday and MailOnline, was more about principles than money. * * * Early cancer detection hopes – Scientists have developed a blood test that could help detect cancer in people with nonspecific symptoms such as unexplained weight loss or fatigue. If validated, the test could enable cancer patients to be identified earlier, when they are more likely to respond to treatment, and help flag up who could benefit from early access to drugs designed to tackle metastatic cancer. There is currently no clear route through which someone with nonspecific symptoms that could be cancer is referred for further investigation. Read more here. * * * Sicilian mystery unravelled – The 200-year-old secrets of the child mummies of the Capuchin Catacombs of Palermo in northern Sicily are to be revealed by a British-led team of scientists using X-ray technology. Dr Kirsty Squires, of Staffordshire University, will head a first attempt to tell the stories of some of the 163 children whose remains lie within the corridors and crypts of the famous underground tomb. The catacombs contain 1,284 mummified and skeletonised bodies, the largest collection of mummies in Europe. While many of the children contained there are now skeletal, others have been described as appearing as if they are sleeping. The two-year investigation will focus on the children who died between 1787 and 1880 and, initially, on 41 bodies residing within a bespoke “child chapel”. * * * Today in Focus podcast: Can the UK cope with the Omicron surge? The year has begun with warnings of critical incidents in UK hospitals and fears over school reopenings but there are reasons to be optimistic, says science correspondent Nicola Davis. Lunchtime read: How to smash your goals in 2022 Every year millions of us resolve to learn a new language, get super fit or master a new skill … and then never start. How can we make it happen? Experts explain all. Sport The opening day of the fourth Ashes Test in Sydney was blighted by rain. Just 21.3 overs were possible before the tea interval. But over in New Zealand, Bangladesh secured one of the greatest upsets in Test history by defeating the world Test champions by eight wickets. Thomas Tuchel will fine Romelu Lukaku despite accepting the striker’s apology for a controversial interview and has said he faced no opposition from Chelsea’s board after dropping the club’s record signing against Liverpool. There was a fierce backlash to the news World No 1 Novak Djokovic has been granted a medical exemption to compete in the Australian Open without being vaccinated against Covid-19. All Australian Open participants must either be fully vaccinated or apply for and secure an exemption in order to enter Victoria without undertaking the mandatory 14-day quarantine. Public reaction to the news of Djokovic’s exemption was overwhelmingly hostile. Among those speaking out was Stephen Parnis, a former vice-president of the Australian Medical Association, who described the decision as appalling. “I don’t care how good a tennis player he is. If he’s refusing to get vaccinated, he shouldn’t be allowed in,” Parnis tweeted. Meanwhile, Nick Kyrgios will arrive in Sydney later this week with a lowly rankings status he has not borne since his stunning breakout performance at Wimbledon back in 2014. * * * Business Japan’s Sony Group will establish a new company for electric vehicles this spring, its chairman said at the CES technology conference in the US, becoming the latest tech company to beef up its ambitions in the fast-growing market. Closer to home and European gas prices rose by more than 30% on Tuesday, adding to mounting concerns about the cost of heating a home, as supplies that usually come into Europe from Siberia continued to flow eastwards for the 15th day in a row. To the markets and it has been a mixed session across Asia, with investors eyeing the release of minutes from the Federal Reserve’s December rate meeting later on Wednesday. The pound is buying $1.35 and €1.20. The papers The staffing crisis across Britain’s healthcare system features on many front pages. The Guardian leads with “Johnson admits NHS could be overwhelmed in coming weeks”. Full story here. The Telegraph reports “Testing rules to be relaxed to solve staff shortages” while i has “Daily tests for key workers as PM sticks with Plan B”. The Times has “PM: We can ride this out without new curbs” as daily infections hit a record high of 218,000. The Daily Express picks up on the same quote, leading with “No shutdown! Boris: We can ‘ride out’ Omicron surge”. The Mirror has “Covid critical hospitals: Heart attack? Get a lift to A&amp;E”. The Daily Mail veers away from the pandemic with its splash, “Ex-minister: Blair’s aide told me to burn Iraq war advice” amid an ongoing campaign to strip the former PM of his knighthood. And the FT has “Holmes truths: Theranos case raises red flags” after the founder of the blood testing startup was convicted on four charges of fraud, while its Covid front-page story is more optimistic: “Travel and leisure shares surge on belief Omicron turmoil is waning”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe world’s largest coal port has announced it will now be powered entirely by renewable energy. The announcement from Port of Newcastle comes as coal power generation in Australia’s national electricity market fell to its lowest level in the final three months of 2021. Though the port continues to export an average of 165Mt of coal a year, the move is part of a plan to decarbonise the business by 2040, and to increase the non-coal portion of its business so that coal only makes up half its revenue by 2030. It has signed a deal with Iberdrola, which operates the Bodangora windfarm near Dubbo in inland New South Wales, for a retail power purchase agreement that provides the port with large scale generation certificates linked to the windfarm. Chief executive officer Craig Carmody said the Port of Newcastle’s title as the largest coal port in the world “isn’t as wonderful as it used to be” and that change was necessary to avoid what happened in Newcastle and the steel industry closed. “I would prefer to be doing this now while we have control over our destiny, while we have revenue coming in, than in a crisis situation where our revenue has collapsed and no one will lend us money,” Carmody said. “We get 84 cents a tonne for coal shipped through our port. We get between $6 and $8 for every other product. You can see where I’d rather have my money.” As part of its transition the port has converted 97% of its vehicles to electric and engaged in other infrastructure projects to decarbonise its operations. Andrew Stock, climate councillor and retired energy executive who was a founding board member of the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, welcomed the development but said there was a “still long way to go”. “It’s a good thing they’re looking at it, but 50% income diversification by 2030, it’s still a decade away. That’s still a lot of coal that’s going to go through that port particularly when the IEA and the IPCC have made it clear we have to move,” Stock said. “And 50% by 2030 is still 50% coal income.” Stock said governments should encourage a “rapid advance in the uptake of renewables” similar to what has occurred in South Australia, which is powered by 100% renewable energy on some days. Carmody said that as an “open access port” the business was unable to refuse traffic except under specific circumstances, but he hoped showing the company was embracing change would encourage its workforce and others to do the same. “In some ways it doesn’t matter what the policies of government are, equities and debt markets, they’re making the decision for us,” Carmody says. “It doesn’t matter what the policy settings are in Australia, it’s what some investor in New York or Tokyo is thinking.” “We don’t really have a choice. Nobody wants to invest in [being part of the fossil fuel supply chain].” The announcement comes as figures from Dylan McConnell, research fellow the University of Melbourne’s Climate and Energy College, shows renewable energy provided nearly a third of all electricity produced in the national electricity market (NEM). In the last three months of 2021, coal’s share of the electricity grid fell 5.9% when compared to the same period in 2020, while gas recorded its lowest quarter of generation since 2004 Over the same period, rooftop solar grew 24% and utility solar by 26% – though wind’s share only grew by a “quite modest” 6.4% compared to previous years. This was partly due to poor wind conditions and a lack of new capacity. “At the high level, solar is squeezing out coal, particularly black coal,” McConnell said. “You can see it quite clearly in the shape of what’s happened to the profile of generation.” McConnell said that Victoria and South Australia recorded average negative power prices in the middle for the entire quarter. “It’s a sign of the time that we’re getting negative prices on average,” McConnell said. “Coal’s being hollowed out in the middle of the day and that’s also what’s affecting their bottom line as well, as that’s when you’re having negative prices quite consistently.”India is in the midst of a Covid third wave, officials have said, as the spread of Omicron has led to a doubling of cases in recent days and curfews being imposed on cities across the country. “India is clearly in the third wave of Covid-19, and the whole thing seems driven by Omicron,” said Dr N K Arora, chairman of the Covid-19 working group of the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation, who cited the “galloping increase” of cases seen over the past week as evidence. Officially, India has detected 1,892 Omicron cases but Arora said that Omicron probably now accounted for around 50% of the new Covid cases in urban areas, overtaking Delta as the dominant variant. In Delhi, 84% of sequenced cases were found to be the Omicron variant. The highest concentration of Omicron cases are in Delhi and Mumbai. On Wednesday, Delhi experienced a 94% increase in new cases from the previous day while in Mumbai, the mayor Kishori Pednekar said the city was preparing for a “tsunami” of cases. The metropolis is now registering over 15,000 new cases a day and Pednekar warned that if it hit 20,000, they were likely to impose a lockdown. The central government has advised all states to reactivate their Covid war rooms and strengthen health infrastructure, particularly around oxygen supply and hospital bed capacity. In Delhi, 40% of hospital beds have now been reserved for Covid patients as the government announced a weekend curfew. Chief minister Arvind Kejriwal was among those who tested positive for the virus, a day after he had attended an election rally without a mask. The states of Punjab and Bihar have also imposed night curfews. Soumya Swaminathan, chief scientist at the World Health Organisation, warned that “India could have a big surge. The next two weeks will tell us.” Swaminathan warned people not to be complacent about the virus, which still had the potential to overwhelm India’s healthcare system, even if it was milder than the Delta variant, adding that it was “not the common cold”. Currently 64% of India’s adult population is fully vaccinated, while 90% have had one shot, mostly of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine. However, the government has been criticised for its failure to start rolling out booster shots quicker in the wake of omicron, which have been seen as crucial in other countries to preventing the spread and hospitalisation from the virus. From next week, vulnerable people, healthcare workers and those over 60 in India will be eligible for boosters. Arora was among those making assurances that the third wave was unlikely to be as brutal and devastating as the second wave which hit India in April,which pushed the healthcare system to collapse, led to a nationwide shortage of oxygen and overwhelmed crematoriums due to the scale of the dead. He pointed to the situation in South Africa, where there were a high number of cases as Omicron spread quickly through communities, but where most cases were mild or asymptomatic. The wave has now almost died down after a month. Arora said that the high seroprevalence in India from previous exposure to the virus – which in Delhi was as high as 97% – could also help curb the impact of the third wave. “In view of this, we may see a somewhat similar pattern in India as far as the third wave is concerned,” Arora told Press Trust India. “Looking at the behaviour of the Covid infection in the last seven to 10 days in India, I feel that we may be in for a third wave peak very soon.” In Goa, which had held off introducing any restrictions to avoid hurting the already beleaguered tourism industry, the state’s Directorate of Health Services said the third wave had hit the state on 28 December. Just days later, around New Year’s Eve, beaches in north Goa teemed with crowds of tens of thousands of people, leading to fears of a huge surge in cases in coming days. Over 1,800 double vaccinated revellers, mainly from Mumbai, Delhi and Gujarat, who were on a New Year party cruise from Mumbai to Goa were held on the ship after over 200 of them tested positive. Everyone on board was prevented from disembarking by the Goa authorities after an initial 66 were found to be positive and the boat was sent back to Mumbai, where an additional 143 people were found to have been infected. All the Covid positive passengers were taken into institutional quarantine in Mumbai.Kazakhstan’s president has accepted the resignation of the government, hours after he declared a state of emergency in large parts of the country in response to a rare outbreak of unrest. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev has appointed Alikhan Smailov as acting prime minister, the president’s office said early on Wednesday. Smailov was previously the first deputy prime minister. The political moves follow protests, sparked by rising fuel prices, that began in the west of the country over the weekend and have spread quickly. On Tuesday evening, video footage from Almaty, Kazakhstan’s largest city, showed lines of riot police and numerous crowd control vehicles massed in the centre of the city. Police used stun grenades and teargas after crowds refused to disperse, AFP reported, estimating there were more than 5,000 people present. Later, there were unverified reports of police cars on fire in Almaty, and videos from a number of other cities appeared to show protesters braving subzero temperatures and a large presence of security forces. Mobile internet was down and messaging apps were blocked across large parts of the authoritarian Central Asian nation. “All calls to storm or attack government buildings are absolutely illegal,” Tokayev said in a video address on Tuesday evening. In a tweet, Tokayev blamed the protests on “destructive individuals who want to undermine the stability and unity of our society”. In an attempt to quell the unrest, however, he said the government would meet on Wednesday to discuss “the socio-economic demands” of protesters. Late on Wednesday, he imposed a state of emergency covering Almaty and the western Mangystau province, which is due to last for two weeks. The protests began over the weekend in the oil city of Zhanaozen, the same place where, in December 2011, police fired on protesters killing at least 16 people. The initial spark for outrage was the sharply rising price of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), used by many to power their cars, particularly in the west of Kazakhstan. The price doubled in a matter of days. Tokayev said the government would introduce a price cap of 50 tenge (about 8p) a litre on LPG, roughly half the current market price, in Mangystau province. Speaking to acting cabinet members, Tokayev ordered them and provincial governors to broaden the LPG price controls to gasoline, diesel and other “socially important” consumer goods. He also ordered the government to develop a personal bankruptcy law and consider freezing utilities’ prices and subsidising rent payments for poor families. He said the situation was improving in protest-hit cities and towns after the state of emergency was declared which included a curfew and movement restrictions. Tokayev is the handpicked successor of Nursultan Nazarbayev, a Soviet-era Communist boss who became Kazakhstan’s first leader after independence and ruled for nearly three decades until he stepped down in 2019. The 81-year-old still wields enormous power behind the scenes, and the country’s capital city was renamed Nur-Sultan in his honour in 2019. Under Nazarbayev and his successor, a small elite have amassed enormous wealth, while life for many ordinary Kazakhs is still hard-going, particularly in the resource-rich west of the country. Rare protests have been ruthlessly crushed, and the regime faces no real opposition in parliament. Separately, the interior ministry said that in addition to Almaty, government buildings were attacked in the southern cities of Shymkent and Taraz overnight, with 95 police officers wounded in clashes. Police have detained more than 200 people.Family legend has it that I began reading the Times at around the age of four. At school in London I was that kid who stuck his hand up to read aloud from the Shakespeare play we were studying or to recite a poem. At secondary school, in Nigeria, literature was something I was negligently good at, but didn’t take seriously. Over the holidays I would visit the libraries of foreign embassies and read my way through their literatures. At the American embassy, I discovered Emerson and Whitman; at the Japanese embassy, I discovered karate, Zen Buddhism and Bashō. It seemed then I was destined to be a scientist. I applied to university, but at age 14 was deemed too young. I spent a year at home, waiting to be old enough. My main task, during that year, was to dust my father’s library. I was to dust the books but not read them. The first book to catch my attention was Plato’s Symposium. I had a great thirst for philosophy and devoured all his dialogues. I read the plays of Ibsen, Shaw, Shakespeare; the short stories of Maupassant, Chekhov, Maugham; then I got lost in 19th-century novels. Like everyone else, I read American and English thrillers. They were a bad influence in every way except one: they made writing seem deceptively easy. We lived then in a place called Mile Twelve. There was poverty all around us. We had lived in a more genteel part of Lagos, but now we lived on the outskirts. They say three things make you a writer: childhood illness, a fall in your parent’s lifestyle, and encounter with death early in life. I had experienced them all. Solitude is terrible for an adolescent but invaluable for learning to think for yourself. While my generation was dancing at the most wasteful national jamboree after the end of the civil war, I was in a ghetto learning to write. My father became a lawyer for the poor. It was the best education a young writer could ask for, to see the truth of society in the raw. I began with poetry. I wrote a hundred love poems and burned all except five. Then something happened that plugged my writing into the nerve of life. The ghetto landlords had unlimited powers. They could throw families with all their possessions out into the street. I was so outraged at seeing this happen that I wrote an article about it for the Evening Times. To my amazement it was published. Encouraged, I wrote about other injustices. Those pieces were not published. Then it occurred to me to write a story about them. Two of the stories were published in women’s magazines. This began my long adventure in the rigorous craft of the short story. Then one of the short stories grew and grew, and became a novel. By this time I had finished my A-levels and had a job working for a paint company. Traffic in Lagos was so atrocious that it took three hours to get to work. I would wake up at four o’clock in the morning and write for an hour before setting out for work. When I returned, I would sleep and then write till one o’clock. I was always dozing on the long bus ride to the office. The first draft took a year. I got myself fired from work and bought a typewriter and a camera with the severance pay. I then worked as a reporter for a news magazine. In the autumn of 1978 I came to London to study. I came really to write. All my colleagues dreamed of America, but my sentimental attachment was to the England of my childhood. I brought my typewriter, camera and the first draft of my first novel. I read my way through the literature of Africa and the world. I made notes. I began re-writing. This was at my uncle’s house in New Cross. I sent the manuscript to many publishers, who all turned it down. Then, one morning, a letter came from Longmans’ African Writers’ Series. I remember giving a cry of joy. That moment changed everything. I was 19. With the publication of Flowers and Shadows, the life I was meant to live began. Every Leaf a Hallelujah, an environmental fable for children and adults, is published by Head of Zeus (£14.99).On New Year’s Eve, my wife and I locked ourselves in a tiny British Airways bathroom and frantically pulled off items of clothing. It would have been a pretty exciting way to see off 2021, were it not for the fact that the clothes belonged to our seven-month-old, who had decided to do an enormous poo at 30,000 feet. I had had a little chat with the child before the flight and told her Mummy and Mummy would appreciate it if she held off on any major bowel movements while we were in the air, but she didn’t cooperate. Babies, I have learned, are not very good at listening. They are good at screaming, though. At least, my kid is. She has always had a good set of lungs on her, but, my God, screams reach a whole new decibel level when you are squeezed into cattle class on a plane, surrounded by people who are quietly judging you. So, I would like to extend an apology to everyone on BA175 from London to New York last Friday who may be experiencing mild PTSD after seven hours of being trapped with the high-pitched squeals and shrieks – interspersed with grunts and farts – of my darling demon child. My wife and I had not approached our first big trip with a child lightly. We had spent days researching how to take a child on a plane without making your fellow passengers want to murder you. We had brought along an array of soothing toys and teethers; we had bought a fancy little tent that you stick over your baby to lull them to sleep. On our way to London, this had worked like a dream. As I kept telling the lovely flight attendant, who popped by every few minutes to check on us and mutter: “Oh dear,” our baby was not normally this cranky – she had been an angel on the first flight of her life. I had got all smug, thinking I had this whole parenting thing down. Ha! Ha! HA! If I have learned anything during my short time being a mum, it is that you should never be smug. The moment you think you have everything figured out, your child will very loudly put you in your place. Another lesson I have learned painfully? Bring several changes of clothes with you everywhere. A few hours into our flight from hell, I spilled dry baby formula all over myself. This was stressful – you don’t want to have an Arabic name and arrive at US immigration covered in mysterious white powder. I decided to deal with the stress via the medium of chocolate. I looked around for the little pot of aeroplane pudding I had set aside earlier. Then I discovered that I was sitting on it. It had exploded all over my trousers. An organised mum would have had something clean to change into. I just sat in my chocolatey, formula-specked trousers and wished myself dead. I reckon a fair few other passengers wished the same; no one wants to sit in the vicinity of a “lively” baby. A few years ago, there was even a trend for parents to hand out goody bags on planes as penance for procreating; on a flight in 2017, Amal and George Clooney gave noise-cancelling headphones to their fellow first-class passengers, in case their six-month-old twins started crying. Sorry, but bribe bags are not the answer. We need to find a better way for babies to fly. Maybe we could stick them in the hold, as we do with pets? Only joking; I am not a monster. I would never put my dog in the hold. Anyway, I am afraid I don’t have any answers when it comes to improving the in-flight experience. I have only apologies. Lots of apologies. Sorry, once again, to my fellow passengers. But, however bad it was for you, let me assure you that it was much, much worse for me. • Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistWarrington It’s not so much a mist as a murk, a weakness of light due to the late season and lowering sky. Mirroring the grasping hands of wintry trees are bare branches plunged into still water, in turn reflected there. I think of flooded forests on the upper Amazon. I’m in Warrington. If the juxtaposition seems silly or funny, that’s not my problem. I’ve come to take a circular walk along the Mersey and the Manchester Ship Canal, two great watercourses almost universally ignored – certainly by travel writers and tourist boards and, from the evidence of the empty footpaths, by Warringtonians too. It’s a Saturday afternoon. No doubt the locals are largely seated beside their hearths, perhaps reading the glossy supplements, surfing the net, wondering over a holiday away from the pandemic pandemonium and the pall of December. Most of the travel we choose is chosen for us – at best by past adventurers, more usually by tour firms devoted to cliche and consumption. I’d bet Warrington is less attractive to most British passport holders than Ulaanbaatar, Bilbao or Cancún – despite those places being, respectively, poorer, more industrialised, more dangerous. Capitalism, the Crap Towns crowd and all those unfunny-as-hell websites have made much of the UK unfashionable, undesirable and uncool. Yet a minimal effort uncovers Warrington’s secrets: the statue of Cromwell, whose forces overcame the Duke of Hamilton’s Royalists and Scots in 1648; the Academy, where Joseph Priestley, discoverer of oxygen, worked and which once made the town the “Athens of the North”; the Bank Quay factories that turned us into a nation of sweet-scented soap users; one of the UK’s last transporter bridges; and Warrington Bridge itself, on the old Roman road, once a portal to a swampy nowhere, then to Northumbria, Lancashire and, post-1974, a dubious corner of Cheshire. As for the walk, well, you get to see the glorious Mersey, which meanders wildly here at its shallowest stretch; the Woolston Cut (now an ecology trail) was built to shave off a great loop. You see the ship canal, the precursor to those of Panama and Suez (where you’d no doubt love to take a holiday). I see a cormorant skimming, a stork rising like an old C-54 Skymaster from nearby Burtonwood, and a huge raft of tufted ducks by the weir, dabbling and drifting. I hear the hum of the M6; transport is everywhere in the north-west. Above all, I feel, in the gloom-hued canal, the rushing river, and in the great iron girders and steel spans of rail and road bridges, the weight and tow and flow of history. At the Barley Mow pub, built in 1561 and a rare Tudor trinket in a town obsessed with rebranding, regeneration and, above all, demolition, I toast Warrington’s wonderful absence from Unesco’s or any other sappy heritage list. Overtourism? It’s not a problem. It’s just you, on your holidays, with everyone else. Blackburn and Darwen Mill towns would have done well to keep more of their mills. On Gorse Street, Blackburn, Imperial Mill, built in 1901, is a redbrick beauty. It would have been truly wondrous if they hadn’t felled the chimney in 1958. The facade of Waterfall Mill on Peel Street is lofty and dignified. Again, no chimney. Like a house without windows. No hope of resurrection. I walk the A666 (the Devil’s Highway – perhaps the road where the “4,000 holes” of A Day in the Life pocked the blacktop) into Darwen, and stop at the junction with Spring Gardens. India Mill still has its chimney, at more than 92 metres one of the tallest in Lancashire; today the building’s “open plan suites are available for office, leisure and storage”. Better than the wrecking ball, anyway. Such solidity, such fearless symmetry: I am more moved by textile mills than by any Taj Mahal or Angkor Wat. Why? Because their shadows are internal and external, and if you are a northerner, that’s where you still walk. If you are a southerner, consider: these paid for your gherkins and your cheese graters. Long before he became a national treasure cum caricature associated with the Cumbrian fells and other hiker honeypots, Alfred Wainwright was an anonymous Blackburn native, Rovers supporter and tramper of the less-exalted heights of Darwen Hill and the lowland pastures of the Ribble Valley. A 126-mile Wainwright’s Way, devised by guide and author Nick Burton, links Blackburn to Buttermere: a journey from truth to fiction. If you’re after a shorter ramble, try the 4.5 mile walk, by way of the Wainwright Memorial (and troposcope, a directional circle giving distances to landmarks) on the Yellow Hills. On a clear day you can see the summits of the mountains the great man would scribble about and sketch. According to Panorama in 2007 and again in 2018 – someone had a point to make – Blackburn is Britain’s most divided town. But the fact that this city is 27% Muslim surely makes it fascinating as well as fractious. Clock the 30-odd mosques, with their minarets – their chimneys for the djinn, perhaps. Morocco has been a must-visit destination for too long; do something original, swap the Atlas mountains for the west Pennines, and visit your very own Marrakech-on-the-Moors. Surbiton One of the strangest things about the London hipsterati is that they haven’t moved on from The Good Life (1975-8). Still, they insist, “Surbiton, bah, boring, square, Surrey.” Though filmed in Northwood, north-west London, the TV series was set in a fictional Surbiton – a byword back then for middle-class commuterland. The name even looks like “suburb”. But it was a joke, or perhaps a trick to fool the obtuse. For this Thames-side town in London’s zone six harbours more easily accessible joys than many supposedly happening districts in the capital’s inner boroughs – and it does so with none of the gloating self-satisfied superiority of nearby Richmond, Kew, Barnes and Wimbledon. The landmarks start as soon as you alight, for Surbiton station is a poem in reinforced concrete. Built by James Robb Scott in the 1930s in art deco style, its straight lines and whitewashed plainness suggest both an Odeon cinema and a mausoleum. Stepping away from this portal to the Smoke, we soon find ourselves on leafy lanes and stately avenues lined by lofty Georgian townhouses, Victorian terraces (the St Andrew’ Square Conservation Area could grace Belgravia), 30s deco-influenced blocks and to-be-expected Tudorbethan detached houses. Village-type pubs and restaurants punctuate the quietly elegant residential streets. This continues all the way through the Seething Wells area – an unhappy corruption of the original name, Soothing Wells – to the marina and riverside, where a path leads to Kingston, across the bridge, and into Home Park – the nicest of the royal parks, with ancient meadows, floodplain ecosystems, a superb fallow deer herd and the Long Water – the original neighbour-impressing “water feature”, built by Charles II in 1660 as a wedding gift for bride-to-be Catherine of Braganza. Hampton Court is at the far end of the geometrical pool, should you wish to join in the melee of stately home-ites and Wolf Hall fans. Birkenhead Visitors to Liverpool swarm to the waterfront to see the Three Graces, but they are so big, so imposing and so close that they lead only to neck cricks and distorted photographs. Look, instead, to the muddy, maudlin Mersey – so quiet these days – and the strange oblong on the opposite bank. It looks like a Modernist church. That is where you should go to pray and meditate on Liverpool. The Pier Head–Woodside ferry runs at peak times Monday to Friday, costs £3.70 return, and takes about 10 minutes to cross. First stop is the church – that is, the Grade II-listed Woodside Ventilation Station, drawing fumes from the Queensway tunnel as its giant fans push fresh air underground. Designed by Herbert Rowse (also responsible for Liverpool’s Philharmonic Hall and India Buildings) and built between 1925 and 34, it’s a brilliant expression of form meeting function. Rowse’s Sidney Street and Taylor Street shaft buildings are also on the Wirral and also in staid brown brick, while the better-known George’s Dock building across the water is in Portland stone. If you need a stretch of legs, the East Wirral coastal trail is awash with maritime memories, from the Camell Laird shipyard, to the U-boat Story (currently being refurbished), to the (probable) steps and jetty of Job’s Ferry – the 12th-century precursor of the trans-Mersey service to “the place I love”. A few paces inland are Birkenhead Priory – the oldest building on Merseyside – and the Georgian masterpiece that is Hamilton Square, second only to Trafalgar Square for the number of Grade I-listed buildings on a single site. Birkenhead Park, opened in 1847, was the first park to be built with public money. It was laid out by Joseph Paxton, best known for work at Chatsworth House, and offers native and exotic trees, lodges, ponds, rock gardens, serpentine paths, bridges, a cricket crease, “probably the oldest brick-built cricket pavilion in the world” and a boathouse. American landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, visiting in 1850, took ideas from Birkenhead when designing Central Park in New York. Wrexham Wrexham confounds English notions about Wales – the fantasy island of Merlin and Arthurian myth, the unpeopled Green Desert, and laughingly tying one’s tongue over Llanfairpwllgwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllantysiliogogogoch. It’s six miles from the English border – and there is a sense that it might have been better off if it could shirk off the old yoke and shift farther into Cymru. The most purist form of tourism is to travel in search of nothing, whether that’s a colourful version of empty spaces (Patagonia, Death Valley, the central Asian steppe) or a ghost of what has been. Wrexham, from the latter viewpoint, is quite remarkable, a veritable Paris of what is lost. Highlights of the missed include the former police station, a Brutalist masterpiece that was razed in November 2020; the mock Tudor vegetable market, demolished to make way for a BHS, now also extinct; Manchester, Birmingham and Yorkshire Squares, where trading in textiles, hardware and leather from those respective regions took place. The General Market (formerly the Butter Market, for dairy produce), built in 1879 in the famous Ruabon brick of this area, is the last edifice to evoke the glory days of Wrexham as a commercial hub. With plans to demolish the old Rhosddu vicarage and 18th-century Moreton pub – despite local protests – the “capital of north Wales” seems anxious to keep emphasising the “wreck” in Wrexham. As they say in the guidebooks, go before it’s gone. Outside town, things are somewhat more enduring. Clywedog Valley Trail is an easy 5½-mile walk from the 18th-century Kingsmill corn mill (recently saved by a community fundraiser) at the south-east edge of town to the Minera Lead Mines and country park. Do a detour to pay a visit to the National Trust-managed Erddig Hall, a 1,200-acre country park and 18th-century pile. Wrexham is east of Offa’s Dyke, but it’s well worth the trip out to visit this section, as it includes the Unesco-listed Pontcysyllte aqueduct, which carries the Llangollen canal over the steep-sided valley of the River Dee. Elephant &amp; Castle, London As Brian, an old friend of mine and long-term resident of the Elephant, likes to say, his barrio is the centre of London. He points me, and everyone else, to the obelisk at Saint George’s Circus – erected in 1771 – where it is clearly announced in stone that it is “One Mile” and a bit to Fleet Street, Palace Yard in Westminster or London Bridge. But don’t dash off to those well-trodden sites. For the 21st century is happening right here: like it or loathe it, few areas of Britain can compare for scale or style of reinvention. Two decades ago, Elephant and Castle could, for most people, be summed up as two teeming (and, for cyclists, lethal) roundabouts, one ugly yet quirky shopping centre, and urine-perfumed underpasses to test even the most avid of urban psychogeographers. While tourists happily went to Brixton, Clapham Common, even dull old Dulwich, their main interest in Elephant was the fine range of bus services to other places. But dig a little and the Elephant reveals its tender verities. The Pullens buildings are among the last few remaining Victorian tenements extant in London, which removed thousands of properties during slum clearances in the 1920s and 30s. Behind the elegant terraces are cobbled yards where studios and workshops clang and whoosh to the postindustrial sounds of 3D printers and digital cameras, and neo-artisans and crafters making floral arrangements, ceramics and woodwork. This district is home to London’s largest Latin quarter, with hundreds of residents originally from Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru and about 150 Latin American small businesses selling anything from tasty ground-maize arepas to classes in salsa dancing or English and Spanish language. Like other residents, they lamented the recent demolition of the Elephant &amp; Castle shopping centre – not for them a symbol of urban decay, but of home from home. The Strata SE1 residential tower (with its famous non-functioning wind turbines), 15-storey Vantage building (one-beds at £1,425 pcm) and the yuppifying of Metro Central Heights, designed by Ernő Goldfinger and formerly occupied by the Department of Health and Social Security, signal a different future. Elephant, once known as the “Piccadilly of south London” for its commercial, retail and entertainment offering, is joining the rest of Alpha-City London on the high road to hyper-gentrification. What is tourism for if not to see the clamour of the present day and the collisions of past and future?A roaring and often harmful cacophony that has long afflicted Washington DC has finally been silenced. Not the roar of politicians sounding off, alas, but the use (and sale) of gasoline-powered leaf blowers, banned since New Year’s Day. Anyone using the blowers, which have been blamed for ear-splitting noise and a stew of air pollution, risks a fine of up to $500. People who still want to rearrange the natural fall of leaves from trees have been offered rebates for quieter electric blowers. The push to ban gas leaf blowers was led by local resident James Fallows, a former speechwriter for Jimmy Carter who has blamed the anti-social implements for producing “the secondhand smoke of this era”. It is just the latest crackdown on leaf blower use across the US. Last year, Gavin Newsom, governor of California, signed a law prohibiting gasoline-powered lawn equipment, including leaf blowers and lawnmowers, from 2024. More than 100 cities in various states have already banned gas leaf blowers, with Dallas and Portland the latest major urban areas to mull new restrictions. The use of gas-powered leaf blowers is deleterious, opponents argue, due to their toxic emissions and ruination of neighborhood harmony. The blowers typically use two-stroke engines, an outmoded design that can produce up to 100 decibels of low-frequency noise, around the same as a plane taking off. This has led to concerns regarding hearing loss and tinnitus for users. The inefficiency of such engines also causes enormous levels of air pollution: a 2011 study found that just 30 minutes of using a leaf blower in the yard can emit the same amount of hydrocarbons as driving a pickup truck from Texas to Alaska. Michael Leamy, an expert in mechanical engineering at Georgia Tech, said the amount of air pollution from such a relatively small device was “astounding”. “Homeowners will use them occasionally but mostly we are talking about people from lower socio-economic backgrounds working in landscaping who are exposed to these pollutants, which are very harmful to human health,” Leamy said. “These are very dirty, crude engines compared to the engine you will find in a modern car. The government should really step in to protect the workers dealing day in, day out with the air pollution and hearing loss caused by these leaf blowers.” Regulators in Washington DC sent out notices to lawn and building maintenance companies last summer, warning of the upcoming change and pointing out that residents are able to file complaints online, along with photographic or video evidence, if they see gas leaf blowers used. The change will require a major shift for most landscapers, said Nancy Sainburg, founder of the Enchanted Garden landscape company, which operates in Washington. “Hardly anyone is using electric leaf blowers,” she said, “and I have no idea what enforcement will be like, will people rat out their own neighbors? “I mean it’s DC, so probably.” Sainburg switched her own workforce to electric blowers five years ago, after, she said, becoming fed up with the smell of gasoline on her clothes and company trucks. “The electric ones are just as powerful as gas blowers, you charge them overnight and just go for it,” she said. “My crew doesn’t get sick like they used to, they don’t get respiratory issues like they used to, they love it. “These blowers don’t make the big stupid noise of the gas ones, it’s more like a vacuum cleaner noise. I think they are great.”Fossil fuel companies and firms that work closely with them are among the biggest spenders on ads designed to look like Google search results, in what campaigners say is an example of “endemic greenwashing”. The Guardian analysed ads served on Google search results for 78 climate-related terms, in collaboration with InfluenceMap, a thinktank that tracks the lobbying efforts of polluting industries. The results show that over one in five ads seen in the study – more than 1,600 in total – were placed by companies with significant interests in fossil fuels. Advertisers pay for their ads to appear on the search engine when a user queries certain terms. The ads are appealing to businesses because they are very similar in appearance to search results: more than half of users in a 2020 survey reported they could not tell the difference between a paid-for listing and a normal Google result. ExxonMobil, Shell, Aramco, McKinsey, and Goldman Sachs were among the top-20 advertisers on the search terms, while a number of other fossil fuel producers and their financiers also placed ads. Jake Carbone, senior data analyst at InfluenceMap, said: “Google is letting groups with a vested interest in the continued use of fossil fuels pay to influence the resources people receive when they are trying to educate themselves. “The oil and gas sector has moved away from contesting the science of climate change and now instead seeks to influence public discussions about decarbonisation in its favour.” Oil major Shell’s ads – 153 were counted in total – appeared on 86% of searches for “net zero”. Many promoted its pledge to become a net zero company by 2050 and align itself with a 1.5C warming target. However, Shell’s net-zero strategy relies heavily on carbon capture and offsetting, according to a Carbon Brief analysis, which says: “Despite its ‘highly ambitious’ framing … Shell’s vision of a continued role for oil, gas and coal until the end of the century remains essentially the same.” A spokesperson for Shell said: “Shell’s target is to become a net zero emissions energy business by 2050, in step with society. Our short, medium and long-term intensity and absolute targets are consistent with the more ambitious 1.5C goal of the Paris agreement.” Goldman Sachs, which facilitated nearly $19bn of lending to the fossil fuel industry in 2020, had the third highest number of ads. The bank’s ads appeared on almost six in 10 searches for “renewable energy”, with many emphasising its “continued commitment to sustainable finance”. Consulting firm McKinsey’s ads appeared on more than eight in 10 searches for “energy transition” and four in 10 searches for “climate hazards”. Its ads stated: “McKinsey works with clients on innovation &amp; growth that advances sustainability.” Alongside its work on sustainable investing, the company receives significant income from fossil fuel clients. In recent years McKinsey has advised 43 out of the world’s 100 most polluting companies, according to the New York Times. A spokesperson for McKinsey pointed to an op-ed written by a managing partner at the company, which states: “There is no way to deliver emissions reductions without working with these industries to rapidly transition.” Aramco, the state-owned Saudi oil company, which is the world’s largest oil exporter, had 114 ads on the keywords “carbon storage”, “carbon capture” and “energy transition”. A number of their ads claimed the company “promoted biodiversity” and “protected the planet”. Melissa Aronczyk, an associate professor at Rutgers University, said: “Since at least the 1980s in the US, there has been a very concerted effort by public relations agents to help polluting companies develop strategies to ‘go green’ while maintaining business as usual. “Many of the initiatives companies are taking are very piecemeal and will not amount to any kind of long-term or systemic change.” Johnny White, a lawyer at environmental charity ClientEarth, called for stronger regulation of adverts placed by polluting industries. “Fossil fuel companies spend millions on incredibly sophisticated advertising campaigns, so sorting fact from fiction can be really tricky for the public. “Damaging greenwashing has become endemic – to stamp it out we need to legislate bans on all fossil fuel advertisements, just like what happened with tobacco.” The analysis also looked at “snippets”, which are not paid-for but are chosen by Google’s algorithm as the most relevant result. The Guardian found the snippet chosen for “fracking” linked to the website of an oil and gas lobby group, the Independent Petroleum Association of America. In answer to the question: “Is fracking a threat to public health?”, the IPAA page states: “No. In fact, there is ample evidence that increased natural gas use … has improved public health by dramatically improving air quality in recent years.” A years-long piece of research by the US Environmental Protection Agency concluded in 2016 that in some cases fracking had harmed drinking water supplies. Unlike Facebook, Google does not have a publicly accessible ad library, meaning it is difficult to analyse advertising on the platform. In the EU and UK, Google only provides comprehensive data on ads which directly mention politicians or a political party, or those which feature a referendum question. A spokesperson for Google said: “We recently launched a new policy that will explicitly prohibit ads promoting climate change denial. This policy applies to all advertisers, including energy companies and financial institutions, and we will block or remove any ads that contain violating content. “When search ads do appear, they have the word “Ad” clearly labeled in bold black text in the current design. We rely on extensive user testing both on mobile and desktop to ensure ad labels meet our high standards for being prominent and distinguishable from unpaid results.” A spokesperson for ExxonMobil said: “ExxonMobil has contributed to the development of climate science for decades and has made its work publicly available. And as the scientific community’s understanding of climate change developed, ExxonMobil responded accordingly.” Aramco and Goldman Sachs did not respond to requests for comment. • This article was amended on 6 January 2022 to add a response from Google relating to search ads that was received after publication.Whether it was praising white supremacists, siding with Vladimir Putin or suggesting bleach as a coronavirus cure, there was nothing that Donald Trump could do to make the Republican party fall out of love with him. Then came 6 January, and – for a brief moment – it seemed that was no longer true. “Today all I can say is: count me out,” said Lindsey Graham, standing in a Senate chamber that just hours earlier had been overrun by a pro-Trump mob determined to overturn the 2020 presidential election. “Enough is enough.” A week later he was joined by Kevin McCarthy, the Republican minority leader in the House of Representatives, who called on Trump to “accept his share of responsibility” for the deadly violence at the Capitol. Other allies turned against the president. If ever there was a moment that the party could snap out of its five-year fever dream, this was it. Yet it did not. In the year since the insurrection that reverberated around the world, Trump’s stranglehold on Republicans has seemingly become stronger, not weaker. Graham was soon back on the golf course with him; McCarthy was soon kissing the ring at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida. Many leaders of the party have set about changing the narrative of the insurrection to portray it as a heroic last stand – a new “lost cause”. “We now have a major political party that is embracing violence systematically,” said Elaine Kamarck, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution thinktank in Washington and former White House official. “They’re rewriting the events of January 6. They’re referring, as President Trump does, to these people as patriots. They are stirring up a minority.” Trump was the first president in American history to inspire an attempted coup. After a rally where the defeated incumbent urged supporters to “fight like hell”, the angry mob laid siege to the US Capitol to disrupt the certification of Joe Biden’s victory. Five people died, scores of police were beaten and bloodied and there was about $1.5m in damage in the first major attack on the Capitol since the war of 1812. More than 700 people have been charged in one of the biggest criminal investigations in American history. But even on the night 6 January, as members of the House and Senate stepped over blood and broken glass to get the job, some 147 Republicans still voted to overturn the election results. It was the first clue that Trump had burrowed too far down into the party’s foundations to be expunged – and that anyone who tried would themselves be purged. The second clue came after Trump had been impeached – for the second time – by the House, a vote in which just 10 Republicans joined Democrats. A majority of senators voted to convict the former president but fell 10 votes short of the two-thirds majority required by the constitution. Trump was acquitted. Jamie Raskin, a Democratic congressman who was the lead impeachment manager, said: “The evidence was so overwhelming, our legal case was so airtight and Trump’s culpability was so plain to see, I thought that perhaps the Republican party would use this as an opportunity to perform an exorcism on their own body. “But Trump just controls way too much money and too much power in the Republican party and it was really only a matter of a week or two before he reasserted his authoritarian, cult-like control over the whole GOP [Grand Old Party] apparatus.” The third clue, demonstrating Raskin’s point, came in May when Senate Republicans voted down an independent commission to investigate the riot, based on the model of a commission that examined the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Even the minority leader, Mitch McConnell, who had condemned Trump for inciting the violence and remains an arch foe, dismissed the proposed commission as a “purely political exercise”. Democrats instead created a House select committee to examine the events of that day and understand what role Trump played. It has interviewed hundreds of people and is threatening jail time for those who refuse to comply. But it has only two Republican members, Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger, and their fates say much about the direction of the party. Cheney, vice-chair of the committee and daughter of the former vice-president Dick Cheney, has faced the wrath of the Republican party of Wyoming, which voted to no longer recognise her as a Republican. She will be challenged for her seat in a primary election by a pro-Trump candidate. Kinzinger has been subjected to death threats and will not seek reelection. Michael Steele, former chairman of the Republican National Committee, said: “They have to rewrite the history because that’s the only way they can justify their existence because if you let the actual facts of history speak to the truth of who they are, then I don’t know how they look themselves in the face in the morning.” Today the loudest voices in the Republican party belong to the extremists. For them, Trump’s “big lie” that the election was stolen from him due to voter fraud, rendering Biden an illegitimate president, goes hand in hand with the lie that the insurrection was a morally justified crusade, an righteous endeavor to save democracy, not destroy it. Trump himself perpetuates this through a regular barrage of interviews, rallies and emailed statements since he was barred from Twitter. Notably he has sought to lionize Ashli Babbitt, who was shot dead during the riot, as a martyr. Marjorie Taylor Greene, a Republican congresswoman, has cast rioters currently held in detention in a similar light. In November she visit a Washington jail’s so-called “patriot wing” and complained the inmates were enduring “inhumane” conditions because of their political beliefs. Other pro-Trump Republicans in the House echo these messages – one referred to the Capitol attack as a “normal tourist visit” – or do little to contradict them. Some Republican senators are evidently more uncomfortable with the web of deceit and urge the party to look forward to the next election. But again only a small minority are willing to take Trump on directly. All are aware of the power of rightwing media over state Republican parties and the “Make America great again” base. Fox News host Tucker Carlson produced a three-part documentary, Patriot Purge, for the Fox Nation streaming platform that pushed the bogus claim that the insurrection was a “false flag” operation designed to hurt Trump’s supporters. Steve Bannon, a former adviser to Trump, uses his “War Room” podcast to promote the “big lie” that Trump won re-election in a landslide and features guests such as Mike Lindell, a pillow businessman who peddles wild conspiracy theories. Bannon encourages listeners to support the legal defence of the 6 January “political prisoners”. This has helped fuel a climate in which fealty to Trump and his debunked narrative is a litmus test for Republican candidates for Congress. Almost a third of Republicans believe violence may be necessary to “save” the US, according to a recent poll by the Public Religion Research Institute. Trump’s resilient ability to bend the party to his will, and to his disinformation about election “integrity”, have fueled a drive to make it harder to vote, likely to have a disproportionate impact on Democrats. Between January and October, 19 states enacted 33 laws to restrict voting access, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. In addition, Trump loyalists are running as candidates for secretaries of state and other positions that would give them power over the running of future elections. With Republicans in a strong position to regain control of the House and Senate this year, the party is readying for a repeat of 6 January with a different outcome. Steele added: “The elements of it are being played out in states throughout the country as Republicans rewrite the election laws in their favor.” One year on, many analysts argue that America is now split between a Democratic party and anti-democratic party, the latter being barely recognisable as the one-time home of Abraham Lincoln and Dwight Eisenhower. Instead Trump remains its most powerful and popular figure and could run for the White House again in 2024. Kurt Bardella, an adviser to the Democratic National Committee, believes that 6 January will go down as the day that the Republican party surrendered to “an anti-democratic terrorist cell” and that its mission since has been to permanently undermine democracy. “I have long said that January 6 was merely a dress rehearsal for how Republicans intend to try to hijack free and fair democratic elections in this country going forward,” added Bardella, a former Republican congressional aide. “They know that when the playing field is level and everybody can participate in the democratic process, they cannot win, so the only recourse that they believe that they can obtain power is by throwing out democratic norms and overthrowing elections, even if that means using instruments of violence, fear and terror to do so.”More than 1,000 Americans in positions of public trust acted as accomplices in Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn the 2020 election result, participating in the violent insurrection at the US Capitol on 6 January or spreading the “big lie” that the vote count had been rigged. The startling figure underlines the extent to which Trump’s attempt to undermine the foundations of presidential legitimacy has metastasized across the US. Individuals who engaged in arguably the most serious attempt to subvert democracy since the civil war are now inveigling themselves into all levels of government, from Congress and state legislatures down to school boards and other local public bodies. The finding that 1,011 individuals in the public realm played a role in election subversion around the 2020 presidential race comes from a new pro-democracy initiative that launched on Wednesday. The Insurrection Index seeks to identify all those who supported Trump in his bid to hold on to power despite losing the election, in the hope that they can be held accountable and prevented from inflicting further damage to the democratic infrastructure of the country. All of the more than 1,000 people recorded on the index have been invested with the public’s trust, having been entrusted with official positions and funded with taxpayer dollars. Many are current or former government employees at federal, state or local levels. Among them are 213 incumbents in elected office and 29 who are running as candidates for positions of power in upcoming elections. There are also 59 military veterans, 31 current or former law enforcement officials, and seven who sit on local school boards. When the index goes live on Thursday, it will contain a total of 1,404 records of those who played a role in trying to overturn the 2020 election. In addition to the 1,011 individuals, it lists 393 organizations deemed to have played a part in subverting democracy. The index is the brainchild of Public Wise, a voting rights group whose mission is to fight for government that reflects the will and the rights of voters. Christina Baal-Owens, the group’s executive director, said that the index was conceived as an ongoing campaign designed to keep insurrectionists out of office. “These are folks who silenced the voices of American voters, who took a validly held election and created fraudulent information to try to silence voters. They have no business being near legislation or being able to affect the lives of American people,” she said. The project has been set up with legal advice from Marc Elias, one of the most influential election lawyers in the US who was Hillary Clinton’s top counsel in the 2016 presidential campaign and who successfully led Joe Biden’s resistance to Trump’s blitzkrieg of lawsuits contesting the 2020 results. Elias told the Guardian that the index was needed urgently to avoid history repeating itself in 2024 or beyond. “We are one, maybe two elections away from a constitutional crisis over election subversion,” he said. “If we don’t recognize who was behind the attempt to disrupt the peaceful transfer of power, then next time we will be less prepared and it may succeed.” Elias said he saw the index as an example of the kinds of robust action progressives need to take to combat an unprecedented wave of anti-democratic legislation emanating from Republicans in the past 12 months. While Trump had reshaped the right to be laser-focused on elections and winning at all costs, Democrats are spreading their energies thinly between a number of causes of which protecting democracy was just one, he said. “The central theme of the Republican party today is undermining free and fair elections. Under Trump that has become a credential within the party, and we can’t let those folks win without a fight because if we do we lose our democracy.” The individuals recorded on the index who are already in public office include the 147 members of Congress who objected to the certification of the 2020 election result. The list also names many elected officials in state legislatures across the nation, including states like Arizona that were ground zero for Trump’s efforts to steal the election from Biden. Jake Hoffman, a lawmaker who represents Arizona’s 12th district, wrote to fellow Republicans a day before the Capitol insurrection urging them to pressure then vice-president Mike Pence into blocking Biden’s victory. “Vice-President Pence has the power to delay congressional certification and seek clarification from state legislatures in contested states as to which slate of electors are proper and accurate,” Hoffman wrote, reflecting a theory embraced by Trump that has been thoroughly rebutted. The week before the insurrection, 17 Arizona state lawmakers wrote to Pence urging him to “block the use of any Electors from Arizona” despite multiple counts by then establishing that Biden had won the state by more than 10,000 votes. Among the signatories was Mark Finchem, a member of the Arizona House of representatives who was present at Trump’s “stop the steal” rally in Washington on 6 January and who is now vying to become Arizona secretary of state – the top election official who oversees the presidential count. Among the 59 individuals on the index with military backgrounds is Christopher Warnagiris, who in June became the first active-duty member of the armed forces to be charged in relation with the Capitol assault. Despite facing nine counts of assault and violent entry, he has been permitted to continue serving within the training and education section at the Marine Corps Base Quantico in Virginia. Public Wise has drawn on a number of public information sources to compile the index, working in partnership with other pro-democracy groups who have added specialist skills. The partners include American Oversight, a non-partisan organisation that has used freedom of information laws to extract information from government agencies that exposes participants in the big lie. “The goal is to build up a holistic picture so that nothing can fall through the cracks and no one can slip away,” said Austin Evers, the executive director of American Oversight. “We ask: who is this cc’d on this email? What handle is this on a social media account? If we can connect the dots we can ensure accountability can be brought to bear.” Evers said that the most chilling revelation of the research was that the 6 January insurrection was inspired by an ideology that was supported by people in power. “State legislators in Arizona were involved in the run-up to January 6 and after January 6 used their positions to drive the big lie. That feels cancerous – the attack on democracy has the backing of political, and even governmental, infrastructure.” One likely charge leveled at the new index by rightwing individuals and groups is that it is a form of “cancel culture”, designed to silence anyone airing uncomfortable views. Baal-Owens dismisses any such criticism. “Our call to action is about voting, not doxing,” she said, pointing out that no private information is included on the index. “The call to action is not to show up at this person’s house or chase their child to school, but to allow every registered voter to have an educated way to cast their vote.” The groups behind the index hope that it will alert voters to the anti-democratic actions of people running for elected office. The value of such a record, they believe, would increase exponentially were the Republicans to take back control of Congress in this year’s midterm elections, leading almost certainly to an abrupt halt in congressional investigations into the events of 6 January.I fell victim to a banking scam and reported it to my bank within a couple of hours, but the transactions had already gone through and I have lost £12,650. Four months later, I’m still waiting for my bank, the Co-operative, to decide on a resolution. Without help from my family, I would be destitute. I have been unable to work for a year due to severe depression and anxiety. I’ve been recently diagnosed with autism and am awaiting a claim for the employment and support allowance. I have explained all this to the bank and told them of the distress it is causing. I had hoped the autism diagnosis would help me to understand and tackle my mental health difficulties so that I could work again, but this has smashed my confidence. JK, Newcastle upon Tyne This scam started with a call from a conman pretending to be from the Co-operative Bank’s fraud team, who knew enough of your personal details to trick you into trusting him. Over several hours, he persuaded you to transfer money held with Virgin Money and Halifax to your Co-op account, claiming it would evade a cyber-attack. Virgin blocked the transfer of £10,000. You were therefore told to transfer your £14,720 help-to-buy loan, held with Halifax, in two instalments. The first £10,000 went through, but Halifax blocked the second payment. The Co-op was, apparently, not so vigilant and allowed you to pay the £10,000 transferred from Halifax and the £2,600 already in your savings account to the fraudster. You say you struggle with phone calls because of autism, and it was your parents, who arrived during the call, who realised it was a scam. It’s concerning that the Co-op, unlike the other two banks, did not question this uncharacteristic activity. And it’s woeful that a signatory of the contingent reimbursement model (CRM) code, which pledges to refund blameless fraud victims, has left you in limbo for so long. The code is clear that vulnerable customers, of which you are evidently one, should be repaid in all circumstances. Only when I questioned its adherence to the code did the bank action a refund. It said: “We have apologised and refunded the money, and we will be offering recompense for our delay.” Reader TM wants to know what happens to the money stolen from customers like JK. “If I instruct my bank to pay £20,000 into the scammer’s account, my bank will have a record of the deposit,” he writes. “I’m assuming that the receiving bank will know who owns that account and, once alerted, will be able to act.” One of the reasons the CRM code was agreed in the first place was to incentivise banks to collaborate more effectively to trace stolen funds. A major obstacle is the piecemeal way in which banks communicate with each other. In the US there is an online portal for the purpose – here, they have to rely on email. Fraudsters are cunning. They know the security protocols banks follow, and they know how to get around them. That’s why they evade checks by paying students to allow gang members to use their bank accounts to receive stolen cash. Chances are, your £20,000 would be paid into such an account and then swiftly transferred on through a chain of other accounts, often overseas, until the trail is muddied. It’s also possible for scammers to steal a stranger’s identity and open a bank account in their name, especially since online account applications do not always require physical proof of ID. Enough personal information can be harvested via social media, Companies House, the Land Registry and ancestry websites to impersonate a victim and to satisfy ID checks. Vigilance, by customers as well as by banks, is the only protection, so bear in mind that personal information heedlessly flung into cyberspace can, quite literally, be worth its weight in gold. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditions • The subheading of this article was amended on 12 January 2022. As the article already stated, the Co-operative Bank refunded the reader after being questioned by the Observer. However, it has been made clearer that the complaint was resolved by the time the article was published.Around 20 civilians have been killed and nearly 40 homes destroyed in a Myanmar village, according to local media, the latest in a series of massacres allegedly committed by the military. The victims of the attack in late December were found in the north-eastern Sagaing region, and included four men 60 or older, online news outlet Myanmar Now reported. The military seized power in a coup in February last year, creating a political crisis that has developed into a civil war marked by extreme brutality by security forces. Sagaing was one of the first areas where civilians rose up in armed rebellion after the military slaughtered hundreds of peaceful protesters. The region has seen armed clashes, multiple massacres and military airstrikes. According to Myanmar Now, the military occupied Natchaung village in late December, with resistance groups compiling a list of victims on 31 December. The year ended with a number of other violent incidents. The military allegedly massacred more than 30 civilians in Kayah State on Christmas Eve, near the border with Thailand, including women, children and two members of international humanitarian organisation Save the Children. While the United Nations called for a “thorough and transparent investigation into the incident”, state media dismissed the reports as a “plot … drawn up based on their whims and fancies”. A spokesperson for the Kayah state police, a revolutionary force formed by officers who defected after the coup, said during a press conference that they had received missing person reports of 42 people, but have confirmed 31 deaths. A doctor said many of the bodies bore signs of torture. Fighting also broke out in Karen state in December after military forces entered territory controlled by an ethnic armed group sympathetic to the pro-democracy movement, arresting political dissidents in hiding. Thousands fled as fighting spread throughout the state, with many seeking refuge in Thailand, where an estimated 6,000 still remain with limited access to basic necessities.As in years past, 2022 promises a trove of documentaries – some still on delayed releases due to the pandemic – about the world’s biggest celebrities, scandals and contemporary forces (namely: TikTok). The coming year will see the unveiling of a Kanye West project 20-plus years in the making, an investigation into the aftermath of two Boeing aircraft due to design flaws, Amy Poehler’s documentary debut on Lucille Ball, and perhaps the premiere of the long-gestating and still-unnamed Rihanna film. With more sure to be announced in the coming months, here are some of the most anticipated documentaries of 2022: Jeen-yuhs: A Kanye West trilogy Arguably the most anticipated documentary of the year, Jeen-yuhs culls 20 years of footage from the rapper and producer Ye’s (the name West now goes by) early career in Chicago to provocative (for better or for worse) superstardom into a “documentary trilogy”. Directed by longtime collaborators Coodie &amp; Chike (Clarence “Coodie” Simmons and Chike Ozah, who directed the video for Ye’s debut single, Through the Wire, in 2002, Jeen-yuhs promises never-before-seen footage of Ye’s early career. A first-look clip released in September finds a young Ye and Mos Def trading bars to a camera in New York, 2002. Netflix reportedly paid $30m for the project, which does not involve Ye though did receive his approval for use of the archival material. The Sundance entry will hit streaming at an unannounced date later this year. The Janes The Janes, an HBO-produced Sundance entry from Tia Lessin and Emma Pildes, revisits the Jane Collective, a clandestine network of women from Chicago who helped women obtain safe, illegal abortions between 1969 and 1973, the year the supreme court guaranteed a woman’s right to an abortion in Roe v Wade. It’s a look into the past – an underground service of safe houses, code names and blindfolds assisting women desperate for help – which could foreshadow a dystopian future of criminalized abortion in the US, as the conservative supreme court appears poised to overturn or at least gut the landmark decision in 2022. Rihanna Just like her follow-up album to 2016’s Anti, the still-untitled Rihanna documentary by director Peter Berg (Friday Night Lights) appears to be on seemingly permanent delay. The long-gestating project – the film has been in the works for six years and was acquired by Amazon for a whopping $25m in 2019 – has no confirmed release date after the pandemic delayed its initial planned 2020 release until summer 2021, and then again until … who knows. Maybe 2022? Perhaps the extra couple of years allowed Berg to assemble even more footage than the reportedly 1,200 hours he filmed before 2020, during which time the Barbadian singer launched her Fenty beauty line, became the first black woman to head a luxury line for LMVH, debuted her now staple lingerie line Savage x Fenty, started dating fellow musician A$AP Rocky, and maintained global superstardom. Benjamin Franklin Documentary titan Ken Burns’s latest is a deep dive into one of the most prolific and dynamic Americans of the 18th century: Benjamin Franklin, the writer, printer, philosopher, inventor, diplomat and socialite, a rare transcontinental celebrity in his own time. The two-part, four-hour project, which airs on 4-5 April on PBS, promises to admire Franklin’s life with a critical eye uncommon to biographies of the founding fathers; the logline notes that Franklin’s life was “full of contradictions” – he eventually denounced slavery but owned enslaved people in middle age, he condemned violence against Native Americans but championed white expansion on to indigenous lands. We Need to Talk About Cosby The comedian and CNN host W Kamau Bell delves into one of the most fraught cultural legacies in recent memory: that of Bill Cosby, the comedian and former television staple convicted of sexual assault in 2018. (Cosby was freed in 2021 after the Pennsylvania supreme court overturned his conviction on a legal technicality; at least 60 women have publicly accused him of sexual assault, often through a sickening pattern of tranquilizing drugs and denial.) According to the logline, Bell’s four-part series, which premieres at Sundance and airs on Showtime on 30 January, incorporates archival material and cultural and political analysis to “reconsider his mark in a society where rape culture, toxic masculinity, capitalism and white supremacy is shaping how we re-evaluate sex, power and agency”. The Occupied City Award-winning director Steve McQueen’s documentary about Nazi-occupied Amsterdam during the second world war has been in production for several years, and may not be ready by the end of 2022 (no release date has been announced). But anticipation is high for the Oscar winner’s $5.7m-budget film based on the book Atlas van een Bezette Stad, Amsterdam 1940-1945 by McQueen’s wife, the Dutch film-maker and producer Bianca Stigter, whose debuted her own Holocaust-set documentary, Three Minutes: A Lengthening, at the Venice film festival. Downfall: The Case Against Boeing In October 2018, Lion Air Flight 610, a Boeing 737 Max jet, plunged into the Java Sea minutes after takeoff from Jakarta, killing 189 people. Four months later, another 737 Max, Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302, crashed six minutes after takeoff from Addis Ababa, killing 157. Investigators later concluded that malfunctioning automatic flight controls caused the planes to nosedive, and that mentions of recent changes to said system were deleted from pilot training manuals. Downfall: The Case Against Boeing, directed by Rory Kennedy, is the second documentary project to explore the American company’s prioritization of profit over safety in less than a year; the Netflix film follows Boeing’s Fatal Flaw, the PBS Frontline and New York Times collaboration which premiered in September 2021. Kennedy’s film, which premieres at Sundance, will explore the company’s PR crisis in the wake of the disasters. TikTok, Boom For those looking for a visual deep dive into TikTok’s rapid ascent to the forefront of digital culture, there’s TikTok, Boom, from director Shalini Kantayya. The Sundance entry chronicles TikTok’s rise to prominence from Music.ly to the most downloaded app in the world (owned by the Chinese company ByteDance) and its stupefying forces of virality, through the perspective of Gen Z app users and stars, journalists and experts. Chocobar The celebrated Argentinian film-maker Lucrecia Martel follows Zama with her first entry into non-fiction: Chocobar, a hybrid fiction-documentary project about the murder of the indigenous Argentinian activist Javier Chocobar by a white landowner in 2007. The film, which Martel has described as “a documentary which is mortally wounded in its pretensions to be a documentary, because the problem in this story is the document”, won the top international prize at the 2020 Locarno film festival’s The Films After Tomorrow Initiative, in Switzerland, for films stalled by the pandemic. No release date has been announced. The Princess We are reaching peak saturation of Diana content, from the disastrous Diana: The Musical to the critically acclaimed fourth season of The Crown to Kirsten Stewart’s likely Oscar-nominated turn in Pablo Larraín’s surreal Spencer. Now comes Ed Perkins’ The Princess, premiering at Sundance with an HBO Max streaming date to be announced, which purports to examine the life of the People’s Princess and her influence on the public’s view of the monarchy, both during her life and long after her death in 1997. Lucy and Desi Amy Poehler’s documentary debut, produced by Ron Howard, examines the life of the groundbreaking comedian Lucille Ball and her intense, devoted partnership with husband and I Love Lucy co-star Desi Arnaz. Poehler, who has directed the feature films Wine Country and Moxie, took on her first non-fiction project as a longtime fan of Ball. It was inspired by “her story and what kind of woman she was in business, and what kind of culture she was in when she was making the show”, she told Variety in 2020, as well as the “interesting and complicated and loving” relationship with Arnaz. Here’s hoping reviews are stronger than for last year’s coolly received Being the Ricardos, Aaron Sorkin’s feature starring Nicole Kidman as Ball and (controversially) Spanish actor Javier Bardem as the Cuban American Arnaz.In a bowling alley somewhere in postapocalyptic rural America, a 10-year-old savant is celebrating his birthday. His mother has chosen this moment to tell him, via the unusual method of having a murder scene rendered in icing on his cake, that his father killed his grandfather. The baker, though, has erred, and topped the cake instead with an edible version of Goya’s Saturn Devouring His Son, an image so disturbing it causes the child to question his own existence. “Saturn,” a party guest helpfully informs him, “represents Time, which, with its ravenous appetite for life, devours all its creations.” Later we will learn that the bowling alley never existed, and that some or all of these characters may very well be dead. Welcome, if you have not been here before, to the world of Joy Williams – widely praised, sadly not quite as widely read. My Vintage paperback of 2001’s dazzling The Quick and the Dead carries admiring quotes by Don DeLillo, Raymond Carver and Bret Easton Ellis, yet in the UK it is unforgivably out of print. Williams’s 2015 short story collection The Visiting Privilege was heralded by all who read it as a major literary event, yet it took the tiny imprint Tuskar Rock to bring it to the UK market. On the surface of it, Harrow, her first novel in more than 20 years, seems unlikely to broaden her audience. This is not to say the book is not brilliant – it is. It’s simply that Williams has made no concessions; she remains wonderfully and determinedly herself. What might be a little different, though, is the world into which her work emerges, and the reality she so daringly alchemises into her vision. Attempting a precis of this novel feels like exactly the kind of misguided endeavour Williams would scorn, but allow me to try. Harrow is set in an undefined near future in which the global environmental situation has gone from being on “the verge that people thought would go on forever” to all-out catastrophe. Khristen, the novel’s not-quite-central character, briefly died as a baby, or so her mother adamantly believes, and may never have entirely returned. Post-disaster, amid a hallucinatory terrain that may or may not be an afterlife, she finds herself at The Institute, where a loose collective of geriatric terrorists “in the worst of health but with kamikaze hearts” plot suicide missions targeting vivisectionists and pesticide salesmen in the hope that this will “refresh, through crackpot violence, a plundered earth”. Williams’s method is one of adjacency more than linearity. Language, not narrative, is the connective tissue. To read her is to be flung every which way: from the spiritually profound to the farcically bizarre. One minute we observe “unprepared souls, moments from the clarity of their deaths”. The next, we are invited to consider the condition of a very old man’s penis: “She wondered if his pecker was as shredded and gribbled and nicked as the rest of him or whether it hung wondrously, impossibly smooth and aloof, its head like burled oak.” Every sentence is lathed into sleek and startling perfection. At the bowling alley, serious bowlers “held the afterward of their poses for a vanity of time”. A crashing car flies “like a crumpled Kleenex into a cement utility pole by which it was trephined with glittering efficiency”. A salesman is so talented he “could sell a shock collar to a Doberman”. Even seemingly offhand phrases glitter with wit. Admire if you will the sing-song perfection of “Eddie Fucking Emerald offed by a fatty in a Caddy”. Zeroing in on our collective complacency and denial, Williams is both wry and merciless, lamenting “twelve lane highways with bicycle supplements” and people “who think they can still save the earth by grinding up some modest nut or bean for pancake meal”. A pre‑collapse environmental conference includes a talk entitled The Potentiality of Landscape’s Emptiness: The Integrity of Half Measures. A TV channel streams nothing but minutes of silence. “We all lead three lives,” Khristen is told. “The true one, the false one, and the one we are not aware of.” This life we’re not aware of is Williams’s great subject. She peels back the visible and known, revealing death and chaos beneath. Wandering around a rescue centre for birds, Khristen stumbles across “an old oil drum, brimming with amputated wings”. A grove of trees is “surprisingly green and freshly pleasant except for the packages of meat dumped there”. What seems to be a livestream of a nesting bird is in fact a recording, the bird having long ago flown into a truck. Part of what makes Williams’s work so destabilising is that agency has almost no significance. Navigating a world that makes no sense, her characters are lost and baffled, their actions and ideas stripped of meaning. These are people who “suspected they were meant to be more or different but fumbled about in the smoky light of half-realised lives”. With free will in question, and the borders between life and death or reality and delusion queasily blurred, individuality itself begins to fray. “Every person,” Williams tells us, “considered themselves unique as snowflakes but in the aggregate they were a blizzard, a whiteout of swirling expectation and denial.” In her remarkable essay Hawk, about a beloved dog that inexplicably attacks her, Williams writes: “Experience is fundamentally illusory. When one is experiencing emotional pain or grief, one feels that everything that happens in life is unreal. And this is a right understanding of life.” Harrow reminds us that, as a consequence of climate collapse, trauma and grief are the condition of our collective existence. As our world disintegrates, it will take what we think of as reality with it. Addressing this in fiction will be the job, partly, of a certain kind of modern mystic. Williams – great virtuoso of the unreal – is one of them. • Harrow by Joy Williams is published by Tuskar Rock in the UK (£14.99) and Australia ($29.99). Sam Byers’ latest novel is Come Join Our Disease (Faber). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Ali Martin’s day one report from the SCG: Mark Wood on overcoming a ‘rough night’ to deliver: The latest edition of The Final Word podcast: The lights are on at the SCG and as the crowds drift away, that must be England’ most promising day of the series. An on-off, stop-starter, which perhaps gave England’s bowlers’ rest, and disrupted the rhythm of Australia’s batters who got going, but couldn’t accelerate. Much rests on Smith tomorrow. My eyes are being propped open so I’m going to leave you here. Thanks for all the messages, see you tomorrow at the witching hour! That’s it for the day with England, dare I say it, fractionally on top. 46.5 overs: Australia 126-3 (Smith 6, Khawaja 4) Broad it is, for Wood, as a flurry of rain hovers over the ground, and finally sends them off. A lament arrives, from Tim Maitland. “Happy New Year and all that stuff. I’m sitting here with all the doors and windows wide open because it’s 22C and sunny here... yet still suffering from a similar Mancunian gloom as your “only a box of tissues and the dog for company”. I can’t even bring myself to watch. “If we’re going to keep The Ashes relevant, we need to switch some of the focus on to saving the long form of the game. It seems to me the ECB needs to take some sort of a central role in improving the viability of the County Championship, rather than letting it wither on the vine. At the moment, given the effort they put into the Hundred, it’s hard not to believe that they’re tacitly trying to ease the smaller counties out. “Even as I write this I despair. But it could look different. “They could be leveraging contracts for the domestic limited overs. T20 and even The Hundred to get more long-form cricket televised. They could be working with the counties - or those counties that will work with them - to help them boost attendances and income. They could, for instance, help create and fund a nationwide scheme to get more schools organising days out at county matches. They could be using the under-utilised capacity of county championship games to introduce more children to playing the game. They could. Will they? “I feel like I just wasted 20 minutes of my time and two minutes of yours. 2022 eh?” 46th over: Australia 125-3 (Smith 6, Khawaja 4) I think that’s a victory for Stokes - who sends down a half-tracker. Smith lays into it like a tennis player and it goes high, but safe, for four. It can’t be true that Smith’s bat is longer than anyone else’s, but why does it look that way? Does he have exceptionally long arms in comparison to his body? 45th over: Australia 121-3 (Smith 2, Khawaja 4) Khawaja scores his first runs in Tests for two and a half years, spins and pulls a short one from Wood to backward square leg for four. 44th over: Australia 117-3 (Smith 2, Khawaja 0) Stokes for Anderson: a maiden. Thirteen overs left in the day. Being a Test cricketer: 43rd over: Australia 117-3 (Smith 2, Khawaja 0) Smart bowling from Wood, whose hair and shirt are soaked with sweat . He varies his length and speed and, whisper it, for the moment, England’s bowlers are on top. 42nd over: Australia 117-3 (Smith 2, Khawaja 0) A humdinger of a maiden from Anderson to Smith, who is completely beaten by one that straightens. 41st over: Australia 113-3 (Smith 2, Khawaja 0) Wood’s first ball is beautifully back-foot driven for four by Labuschagne, but he gets his reward the very next delivery. Wood roars and a big smiles spreads over Buttler’s face, which is lovely to see after his tribulations. Nudged away and Labuschagne can’t resist, giving Buttler an easy catch. Beautifully bowled by Wood, nicely done bowling change by Root. 40th over: Australia 113-2 (Smith 2, Labuschagne 24) Smith off the mark straight away with an ambitious tilt at Anderson with a rising blade through the covers. Jedi and apprentice take the crease. “Last match England were 2-22 twice,” writes Yum, “Australia before that were 2-222 and now at 1-111 another wicket falls so next wicket at 222?” Elegantly caught by Root at second slip, who sways to his left like a member of the corps de ballet. Beautiful from Anderson who finally tempts the edge. 39th over: Australia 111-1 (Harris 38, Labuschagne 24) Leach scurries through his second over. 38th over: Australia 110-1 (Harris 37, Labuschagne 24) The sun is fully out at last, decorating Anderson with a shrinking shadow that scuttles under his feet. He doesn’t exactly trouble Labuschagne, but worries him. Just two off the final ball. “Morning Tanya and morning all those on GMT.” Hello Em Jackson! “Andy Zaltzman on TMS just read out stats for Ben Stokes saying he’s averaging 60 with the ball in Aus for this Test . , . . . so what is Stokes actually balancing out this Series by his inclusion?” It’s not been his best tour: whether it is rustiness or a fragility to the body I can’t tell you. I’d wager, not the time to hand him the Test captaincy. Discuss. 37th over: Australia 108-1 (Harris 37, Labuschagne 22) And Leach does get his chance. He dries his hands in the dust at the crease. Harris picks up one after a Stokes misfield. Against Labuschagne, there are four fielders in the deep, they must think he can’t resist. And that didn’t look a bad first over to me; and on the telly, the experts like it. DRINKS with a blueish sky watching over. 36th over: Australia 106-1 (Harris 36, Labuschagne 21) Anderson has had a brutal visit to the hairdressers, short on top, fierce on the sides. He sends now a metronomical maiden. 35th over: Australia 106-1 (Harris 36, Labuschagne 21) Beautiful from Harris: a short, fat one from Stokes is driven off the back foot, on his tip toes, for four. Beaten off the next ball. 34th over: Australia 102-1 (Harris 32, Labuschagne 21)I think play can continue till 8am GMT if the light holds. We get a peak at Haseeb Hameed’s new haircut, just a ruffle poking out from the back of his cap. Beard is now longer than hair. Anyway: Anderson is quite fierce this over, but Labuschagne leaves with perfect judgement and elaborate sound effects, then picks up a couple through the covers off the last ball. 33rd over: Australia 100-1 (Harris 32, Labuschagne 19) Stokes is the switch for Broad. Labuschagne brings up the hundred with a nurdle to the mid-wicket boundary which is just cut off by a diving Jack Leach. Talking of whom - time for a little bowl. Surely? 32nd over: Australia 92-1 (Harris 32, Labuschagne 16) A jitter, a judder, then a beautiful extra-cover drive from Harris for four. “Is trousers that show a fair amount of sock!’ a euphemism? The children are not awake here yet, it’s safe to answer.” NO Kim Thonger. NO!!!!! “I’m ready to pronounce this game a draw by the way. Even England will struggle to collapse twice on this pitch, won’t they? Won’t they?” Do you really need me to answer this? 31st over: Australia 92-1 (Harris 28, Labuschagne 16) Broad continues, let’s see what the old dogs can do in tandem. Labuschagne plays and misses again, one that jags away past the bat, but seems entirely unbothered. A maiden. “Did anyone else just wake up, see Australia are only 80/1 and assume England had been bowled out for 50?” An entirely natural reaction, Peter Salmon. 30th over: Australia 92-1 (Harris 28, Labuschagne 16) Anderson is back for his second spell of the day. Three balls in and he’s asking for a new ball - and, lo, gets one - as the old one won’t fit through the umpire’s cookie cutter. Harris picks up a couple through square leg. 29th over: Australia 90-1 (Harris 26, Labuschagne 16) Root’s hands are on his hips at slip. Then he pulls his sleeve over his hand to give the ball a good polish before throwing it back to Broad. England could do with a bit of magic from somewhere here - a Mark Ramprakash at the MCG grab out of nowhere. (Broad incidentally is not in shorts, but trousers that show a fair amount of sock!) 28th over: Australia 87-1 (Harris 25, Labuschagne 14) Labuschagne is alarmed enough by his waft to quickly turn around to see where it has gone, but it flies well away from Jonny Bairstow at leg slip. Wood then bounces Harris, but he only has to duck the top of his head in greeting and it flies onwards, with Buttler just getting the top of his fingers to it to tip it down to the boundary. 27th over: Australia 80-1 (Harris 24, Labuschagne 13) Dib and dab. 26th over: Australia 76-1 (Harris 21, Labuschagne 12) A tasty over from Mark Wood, quick and sparky, with two balls up to 93mph. In the stands, t-shirts rule despite the rain. “Hi Tanya.” Hello Tony Jennings! “On a scorching hot day at the Bay Oval in Tauranga Bangladesh finally have their second test match win. Congratulations to them. But mystery surrounds Kane Williamson captain of the Black Caps. He has been out of the game with an elbow injury for almost a year. NZ Cricket won’t say how he got it, presumably he was hit there by a cricket ball, he has played but then had to stop playing. Tom Latham his stand in is not quite of the same calibre as Williamson. Perhaps he will be back for the second test just a thought.” It sounds nasty doesn’t it, I wouldn’t fancy a “re-aggravated” elbow problem. 25th over: Australia 75-1 (Harris 20, Labuschagne 12) Events. Labuschagne first squirts Broad between third slip and gully for four. Then leg glances -with debatable control - between Buttler and leg slip. Then a huge lbw appeal. Broad begs with typical Disney animation -but Stokes intervenes: inside edge. 24th over: Australia 67-1 (Harris 20, Labuschagne 4) Wood switches ends from his opening spell and takes over from Stokes. Harris’s on-drive slides off with geometrical purity and dribbles over the boundary rope. “Afternoon Tanya!” Hello David Warner! “You may have covered this but if Travis Head is cleared tomorrow is he allowed to be a concussion sub? Clearly the continued rain delays have taken me right down the garden path mentally.” Let me just dig through my CA regulation book 64.2b.... 23rd over: Australia 60-1 (Harris 14, Labuschagne 4) Broad, white bandana, short trousers, powers in.The first keeps low, the fourth is eased by Labuschagne through the covers for four, like a long cool slurp of iced coffee. 22nd over: Australia 56-1 (Harris 14, Labuschagne 0) Stokes polishes off the remaining two balls of his over. Gently does it. Appreciation for good housekeeping. The umpires have just walked off and nodded to Pat Cummins, who is in leisure wear and drinking something that looks like a red bull but is probably isotonic vitamin water. Meanwhile David Gower is discussing crosswords and how the Times is more difficult than the Telegraph. I’m not sure if he’s talking cryptic or not. Hmm, slight problem with the virtual ticket, the image seems to have disappeared off my laptop. Suggest doing it on a phone. What skills! This is a such a lovely idea, to raise money for the McGrath Foundation. Buy a virtual seat at the Test - I’m going to get one for my dad who has never (yet) been to an Ashes Test in Australia - will let you know if it is an easy process. If there is no more rain.... Ali Martin has been walkabout and found the most perfect museum piece. Coffee is calling from the kitchen. I like this idea... “Enjoying the rain,” taps Jim Warwood, a Pom living in Australia for 37 years and “routinely having my summers ruined by Ashes series. “It should mean the game is not finished before or during the crucial third day; that should help the McGrath Foundation.” (good point, and hopefully McGrath will be out of isolation by then too and able to be at the SCG) “Wood X Factor: He would be better if he was not so nice, all the short balls are never directed in a way that may hurt the batsman. If he hits them its more because it misbehaves off the pitch and he makes me think of Statham who used to apologise. Now the Aussie bowlers never look at all distressed by it.” The drizzle, it carries on drizzling, I’m afraid, and it is making Phelim Mcmanamon think of Manchester: “If Mattie Parkinson was bowling on the pitch Australia would be worried.” He would be a fantastic joker to have up your sleeve. Is he ready? I’ve no idea - but he and Saqib Mahmood had moments of brilliance for Lancashire last season. And he’s definitely got the big match temperament. His ball of the century from April: Lovely scenes in the Bangladesh dressing room at Mount Maunganui. I’m reading Scyld Berry’s new book which contains a chapter on each Test country. I wasn’t aware just how unready Bangladesh were for Test cricket when they were given Test status. Their first-class competition had only been going a year, they’d never won a first-class match and never made a first-class tour. The only country they’d ever beaten in any format was Pakistan in that infamous 1999 World Cup match. No wonder it has been such a battle. The covers are being preened and pressed back into position, which gives me an opportunity to bore you with my one Sydney Test story. It was the first time I’d ever been to Australia and I was blown away by how gorgeous Sydney was. I stayed at a friend’s house in Paddington, felt like I was living my best life, and then got to see Darren Gough take a hat-trick, centuries from Mark Waugh and Mark Slater and seven wickets for Stuart MacGill. Happy days. If there is not further rain...cancel that.... I suspect one of the reasons they dropped Burns for Crawley is that they reckoned he was a better option at slip. He has an air of competence about him, despite being so tall, not quite Cameron Green, but the slightly cheaper English version. He swallowed that Warner catch really well, despite looking surprised by the fact it came so quickly. My colleague Ali Martin tells me the big cover is coming off at the SCG and that it is very, very, humid. An early email wings its way from Jimmy McManners: “It’s a fair point from Sankaran Krishna about Mark Wood’s stats, but there are a few caveats to that. Aside from the stop/start nature of his career (plenty of matches played half fit) there is also (and I’m not telling anyone anything they don’t know) the “X-Factor” of some bowlers. “My mate Dave Murphy always says Stokes is a terrible bowler, not fast, nor scary, and with a bowling average of over 30. But… would you want to face Stokes with his pecker up in a vital part of a game? Botham has a batting average of under 35, but I bet most of those runs were very, very useful ones. “ (And yes, I wrote this so Dave Murphy would react).” Are you there Dave? I agree btw on Mark Wood’s X-factor, it’s worth more than a few runs, especially in an attack of same-i-ness. Thanks Jonathan! Good morning wet Sydney from wet Manchester. I’ve put the Christmas tree lights on for the (almost) last time and have a box of tissues and the dog for company. How is it going for you? It’s nice to wake up to a day that hasn’t , yet, run away from England. This rain delay offers a perfect opportunity for me to hand over the OBO to Tanya Aldred. I’ll be back for more shower-dodging tomorrow. 22.4 overs: Australia 56-1 (Harris 14, Labuschagne 0) More extras against Stokes’ figures, this time five wides for a ball that bounces miles over Harris, and Buttler, and runs away to the sightscreen. And soon afterwards another shower bursts over the SCG, and we’re off again. 21st over: Australia 51-1 (Harris 14, Labuschagne 0) Warner pushed hard at a delivery at just that awkward length, the kind he’d done well leaving all morning. Surprise breakthrough for England. Australia were cruising but Stuart Broad has come back into the attack and bagged his bunny. A copy-and-paste dismissal for the pair, Broad angling the ball in from around the wicket, Warner thick-edging to second slip. Unexpected in the context of the match, far from it in the history of that duel. 20th over: Australia 50-0 (Warner 30, Harris 13) Stokes &gt; Warner &gt; maiden. 19th over: Australia 50-0 (Warner 30, Harris 13) A couple of singles from a straight up-and-down Wood over make it consecutive 50+ opening partnerships for Australia. England are really up against it now with an ageing ball on a flat deck. Warner in particular looks in the mood. 18th over: Australia 48-0 (Warner 29, Harris 12) Stokes changes his line of attack to around the wicket, and two balls into the shift THE FIRST CHANCE OF THE DAY! Warner is squared up and gets a thick edge that flies to where a third slip would have stood. As it was, there were only two slips, the second of which, Zak Crawley, dived full length, but could barely get a fingertip to the chance. Warner replies by ushering a cover drive to the boundary with all the aggression of a shadow-stroke between overs. He has hit some gorgeous shots today. 17th over: Australia 40-0 (Warner 21, Harris 12) Warner content to allow Wood to hurl down a maiden. “There is a bit too much talk about Mark Wood’s pace (high 140s quite often) and not enough about the fact that he has something like 69 wickets in 24 tests at about 33 apiece. Proof yet again that we sometimes focus on the wrong numbers.” I’m not far off this opinion from Sankaran Krishna, but Wood is such a tough bowler to appraise considering how stop-start his career has been. Plus, his extra pace is proportionally more valuable in Australian conditions than in England. It’s just a shame he doesn’t have Jofra Archer at the other end backing him up. 16th over: Australia 40-0 (Warner 21, Harris 12) Two front foot no-balls and a wide, as well as a perfect delivery that sashayed beyond Warner’s outside edge, in a curious Ben Stokes over. Australia up to 40 without much fanfare. England have not taken advantage of the new ball and the seam and swing it has offered. 15th over: Australia 36-0 (Warner 21, Harris 11) Warner purses his lips and nods appreciatively after he’s beaten for pace on his outside edge by Wood. The rapid delivery bounced just over the stumps. Warner is then induced into a leading edge later in a good maiden over. 14th over: Australia 36-0 (Warner 21, Harris 11) Stokes bowls the first full over after lunch, a maiden, and it brings the TV pundits (including Mike Atherton) in to discuss why neither Broad nor Anderson were called upon after a long break, considering they are England’s most likely wicket-takers. The extension of the conversation being Root’s captaincy decisions. 13th over: Australia 36-0 (Warner 21, Harris 11) David Warner is composed from the off, first presenting the full face of his bat to an overpitched Wood delivery, for two, then thrashing a wider half-volley through the covers for four. That was all hand-eye coordination, and to thrilling effect. The players are back out in the middle after lunch. Time for another dart between showers. An early lunch has been called while the rain falls. “The ground DJ had the temerity to play ‘Have you ever seen the rain?’ as the covers went on this time,” emails Gavin Robertson. “Answer- yes we bloody have.” While we wait for play to resume, enjoy Bangladesh’s incredible Test triumph in New Zealand. 12.3 overs: Australia 30-0 (Warner 15, Harris 11) Time for some raw pace with Mark Wood replacing James Anderson. If he doesn’t engineer an early breakthrough it could be a long couple of days in the field for the tourists. He only gets three deliveries before the heavens open again. 12th over: Australia 30-0 (Warner 15, Harris 11) Ben Stokes replaces Stuart Broad and he fails to test either opener in an over that passes mostly outside Marcus Harris’s off stump. Warner advances his score with a simple nudge off his pads. 11th over: Australia 29-0 (Warner 14, Harris 11) Anderson continues around the wicket and Harris doesn’t look completely assured, especially when some movement beats his outside edge for the second time in a couple of overs. Anderson gets too straight though and concedes a couple of easy runs. Harris demonstrated his ability to shrug off the previous ball during his match-winning knock at the MCG and he is back in that groove today. “Hey Jonathan,” good afternoon John Kyriazis. “At the game with the family, paid top dollar, looking forward to it and they stop playing for a few raindrops. Then too slow to restart. Please stick up for the fans at the game.” Agree 100% John. As Geoff tweeted earlier, quite why we can’t adapt and start earlier on days like this (when it’s sunny and dry with a forecast for later rain) is beyond me. 10th over: Australia 27-0 (Warner 14, Harris 9) Glorious swivel pull from Harris to despatch Broad through midwicket for four after the England bowler dropped short to begin the over. The remainder of the duel is even with Harris defending deliveries targeting the top of off, and picking up a further single for his troubles. This opening partnership looks rock solid. “Get the spinners on,” emails Phelim Mcmanamon. 9th over: Australia 22-0 (Warner 14, Harris 4) I don’t think I was effusive enough in my praise for that final delivery of Broad’s over. It was a jaffa. The exact delivery that he had perfected to remove David Warner in England. Now Anderson follows suit and moves around the wicket, but Warner again demonstrates how his eye is in today, timing an effortless straight drive for four to an overpitched delivery. Anderson responds well, rapping the opener on the pads, but it’s a stifled appeal after the ball jagged a mile off the surface into the left-hander. England decline a review, and DRS indicates the ball was a couple of coats of lacquer too high and wide of leg stump. England’s salt and pepper shaker finishes the over beating Warner’s defence again, but once more the line is angling down leg. 8th over: Australia 18-0 (Warner 10, Harris 4) Broad still pretty full, angling in to Harris from around the wicket. There’s no lateral movement on offer though, so by the time Broad refines his line to tempt Harris into a stroke, he’s too straight and it’s an easy nudge into the on-side for a couple of runs. Broad is undeterred and he does find a skerrick of wobble away from the bat and, for the first time today, there’s a genuine play-and-miss that beats an outside edge. 7th over: Australia 16-0 (Warner 10, Harris 2) Beautiful shot from Warner. After Anderson targeted the batter’s ribs, he threw a wide tempter that had some swing angling it away and the Australian calmly stroked it through the covers for a very pleasing boundary. Four more soon follows with Anderson losing his line and Warner glancing him fine for four... off his thigh-pad; leg-byes. England have not taken advantage of the new ball or the slightly helpful conditions. 6th over: Australia 8-0 (Warner 6, Harris 2) Broad has come back from the break fuller, forcing Harris to play around his off stump, inducing a false stroke from a very late leave. No alarms yet for this opening pair though. 5th over: Australia 8-0 (Warner 6, Harris 2) Anderson is harmlessly wide of off stump for a couple of deliveries, then he’s straight and towards Warner’s ribs to complete the fifth over. Benedict Carter wants England to go back to basics. “There is a youtube video where Geoff Boycott gives a batting masterclass with Michael Vaughan and Ricky Ponting looking on in awe. We have to go back to basics with the batsmen - India can do it, Australia and New Zealand do it. But we ignore basic technique and the result is useless contortionists at the crease.” We’re back on! Anderson has three deliveries remaining in the fifth over. David Warner on strike. We could be back on in five minutes - further rain permitting. “We’re gonna need a bigger whiteboard...” David Sadler has sent in a lovely email, full of the common sense and naiveté of one not embittered by unravelling the mysteries of cricket for decades. “Still fairly in my infancy of watching Test cricket, and a vested interest in this match as I have tickets to days 3 and 4 (albeit reluctantly given the weather, England, and err, COVID). Is there any circumstance under which they will abandon the match early given it is forecast to rain every day pretty much continuously, barring a few brief spells of sunshine? E.g. would they get to the 3rd day, when Australia are still 50-1 on their first innings, and just go “well we’re not getting a full match, let’s call it”. Oh David, welcome to cricket. The short answer is no. The longer answer is: welcome to the club, you have more head-scratching ahead of you. The covers are coming off again... The umpires were out inspecting the square and the word was we were just five minutes or so away from a restart - but more rain has now arrived. Bangladesh have beaten World Test Champions New Zealand, in New Zealand, by eight wickets. The covers are being peeled back. We may be back on sooner than expected. Ashley Giles has really rattled your cages, hasn’t he? “It sounds as if they are on at the wrong ends,” emails John Davenport, “Jimmy can conjure movement out of nothing, but Broad needs some help. Anyway, who decides from which end the first over is bowled? In fairness, it should be the batsmen.” It’s up to the fielding team to decide that John, and as for which of the two new ball bowlers, most have a preferred end that factors in the run-up, landing position at the crease, or simple superstition. If both bowlers want the same end, we find out who the alpha is. But it’s a good general point about how Broad and Anderson (as magical as they have been for a long long time) have long felt as if they captain themselves in the absence of decisive/intuitive leadership from Cook or Root or whomever. 4.3 over: Australia 8-0 (Warner 6, Harris 2) Anderson has decided his stock ball today will be the one that swings away from the left-handed openers. The problem he’s got is judging where to start his line. Anything wider than middle and Warner can leave outside off. Anything on leg allows Warner to get inside and work to the on-side. That particular calibration will have to wait, because one of those heavy blustery showers has blown across the SCG. The players are coming off, and the blanket coverage of overhead clouds suggests they may not return for a while. 4th over: Australia 8-0 (Warner 6, Harris 2) Broad is still bowling gun barrel straight and a little short. Eventually he pitches up and Warner throws his hands at the ball outside off stump and crunches a four just in front of point. The kind of shot that encourages both batting and fielding units. Some drizzle in the air. Meanwhile over in New Zealand, literally “THE BIGGEST UPSET IN THE HISTORY OF TEST CRICKET”. 3rd over: Australia 2-0 (Warner 1, Harris 1) Another maiden, this time Anderson to Warner, the Aussie opener comfortable watching the ball sail over over his pegs or slant wide of them. There is something on offer for the new ball, but England have not yet hit the right lines and lengths. 2nd over: Australia 2-0 (Warner 1, Harris 1) Broad begins around the wicket to the left-handed pair, searching for that delivery that angles in but seams away. There’s less movement on offer for Broad than Anderson and Harris defends a maiden from the crease with a lovely straight bat. “Ashley Giles: the poor man’s Phil Tuffnell” is the kind of email I’m going to click on. “A few years ago, before he became a 3rd rate cricket administrator, the King of Spain tried his hand at being a summariser on TMS,” emails Tom Paternoster-Howe, who goes on to make his thoughts clear about Gilo on the radio. In short: no stars. “I recall one particularly salient and topical incident, when rain delayed the start of play. The junior groundstaff were running a rope around the outfield and the commentators were wondering why. A physicist wrote in to explain that the rope running over the grass would break the water droplets up into smaller ones so they would evaporate quicker. A concept so simple I would expect a seven-year old to grasp almost immediately, but which Giles claimed not to be able to understand.” As every year goes by, the Mitchell and Webb “are we the baddies?” meme about the 2005 Ashes series becomes more salient. 1st over: Australia 2-0 (Warner 1, Harris 1) Lively start from Oh Jimmy Jimmy, rapping Warner on his knuckles with a tasty lifter first up. Anderson is bowling over the wicket to the left-hander, and after that initial delivery curving back into Warner, the next three seam away, a couple prodigiously. Another in-ducker is too straight and Warner get the scoreboard moving with a tuck off his hip. Harris also gets off the mark with a single, but this is much tighter, and the product of a delivery that moved like a frisbee in the air. Promising signs for England with the new ball. Now, can then find the right length to take advantage? 30 minutes later than scheduled, David Warner is taking guard and James Anderson is at the top of his run-up. It’s cricket o’clock. “Hi Jonathan,” hello Ruth Purdue. “I have just listened to that Giles interview. Seriously, seriously, why is he so combative? They have nowhere to hide anymore. They have no excuses left. Some of these excuses were trotted out last time in Australia by the way. The worst being talking about being in bubbles and letting go home. How about they treat Leach better? How about playing a spinner when it’s spinning pitch? How about you let all the players that are never picked and deserve a chance go home? Why are kept around, in the hope of getting a game when they have no interest in playing them? We all know the names of these players now. They have a duty of care to those not playing too right? Maybe try a different tone. I for one am no longer nodding along. Talk is cheap, I don’t give myself a bonus at the end of the year.” The teams are out in the middle of a blustery but dry SCG for the anthems and Welcome To Country. Colum Farrelly takes aim at the players: “The current batch of players are not anywhere near as good as they have been talked up to be and a little more realism and modesty from press and players wouldn’t go amiss.” The question, of course, is why are the best not good enough? Andy Robinson is looking higher up for scapegoats. “Tom Harrison has to go along with the ludicrous Hundred. And some test matches have to be on terrestrial telly. Sacking Giles is just rearranging deckchairs.” It’s safe to say Ashley Giles hasn’t endeared himself to some of you. Here’s Seth Levine’s take: “Just listened to the Ashley Giles interview on TMS. I cannot imagine any other leadership position where you get to burnish your credentials by referencing how poor your predecessors were (seriously - using 90s England as your benchmark?). He came across as chippy, self-serving and fatalistic. Harrison should be first to go. Then Giles.” Joe Root admits he would have batted first too, given the option, but he likes the grass coverage on the pitch and hopes there’s some early movement. “We don’t need much change now,” Root adds, when asked about the one switch to the XI. Joe Root called incorrectly, Pat Cummins had no hesitation. Not the worst toss to lose given the rain and humidity around the SCG. Just the one change expected to both XIs with Usman Khawaja replacing Travis Head (Covid) for Australia and Stuart Broad coming in for Ollie Robinson (shoulder). Trevor Kingston is thrilled. “England bowled out for under 70 and the only change is the return of Broad in place of Robinson, lengthening the tail. But I suppose when the tail extends to the two openers...” “Picking over the carcass of English cricket is unseemly and unhealthy. May I suggest an aquamation?” asks Scott Poynting, referencing a word I had not encountered until this week. And here’s Andrew Benton with the first email of the day, enraged by the comments below from the King of Spain. “It is remarkable and truly disappointing that Ashley Giles doesn’t feel that anyone’s head needs to roll for the appalling performances of late, especially given that the failures earlier this year were all prep for this series. He needs to take responsibility for the failures, and suffer because of them, to foster the change that is needed. Not do so makes a laughing stock of the ECB. Clearly he’s protecting his bonus. England have lost a supporter in me because of the way this is being handled. The only right thing is two resignations - Giles and Chris Silverwood. Then the changes that are needed can start.” England’s managing director, Ashley Giles, understands the bigger picture. Now, what’s he going to do about it? Unless we look at more systemic change, a collective responsibility and collective solutions, we can make whatever changes we want – you can change me, the head coach, the captain – but we’re only setting up future leaders for failure. That’s all we’re doing. We’re only pushing it down the road. A reminder that the Sydney Test is the annual fundraising centrepiece for the McGrath Foundation. Let’s hope we reach day three and we can see the SCG turn pink again. Meanwhile in New Zealand, the World Test Champions are about to suffer an almighty upset. Match now scheduled to start at 11am. Ok, let’s tuck into some analysis of where we are in the series with Geoff Lemon and Jonathan Liew. Is it time to revise the Ashes schedule? Is there any appetite to to do so? Is it even feasible? This is going to be one of those days full of heavy showers blowing through and the covers coming on and off again. But reports from the ground are that we should have a toss on time. Great news! There will be even more time to pick over the carcass of English cricket, because it’s raining in Sydney. Heavy showers are forecast over the next few days, blowing in from the east (the coast), and one of those bands is sweeping through Moore Park at the moment. Hello everybody and welcome to live over-by-over coverage of the opening day of the fourth Ashes Test. We’re underway at the Sydney Cricket Ground at 10.30am local time (11.30pm UK). With the Ashes done and dusted for another cycle it’s hard to know what to make of the remainder of this series. With both countries in the midst of another wave of the pandemic, sport once again feels detached from reality, especially a match such as this, where the sport itself is shorn of most of its competitive jeopardy. With neither side ringing the changes at the selection table, we’re grasping for narratives like Old Mother Hubbard searching for a bone. “But it’s an Ashes Test!” some of you are probably yelling, “that’s all the bloody narrative you need.” Maybe, but in the current circumstances this Test feels like little more than a couple of dozen content providers fulfilling their production duties for a TV show that reached the apex of its plot arc earlier in the series. Maybe Zak Crawley makes good on his pre-match comments? Maybe a fired up Stuart Broad delivers one of *those* \0/ spells? Maybe Harold Bishop returns from the dead and revives the format? There has been lots written about the moribund state of English cricket since the Boxing Day Test, and some thought provoking pieces about Australia and the health of the rivalry too. So we should wade into that without further ado. If you would like to join in, you can reach me by email or Twitter (@JPHowcroft).The decision to grant Novak Djokovic an exemption from Covid-19 vaccination requirements to play in the Australian Open in Melbourne has been labelled “appalling”, with some players expressing surprise at the late decision. On Tuesday night, the defending Australian Open champion posted on Instagram that he was coming to Melbourne to participate in the tennis tournament with an “exemption permission”. All Australian Open participants must either be fully vaccinated or apply for and secure a medical exemption in order to enter Victoria without undertaking the mandatory 14-day quarantine. Tennis Australia said players seeking an exemption went through a two-stage process, with their application first considered by a panel of experts in Tennis Australia, and then an assessment from the Victorian government. But on Wednesday afternoon, the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, indicated the federal government might also have a say in the matter. Andrews said in a statement it was for Tennis Australia and the Victorian government to decide whether a non-vaccinated player could take part in the Australian Open but “it is the commonwealth government that will enforce our requirements at the Australian border”. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, subsequently said when Djokovic arrived “if he is not vaccinated he must provide acceptable proof that he cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons”. “If that evidence is insufficient, then he won’t be treated any different to anyone else and will be on the next plane home – there should be no special rules for Novak Djokovic,” Morrison said in Canberra. The chief executive of Tennis Australia, Craig Tiley, said the exemption granted to Djokovic was the same medical exemption anyone can get under the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) guidelines. “If there are several reasons why they are unable to be vaccinated, Atagi have set out very clear guidelines that have to be followed in order for you to be added to the Australian immunisation register and if you are added to that register, you are then exempt from a vaccination and can come into Australia,” he told Nine’s Today Show on Wednesday. “For tennis players, it was a process that was above and beyond what anyone coming to Australia would have experienced. Simply because we had an extra panel … which through a blind review assessed any application and then granted exemptions if it was appropriate.” Last year Djokovic said he was “opposed to vaccination” and added: “I wouldn’t want to be forced by someone to take a vaccine in order to be able to travel … But if it becomes compulsory, what will happen? I will have to make a decision.” Tiley said it was up to Djokovic to decide whether to disclose the reason the exemption was granted. The Atagi guidelines state exemptions can be given for those with acute medical conditions, including undergoing major surgery, those who have had Covid-19 in the past six months or have had a serious adverse event attributed to a previous Covid vaccine dose. Tiley said in a press conference on Wednesday he could understand why people would be upset about the decision. “Some of you will be upset about the fact that Novak has come in because of his statements of the past couple of years around vaccination,” he said. “However, it’s ultimately up to him to discuss with the public his condition if you choose to do that, and the reason why he received an exemption. We as an event, also as a state, as a country, will do everything we possibly can to give everyone an equal opportunity to come into the country.” The state employment minister, Jaala Pulford, acknowledged Victorians would find the decision frustrating, but said the panel process to approve the exemption was “incredibly robust” and Djokovic had not received special treatment. “I wanted to recognise and acknowledge that this outcome is something that many of the Victorian community find frustrating and upsetting,” Pulford said. “But I want to make absolutely clear that as has been the case the whole time, no one is receiving special treatment because of who they are or what they have achieved professionally.” Andrews said in her statement any individual seeking to enter Australia “must comply with our strict border requirements”. “If an arriving individual is not vaccinated, they must provide acceptable proof that they cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons to be able to access the same travel arrangements as fully vaccinated travellers. “Australian Border Force will continue to ensure that those who arrive at our border comply with our strict border requirements. “No individual competing at the Australian Open will be afforded any special treatment.” Both Tiley and Pulford called on Djokovic to explain his medical exemption when he arrives in Australia. “I think it’ll certainly be helpful if Novak was to explain the condition for which he sought an exemption and he got the exemption,” Tiley said. “But ultimately, it’s up to him.” Public reaction to the news of Djokovic’s exemption was overwhelmingly hostile. Stephen Parnis, a former vice-president of the Australian Medical Association, said the decision was appalling. “I don’t care how good a tennis player he is. If he’s refusing to get vaccinated, he shouldn’t be allowed in,” Parnis tweeted. “If this exemption is true, it sends an appalling message to millions seeking to reduce #COVID19Aus risk to themselves &amp; others. #Vaccination shows respect, Novak.” Australian tennis players James Duckworth and Alex de Minaur expressed surprise at the decision when asked at the ATP tournament in Sydney. “Look, I don’t know the criteria for exemptions. Yeah. Apparently it’s an independent panel. He must have fit the criteria somehow,” Duckworth said. “That’s very politically correct of you,” de Minaur replied. “I just think it’s very interesting. That’s all I’m going to say.” Tiley said 26 people associated with the Australian Open applied for a medical exemption to come to the tournament, but only a handful were granted. The deputy Victorian Liberal leader, David Southwick, said it was a “disgrace”. “What a disgrace! We have had 6 lockdowns – schools and small businesses closed, funerals and weddings told not to go ahead, families separated for months on end and now a tennis star gets an exemption,” he tweeted. “A kick in the guts to every Victorian.” The decision also drew an angry reaction on social media, with many predicting a hostile welcome for the nine-time Australian Open champion when he takes the court. Former AFL great Kevin Bartlett said on Twitter that the public had been “taken for fools”. Russian tennis star Natalia Vikhlyantseva announced in December she would skip the Australian Open because the Sputnik vaccine she has received is not recognised in Australia. Just last month, Victoria’s deputy premier, James Merlino, said exemptions on medical grounds should not be viewed as a “loophole for privileged tennis players” and everyone at the Open is expected to be vaccinated. Last year Djokovic said he was “opposed to vaccination and I wouldn’t want to be forced by someone to take a vaccine in order to be able to travel … But if it becomes compulsory, what will happen? I will have to make a decision.”On the back of encouraging polls – including one that eliminated the Tory lead on the economy – Keir Starmer started the new year with a speech linking the months of Tory corruption and incompetence to a wider argument about Britain. Though the Labour leader is surely correct to acknowledge that his party can’t just rely on Tory collapse, there is some way to go to turn the headings of security, prosperity and respect into something that can capture the public imagination. Tucked away near the start of his speech was a small reference to the other Keir, Hardie, in the context of a point about patriotism. “The Labour party is a deeply patriotic party. Keir Hardie once said that British socialism must ‘wear a local garb’. He meant that British socialism was rooted in the everyday concerns of working people.” But while Hardie’s socialism was quoted, we heard no more from the present Keir about his own. It is something he must address but seems reluctant to. In an interview last month, Starmer was asked whether he was a socialist. He refused to say, asking “what does that mean?”, moving quickly past the question. It was a strange response. Each Labour leader has had to define where they stood in relation to socialism. Labour was established through an alliance including trade unionists and socialists. Through clause IV of its constitution it was committed to a form of widespread common ownership. Leading figures from all parts of the party have argued about what socialism is. That contested nature is a reflection of its role in the political life of the party. There are two broad considerations that flow from Starmer’s answer. One is the perennial need to engage with and answer what is, or should be, a central question; and it is worth noting that leaders from the party’s centre and right have done so to further their own purposes as much as the left. Answering it, with certainty and clarity, certainly need not be a barrier to electoral success. But, the other is that the crises of the 21st century – the pandemic and climate – surely cry out for a politics based on socialism. Reaction to Starmer’s positioning was not limited to Labour’s left. The commentator John Rentoul, hardly a proselytist for the left, argued that he ought to have answered “yes, of course”, and then should have defined what socialism means to him. The Labour leader’s answer was particularly unusual because in 2020, he had set out his view of socialism in a Guardian article. “If I see something wrong or spot an injustice, I want to put it right,” he argued, adding: “We can win again if we make the moral case for socialism, a moral socialism, that is relevant to people’s everyday lives and the challenges we face as we move into the 2020s and 2030s.” I took part in the discussion that preceded the publication of Starmer’s article. There was never any question that such a statement of political values was unnecessary or a hostage to fortune. It was a function of being a senior Labour politician that you set out a wider philosophy. His was not everyone’s view of socialism. But in a sense, it was his attempt to answer in advance the question put to him more recently. That “moral socialism” piece, so carefully thought through, makes the Labour leader’s subsequent non-answer all the more perplexing. Why resile from it? Perhaps Labour’s leadership is inclined to avoid anything that nods to the wider left. Yet all Labour leaders, left and right, have to resolve their approach to socialism. Ed Miliband said he was bringing it back. Tony Blair’s replacement for clause IV declared “the Labour party is a democratic socialist party”. Neil Kinnock, well versed in the language of the labour movement, was interviewed for Marxism Today, whose analysis was seen to be of use to a Labour leader moving the party rightwards. Some may say that any talk of socialism is a turn-off, but no one is so naive as to believe that Labour ought to fight the next election with socialism as its slogan. Jeremy Corbyn’s overarching platform was not “vote Labour for socialism”, but “for the many not the few”. People will vote for left politicians of every stripe because their stances and policies connect to the direct interests and values of the voters. The challenge is to work out how to apply socialist ideas in order to advance at an electoral level. Our times demand more, not less, socialism. Polling consistently shows high levels of support for socialism among young people – to the alarm of rightwing analysts. Even among the wider population, including in the US, positive and negative views of capitalism and socialism poll closely together. More importantly, the free market has offered no solutions to the most fundamental aspects of the present pandemic. The state has had to intervene, massively and repeatedly. Ninety-seven per cent of the funding for the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine came from the public sector and charities, for example. The vaccines would have been impossible without the state. Gordon Brown’s demand for global action to end the scandal of undervaccination around the world should remind us that this is an unequal planet, organised to the benefit of a relatively small number of rich countries. A socialist view looks at the contending class interests in society. In any given situation socialists will ask, who pays? So it is with the fallout of this pandemic. No new furlough for the Omicron wave has left huge numbers of workers in the lurch. The TUC highlighted the worst Christmas wage squeeze in nearly a decade. Many key workers, having seen the economy through the phases of the pandemic, can now expect a pay cut. The Treasury’s case that public sector pay settlements should not keep pace with inflation equates to a real-terms reduction. The pandemic has seen our society gripped by questions long-raised by socialists: internationalism, collectivism, inequality, class interests, planning, public ownership and state intervention versus the free market. The same applies to the climate crisis. Labour appears reluctant, but it simply must engage with where it stands on socialism. It is just over 30 years since the dissolution of the Soviet Union. At the time, many on the right hoped that seismic event would also mean the end for a politics that looked to a future beyond capitalism. It was never likely then, and the twin global challenges of Covid-19 and climate emergency must surely lead to the opposite conclusion now. Simon Fletcher is a former adviser to Keir Starmer, Jeremy Corbyn and Ed Miliband. He previously served as chief of staff to the mayor of London, Ken Livingstone, from 2000 to 2008“I’ve just looked through my 2021 Arsenal calendar before throwing it out,” begins Gordon Forbes. “Mr May, William Saliba, has made zero appearances for the club during 2021. Is there a higher profile calendar participant out there who did not play for his club during that same year?” We’ll deal with that question shortly but first let’s allow Gordon to show his workings: “Thanks mainly to Saliba (0,0 subs), Willian (eight,12 sub), Maitland-Niles (five, nine sub), David Luiz (16, one sub) and Héctor Bellerín (17, one sub) and with the post-summer contributions of Bernd Leno, Granit Xhaka, Kieran Tierney and Pépé I estimate that all 12 players in the calendar have only filled 306 of the 784 available places (starting XIs and all substitutions) during 2021. At 39% of available playing spots, is this indeed the most unrepresentative club calendar ever?” That additional question might be one for readers to answer next week but, thanks to the January transfer window, we have found a few examples that help answer the original question. Any Liverpool fans who had the club’s official 2018 calendar would have seen Philippe Coutinho staring at them from the wall in January, a month in which he never played for the club and left for Barcelona for around £142m. Similarly, Virgil van Dijk features in a composite image on the January page of Southampton’s 2018 offering having been confirmed as a Liverpool player on New Year’s Day. Andy Carroll was Newcastle’s Mr February on their 2011 wallchart having played the last game of his first stint at his boyhood club on 27 December 2010 before joining Liverpool. And two years later Demba Ba was the face of January 2013, a month in which he was in fine form … for Chelsea. We have also unearthed a few calendar-appearing one-match wonders. Fikayo Tomori was pictured alongside Reece James for August in Chelsea’s official 2021 calendar, meaning his club appearances (one in the FA Cup on 10 January against Morecambe) matched those on the wallchart thanks to a loan move to Milan on 22 January that became a permanent transfer. And Wes Morgan (January on Leicester’s 24-player 2021 calendar) made just one appearance – for eight minutes in the Foxes’ victorious FA Cup final win over Chelsea – last year while Christian Fuchs (May) similarly played just once – 15 minutes in the Cup against Brighton – in 2021. Big climbs and falls after Christmas Day (2) In our festive edition we detailed teams who had a remarkable turnaround in results after 25 December, and Ásgeir Ingólfsson has a great example from the land of fire and ice. “Concerning second half of the season meltdowns from leagues further afield, I present to you Þróttur from the Icelandic league. In the 2003 season they were top of the table at the halfway point with 18 points from nine games. They got only four points from the other nine games and ended up relegated (ninth out of 10 teams), despite being third as late as after the 14th round. In addition, they had two out of the three top scorers that summer.” Sacked after an abandoned game Yes, they have Richard. “Dennis Greene left Boston after an abandoned FA Trophy tie at Witton Albion (having been losing 1-0 at half time),” writes Christian James. “We had lost 9-2 the week before.” And Alun Thomas has this: “Not an abandoned game, but Sunderland sacked Malcolm Crosby in February 1993 after the pools panel ruled they had lost a postponed game away to Tranmere.” Longest fixture in England “Brighton and Hove Albion v Wolverhampton Wanderers must be a contender for the longest fixture possible in the English leagues, in terms of letters used (43 letters excluding ‘v’). Any advance?” asks Tom Biltcliffe. It would appear to be the longest meeting of two clubs from the four professional leagues in England, Tom, but if we dip into the lower leagues we can find a lengthier matchup. “Havant &amp; Waterlooville v Hampton &amp; Richmond Borough in the National League South beats it by a character; even more (48) if you spell out the ampersands in full as with Brighton and Hove Albion,” writes Steve Hyde. “I know Tom’s question was aimed at English leagues but if you expand it to include Scottish leagues, you can have Inverness Caledonian Thistle v Dunfermline Athletic (45 characters),” offers Adam Anderson. “A potential early round Scottish Cup clash between ICT and Bonnyrigg Rose Athletic (Scottish Lowland League), would also produce 47 characters.” Knowledge archive “Dundalk scored after 12 seconds in the League of Ireland … after their opponents Derry had taken the kick-off,” wrote Sam Alanson in September 2014. “Is this the quickest goal ever scored by a team who didn’t kickoff?” The short answer to this question is, no. But we had several responses from which we have permed the following quickfire top four, including the fastest goals in the entire history of the FA Cup, the Champions League and the World Cup: 9 seconds: Roda v Den Haag, October 2011. Den Haag took the lead nine seconds after the home side took the kick-off, but it didn’t help them much: they lost the game 5-2. Thanks to Stephan Wijnen for the tip-off. 9 seconds: Reading v West Brom, February 2010. “Nine seconds was all it took for the home side to seize the lead,” we reported. “Albion had kicked off and the ball was fed swiftly to right-back Gianni Zuiverloon, but the Dutchman dallied, allowing Jimmy Kébé to pilfer possession and then guide a low shot under the goalkeeper.” Hat-tip to Adam Roberts for the reminder. 10.12 seconds. Bayern Munich v Real Madrid, March 2007. Hat-tip to Joe Foley for this one. Roy Makaay’s goal remains the fastest in the Champions League, and as an added bonus it contributed to eliminating Madrid from the Champions League. 10.80 seconds. South Korea v Turkey, July 2002. The World Cup third-place play-off, Hong Myung-bo is a little bit too relaxed with his first touch, and Hakan Sukur pounces. Yaad Ilani suggested that one. Can you help? “What is the largest goal tally for two teams combined drawing in both their home and away fixtures in a season? I presume there are examples of say 3-3 and 4-4 but are there any really big tallies where they just got two points?” asks John McDougall. “I was interested to read that Celtic captain Callum McGregor has won all 14 of the finals that he’s played in for the Hoops,” writes David Shearan. “Has anyone bettered this record?” “Raheem Sterling has scored 18 goals for England, all in competitive matches,” notes Yasin Uddin. “Are there other players with similar records and which player has the highest number of international goals without padding their stats in friendlies?” “Porto have won the Primeira Liga 29 times, and the main domestic cup 17 times, but are yet to win the Portuguese League Cup (which admittedly only began in 2007) having lost four finals,” writes Niall McVeigh. “Are there other examples of trophy-laden teams with a drought in one particular domestic competition?” • Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.As openings go, it was at the subtler end of the bang-whimper spectrum. So subtle, in fact, that the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain’s first concert of 2022 began before most of the packed auditorium noticed. What sounded like pre-performance doodlings among the double basses and percussion suddenly cohered into a heavy tread of repeated notes and rhythmic filigree. As the rest of the orchestra filed on stage, the standard-issue minimalism (shades of Terry Riley’s In C) blossomed into more colourful textures. And then it all dissipated as mysteriously as it had begun, leaving the principal oboe playing a sustained A for tuning. There was no conductor and no music. Just, as we were told in one of multiple spoken cameos from players, the NYO’s trademark “unashamedly enthusiastic atmosphere”. Such devised pieces are now a regular feature: a reminder of how much the organisation provides for its members beyond high-level orchestral training. (Though nothing encapsulates the scale of Operation NYO better than their gargantuan pre-concert pizza order, which arrived as I did.) If the main body of the concert seemed more subdued than some NYO appearances, that’s surely because it was this cohort’s first outing, after a single week together. But the quality of playing under the careful, encouraging leadership of Sian Edwards was largely as polished as ever. Ravel’s La Valse emerged from barely-there rustles, taking flight in irresistibly brash climaxes. The middle movement of Karim Al-Zand’s City Scenes wove delicate skeins of percussion and strings, while Dani Howard’s Coalescence showcased on-the-money brass and exquisitely blended polychrome shimmer. Best of all were Rachmaninoff’s Symphonic Dances, which boasted a gorgeously mellow saxophone and tender strings, liquid ripples of woodwind and a muscular, sharply chiselled finale – and there’s no full orchestral sound quite like an NYO tutti, as this huge, energetic machine roars joyously into life. • At Warwick Arts Centre, Coventry on 7 JanuarySpeaking of summaries, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down today: National cabinet decided to make RATs free for concession card holders, ease testing requirements on a range of situations, and no longer require PCR tests after a positive rapid test result. Labor called for free rapid antigen tests, after days of pressure. The Australian Medical Association and the Public Health Association of Australia called for rapid antigen tests to be made free as a matter of equity. NSW reported a record 35,054 new cases and eight deaths, with 1,491 people in hospital. NSW premier Dominic Perrottet admitted the health system was “under pressure” but denied nurses are working while Covid-positive. Victoria recorded 17,636 new cases and 11 deaths, with 591 people in hospital. Queensland reported a record 6,781 new cases overnight, with 265 people being treated for Covid in hospital. Tasmania reported a record 867 new Covid-19 cases, with 72 at a community facility. The ACT reported 810 new daily cases, with 16 people in the hospital, including one person in ICU who is on a ventilator. South Australia recorded 3,493 new Covid cases, with 125 people in hospital, 12 in intensive care and one on a ventilator. Western Australia recorded five new local cases of Covid. The Northern Territory has recorded 117 new cases, which is up from yesterday’s 75 cases. Epidemiologist Adrian Esterman said the fourth Ashes test in Sydney will be a super-spreading event, calling it a “recipe for disaster”. The decision to grant Novak Djokovic an exemption from Covid-19 vaccination requirements to play in the Australian Open in Melbourne has been labelled “appalling.” The Victorian health department announced elective surgeries will be cancelled, in a bid to ease pressure on the health system. Thanks for reading. OK, you’d be forgiven for watching that presser and thinking it was all a bit much. Fear not, here is a quick summary of what was announced: Rapid antigen tests (RATs) will be made free for concession card holders, who will receive 10 free tests every three months from pharmacies. RATs are free for close contacts and the symptomatic, available at testing sites. PCR tests are no longer necessary after a positive RAT. Other testing requirements have been scrapped, including for truck drivers, hospital attendees, and for interstate travel. Supply of RATs will remain an issue over the next couple of weeks. Boosters and vaccines to be made available to children aged five to 11 from 10 January. So Scott Morrison has wrapped up his presser, but an alarming detail was discussed towards the end, when a journalist asked about reports that Coles is imposing limits on the amount of meat you can buy. The PM says the treasurer is working with major retailers on such issues: The treasurer has been working with Woolworths and Coles and the other suppliers, and there are a lot of issues that we are monitoring very closely. I think that is a precautionary step they have taken and a wise one. I wouldn’t read too much into it. That is why it is just important that we are working with their distribution centres and treating their workers the same we would healthcare workers and those in aged care. As the prime minister was speaking, the Victorian health department has announced that elective surgeries will be cancelled in Melbourne and major regional cities, in a bid to ease pressure on the health system. In a statement, the government says only emergency and urgent elective surgery will be allowed from tomorrow: As the Omicron strain continues to spread rapidly, these changes will reduce the strain on our hospitals by ensuring as many resources as possible are available across the system to manage both Covid-19 demand as well as other patients with emergency and urgent medical needs. The PM is asked a question about how rapid antigen test results will be reported, and essentially says they won’t be. He urges anyone who tests positive to contact their GP, but did not answer that question: That is always your first point of contact when it comes to managing your illness, if you are not in hospital. And your GP would be able to assist you through telehealth if you need to go and get further treatment in hospital. As we have seen, there are very low incidence, particularly with Omicron, which is what we have seen in a state like Tasmania, which is now starting to see cases. Obviously, the majority of their cases are Omicron, which is far less severe, hence we are not seeing the same rate of hospitalisation, which gives us a bit more confidence about their workers being able to return sooner rather than later. Morrison has just blamed pressure on the transport system as a reason to not mail out free tests, referring to them “non-essential tests”: The reason we are not mailing rapid antigen tests out to everybody ... was because we know there is already enough stress on the transport distribution network. General knows better than anyone, [we] want to focus on vaccines. We don’t want to put additional stress on what are non-essential tests and that is why we didn’t go down that path. The United Kingdom is finding that is a very difficult system to run and the supplies are exhausted within an hour of being posted. No magic solution there. There are no magic solutions. Morrison is asked if he has ever personally bought a rapid antigen test, and says his wife purchases them for the family, so he has never bought one. The PM is asked whether Novak Djokovic should be allowed to play in the Australian Open: Novak Djokovic, when he arrives in Australia, I don’t think that will be too far away, he has to, if he is not vaccinated, he must provide acceptable proof that he cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons to be able to access the same travel arrangements as fully vaccinated travellers. We await his presentation and what evidence he provides to support that. If that evidence is insufficient, then he won’t be treated any different to anyone else and will be on the next plane home. There should be no special rules for Novak Djokovic at all. None whatsoever. If medical exemptions have been provided by medical professionals and that has been furnished to him as a proviso for him to get on that plane, well, that will have to stack up when he arrives in Australia. But he will be treated no different to anyone else. Morrison is asked whether Australia is in a position to “ride out” the Omicron wave, as the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, has said. The PM points to Australia’s high vaccination rate as a difference between the two contexts, before saying he thinks the country is in “a good position to push through”. We have no choice but to ride the wave. What is the alternative? We are in the top 10 most vaccinated OECD countries in the world both on first dose and on second dose. So we are in a good position to push through, ride the wave or whichever way people might want to describe it. That is why we just have to keep carefully managing these issues as they present. I am confident we will continue to manage them as we have over the last two years and meet the challenges that come, and principally by doing what we did today. There are a lot of knockers out there of national cabinet, I get that. The federation, it isn’t the most efficient of systems, but it is a lot more efficient than a lot of the alternatives. Another journalist asks why there aren’t more supplies of RATs, and the PM gives a rather short answer: The Australian government did secure testing supplies we need for rapid antigen testing to deal with commonwealth responsibilities. In aged care, we already had 4m to be dispensed through the aged care network and secured 10m as part of that group, and now we have added a further 50m on top of that and another 20m on top of that. The commonwealth in terms of our responsibilities for rapid antigen testing that were agreed in early November we have fulfilled. He goes on to hang the blame of accessibility onto the states: The suggestion that somehow this responsibility shifted from state to commonwealth is false. It was always a state responsibility. Scott Morrison’s first question is about whether these measures will actually ease the burden on testing infrastructure, with the PM first saying that RAT supply will continue to be an issue over the coming weeks: But those supplies will be constrained for the next few weeks, and so people then should exercise caution when they are coming in contact with vulnerable people for exactly that reason. But if you are not symptomatic, and you are not a close contact, then there isn’t a requirement for you to go and have that test. The PM goes on to say it “stands to reason” that these measures will remove “unnecessary sources of demand”. The Covid-19 taskforce commander, Lt Gen John Frewen, has announced that the administration of vaccines for five- to 11-year-olds will begin on 10 January: The program for the 2.3 million kids in that category will commence on 10 January. Again, the very particular supply for that cohort is in country, has been tested and is being distributed as we speak, and there will be adequate paediatric doses to meet the first dose requirement for all kids, prior to the commencement of school ... either within January or in the early weeks of February. Before handing over to the chief medical officer, Morrison makes a point about the plan for schools, saying all leaders have agreed they don’t want schools opening and closing, and they want to avoid disruptions: The objective here is very clear and we are all very shared in our view that schools go back and stay back. On day one of term one. He says officials in each jurisdiction will meet to develop a national framework that will cover “any furloughing issues, matters relating to health and safety, matters relating to vaccination and of other issues that will be defined over the course of the next month by the secretaries to ensure that we have a clear common approach as best as we are able to achieve across all states and territories”. Morrison says he has tasked the attorney general and the employment minister from each jurisdiction to work out a way around “the obligations of employers in relation to their occupational health and safety obligations”. Alluding to testing requirements, and the pressures it is placing on workplaces, especially critical places such as aged care facilities, Morrison says the new isolation requirements may be extended: Employers are concerned that under those OHS rules that they have to require their staff to be tested in order to meet those obligations. We will be working to ensure that that obligation will not be required. If businesses are wanting to test their staff for other reasons, well, that is a matter for them. Supplies are short and in the next few weeks we want to make sure they are going to where they are essentially required, which is, once again, close contacts and people who are symptomatic. We will be working together with them to clarify those arrangements and to ensure that particularly small businesses and medium-sized businesses are not imposed with the burden of having to pay for tests simply to comply with the regulation that would not be considered necessary. He also announces anti-hoarding measures, saying the government will work with retailers to prevent any extreme hoarding: We’re also to agree with the industry that we will have some anti-hoarding provisions put in place by the retail sector, where you can buy only one at a time ... They will be administered and monitored by the retail industry themselves and many of them are already doing that right now. It includes the supermarkets, where they already have those rules in place. The PM says measures will be introduced to prevent price gouging, saying the government will be using the Biosecurity Act to prevent businesses from adding up to 120% markups: Which means that if you are selling a rapid antigen test for more than 120% markup on what you have paid for it to supply it, then you will be in breach of that regulation. And that carries a penalty of $66,000 and up to five years in jail. Morrison has announced a system for concessional access to tests and stressed that providing them universally for free is not what national cabinet agreed on: Universal free access to tests was not agreed by any of the states and territories today, or the commonwealth. Make that very clear. Universal free access was not considered the right policy response by all of the states and territories in attendance today, and the commonwealth. What was agreed, though, was providing, as I flagged two weeks ago, a model to provide concessional access for tests over a three-month period, and they will be made available through the pharmacy network. If you are symptomatic or a close contact and you are a concession card holder, and I will go through the cards in a second, do not go to a pharmacy, go to the testing centre. We don’t want people who are symptomatic or who are close contacts and may be carrying the virus going into pharmacies. That raises further health risks for people who are in pharmacies. You get a free test at the testing centre. Morrison says rapid antigen tests will no longer be necessary for interstate travel, with only Western Australia being the exception. He also says the commonwealth will be providing 10m RATs to states and territories to be used as both self-testing as well as point-of-care testing. You will find yourself in the next couple of weeks, they will be transitioning where you either get a rapid antigen test provided at that site and you will get your result there and then, within 15 minutes. You won’t have to wait for the test results to come back from the lab. This will take the pressure off the pathology labs which are out there, which will speed up the test results for PCR tests. They are needed for those who are essential to get PCR tests. We are looking to move the queues quicker, moving to get results quicker and for those having their rapid antigen tests at a testing centre, it means ... if they have a negative test, they can go home and get on with their life. We’ve moved on to the announcements, and the PM has confirmed that tests will be made free for close contacts and for the symptomatic, while also saying they were always free, which is rather confusing. The PM also announced that a PCR test is no longer necessary to confirm a positive RAT, saying it will ease the burden on PCR tests: I want to stress at the start as we confirm today that tests for close contacts and those who are symptomatic, they are free. They have always been free. They are the essential tests that are required for public health management. These are the tests that are recommended by the medical expert panel, the AHPPC. These are the tests that they say must be done. So if you are a close contact, as recently redefined, if you are symptomatic, then you need to go and get a test from the testing clinic. If you are not a close contact, if you are not symptomatic, you do not need to get a test. That is the advice that we have – to get a test. We need to ensure we focus the testing resources on the essential tests that are required, not the casual test. I will come back to those issues in a moment. We also agreed today to remove the requirement for a PCR test to confirm a positive rapid antigen test result. So if you have gone along, if you are a close contact and had a rapid antigen test and it is positive, you do not need to get a PCR test to confirm that. That will take pressure off PCR testing lines. The prime minister has begun his press conference by dismissing reports that the nation’s hospital systems are under strain. He says the current case load faced by hospitals is “well within the capacity of the hospital system”: We are dealing with much higher levels of cases and as we look through the impact on the hospital system, which we discussed at length today, and we can still see that particularly in areas of most acute serious disease in ICU and ventilated patients that they remain at very low levels and well within the capacity of the hospital system. Hospital system challenges relate more particularly to continue to gain access to workforce. That is the key constraint on the hospital system at present and that relates to a set of rules around testing arrangements and furlough and isolation arrangements and we discussed those at length today as we looked at both the demand issues that relate to testing as well as the supply issues that relate to testing and seeing how we can address those. And with that, the prime minister has stepped up for his national cabinet update. While we wait for the PM, the vice-president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Chris Moy, has hit out at politicians urging people not to call triple zero without explaining why: And we have a preview of the decisions made in national cabinet: The PM is due up in minutes. I wanted to just return to the Western Australia Covid press conference earlier today, where the vaccine commander, Chris Dawson, was asked whether the state will be able to keep the new variant out, especially as it prepares to open its borders. Dawson dismissed the idea of eradicating the virus, calling it “fanciful”: I wouldn’t share a lot of confidence we’ll keep Omicron out, because one, we’ve already got it here so to totally eradicate it would be fanciful. What we do know, and it’s very compelling, is that the third dose is particularly important in the extra layer of protection for the Omicron variant but there are still some members in our community who haven’t had a first dose. NSW hospitals, we know, are filling up fast with Covid cases topping 35,000 today with some regional areas reporting a tripling of daily numbers (see forthcoming article). But Sydney’s hospitals are struggling to cope too. Liverpool hospital’s tally of Covid patients, for instance, has now passed 180 and is rising about 10% daily. “Not manageable,” was the comment of one doctor to Guardian Australia. The Royal Prince Alfred hospital, another big Sydney medical centre, now has as many as 110 Covid patients, while Concord hospital, in the same health district, is approaching 70 patients. While RPA has about 950 beds and Concord 500, it’s not as though they had a lot of spare capacity, prior to the latest Covid wave. Staff have told us their condition of employment requires them not to speak to the media. As one WA-based doctor tells us, that gag order “is a severe breach of freedom of speech and means the true severity of the situation isn’t reflected in media. Anyone I know working in NSW describes it as a total disaster”. We’re not sure it’s quite a “total disaster” - yet. If you know more, please contact us, such as via peter.hannam@theguardian.com The Pharmacy Guild of Australia is calling on the government to implement a rationing system on rapid antigen tests, to prevent stockpiling. In a statement released today, the Guild says they are working with the government to develop a “voluntary code” which will limit the number of tests someone can buy. We are working with the commonwealth through the National Co-Ordination Mechanism to implement a voluntary code which will place limits on Rapid Antigen Tests at point of sale. These voluntary mechanisms are put in place to prevent stockpiling and ensure as many people as possible have access to these tests. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, and a quick thanks to Cait Kelly for her sterling job today. And with that, I am going to say adieu for the afternoon and hand you back to the exceptionally capable Mostafa Rachwani who will take you through to the evening. This article that went up earlier today has drawn many responses from across the country about the difficulties regional hospitals are suddenly finding themselves in. Here’s a comment from one nurse from a major coastal hospital in NSW: I work in a regional ICU. We have 24 fancy beds with frosted glass ... Our capacity sounds very good when relayed to the anxious general public. We were staffed to use 14 of them. Our hospital is broke, so our staffing levels were recently dropped again. We were in crisis before the outbreak. It’s not about nurses whingeing and wanting more money. It’s not because we want the luxury of taking sick leave or mental health days. We can’t stand to see people suffer, our patients are absolutely suffering because there aren’t enough nurses to provide basic and essential care. Many of them are old, confused and sick. Visitors are banned and there is no one to advocate on their behalf. It makes me sick to the stomach. There’s a lot more to come from the regions, not least because vaccination levels were typically lower than the big cities to start with, but also because of the distances and availability of skilled healthcare workers that add to the challenges of providing an acceptable level of care even before Covid. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, has released a statement on Novak Djokovic and his exemption from vaccine requirements to play in the Australian Open. “Any individual seeking to enter Australia must comply with strict border requirements. While the Victorian Government and Tennis Australia permit a non-vaccinated player to compete in the Australian Open, it is the Commonwealth Government that will enforce our requirement at the Australian border. Since 15 December 2021 fully vaccinated eligible visa holders can travel to Australia without needing to apply for a travel exemption, and enter eligible states and territories quarantine for free. If an arriving individual is not vaccinated, they must provide acceptable proof that they cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons to be able to access the same travel arrangements as fully vaccinated travellers. Australian Border Force will continue to ensure that those who arrive at our border comply with our strict border requirements. No individual competing at the Australian Open will be afforded any special treatment. Quarantine requirements for international arrivals in Victoria, including for non-vaccinated individuals are a matter for the Victorian Government. Dawson says 93% of people in WA have now had their first dose of the vaccine. 10% of eligible Western Australians have received their third dose. We just lost the live stream for a second but we are back with WA now. The vaccine commander Chris Dawson is talking. “We expect it will enter WA and will have a big impact on us.” He is thanking those on the frontline. Cook says the ACT and Tasmania are now high risk. Today I can also provide an update on WA’s border controls. With case numbers dramatically increasing in ACT and Tasmania, the chief health officer has recommended these jurisdictions be elevated to extreme risk. As of 12.01am on Saturday, 8 January, Tasmania and ACT will move from high risk to extreme risk. Cook says there are more exposure sites online. As of this morning, 787 close contacts in total have been identified in the Delta backpacker cluster, 12 of whom are yet to be tested. 775 of these close contacts have produced a negative result. There are also 1,464 casual contacts. 1,245 tested negative and 214 are yet to be tested. Cook says if you were at the: Lucky Shag bar in Perth on Wednesday, 29 December, between 1.30pm and 11pm and on Friday, 31 December, between 11am and 3.30pm Aviary bar, also in Perth, on Thursday, 30 December, between 6.30pm and 10.30pm You need to get tested immediately and isolate until you receive a negative result, unless directed otherwise by WA Health. WA deputy premier Roger Cook is up. I can advise that overnight, WA has recorded 16 new cases of Covid-19. This includes five new local cases in total. Three are related to the Delta backpacker cluster. Two of these cases are considered to have been infectious while in the community. And this includes the one case announced yesterday linked to the two exposure sites in the city, in the Lucky Shag and Aviary bars. One of the other local cases is not part of the Delta backpacker cluster and is a hotel quarantine worker at the Hyatt Hotel, and an investigation is underway into this case. The fifth local case is a household contact of a recent interstate arrival who is currently quarantining at home and was previously announced. There are also seven cases related to interstate travellers, two cases related to returned overseas travellers, and two cases related to aircrew. All these cases are in quarantine. Just putting the icing on a hectic afternoon is ex-tropical cyclone Seth, which is making its way towards Queensland. The Australian Reptile Park’s animal hire service has come under fire for allowing koalas to be rented out to hotel rooms or private homes for $2,000 an hour. As of January 4, the “Koalas to Your Room” page on the Australian Reptile Park’s website was advertising the service. “Our friendly keepers will come to you with a koala or other native species to let you enjoy the animal in the peace and comfort of your hotel room or home,” it read. “Koalas are not toys for the ultra-rich,” NSW upper house MP for the Animal Justice party Mark Pearson said. “Koalas are wild, native animals that deserve a life of freedom away from unnecessary human stress. No animal should be treated like this, dragged from hotel to hotel for the sake of making somebody money. This isn’t conservation or education - this is exploitation.” The page on the Australian Reptile Park’s website has since been taken down but the archived page can still be found. “I’m appalled Australian Reptile Park ever thought this was acceptable and I urge them to discontinue this practice, using any animal, immediately,” Mr Pearson said. The Australian Reptile Park has been contacted for comment. We are just waiting on WA deputy premier Roger Cook who will address the media very soon. Shelves are empty in supermarkets once again as staff shortages due to illness or isolation combine with ongoing supply chain difficulties. Australia hit the grim milestone of more than 500,000 Covid cases since the pandemic began on Tuesday. Daily cases in the states and territories continue to rise, forcing tens of thousands into quarantine and even more close contacts into isolation. Between a third and a half of Australia’s transport workers are absent every day, interrupting the supply to supermarkets, the Transport Workers Union said. From AAP: NSW Labor has named the candidate it hopes can retain former leader Jodi McKay’s seat of Strathfield ahead of upcoming byelections sparked by a spate of resignations. Former United Nations lawyer turned investment firm chairman, Jason Yat-sen Li, announced his candidacy for the seat on Wednesday, having previously run for Labor at federal elections in the house and the senate in 2013 and 2019. Li says he hopes to apply his skills and experience in the private sector to help the Strathfield electorate, “a community that really reflects my family and my upbringing”. “It is hardworking, it wants to make itself better. It embraces tradition and change and it really understands the importance of family and the value of education.” It was announced in December that Bridget Sakr would contest the seat for the Liberals. Sakr’s 11-year-old daughter died along with three other children when they were hit by a drunk and drugged driver at Oatlands in 2020. RACGP president, Dr Karen Price, has tweeted that the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners is also calling for free RATs. Morrison was also asked about Novak Djokovic getting an exemption to travel to Australia. Well, that is a matter for the Victorian government. They have provided him with an exemption. That is how it works. States provide exemptions to enter. The Victorian government have made their decision on that, so I would have to refer you to them. Morrison was speaking to reports just before he went into the Nat-Cab meeting which is happening now. Here are a few things he had to say: I want to stress, [for] those that are required to have a test, a RAT or a PCR test, those tests are free. Those tests are free to all Australians, always have been, that hasn’t changed. For what I call peace of mind tests ... I’ll be putting a proposal to the premiers today on how we can offset the costs. The Omicron variant has been a major disruption in many respects, not just in Australia but all around the world. This massive demand ... is caused by the sheer volume of the variant. Under Delta, it was very, very different. That is affecting all countries around the world, not just Australia. Making everything free is not a silver bullet. Hello Guardian Australia. This is Cait Kelly and I will be taking you through the next two hours. If you see anything that you think should be on the blog, tweet me @cait__kelly or email cait.kelly@theguardian.com. Let’s get into it! And with that I will hand the blog back over to the ever capable Cait Kelly. The Australian Medical Association and the Public Health Association of Australia have released a joint statement calling for rapid antigen tests to be made free as a matter of equity. Both associations call the tests an “essential tool” in the fight to control the virus, and said governments should work towards making them free. PHAA chief executive, Adjunct Prof Terry Slevin, says market forces shouldn’t determine who can and can’t get tested. RATs do, and must continue to play, an essential role in a pandemic that is looking increasingly out of control, With the difficulty of getting a PCR test, many people just want to be confident they don’t have the virus before they interact with others. We cannot diminish the incredible work of our public health and healthcare workers across the continent by letting market forces decide who can afford to get and use RATs during this health emergency. Equity matters – as it does for every aspect of public health. The people most at risk from the pandemic are often least able to afford RATs, if they can find any. AMA president, Dr Omar Khorshid, said the community benefits from free tests, not just individuals. Given the soaring case numbers which most likely represent just a fraction of actual infection rates, and the stretched capacity for PCR tests, we are running out of time to get widespread use of RATs in the community underway and support people to do the right thing. There’s no time for piecemeal measures, like targeted subsidies which might be difficult to implement. We need to harness the goodwill in the community to use RAT kits and free access for everybody. And the South Australian press conference has wrapped up, so we’re sticking with the Northern Territory now, with health minister Natasha Fyles saying they have enough rapid antigen tests for now. Fyles says they have a “sustainable supply” of the tests, and will give them out free of charge. However, she did say there was a shortage of tests available at supermarkets. They are a precious resource, so please only use them if [you’re] required to, [they’re] not for a ‘worried well’, so to speak. Fyles also said people can get the kits at a testing site for free if they are isolating. Flipping back to South Australia, Marshall has said that hospitalisation rates are lower than expected. Marshall said they estimated the Delta variant would hospitalise around 5% of cases, but that Omicron is hospitalising less than 1% so far. We’d been working at around 1% in terms of Omicron. But the data in South Australia would suggest it’s 0.5%, so there is some upside. But the problem is 0.5% of a very large number is still a very large number. And that’s why we’ve got to space those cases out, and that’s why we’ve got those restrictions in place, and that’s why we’re asking people to go and have that vaccination. The Northern Territory has recorded 117 new cases, which is up from yesterday’s 75 cases. 39 of the new cases are from community transmission, 31 are close contacts, 46 are recent interstate arrivals, two are international arrivals, and nine are under investigation. Five of the cases are from Katherine, with the majority of the rest from Darwin. Meanwhile, back in SA, Marshall has said that the state is expecting a million new rapid antigen tests per week. Marshall said there is “no shortage” of the tests in South Australia, and that a “big shipment” of the tests arrived yesterday. We’re expecting around a million rapid antigen tests for use within the state system every single week from now on. We’re very satisfied with that. And the spate of press conferences continues, with Northern Territory authorities due to give an update any minute. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, and a quick thanks to Cait Kelly for covering the morning’s headlines. We’re in South Australia for their Covid update, with premier Steven Marshall saying that six of the 12 people in ICU are unvaccinated. I am just going to hand you over to Mostafa Rachwani to take you through the rest of this presser. The SA premiere says the state is moving to rapid antigen tests for close contacts. Only symptomatic people will be able to get PCR tests in the coming days. Marshall says almost 20,000 people got vaccinated yesterday. 50% of people in the ICU were unvaccinated. “The critical message to all South Australians is that vaccination is crucial.” He says 271 healthcare workers are Covid positive at the moment and 535 are furloughed. We are going to jump over to South Australia, where premier Steven Marshall is speaking. There are 125 people in hospital, 12 in intensive care and one on a ventilator. “Our hospital system has ticked up slightly to 125 in hospital, but that’s of course well within our current capacity,” he says. “So we still have patients who are in the ICU, same as yesterday, and one person who was on a ventilator, which is again also the same as the day before – so no increase in ICU.” Tasmania will scrap quarantine for international arrivals from midnight tonight, he said. “Public Health and the state control centre have reviewed this and the associated risks are now considered equivalent to domestic arrivals.” Vaccination and testing requirements will still be in place, and arrivals will still be required to monitor for symptoms and get tested if they develop. Gutwein said the wait time for PCR tests is about 40 minutes at the moment. “Please be patient as we work through this.” He said to be aware “that Covid is around”. Tasmania has ordered 5 million RAT tests, he said. “If you are being asked to test, you’re a close contact, we will provide them.” 85% of the state’s cases are under the age of 50 and nearly 60% are aged between 20-39. He said people “need to be sensible”. “If you’re young and out and about, don’t go and visit vulnerable people or vulnerable settings.” Tasmanian Premier Peter Gutwein has been talking in Tasmania. He said that 92 % of the state’s population over the age of 12 are fully vaccinated. The state should expect daily case numbers as high as 2000, according to Gutwein. Most of them will be “quite mild”. “But I don’t want to sugarcoat this; we will, over time, see more people in hospital simply through the increased cases we’re seeing,” he said. The head of the Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, Nancy Baxter, has this really good thread on getting/avoiding Covid. It’s long, so I am going to break it up in two posts. Part one: Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath said if you are not a household contact and you have been in contact with a case, but you do not have any symptoms, you do not need to test. This is who needs to test: People with symptoms Household close contacts People who already have a positive RAT result Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says she will be pushing national cabinet for free RATs for pensioners and low-income workers. “This needs to be as simple as possible,” Palaszczuk said. “For our pensioners, for our health cardholders, these should be made available for free.” Gerrard said the “real number” of cases in the state is “significantly higher” than what the state is recording. “We know that number is going to increase in the coming weeks,” he said. It has been a huge spike for Queensland, which recorded 6,781 cases today, up from 5,699 yesterday. More than 29,000 people were tested in the last 24 hours. There are now more than 32,000 active cases in the state, with 265 people being treated for Covid in hospital. Six more Covid testing sites will open in Brisbane tomorrow. They will be: Indooroopilly Cleveland Ashgrove Boondall Wilston Bundle Queensland’s chief health officer John Gerrard is up. He says it is difficult for people to access PCR and RAT tests at the moment. “The vast majority of us, particularly if we are young and healthy and we don’t have underlying immune disorders or major medical conditions will have a mild illness with Covid.” He said those people should just stay at home, and that people should only dial 000 if they were very unwell. Annastacia Palaszczuk is addressing media now. The ACT has reported 810 new daily cases, with 16 people in the hospital, including one person in ICU who is on a ventilator. There are now 3,069 active cases of the virus in Canberra. Allan is asked if more restrictions will be put in place to curb numbers. “Obviously, with the arrival of Omicron and its spread around the country, we’re seeing the challenges that are presenting here and around the world. “We are very carefully monitoring the settings and we’ll continue to review those and consider the advice. “Really these are the question of settings and any forward changes is a matter for the minister for health.” She says people need to get vaccinated, wear a mask, socially distance and wash their hands. Dr Laila Ibrahim, a paediatrician in Melbourne, is speaking now. She says they are seeing an increase in referrals from children in the community: The good news, however, is that there is still a small proportion of children being admitted to hospital. Most of us hope that our kids if they do get Covid get a runny nose, but there will be some quite a significant proportion who will have high fever, vomiting, diarrhoea, blocked nose. They will have significant symptoms for several days. These children can be cared for at home. Unfortunately, we are seeing children who are severely affected ... but the majority make a full recovery. She says many children will test positive in the coming days, the majority will be able to be treated at home. Some will become severely sick and need hospital care. The best thing parents can do is vaccinate their children. Allan says Victoria has now secured 44m RATs. “As the first batch of those tests arrives in the state in the coming days we will have more to say about how they will be made available throughout Victoria.” Allan says Victoria has some of the highest rates of child vaccination anywhere in the world. From 1pm children can get bookings at state-run clinics. Allan says vaccinating children was not just about protecting them, but other family members who might be vulnerable. She says “a lot of thought and care” has gone into supporting vaccinating children. At 18 of the clinics, there will be an animal theme decoration “to make the experience as enjoyable as it can be”. Allan says parents can make a booking for their children aged 5-11 from this afternoon. “From next week children aged 5-11 become eligible for the Covid vaccine.” Here we go – Jacinta Allan up first. “Firstly on vaccinations, we are seeing just over 11% of Victorians age 12 years and above who have received three dose of the vaccine and 93% have received their second dose.” She said Victoria has 591 people in hospital, with 106 in ICU and 20 on a ventilator. The state has seen 11 people pass away. There were 17,636 positive cases out of 59,682 tests. Acting premier Jacinta Allan and deputy secretary of the Victorian Department of Health Naomi Bromley are expected to address media any moment now. Albanese: We’ve tried to give the government some space to get its act together here, but it’s getting worse, not better. The solutions they’re putting forward are getting more costly. It’s not more simple. And we know that if people don’t access testing, and they’re unaware of their status, then there are complications there. Then what that does is add to the cost down the road.” Albanese: “The national plan relied upon test, trace isolate and quarantine as well as vaccinations. “This government is not delivering on that, because people aren’t able to get the tests.” Albanese said Labor was “happy to work with the government” on this. “We’ve seen a range of different costs [for RATs]. We have costs as low as $12, but as high as $50 for a single test. Now, that’s not affordable. “It’s very clear that the simplest way to do it is to make these tests free and to make them available.” Albanese: It’s clear from Scott Morrison’s ridiculous proposal today of making payments to people, so that they can then purchase rapid antigen tests that aren’t available, and some of which are the subject of price gouging, just shows how out of touch the prime minister is. The fact is that people are crying out for action. Small business is crying out for action. There’s an economic cost to this health failure, which is small business and other businesses not being able to open because they can’t get staff. There’s a real issue with staff at health facilities. with staff in aged care facilities. We have childcare being shut.” Anthony Albanese was speaking in Sydney earlier, where he announced Labor’s proposal to make RATs free. This is some of what he had to say: We have circumstances of people who are feeling unwell travelling around from venue to venue to venue, trying to get access to a rapid antigen test. And if they actually get access to one, then they might not be able to afford it. It’s time that this prime minister actually showed some leadership. Labor calls upon the government today, to ensure that antigen tests are available and are free.” Professional Pharmacists Australia is urging Australians to get their booster shots as soon as possible. President of Professional Pharmacists Australia Geoff March said: The booster shot reduces potential for serious illness and lowers the impact on a fragile health system, including pharmacies. Pharmacists are an option for those looking to get their booster shot and while we appreciate this is putting pressure on the pharmacy workforce, the burden will be much more severe if people are not getting boosted, and experience more serious illness. So, while working pharmacists are stretched, we’re saying: book your booster now.” I have received this email from a reader who said I could share his story with you all – I’ll just keep his name out of it. I am 65 and have what they call comorbidity conditions and I am on povertykeeper. I have to, like almost everyone else, fulfil my “mutual obligations”. In my case, I am a volunteer tutor at a job service provider teaching English to, mostly, older foreign students. There is no way I can afford RATs and yet I still have to attend two days a week in a closed room with a lot of people. This whole federal government stuff up has put me into a difficult position.” We are expecting the Victorian press conference at 11.30am. Are you Covid positive? We want to talk to you! Hello, Our daily news podcast, Full Story, is looking to speak to people who have contracted the Omicron variant. Whether you are asymptomatic, have a few symptoms, or have been to ICU – they are keen to hear about your experience with Omicron. If you would like to remain anonymous, that is more than ok. You can leave them a voicemail on (02) 8076 8550, or send them an email at australia.fullstory@theguardian.com with a way to get back in contact with you. Thanks! Everything is cool and normal From AAP: Tasmania has recorded 867 new Covid-19 infections, another new daily record for the island state, which now has 3,118 active cases. Of the fresh cases reported on Wednesday, 333 are being managed at home and 72 at a community facility. The active cases have come from 2,412 tests. Five people with coronavirus are in hospital for unrelated medical conditions. Tasmania’s previous daily high was 702 cases reported on Tuesday. It comes as the state government launches a testing blitz on remote King Island due to concerns a positive case visited several large events before knowing they were infectious. The state’s health department has urged anyone on the island with symptoms, regardless of how severe, to isolate and get tested as soon as possible. Victorian employment minister Jaala Pulford has said she hopes when Australian Open defending champion Novak Djokovic arrives in Australia in the next day he will explain why he was granted a medical exemption from requiring to be vaccinated against Covid-19 to participate in the tennis tournament. She said only he can disclose the reason he was granted the exemption. Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley said it would be helpful if Djokovic explained the medical condition, “but ultimately it is up to him”. Officials said as part of the assessment process, the panels would have examined the relevant medical documents Djokovic to look for “official seals” and other ways to prove the documents are legitimate. Tiley said players and other workers at the tournament are required to do daily rapid antigen tests when on-site, and have supervised tests on day one, five and seven. On Labor’s delay to announce, they do in fact support free RATs, news.com.au political editor Samantha Maiden had this take: And here we go – after spending the first part of the week calling for “affordable” rapid antigen tests, Labor is now saying they should be free. Tennis Australia and the Victorian government have acknowledged people will be upset and frustrated about the decision to give a vaccination exemption to defending champion Novak Djokovic to attend the Australian Open, but have assured that no one received “special treatment.” In a press conference on Wednesday, Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley said Tennis Australia “completely understands and empathises” with people who are upset about the decision announced by Djokovic overnight, due to Djokovic’s past comments about vaccination. Victorian employment minister Jaala Pulford acknowledged people would be upset about the decision: I wanted to recognise and acknowledge that this outcome is something that many of the Victorian community find frustrating and upsetting. But I want to make absolutely clear that as has been the case the whole time, no one is receiving special treatment because of who they are or what they have achieved professionally. She said the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) criteria for granting exemptions were very narrowly defined, and the process by which Djokovic received an exemption – whereby his application was removed of identifying information when reviewed by the panels – was robust. Pulford would not comment on what premier Daniel Andrews thought of the exemption, given his previous comments around vaccination at the Australian Open, noting Andrews was still on leave save for attending national cabinet later today. We are just going to jump to Tennis Australia quickly... Pearce says NSW has acquired millions of rapid antigen tests, which will start arriving next week. She says the state is already handing out RATs to people who need them. “What we’ve been doing is distributing them to vulnerable groups of people to homeless, to people in refugee areas, and to Aboriginal medical services as well. “So, that work will continue to make sure the most vulnerable people in our society will have access to RAT tests provided by the state.” Pearce says there were 3000 healthcare workers furloughed yesterday. “It’s been a really challenging period for the health system to get through this and we will get through it. “There’s a lot of work going on in the community at the moment and our health teams who are supporting tens of thousands of cases in the community every day are going unrecognised. “We have done our best our absolute best to get in front of this by providing information to people who are Covid positive, to help them to care safely at home.” Perrottet says national cabinet will also discuss isolation requirements for health care workers. He is asked about an exclusive article in Guardian Australia yesterday showing Covid positive nurses are returning to work – sometimes with symptoms. He throws it to Health deputy secretary Susan Pearce: “The suggestion that people are being brought back to work when they’re positive is certainly – we have no evidence of that. “If you are a close contact and you’re a health staff member and there is a critical need for return, there is a process to be gone through that’s really important to understand.” Perrottet says they are working on plans to get kids back in the classroom on the first day of term. “There will be challenges but we will do everything we can to meet them, to minimise disruption to have schools opening.” He says NSW overcame the majority of disruption last year to get kids back in classrooms. “I can’t guarantee that there won’t be disruption from time to time based on what comes our way, particularly the question in relation to isolation requirements at the moment and as case numbers increase.” Perrottet says the next few weeks will be challenging. “The faster we can get those rapid antigen tests into the hands of people across the state ... we will. We want to see that, and will work with the commonwealth government.” Perrottet says RATs will play an important part when school returns. Perrottet is up again and he is asked about RATs. “We’ve obviously put a substantial order here in New South Wales for the antigen test and we want to make sure those who need access to rapid antigen test get access to that now.” He says there is no dollar figure that NSW won’t put on the table. “There is no dollar fee that we will not put on the table to ensure, as we move through this next phase, rapid antigen tests are available to anybody right across the state who needs one.” O’Meara says the best way of protecting children aged over 5 years is to vaccinate them and the best way to protect younger children is to have everyone in the family vaccinated. “Covid can be a severe disease in a small number of children. So it’s worthwhile getting the best protection you can and then getting vaccinated as of today.” NSW chief paediatrician Dr Matthew O’Meara is up and he is talking about the importance of vaccinating children. “A few children can become very unwell and data from earlier strains in largely unvaccinated children in New South Wales showed that between one or two in every 100 children would need to go to the hospital, and about one 1000 would end up in intensive care, and about one in 3000 would develop a serious inflammatory condition.” Pearce says the government is “revisiting plans” made in the last two years and that the health system is under a lot of pressure. “Our plea to people is please do not call triple zero unless you have an emergency.” NSW Health deputy secretary Susan Pearce says the system is under strain. “What has been carrying out is what was predicted – that is that Omicron is less severe than previous strains, but the sheer number of cases is obviously resulting in people needing to come to hospital and that will continue. “So we expect for the next several weeks that we will see that pressure continuing. “We also expect that once it starts to decline, it will likely decline quite quickly but we have got some challenging weeks ahead of us.” Perrottet says 2.5 million people are now eligible for booster shots. He is now addressing the PCR queues. “I appreciate very much the patience that everyone is showing in lining up and rest assured we’re doing everything we can put downward pressure on that system. “We have a number of rapid antigen tests arriving as of next week that will significantly assist, but my clear message today is if you are not required to get a PCR test, please do not line up in those queues.” Perrottet is up now. He says he understands people feel anxious but NSW “will get through”. “The key to that success has been the vaccination rate. Yesterday first dose vaccination rates had one of the highest days ever.” He said even though the state had high vaccine rates, people were still coming forward for their first shot – which was good to see. Over 1000 people came forward yesterday. NSW is now at 95% double vaccination he said. “That has been incredibly successful in ensuring we are able to keep our hospital system in its very strong position.” NSW premier Dominic Perrottet is set to address media at 10am. We are also going to have the Tennis Australia presser then so Josh Taylor will bring you a few lines on that. Fasten seatbelts, hold those hats, etc. The decision to grant Novak Djokovic an exemption from Covid-19 vaccination requirements to play in the Australian Open in Melbourne has been labelled “appalling”, with some players expressing surprise at the late decision. On Tuesday night, the defending Australian Open champion posted on Instagram that he was coming to Melbourne to participate in the tennis tournament with an “exemption permission”. All Australian Open participants must either be fully vaccinated or apply for and secure a medical exemption in order to enter Victoria without undertaking the mandatory 14-day quarantine. The reactions over the Novak Djokovic decision just keep on coming: From AAP: Rapid antigen tests would be subsidised for people on low incomes under a plan being taken to the next national cabinet meeting by the prime minister. The plan, set for discussion at today’s meeting, will see welfare recipients and pensioners get cash payments for up to five rapid tests, or even more if states also put money on the table. They would need to meet eligibility requirements to qualify for the subsidy. Scott Morrison could also announce the government will provide millions of free RAT kits to be handed out at state and territory testing centres. The national cabinet is meeting on Wednesday for the first time in 2022 to discuss community concerns around access to the rapid testing kits, which have been difficult to source and have escalated in price. Infectious diseases expert Prof Robert Booy said the proposed measures would go some way to alleviating pressure on testing clinics, but they should be made free for everyone. He told the Nine Network: We can’t have a system that doesn’t work, we need to be able to test people by PCR if they have got symptoms or if they are a very close contact. We need to do something and rapid antigen tests are the solution. The prime minister has faced increasing pressure to make RAT kits universally free. We’ve just learnt that at 10am Tennis Australia will be holding a press conference to talk about the medical exemption granted to Novak Djokovic. Grab yer pitchforks! Victoria has continued to see a steep rise in Covid cases, with a new record of 17,636 cases overnight. The state’s cases have doubled in just three days – on Monday Victoria recorded 8,577 cases. Across the state, there are 591 people in hospital, which is 75 more than yesterday. Of those, 53 are in ICU and 20 are on a ventilator. Across the state, 1,491 people are in hospital, which is 225 more than the previous record set on 21 September when NSW was struggling to contain the Delta outbreak. Today’s number of people in hospital marks a rise of 147 people on Tuesday’s figures. ICU numbers continue to rise – 14 more people than yesterday but they’re still short of the peak of 244 in September last year. Between a third and a half of Australia’s transport workers are absent every day, leading to empty supermarket shelves, the Transport Workers’ Union says. The major supermarkets are all experiencing shortages of products including fruit, vegetables and meat. Rapid antigen tests are also hard to find because of a lack of supply. Union national secretary Michael Kaine said it had written to prime minister Scott Morrison in October asking for rapid tests for transport workers to “keep drivers on the road”. Large transport operators have told the union that up to half the workforce is missing because of Covid infection and Covid-related isolation: [We] have a completely predictable scenario where drivers are delivering rapid tests to be sold on the shelves of supermarkets and pharmacies – but they, like most Australians, can’t access them themselves. Yesterday Ben from @_ausposters on Instagram sent me this to lighten my afternoon – I thought you would also appreciate it: @_ausposters also do a summary based on the film: Scott. J. Morrison has placed six separate gold cells on different spreadsheets in his 2022 budget. The lucky four Liberal states who find these cells discover an opportunity of a lifetime: the chance to own 2 million R.A.T.s., locked up in one of Jerry Harvey’s warehouses. These 8 contestants must now race each other to be the first to the stockpile at $15 to $25 a pop. There are no rules in place and everything that could possibly happen, does. Whilst, behind the scenes, Scott’s associates are placing their bets and making their trades. ACTU president Michele O’Neil wrote to Scott Morrison late yesterday to ask him to reconsider the federal position on rapid antigen tests and make them free. Overnight the UK PM Boris Johnson announced that his Conservative government will provide 100,000 critical workers with free rapid tests to help keep essential services and supply chains running, allowing workers to take a test every working day. These will be separate to those delivered for free to pharmacies and households. O’Neil says the ACTU urged the federal government to secure RATs in October: Unfortunately, to date you have left this problem in the hands of the market. Now, with Omicron upon us, PCR testing sites are at risk of being overwhelmed, Australians are scrambling to find Rapid Antigen Tests and struggling to afford them. This puts at grave risk public health and our country’s economic recovery. Australia’s system of universal public health care, Medicare, is a source of national pride and an article of national faith. The previous decision of your Government to make PCR tests free has received broad public support as a critical public health measure. It is essential for an effective response to the next stage of this pandemic and the highly contagious Omicron variant that Government does not abandon this approach for a “user pays” pandemic response. Today one of the things Nat-Cab will discuss is how to make rapid antigen tests affordable for low-income Australians. Novak Djokovic has set the internet on fire ... Here is the full statement from Tennis Australia: Everyone is talking about Novak Djokovic this morning, and the mood is, well ... As the fourth Ashes Test between Australia and England in Sydney gets under way today, some are concerned about the risk of Covid spread. It has the potential to become a super-spreader Covid event without stricter public health measures in place, a leading epidemiologist has warned. Adrian Esterman, a professor at the University of South Australia and a former principal epidemiologist for that state, says the match could become a super-spreader Covid event without stricter public health measures in place: It’s a recipe for disaster unless they have really good public health measures in place. I can almost guarantee it will be a super-spreading event. The Sydney Cricket Ground Trust on its website “strongly recommended” spectators wear a face mask when entering, navigating and exiting the ground. With seating for 48,000 fans, the Test was likely to draw 30,000 to 35,000 spectators on day one, “a tick under 30,000” on the second day, and more than 30,000 for Jane McGrath Day on Friday, the spokesperson said. But Esterman said few spectators at the MCG Test match were wearing face masks. Along with New Year’s Eve gatherings, the Test – which drew 140,671 fans over three days – would have fuelled some of the surge in Victorian cases, he said: If you were in charge of public health for a state and you knew that you’re getting massive number of cases, the hospital systems creaking round its ears, would you actually have a mass sporting event without strict crowd numbers and face masks mandates and and things like that? No, you wouldn’t – it’s crazy. From AAP: Extreme demand for ambulances in Melbourne has prompted a “code red” from the service. For three hours between midnight and 3am on Wednesday the service advised there would likely be a delay in ambulances arriving because of an extremely high demand in the metropolitan region. Ambulance Victoria said: Our priority is to provide care to Victorians who require life-saving assistance. It reminded people to call NURSE ON CALL on 1300 60 60 24 or visit their local GP if their case was not an emergency. There has been a lot of reaction to the news Novak Djokovic has received a medical exemption to enter Australia for the Australian Open. Freelancer Ben Rothenberg asks a good question (and one I am sure will be repeated) here: Yesterday nearly 300 childcare centres around NSW were closed because staff are unwell with Covid, the Sydney Morning Herald reports. Elizabeth Death, the chief executive of the Early Learning and Care Council of Australia, said: Early Learning and Care was experiencing a workforce shortage before the COVID-19 pandemic. We are now in a workforce shortage crisis. Currently, there are 303 services closed in NSW, 30 in Victoria, 29 in South Australia, 22 in Queensland, three in the ACT and one in NT. Of these closures, 298 are due to health emergency. Good morning from Guardian Australia. This Cait Kelly – I’ll be taking you through the day’s news. A few other big things around this morning: The queues for Covid tests are getting long again and the search for rapid antigen tests continues. National cabinet is meeting today and Scott Morrison reportedly has a proposal to provide cash payments for low-income earners, welfare recipients and pensioners to buy some RATs – assuming you can get your hands on one. Supply and distribution of that hot commodity is top of the meeting agenda, but state and territory leaders will also discuss a definition of a Covid hospital admission. There are plenty of questions this morning too about how Novak Djokovic managed to get an exemption to play in the Australian Open. The World No 1, who won’t reveal his vaccination status, posted last night that he was on his way to Melbourne for the grand slam after getting an exemption. We will have all the reaction to that announcement this morning. And with that – let’s get into it!The year 2022 – which launches into the Olympic Games in Beijing and ends with the World Cup in Qatar – is set to be a great year for authoritarian regimes looking to cover up their atrocious human rights records. Over the course of a 12-month period, countries such as China, Qatar and Saudi Arabia, all of whom have been criticized for human rights violations, will use prestigious sports events to polish their public image on an international stage. This process is known as sportswashing, a term popularized by Amnesty International in 2018 to describe the use of sports by oppressive governments to legitimize their regimes and distract from their human rights abuses. Traditional examples of sportswashing include the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin under the Nazi regime, which Hitler hosted in an attempt to showcase German and Aryan superiority. While sportswashing has long been a popular tactic, 2022 is a particularly concerning year because both the Olympic Games and the World Cup – the two most-watched sporting events in the world – are being hosted in countries with markedly oppressive regimes. Beginning on 4 February, China will host the Winter Olympics in Beijing and in towns in the neighboring Hebei province. Among other issues, the country’s government has been criticized for its inhumane internment of Uyghur Muslims in the Xinjiang region, its attempts to seize political control over Hong Kong and neighboring Taiwan, and the disappearance (and questionable reappearance) of tennis star Peng Shuai after accusing a Chinese official of sexual assault. Several countries, including the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia have announced that they will not send any government representatives to the Games due to concerns over China’s human rights record. However, these nations will still send their athletes, rendering the diplomatic boycotts as little more than performative theatre. Other countries such as France (host of the 2024 Summer Games) and Italy will not join the boycott, while Russia’s President Vladimir Putin condemned the boycott as a “mistake”. China has since threatened that the countries who have announced diplomatic boycotts will “pay the price for their mistaken acts.” Following the Olympic Games, attention will shift towards the World Cup in Qatar, which is set to begin in November. The nation has a significant record of human rights violations. For example, a Guardian investigation from February 2021 revealed more than 6,500 migrant workers from India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka have died in Qatar since 2010. The shocking death toll, compiled from government sources, is most likely an underestimate and does not include data from other countries that send a significant number of workers to Qatar, including Kenya and the Philippines. Dozens of migrant workers have died during the construction of World Cup stadiums in particular, and more than 100 migrants employed on a construction project related to the event went up to seven months without pay. Most employees were eventually compensated, though some still have several months of missing salaries. Other significant human rights issues in Qatar include restrictions on free expression, forced labor, the criminalization of same-sex relationships, and a lack of accountability for violence against women and minorities. Reforms aimed at protecting migrant workers from exploitative labor were introduced in 2020, though employers maintain disproportionate power and influence. Despite the harrowing reports of death and abuse in the construction of World Cup stadiums, Fifa president Gianni Infantino announced on 30 December that the 2022 World Cup in Qatar was a “celebration of football and social inclusion”. “Fifa is the only governing body that looks after and cares about the entire world,” Infantino said in a prepared statement. “We will continue working hard to live up to the mission of not forgetting the ones who need most and who have no voice, while also protecting the healthy growth of everyone else and the global football movement.” While China and Qatar will host the two most significant sports events of 2022, other countries such as Saudi Arabia continue to expand their positions as key destinations for international sports events. The kingdom has spent billions on high-profile sports events aimed at strengthening its reputation and diversifying its economy to eliminate dependence on oil and gas. Most recently, a group led by Saudi’s sovereign wealth fund – an entity headed by Crown Prince Mohamed Bin Salman – purchased Newcastle United. It is arguably one of the kingdom’s most successful sportswashing attempts, as it provides Saudi with an influential position in English football as well as an opportunity to upgrade its public image and distract from its recent abuses, including the infamous assassination of dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi, its devastating war in Yemen that caused a humanitarian catastrophe, and its crackdown on intellectuals, reformers, and women’s rights activists. Saudi Arabia has proved to be an alluring hub for sports events over the past few years, having signed a 10-year, $650m deal for a Formula One motor racing event, invested millions in a Saudi International golf event, and hosted some of the biggest boxing showdowns in recent memory. The kingdom has also hired the Boston Consulting Group to help lobby its interest in hosting a World Cup event in the not-so-distant future. There are other concerning sportswashing affiliations, including the Ultimate Fighting Championships’ troubling links to Chechnya’s dictator Ramzan Kadyrov, the NBA’s blossoming relationship with Rwandan autocrat Paul Kagame, and the NFL’s newly announced five-year partnership with China (which included a map that pushed the false narrative that Taiwan, an independent country, was a part of China). Each of these examples highlights the growing trend of authoritarian countries using prominent and established sports entities as platforms for propaganda and sportswashing campaigns. This strategy has proven to be remarkably effective in overhauling these states’ public images and legitimizing their regimes. As state-run political projects and soft power propaganda outfits take center stage over the coming year, 2022 is shaping up to be one of the most politically charged sporting years in recent memory.In welcoming you to the first Guardian Weekly magazine of 2022, I’d like to start by rewinding a couple of years. Buried in the 10 January 2020 edition was a small but significant story. “Respiratory contagion is not Sars, authorities say” was the headline on a short global report, at the foot of page 7, about a mysterious infection in the central Chinese city of Wuhan. Two years on, it’s fair to say we now know a little more now than we did then about that mysterious illness. But the broader context of the pandemic can still be tricky to understand. This week, the Guardian’s data and visuals teams have collaborated to produce some beautiful graphics and analysis, revealing the pandemic’s global impact in a new light. Then, our China affairs correspondent, Vincent Ni, explores why, after two years, the search for Covid’s origins remains shrouded in politics and confusion. The conviction of Ghislaine Maxwell for sex-trafficking offences concluded one of the most closely followed trials in recent times. Will this draw a line under the case – or will US prosecutors’ attention now turn to other known associates and employees of the convicted child sex offender Jeffrey Epstein? South Africa has been in the news lately, for the emergence of the Omicron Covid variant and for the death of Archbishop Desmond Tutu. Both stories have touched on issues of governance in the “rainbow nation” (as Tutu described it after the fall of apartheid), so it is both sad and disturbing to read Jason Burke’s dispatch on how many citizens seem to be losing faith in the power of government altogether. It wouldn’t be a new year’s edition without pause to reflect on personal goals for the coming months. Johann Hari unpacks the fascinating topic of concentration, asking why so many of us have lost our ability to focus, and if it’s too late to do anything about it. Then, if your New Year resolutions are already going to pot, Rebecca Seal has some reassuring advice – just don’t worry about it. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your home.Having secured their first signing of the January window in agreeing a £12m (and rising) fee for Atlético Madrid and England full-back Kieran Trippier, Newcastle hope to further bolster their hopes of avoiding relegation by bringing an injury-prone Welsh midfielder to Tyneside from Turin. Speculation abounds that Aaron “Rambo” Ramsey could swap the black and white stripes of Juventus for those of the slightly less decorated English club, although reports he has turned down an approach from Burnley because he wants to sit in the physio room of a more high-profile club suggest Newcastle’s owners will have to dig deep in a bid to turn his head. Ramsey has also been linked with a return to Arsenal and could share a taxi from Luton airport to their nearby St Albans training ground with his Juve teammates Dejan Kulusevski and Arthur Melo. Gazzetta dello Sport reports that Arsenal have formally bid the thick end of £45m (plus the £15m-rated Lucas Torreira) for Fiorentina’s 21-year-old Serbian striker Dusan Vlahovic, who already has 16 Serie A goals to his name this season. A player in big demand across Europe, Vlahovic seems happy enough where he is for the time being. “Only God knows what will happen in the next period,” he said recently. “My desire is to take Fiorentina to Europe, because we haven’t been in Europe for a long time. We’ll see.” Chelsea, West Ham and yes, you’ve guessed it, Newcastle are all interested in liberating French left-back Lucas Digne from his Everton purgatory, but will have to pay up to £30m to get their man. “The most important thing for me is having players on the pitch who want to be there,” said beleaguered Everton boss Rafa Benítez after dropping Digne and playing right-back Séamus Coleman in his position in defeat against Brighton on Sunday, in a state of affairs that suggests the player will be shown the Goodison door this month unless his manager goes first. Manchester United central defender Axel Tuanzebe’s season-long loan to Aston Villa has been brought to a premature end after Villa boss Steven Gerrard refused to give the 24-year-old assurances he’d get game time in the second half of the season. He’ll be off to Napoli. Arsenal midfielder Ainsley Maitland-Niles is another young buck who could be Serie A-bound and may wrap up his loan to Roma on Wednesday. Having been forced to read an entire paragraph without seeing their club being linked with anybody in today’s Mill, Newcastle fans will be pleased to learn that Flamengo striker Gabriel Barbosa wouldn’t be adverse to a move to St James’ Park despite the resident club’s lowly league position, but is also wanted by goal-shy Wolverhampton Wanderers. Depending on your news outlet of choice West Ham definitely do or do not want the 25-year-old Brazilian international, but are reported to have definitely cooled their interest in Adama Traoré. Aymeric Laporte could become the latest player to tread the well worn path between Manchester City and Barcelona, with the Catalan club apparently prepared to send Frenkie de Jong the other way in a swap deal. And finally, rumours abound that the worrying number of preening, self-regarding and under-performing divas who currently occupy the Manchester United dressing-room continue to scoff at the notion that they might be in any way responsible for their poor performances and are already plotting a mutiny against recently-appointed manager Ralf Rangnick, with whom they are reported to be underwhelmed.Alvin Kamara, the versatile running back for the New Orleans Saints, went a little ballistic in March after he found out that the NFL was about to add a 17th game to the regular season. Kamara tapped out a four-word tweet: Two were curses, and a third was “dumb”. Even though the NFL agreed to pony up a bigger share of its revenue to the players, Kamara and many others were not so keen on a 17-game regular season, because they’d be expected to actually play in them (the players’ union passed the new schedule by just 60 votes). A 16-game schedule was already punishing enough. As it turned out, Kamara must wait to find out what it is like to play 17 regular-season games, because, owing to the hazards of his occupation, Kamara missed four straight games late in the season with knee and hamstring injuries. But at least Kamara will be one of the lucky ones who gets to play in a meaningful 17th game. If the Saints (8-8) beat Atlanta (7-9) on Sunday, and San Francisco (9-7) lose to the Los Angeles Rams (12-4), New Orleans will earn the final NFC wildcard playoff berth. There are other games worth watching, namely the season-ending matchup between the Los Angeles Chargers (9-7) and Las Vegas Raiders (9-7), with the winner going to the playoffs and the loser done for the year (though there is an unlikely way both could make it, ugh). But only three of 14 playoff spots are still up for grabs, hardly a rousing crescendo. A year ago, going into the final weekend of the 16-game regular season, seven spots were unclaimed. Six of eight division titles have been clinched, the same as at this point last year. This year, 11 of the 16 games on the final weekend of the regular season carry playoff implications – including seedings – the same as last year. Green Bay (13-3) have wrapped up the NFC regular-season title and a first-round bye, though Aaron Rodgers says he will play Sunday despite a nagging toe injury, and Tennessee (11-5) can do the same in the AFC on Sunday by beating the terrible Texans (4-12). Even the slog for the No 1 overall pick in this year’s draft carries little suspense, because Indianapolis (9-7) need to beat awful Jacksonville (2-14) to clinch a wildcard playoff berth – and because the Jaguars already have the guy they want to rebuild around, rookie quarterback Trevor Lawrence. There is no consensus No 1 draft pick this year, let alone a quarterback that scouts see as a surefire star. Many games will serve as essentially open auditions for players to get a few more highlights on tape so their agents can shop them around in the off-season. As a result, the games might not look much different than the fourth preseason contest that the 17th game replaced. So what has the extension accomplished? Well, more all-important incoming cash for the teams, of course, but not any more drama. For this, you can partly blame the NFL’s desire to expand beyond the US. When the NFL announced the expansion of its schedule, commissioner Roger Goodell said in a statement, “One of the benefits of each team playing 17 regular-season games is the ability for us to continue to grow our game around the world.” What he meant, to be specific, is the ability to schedule four games per season outside the US, with each team required to play at least one game on foreign soil every eight years. Not only do the players get to play more games, more than a few will get to travel a bit more. Those trips – and a little more money – may be one of the few benefits to players. Pro football players are paid pretty well, relatively speaking. The minimum NFL salary in 2021 was $610,000 for a player with no experience and $1.05m for players with at least seven years’ experience, many times more than the median US wage of $56,000. But the average NFL career only lasts a little more than three years and players tend to break down, something a longer regular season will probably only exacerbate. The battered Baltimore Ravens (8-8) still have a chance to make the playoffs if they beat Pittsburgh, and the Chargers, Colts and Dolphins lose (or if Miami tie). But only three players who started on offense for the Ravens in their season opener also started last weekend against the Rams. The coronavirus, to which no team seems to be immune, has shredded plans this year. The Philadelphia Eagles, needing a Minnesota loss Sunday to Green Bay to clinch a playoff spot, appeared to benefit from the absence of Vikings quarterback Kirk Cousins. And then, boom! Twelve Philadelphia players were placed on the Reserve-Covid 19 list Monday afternoon. Even if the season were virus-free, a 17th game offers another opportunity for top players to shine – or get hurt, diminishing the quality of play in the short and long term. Goodell claimed in March that more players get hurt in preseason games, side-stepping the fact that top players participated very little, if at all, in those fourth preseason games. Besides, whoever ends up winning the Vince Lombardi Trophy won’t be the first NFL champion to have played 17 regular-season games. The 1926 Frankford Yellow Jackets won 14, lost one and tied two. The Yellow Jackets played four Saturday-Sunday home-and-away sets. But there were no playoffs, so they were awarded the title by a consensus of reporters. The designated championship game, played before 7,000 chilly fans at Frankford Stadium in Philadelphia, was a dud: a 0-0 tie with the Pottsville Maroons. A 40-yard field-goal attempt was caught by a gust of wind, and the ball rolled out of bounds at the 10-yard line. So there have been more anticlimactic finishes to the NFL regular season. Just wait for Sunday night. The Raiders and Chargers may play to a tie. The Chargers would get in, but so would the Raiders if the Colts also lose. Got it?Up to 10 rapid antigen tests will be offered free to more than 6 million concession card-holders under a new national cabinet agreement but everyone else who is not a close contact of a case and symptomatic will still have to pay. State and territory leaders met on Wednesday to consider how to overcome the national testing crisis which has seen pathology services overwhelmed, rapid tests in short supply, and price gouging by some retailers. Dismissing growing calls for universal free access to rapid antigen tests (RATs), the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said national cabinet had agreed to provide the tests to concession card-holders through the national pharmacy network. Supplies will become available within the next two weeks and limited to 10 each over the next three months – with no more than five per month. The 6.6 million people eligible include those with commonwealth seniors cards, healthcare cards, low-income cards, pension cards and DVA gold and white cards. With the peak in Omicron cases still weeks away, national cabinet also signed off on additional measures to ease pressure on state testing sites and pathology services, which have been plagued by delays. The changes include ditching a requirement that someone who tests positive using a RAT confirms the result with a PCR test and exempting truck drivers, those being admitted to hospital, and overseas travellers from most testing requirements. Queensland and Tasmania will continue to require RATs for travel into those states until vaccination rates reach certain thresholds but travellers will no longer be able to access rapid tests at clinics in Victoria and New South Wales. The federal government will also seek to shield businesses from occupational health and safety obligations that may be requiring businesses to compulsorily test employees. “If you are not a close contact, if you are not symptomatic, you do not need to get a test – that is the advice,” Morrison said. If you do fall into that category testing is free, he confirmed on Wednesday. “We need to ensure that we are focusing those testing resources on the essential tests that are required, not casual tests.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Morrison, whose proposal for cash payments for RATs was overruled by the state and territory leaders in favour of using the pharmacy network, said none of the leaders had argued for universal access to free rapid tests. “To make that very clear, universal free access was not considered the right policy response by all of the states and territories in attendance today,” Morrison said. The cost for the concessional tests will be split between the commonwealth and the states. Morrison said securing supplies had been the responsibility of state governments but the commonwealth had secured an extra 20m rapid antigen tests, with 10m of these to be provided to the states to be used as “point of care” tests administered by health professionals. A total of 200m tests are now forecast to arrive in the country over the next two months but the prime minister warned that the pressure on the testing system would continue over the coming weeks. “Not only I, but all the chief ministers and premiers all understand the challenges currently being faced across the country, particularly in relation to the testing queues, we understand is incredibly frustrating and is highly disruptive, particularly the people’s plans at this time of year,” the prime minister said. He said this was the result of the “volume challenges” posed by the Omicron variant and dismissed suggestions the commonwealth should have secure additional RAT supplies earlier. The federal government is also making changes aimed at preventing price gouging and hoarding, using changes to the Biosecurity Act to prevent retailers from putting more than a 20% mark-up on tests. Penalties include jail terms and fines of up to $66,000. When asked how many tests he had personally paid for, Morrison suggested his wife, Jenny, had purchased them when needed for private purposes, but otherwise he had used stock provided by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. The chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, provided on Wednesday an update on the current wave, saying that over the past fortnight while case numbers grew, the hospitalisation rate went down as did the proportion of cases in intensive care. Morrison said state and territory governments would develop a system for reporting positive Covid cases using rapid antigen tests, but in the meantime, he encouraged anyone who tested positive using an at-home kit to contact their GP. The decision to restrict the access of free tests comes despite a growing chorus in support of making the rapid antigen tests free, including from health experts, unions, business groups, and the federal opposition. “It’s very clear the simplest way to do it is to make tests free and make them available,” the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said ahead of the meeting. “People are crying out for action, the economic consequences of this government’s failure to put in place a proper system are there for all to see.” The Australian Medical Association called for the government to abandon its market-based approach and provide the RATs publicly. The AMA and the Public Health Association of Australia said freely accessible rapid tests would play an “essential role in a pandemic that is looking increasingly out of control”. The AMA president, Dr Omar Khorshid, said the government was “running out of time to get widespread use of RATs in the community under way and support people to do the right thing”. The head of the influential Doherty Institute, Sharon Lewin, also recommended making the tests free as the country shifted its approach, telling ABC’s 7.30 program on Tuesday night tests should be “widely accessible and free”. The national council of the St Vincent de Paul Society said the tests needed to be made free to everyone but particularly the most vulnerable. “We urge all governments to ensure people with disability or other vulnerabilities, and the people who support them, have free and easy access to these tests,” the national president, Claire Victory, said. The Australian Youth Affairs Coalition also raised concern about the prohibitive cost of tests for young people which was “impacting their ability to remain safe”. Amid the rolling testing crisis, the government has been encouraging Australians to take up booster vaccines to try to limit the spread of infections. A total of 176,223 third doses were administered on Tuesday. More than 64,000 Covid cases were reported nationally on Wednesday – up from 48,000 the previous day. It was the highest daily total during the pandemic in Australia. NSW registered a record high 35,054 cases and eight deaths, while Victoria reported 17,636 cases and 11 deaths. Tasmania had a record 867 infections, with Queensland reaching 6,781, SA with 3,493, the ACT 810 and the Northern Territory 117.So, Anthony Charles Lynton “call me Tony” Blair must now be called Sir Tony. In addition to being “Right Honourable” he is to be the Queen’s Companion, chivalrous and knightly. He is to wear a royal garter, the highest honour the monarch can bestow, and it is her personal decision. Gasps all round. A petition of protest has received almost 700,000 signatures already. On paper the reason for the garter, not a normal knighthood, is that Blair was once prime minister and all former holders of that office get one, as they once got earldoms. James Callaghan did, as did Margaret Thatcher. The difference is that Blair’s honour has been delayed for 15 years. The palace might argue that there are only three vacancies in the 24-strong companionship and there are four ex-prime ministers waiting, along with other worthy candidates. That does not explain the delay in Blair’s case. In the light of history, Blair was not a peculiarly bad prime minister. In winning three general elections he might even be rated a success. The two wars into which he led his nation, in Afghanistan and Iraq, were heavily supported by some at the time. But the charge against him, as confirmed by the Chilcot report, is that he woefully misled parliament and the public in stating his case. Hundreds of Britons and hundreds of thousands of foreigners died – and are still dying – as a result of Britain’s participation in those wars. Plenty of people did not think much of Thatcher, who also went to war, but no howl greeted her garter. The Commons Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, has suggested that all ex-prime ministers should be knighted on leaving office, simply for having done “one of the toughest jobs in the world”. Like permanent secretaries, senior judges and (most) Commons Speakers, they deserve a farewell pat on the back, and a knighthood comes cheap. To this extent, Blair would be entitled to his reward. But, in that case, someone should have said so and done it. As it is, the delay over Blair looks like a deliberate judgment somewhere in Buckingham Palace. Were some courtiers muttering, “Must we really, what with Iraq and all that?” Were others saying, “It’s over, just get on with it”? As for numbers, they might hope that with a bit of luck, next-in-line Gordon Brown will refuse, and David Cameron can be dumped in the Lords, where his recent misdeeds will vanish in its mire of sleaze. In other words, the delay in the award to Blair could indeed be a royal comment on his botched job – at which point we should best treat it as matter closed. More evidence, if it were needed, that our entire “honours” system and its associated nomenclature is an outdated mess. Britain has inherited an honours system that, like its Church of England and parliament itself, is shrouded in past fashion and fancy language that it seems incapable of reforming. Honours are divided between people who get them through their job, people who merit them and people who buy them. The cynicism of Boris Johnson’s (and Cameron’s) purchased honours has brought the House of Lords to a new low. I can think of no other democracy where membership of its parliament is so brazenly up for sale. It is not good enough to say it does not matter much. If it is to serve as the nation’s comment on the performance of public figures, a system of honours should convey meaning, not time-serving. In a climate of sleaze and corruption, the case is overwhelming for a commission to clean up and modernise the hierarchy of national awards. Parliament, politics and Downing Street should have nothing to do with it. We can eliminate archaic references to empires, saints, baths, garters and chivalry. We can stick to orders of merit. As for prime ministers, their reward is best kept in heaven, or at least confined to the lucrative lecture circuit and memoir catalogue. It is there that the nation can best express its appreciation of their work. • This article was amended on 6 January 2022. An estimate of the death toll resulting from the UK’s participation in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars was changed from tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistLas Vegas police have stated that pop singer Jason Derulo “committed a battery against two individuals” in an altercation at the city’s Aria resort and casino early on Tuesday morning. Video footage shows Derulo running across the venue’s atrium and throwing punches at an unidentified man, who had taunted him with comparisons to the R&amp;B singer Usher. Derulo was pictured in handcuffs and taken off the premises, with the resort making a trespass order against him. He has not been arrested or charged over the attack, and a police report was not made, as the victims chose not to press charges. Derulo has enjoyed continued chart success since his 2009 debut, earning 15 UK Top 10 hits, five of them going to No 1. He has collaborated with artists including Jennifer Lopez, Nicki Minaj and Snoop Dogg, and amassed a sizeable following for his skits on TikTok, with 51m followers.Judith Iturbe grimaces as she thinks about August and what it means for the residents and rhythms of Milmarcos. At the height of summer, the population of this small and beautiful Spanish village, which sits close to Castilla-La Mancha’s border with Aragón, rises from just 44 to about 1,000. “For me, August is the worst time of the year because all these people come from the city with their urgent requirements,” says Iturbe, who runs a tiny brewery in Milmarcos. Twenty-one years ago, she and her partner decided to leave their hectic jobs and lives in Madrid and start over. If it was quiet they craved, they have not been disappointed. The only people on the streets of the village this afternoon are two older residents who sit on garden chairs by the church tower to chat and soak up the rays of the low winter sun. The peace and quiet, however, comes at a price. The doctor comes through just once a week, the village’s three children have an hour-long bus ride to school, and Milmarcos has precisely one shop and one bar. As Iturbe points out, only half-jokingly, this corner of Guadalajara province is one of the most hollowed-out parts of the demographic realm known as La España vaciada – the hollowed-out Spain. Decades of depopulation have left huge stretches of rural Spain starved of people, attention and investment, and prompted the country’s Socialist-led coalition government to establish a ministry for the demographic challenge. But for many in such areas, change has not come fast enough. At the end of September, an association of more than 160 local and regional groups decided to run as a joint platform in regional and national elections. The España Vaciada platform took its inspiration from the fact that Teruel Existe, a movement that campaigns to improve conditions in the overlooked Teruel region of eastern Spain, managed to win one seat in congress and two in the senate in the November 2019 general election. Despite having just one MP, Teruel Existe has become a powerful force in a political landscape that is increasingly fragmented and dependent on horse-trading to get things done. Antonio Saz, a co-ordinator for the España Vaciada association, says that while the electoral platform may be new, the “struggle against depopulation and for territorial rebalancing” dates back at least 20 years. “We always say we’re not some kind of planned action; we’re the consequences of ignoring and abandoning the rural world and depopulated areas,” he says. “These problems are now on politicians’ agendas, even if we’re not yet seeing them in their programmes and actions.” Among the platform’s 101 initiatives is a national plan with guaranteed funding that would enable overlooked parts of the country to catch up with more developed ones, the creation of a non-political, expert agency to tackle depopulation, and improved rail links and services. “We also have a simple plan to drive recovery and balance things up that we call 100/30/30,” says Saz. “Thats 100mbps of symmetrical internet, 30 minutes to basic services such as education, health or security, and 30km [18 miles] to a high-capacity road. If we could get all that, we’d have a far more well-balanced country.” The platform – which will face its first ballot-box test when it runs in February’s regional election in Castilla y León – is not fond of ideological labels. So would it be happy to strike deals with either the far-left Unidas Podemos or the far-right Vox? “Our ideology is driven by the vital necessity to tackle depopulation before it’s too late and we disappear – that’s what binds us more than left and right blocs,” says Saz. While he says it is far too early to speculate on electoral performances, Saz acknowledges the platform is keen to acquire the kind of clout Teruel Existe can exercise: “The more weight we have when it comes to seats, the more they’ll listen to us and the more we can do.” José Pablo Ferrándiz, a social sciences lecturer at Madrid’s Carlos III University, says the platform is likely to pose the biggest threat to Spain’s old political duopoly – the ruling Spanish Socialist Workers’ party (PSOE) and the conservative People’s party (PP). “In the face of these new demands – which actually aren’t new at all – the two big parties can’t say they’re the ones who are going to solve these problems because they’ve been voted in before and haven’t solved them,” he says. Ferrándiz thinks the arrival of España Vaciada – which follows the eruption in recent years of Podemos, Vox and the fading, centre-right Citizens party – could herald even greater fragmentation. “In a national political scenario where even the vote of Teruel Existe is fundamental in forming majorities – and potentially even in forming governments – the PP and the PSOE know that if these platforms grow and win even three or four seats, they will be important when it comes to forming national governments.” Back at the brewery, Iturbe is labelling beer bottles, keeping an eye on the electoral developments – and refusing to get her hopes up. “At least the platform is made up of people who know the rural world, so perhaps it’ll do something,” she says. “But on a national level, nothing’s changed politically and even after Podemos and Citizens, it’s all back in the hands of the PP and the PSOE.” Time, however, is running out for Milmarcos and for tens of thousands of other Spanish villages. As Iturbe notes, only a third of Milmarcos’s permanent residents are around 50 or younger. In 10 years’ time, many of its older people will be dead and its children will probably be thinking about moving elsewhere. “The politicians need to listen to us, because they haven’t so far,” she says. “They need to differentiate between the urban and the rural but at the moment, all the laws are drawn up in offices in the city, which means there’s no way they suit our needs. No matter how many times they come out here in their chauffeured cars, they never get it.”General Máximo Gómez, a key figure in Cuba’s 19th-century wars of independence against Spain once said: “Cubans either don’t meet the mark – or go way past it.” A century and a half later, the aphorism rings true. This downtrodden island struggles to keep the lights on, but has now vaccinated more of its citizens against Covid-19 than any of the world’s major nations. More than 90% of the population has been vaccinated with at least one dose of Cuba’s homegrown vaccines, while 83% have been fully inoculated. Of countries with populations of over a million, only the United Arab Emirates has a stronger vaccination record. “Cuba is a victim of magical realism,” said John Kirk, professor emeritus of Latin American studies at Dalhousie University, Canada. “The idea that Cuba, with only 11 million people, and limited income, could be a biotech power, might be incomprehensible for someone working at Pfizer, but for Cuba it is possible.” Like most Latin American countries, Cuba knew it would struggle to buy vaccines on the international market. So in March 2020, with foreign exchange reserves plummeting due to the loss of tourism revenue and ferocious new US sanctions, the island’s scientists got to work. The gamble paid off: this spring Cuba became the smallest country in the world to successfully develop and produce its own Covid vaccines. Since then its well-staffed, if dilapidating universal health service, has rolled out injections at a fast clip, inoculating even young children (all vaccination on the island is voluntary). Both vaccines are over 90% effective, according to Cuban-run clinical trials conducted last spring. Successful rollout has brought infection rates down from among the highest in the western hemisphere last summer to low levels today. Last August the island reported hundreds of Covid deaths per week; last week there were three. The vaccine success is all the more striking when set against the parlous state of the healthcare service in other areas. With hard currency inflows cut in half over the last two years, antibiotics are now so scarce that 20 pills of amoxicillin trade on the black market for the equivalent of a month’s minimum state salary. Out of plaster cast, doctors in some provinces now resort to wrapping broken bones in used cardboard. “Ever since the 1959 revolution, Cubans have embarked on these grand crusades which are quixotic yet often successful,” said Gregory Biniowsky, a Havana-based lawyer. A prime example, Biniowsky said, was Fidel Castro’s pipe dream of investing one billion dollars in biotech after the Soviet Union disintegrated. “Any rational adviser would have said this was not the time to invest resources in something that might bear fruit in 25 years. And yet here we are now … where these fruits of the biotech investment are saving lives.” Other quests have dramatically failed: the Ten Million Ton Sugar Harvest of 1970 aimed to produce an unprecedented amount of sugar to spur growth. But to cut the cane, workers were pulled from their regular jobs, paralysing industry and wreaking havoc on the economy. Last year Cuba harvested seven times less sugar than in 1959. “As a nation there’s a tendency to get really good with the big things, and awful at the everyday things,” said Hal Klepak, professor emeritus of history and strategy at the Royal Military College of Canada. “The whole idea of electrifying the country [in under a decade], abolishing illiteracy in 2.5 years, and medical internationalism – these were all just mad schemes. And they did it.” Today, Cuba posts tens of thousands of doctors and nurses doing humanitarian work abroad – but fails to grow enough potatoes for the population. Cuba’s highly centralized, state planning system – one of the last in the world – goes some way to explaining this paradox. When there is political will from the top, objectives can be driven forward; when there’s a lack of direction, the island’s rigid, Kafkaesque bureaucracy can elevate passing the buck to an art form. “In capitalism you tend to have, even with very little things, somebody to fill the market,” said Klepak. “The difference with Cuba is that for [most economic] decision-making, there isn’t anyone but the state.” After registering less than 100 cases a day for weeks, infection rates are now rising due to the highly contagious Omicron variant. Cuban scientists have not released data on the efficacy of their vaccines against Omicron but have begun work to update their vaccine against the variant. In the meantime, the Cuban ministry of public health has fast-tracked its booster campaign, and aims to give almost the entire population an extra shot of vaccine this month.As we chat, Mike van Erp keeps glancing at the line of vehicles queueing on the road in Hyde Park, London. Suddenly, he spots something. “Here we go,” he says, swinging around his sensible-looking blue touring bike, and pedalling away from the traffic lights. He edges along the stationary vehicles until he is parallel to a car. It is well over a minute before the driver looks up and spots him – and the camera strapped to his baseball cap. When he returns, a grinning Van Erp tells me the man reacted badly to the realisation he was being caught on camera. Why the fury? The driver was using his phone as he waited for the traffic to move – and Van Erp recorded him doing it. In the coming months the man will most likely face a fine and six points on his driving licence, in turn triggering a significant jump in his insurance premium. Van Erp, a 49-year-old professional carer, says he has now reported close to 1,000 law-breaking drivers to the police, with about 80% facing prosecution. After any court proceedings are finished, he posts the footage on his YouTube channel. There have been some famous faces among the drivers he has reported. In early December, Van Erp allegedly filmed Frank Lampard using a phone while driving – the former footballer has denied the offence. Footage shot by Van Erp, however, has resulted in court action against ex-boxer Chris Eubank and Guy Ritchie, with the film director banned from driving. All of this has led to headlines, occasional TV appearances and made him the semi-reluctant public face of a new era of road crime enforcement, one in which police forces are being encouraged to accept online complaints about offences, backed up by video footage. Many of the complaints come from cyclists, who view such footage as one of the few ways they can push back against endemic levels of dangerous driving. It can be a controversial area. Van Erp regularly features in news articles as a “vigilante cyclist”, a description he dislikes intensely and which he has, on occasion, managed to have altered after complaining. Van Erp’s 65,000 subscribers to his CyclingMikey YouTube channel have been enough to earn him a modest extra income as a result of his actions. Yet, he says, far from selecting prominent targets, he did not recognise any of the celebrities when he approached them. (The footage of him challenging Eubank for holding a phone at the wheel of his convertible Rolls-Royce sees him ask the clearly unimpressed former world champion, “Are you famous?”). And, he insists, a media profile was never his aim. His motivation is much simpler: trying to make the roads safer, one driver at a time. A Dutch national, who grew up in Zimbabwe and moved to the UK in 1998 to work in IT, he has a particularly personal stake in this. When he was still living in Zimbabwe, his father was killed by a drunk driver while riding his motorbike. Van Erp, then 19, was called by a local shopkeeper about the crash, and went straight to a suburb of Harare, where they lived, to find the mangled wreck of the motorbike and his father’s body covered by a blanket. “It was his birthday on the day, and in the morning I’d begged him to come gliding with me,” Van Erp recalls. “I had a pretty awesome upbringing and was close to my dad. He taught me to ride a bike, to fix punctures, to ride a motorcycle, and to drive a car.” It’s this memory, he says, that “really gives me that extra ounce of determination to cope with the hassle of admin of reporting drivers – I don’t like admin very much.” There is, he adds, a wider motivation: “I just like to think that with the power of one I’m trying to change a little bit of road safety. Most people who cycle realise that bad driving is largely tolerated by society. It’s not considered a really serious thing. Yet it’s claiming 1,800 people’s lives a year in the UK alone, and 27,000 are seriously injured. That’s a quite serious toll, isn’t it?” It is not only a serious toll, but one that disproportionately affects the most vulnerable road users. While the UK has better overall road casualty statistics than most nations, the risk of injury or death per mile is 25 times greater for cyclists than for than those travelling in cars. The UK is also one of the few European countries where fatalities among pedestrians have risen in recent years. The sort of law-breaking captured by Van Erp and his fellow camera cyclists undoubtedly plays a part. On 20mph-maximum roads, an average of 86% of drivers break the speed limit. And to understand the sheer extent of motorists using handheld phones while at the wheel, you only need to watch Van Erp at work. He began taking his on-the-road shots in 2006, using an early bike-mounted camera. “I started filming because I felt a little powerless,” he recalls. “I couldn’t do anything if a bad driver gave me a close pass, or risked my life in some way. On the various cycling forums we started talking about cameras, how they were miniaturising and getting better – even though they’re terrible compared with now.” Initially, police forces had very little interest in following up his footage even of the most dangerous incidents. Yet, very gradually this has changed – Van Erp’s first successful prosecution followed an incident in 2018 when a taxi driver overtook him very closely. Today, many forces allow footage and complaint details to be uploaded via the web, making it easier – and possibly more likely – that cyclists and other road users with dashcams will bother reporting bad driving. The National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) recently recommended that all forces in England and Wales set up such systems, a move instigated by DCS Andy Cox, the NPCC’s lead on traffic casualties and a pioneer in efforts to tackle them. But the ease of reporting road offences online for citizen volunteers such as Van Erp – who provide many more eyes on the road than would be possible for even the best-resourced police force – remains notably patchy. Camera users in Scotland, for instance, are still obliged to put their footage on to a DVD. Many people also complain that by submitting video they are treated only as witnesses, not potential victims, and so are not kept up to date about action taken. Statistics are limited on this new era of road crime enforcement. The Metropolitan police, the UK’s biggest police force, for example, says it does not keep any relevant figures. But freedom of information requests have revealed that several smaller forces now get hundreds of video complaints a year each, and as many as half lead to action. Van Erp says he has been told “sometimes half of driver awareness courses are filled with people caught by camera cyclists”. He became more diligent in his recording of road offences when he began seeing the results. “I started realising that real prosecutions were happening. And I thought, do you know what, it’s worth doing more than what just affects me, because that will help other people. You hope it will improve other people’s safety.” An hour with Van Erp in Hyde Park brings too many phone users for him to report. Yet, he says, while he is organised about backing up video files and cataloguing complaints and number plates, not least to identify what he calls “repeat customers” (his record is three – the driver of a red Porsche), he does not go out looking for phone-using drivers. He encounters enough of them during his usual cycle journeys – and official statistics illuminate how this happens. In the past four years, according to DVLA statistics, more than 90,000 British drivers have been caught driving while distracted, with 932 convicted at least twice, and one motorist punished nine times. Van Erp says he has to be mindful of how common phone use at the wheel is: “I don’t want this to consume my life. I have hobbies, and I have family. I limit how much time I spend on this.” Riding with him, however, also highlights how distracted drivers become once they pick up their phones. Several remain completely oblivious to the fact a lanky Dutchman has spent several minutes staring at them through the driver’s window, a camera attached to his white baseball cap – and that David, the Guardian photographer, is training a longer lens on them from across the street. Such up-close footage is needed because using a handheld phone is only deemed illegal if there is proof of interactive communication, such as sending messages, talking, or commenting on social media – although this law is due to be updated this year. “It means I have to get right up close and personal,” says Van Erp, who now uses a high-spec GoPro. What of those who argue that using a phone in stationary traffic does no harm? Van Erp has little patience with this – noting the “WhatsApp gap” – the way phone-distracted drivers tend to jerk forwards belatedly when the queue moves, often after a toot from behind. “There is evidence that phone use is as dangerous as drink-driving. I think it’s also very naive to imagine these people only use their phone in [stationary] traffic,” he says. Yet aside from his phone-use videos, his YouTube channel also documents an arguably more confrontational strand of his activism. A few years ago, Van Erp heard how queueing drivers at another London junction, in Regent’s Park, were impatiently darting down the wrong side of a traffic island to reach a right-hand turn – sometimes nearly hitting cyclists who were going the right way. He began lurking at the junction, and if a car tried the manoeuvre he would step out in front of it, blocking its path, and ordering the driver to go back. The results make compulsive viewing. In one particularly astonishing episode, currently on 1.7m views and rising, a pair of doctors in a hulking Volvo SUV are aghast at being challenged and insist that their profession means the driver should be allowed to flout road laws. But the most-watched clip, at almost 4m views, sees a driver become so incensed he bumps Van Erp several times with his Mercedes. When the police arrive the driver starts to argue with them too. Van Erp’s resolve – what he calls “a good example of Dutch stubbornness” – however, seems as unshakeable as his good humour. “You know what keeps me the most even-tempered? It’s the camera,” he says. “I know that the consequence will come anyway, and I know that I’m filming myself, and it’ll look worse if I behave badly. And also, the kinder and calmer I am, the worse it looks for the driver.” He regularly receives threats on social media, where he faces a near-continual barrage of anonymous insults. But again, his actions are rooted in painful personal experience of the consequences of such driving: when Van Erp was at school, he witnessed a friend being struck by a taxi driving the wrong way round a traffic island. His friend survived, but was badly injured. It’s not all criticism, however. Van Erp also has fans. “Mikey is an inspiration, genuinely,” says Jeremy Vine, the radio and TV presenter, who also chronicles the bad driving he sees on his bike commute via snappily edited videos using a 360-degree helmet camera. “I often bump into him around London,” Vine says. “He is not mad, not obsessed, not a vigilante, not on a crusade. He simply believes rules are there to be followed, because it was a drunk driver breaking the rules that took the life of his father. The police can’t police everything, so people like Mikey fill in the gaps.” Van Erp uses his social media reach to spread the message that there are increasing numbers of camera-equipped cyclists, meaning that poor driving has consequences. “I don’t really want the fame,” he says. “On the other hand I haven’t really got any choice about it. The result is I have to use it to spread the word about camera cyclists. “Most people are really quite careful towards others. But cars do blunt that a little bit. There’s something about being in a car that takes the kind edge off us. We’re insulated in a soundproof comfort zone, and we very much see it as our personal space.” With that, our chat ends and, camera still clamped to baseball cap, Van Erp cycles through the park towards home – not searching out dangerous drivers, but only too aware how easily one can arrive in your life, unheralded, and with devastating consequences.At three-and-a-bit hours long, this is worth every geeky minute if you’re into the genre of the title – think Witchfinder General all the way through to Midsommar. With its really smart deep dives into cultural criticism, this is a seasonal stocking overflowing with spooky fun. Writer-director Kier-La Janisse, founder of the Miskatonic Institute of Horror Studies, clearly knows the subject inside out, and finds the best authors, scholars and authorities to talk about the subject. But what’s really admirable is the way it is organised into digestible chapters that flow silkily from one subject to another, eased along by a spontaneous and colloquial voiceover from the director herself. As a film essay, the methodology is exemplary; if you want an education in an aspect of film over the winter and have finished watching all of Mark Cousins’ Story of Film docs, this offers an excellent next component. Arguably there may be a little overload, as Janisse and co get so engrossed in tracing the roots and shoots of the term “folk horror” across film, TV, literature and even theatre, that by the end it’s hard to remember what the genre’s defining characteristics are supposed to be. But ultimately you’ll know it when you see it: in film terms, it has to do with stories in rural settings where ancient skills, beliefs or practices rub up against a newer form of civilisation. Think of the pagan islanders with their maypoles and sacrifices in conflict with the austere Christian policeman in The Wicker Man, or the witchcraft practices involving animal transformations and blood meeting the prim 17th-century pilgrims in The Witch, directed by Robert Eggers (interviewed here). These are just two of the obvious touchstones. Janisse includes clips from hundreds of much less well-known movies, many from the UK, which might be considered the spiritual homeland of folk horror, but spreading out to include gems from Australia, Indonesia, Mexico and Iceland. The discussion of the trope of Indigenous burial grounds in American folk horror is especially fascinating, for example, particularly to see how contemporary Americans struggle to cope with their colonial past (see Pet Sematary) as well as attitudes towards death and grieving (Midsommar). Pro tip: keep a notebook handy – there will be loads of titles you’ll want to look up afterwards. • Woodlands Dark and Days Bewitched: A History of Folk Horror is available on 10 January on Shudder.Gal Gadot has sought to explain the thinking behind her widely ridiculed cover of the John Lennon song Imagine, posted to Instagram at the start of the pandemic. The video, which featured Gadot along with stars including Kristen Wiig, Natalie Portman, Will Ferrell, Zoë Kravitz and Jamie Dornan each singing a line from the song, was intended as a statement of solidarity. “We are in this together, we will get through it together,” Gadot captioned the original post from March 2020, but many criticised the project as tone deaf, highlighting the apparent disconnect between lyrics such as “imagine no possessions” warbled from multimillion dollar mansions while hundreds of thousands lost their lives, relatives, jobs and homes. Speaking to InStyle magazine, Gadot said that the timing of video – now viewed more than 10m times – was the central problem. “The pandemic was in Europe and Israel before it came [to the US] in the same way. “I was seeing where everything was headed. But [the video] was premature. It wasn’t the right timing, and it wasn’t the right thing. It was in poor taste. “All pure intentions, but sometimes you don’t hit the bullseye.” At the time of posting, Gadot had been in isolation for almost a week, she said, and watching the crisis unfold had left her feeling “philosophical”. Speaking to Vanity Fair last year, Gadot was unapologetic about the video, calling it “just not the right good deed. I had nothing but good intentions and it came from the best place, and I just wanted to send light and love to the world. “I can only say that I meant to do something good and pure, and it didn’t transcend.”Keir Starmer will miss the chance to challenge Boris Johnson at the first prime minister’s questions of 2022, after the Labour leader tested positive for Covid. He will self-isolate and his deputy, Angela Rayner, will stand in at the dispatch box instead at 3pm. Starmer has been doing daily lateral flow tests and on Wednesday the result came back positive. It is his sixth period of self-isolation since the pandemic began. He last tested positive in October, forcing him to miss PMQs and the chance to respond to the budget. Fresh from giving a new year’s speech in central Birmingham setting out Labour’s strategy for 2022, Starmer will have been keen to keep pressure up on the government given the Conservatives’ waning poll ratings after a damaging series of sleaze scandals. On Tuesday, he said alleged rule-breaking including at Christmas parties across Whitehall during December 2020 meant ministers had lost “the moral right to set those rules”. The speech was attended by about two dozen people, including several local Labour MPs sat socially distanced in the audience. Starmer is believed to have visited nearby constituencies afterwards. Before Starmer’s last positive test three months ago, he was also forced to isolate in July 2021 after one of his children tested positive, and in January 2021 after being identified as a “close contact” of someone who caught the virus. He also went into isolation in December 2020 when a staff member in his private office contracted Covid, and September 2020 while someone in his household had symptoms and awaited a test result. NHS guidance says anyone who catches Covid should notify all those with whom they have been in close contact in the past 48 hours – but those people do not need to isolate unless contacted by test and trace or they develop symptoms. Cases of the virus in Britain have rocketed in recent weeks as the Omicron variant, which scientists say is more transmissible, spread through the country. The highest daily number of new infections in the UK was reported on Tuesday, when 218,724 people tested positive for Covid. Johnson has resisted imposing further restrictions in England, putting the nation out of step with leaders of the devolved administrations in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. The prime minister has himself been forced to self-isolate before, but tried to avoid doing so in July 2021 after he and chancellor, Rishi Sunak, came into close contact with the health secretary, Sajid Javid, who later tested positive for Covid. Johnson and Sunak initially said they were part of a pilot testing scheme allowing them to avoid isolating, but U-turned after an outcry from members of the public and backbench Conservative MPs.The Archibald prize-winning Australian artist Craig Ruddy has died aged 53 as a result of Covid complications. Ruddy, who was based in the New South Wales northern rivers region, won Australia’s most celebrated portrait prize in 2004 for his painting of David Gulpilil, titled Two Worlds. He also won the Archibald people’s choice prize that year, and again in 2010, for his portrait of Warwick Thornton. He was an Archibald finalist in 2011 and 2020, for his portraits of Cathy Freeman and Bruce Pascoe, respectively. Ruddy’s death on Tuesday night was announced on social media on Wednesday in a post that also paid tribute to his partner of two decades, Roberto Meza Mont. “It is with the heaviest of tender hearts we let you know that last night Craig left his body peacefully at home in Roberto’s arms,” the post on Ruddy’s accounts said. “We have lost the most divine human that gave so much to our communities, the creativity, the inspiration, the pure love and plenty of dance.” In a recent profile in the Northern Rivers Review, the pair were described as a “powerhouse couple”, renowned in the region for their community input. In the piece, Ruddy spoke of the rare lung condition he was diagnosed with as a child. “It slowed me down and put me into a strange euphoric state,” he said. “As a result, I learned to sit and observe.” Ruddy’s 2004 Archibald-winning Gulpilil portrait made headlines when another artist, Tony Johansen, took legal action against the Art Gallery of NSW, which administers the prize. Johansen’s claim, which was dismissed by the NSW supreme court, was that Ruddy used mostly charcoal for the work, making it a drawing, not a painting. Ruddy was devastated by the death of Gulpilil just over a month ago. The artist and the Yolŋu actor developed a strong bond in 2004 when Ruddy drew him for Two Worlds. Ruddy drew Gulpilil at the Colo River while the actor took a break from rehearsals for his one-man show, directed by Neil Armfield. Ruddy only had a couple of hours to create the portrait, which he drew on colonial wallpaper. After Gulpilil’s death from lung cancer in November last year, Ruddy posted a picture to social media of him creating the portrait, writing: “This is how I’ll always remember you, strong, resilient and cheeky. My heart is heavy knowing you’ve left this world but your legendary spirit will live on forever.” The last time Ruddy painted Gulpilil was in 2019, the day after the opening of Molly Reynolds’ documentary My Name is Gulpilil. Last month the portrait, I’m Gulpilil, was displayed at the David Roche Foundation in Adelaide. In December, Ruddy completed his last body of work, titled 2021, which Daniel Browning, host of Radio National’s The Art Show, said “puts me in mind of the dystopias conjured by the Spanish painter Goya”. Created in the studio adjoining his home in the Byron Bay hinterland, Ruddy said of the works: “These past two years have been a rollercoaster of emotions and feelings for all of us, including myself … Creating in my studio has helped me to maintain balance and perspective. We are definitely living in unprecedented times and the arts and deep human connection are paramount.” Ruddy was born in Forestville, Sydney in 1968 and studied design and fashion illustration in the 1980s. In 2001 he quit his design career to become a painter, and over the past two decades divided his time between homes in Tamarama in Sydney’s east, the Byron Bay hinterland and Buenos Aires. On his website, his work is described as exploring “questions of social conscience as well as current environmental issues. The recognition of Australian Indigenous people and culture is also a core theme.” When he wasn’t in his studio painting or travelling with his partner, he enjoyed invigorating cold outdoor baths, yoga, dancing, tending to his veggie patch, swimming, cooking and entertaining. Byron Shire Council mayor Michael Lyon said Ruddy was a “well-known locally based artist and Archibald prize-winner” who had “died as a result of complications from Covid-19”. “Devastated at the loss of my good friend and neighbour. Too young to leave us and such a beautiful, kind and generous soul, am still in complete shock,” Lyon said in a statement. The Yuin, Bunurong and Tasmanian author Bruce Pascoe also paid tribute to Ruddy, who painted him for the 2020 Archibald prize – the artist’s fifth submission to the portrait prize. “There goes a really decent and gentle soul,” Pascoe said in a statement. “The world needs the goodness of his spirit replaced. Teach your children well.” In a tweet marking Ruddy’s death, former Olympic athlete Cathy Freeman wrote: “Forever in my heart / Forever in my mind / Forever in my life.” In a statement posted to Twitter, Ben Franklin, the NSW minister for Aboriginal affairs, the arts and regional youth, wrote: “A life so well lived, but taken far too soon. Craig Ruddy was an extraordinary artist. And a wonderful human being.”In 1972, Catholic missionaries entered the Chaco forest of northern Paraguay and forced Oscar Pisoraja’s family, and their nomadic Ayoreo people, to leave with them. Many perished from thirst on the long march south. Settled near the village of Carmelo Peralta on the Paraguay River, dozens more died from illnesses. Still, the survivors kept up some traditions – hunting for armadillos; weaving satchels from the spiky caraguatá plant. “We felt part of this place,” says Pisoraja, now 51. Today, his community – and other indigenous peoples across the Chaco, a tapestry of swamp, savanna and thorny forest across four countries that is South America’s largest ecosystem after the Amazon – are confronting a dramatic new change. On 13 December, Paraguay’s president, Mario Abdo Benítez, visited Carmelo Peralta to launch construction work on a $103m (£76m) bridge that will cross the Paraguay River to Brazil. On the Paraguayan side, the bridge joins a $445m highway – already half-finished – carving a strip of asphalt for 340 miles (550km) east to west through the Chaco. Mario Abdo Benítez, Paraguay’s president, and Reinaldo Azambuja Silva, governor of Mato Grosso do Sul state in Brazil, at the site of a new bridge across the Paraguay River, due to be completed in 2024 In 2024, when both are completed, the massive infrastructure project across the Chaco, the Bioceanic Corridor, will connect cattle ranchers and soya-bean farmers in Brazil and Paraguay with their lucrative Asian markets, via northern Argentina and Chile. Space is also being left for a parallel freight railway. “This is a historic day for our country,” said Abdo Benítez, likening the highway to a new Panama Canal. “We’re going to integrate our two peoples,” Reinaldo Azambuja Silva, governor of the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso do Sul, told the ceremony in Carmelo Peralta. “This is the realisation of a dream.” But campaigners say the Bioceanic Corridor is a nightmare, accelerating destruction of the Chaco – the fastest-vanishing forest on Earth – and piling deadly pressure on its native inhabitants, including some who shun the outside world. In 2019, an area of forest the size of a football pitch was destroyed in Paraguay’s Chaco every two minutes. Smoke hovers over a field in Luque, Paraguay, last August. Such fires are usually started by ranchers to clear land for pasture. Photograph: Jorge Sáenz/AP “It’s the final nail in the coffin for the Chaco and all its peoples,” says Miguel Lovera, director of Iniciativa Amotocodie, a Paraguayan conservation organisation. Paraguay’s Chaco is home to more than a dozen indigenous peoples. But the Ayoreo are particularly exposed to the changes brought by the highway: many live along its path, and already face severe poverty and social marginalisation. Leaders from the 11 Ayoreo communities near Carmelo Peralta say the highway poses many threats: from deadly road accidents and rapid social changes to increased illegal deforestation of traditional hunting and foraging grounds. Yet they felt forced to approve the project, says Juan de la Cruz, an Ayoreo local government official. “Even if we said no, they would still build it,” he says. The new road makes travelling to hospitals easier, its supporters say. Until roadworks began in 2019, the surrounding Alto Paraguay region – an area the size of Austria – had no asphalt road. Buses sometimes get stuck for weeks along muddy tracks, with stranded passengers having to be airlifted to safety. An unfinished stretch of the Bioceanic Corridor between Carmelo Peralta and Loma Plata. The Paraguay government says half of the 340-mile highway will be finished this month But the highway is already killing indigenous people, according to locals. Recent traffic accidents and drownings in roadside drainage pools killed several of their community, including three Ayoreo girls, they say. Local consultations with indigenous communities were rushed, argues Lovera. Dozens of lorries carrying quarried material for the highway are now hurtling through Ayoreo land every day, he says. “They’ve never seen this kind of traffic before. They were duped,” Lovera adds. A host of damaging cultural upheavals are likely to follow. Leaders fear the coming tide of passing truckers and ranchers will spread drug use, prostitution and petty crime. These effects have already been seen elsewhere in the Chaco among other indigenous communities since the building of the 480-mile north-south Trans-Chaco highway in the 1970s, which Paraguay is also widening and resurfacing. “The building of a highway always brings negative things with it,” Pisoraja reflects. Clockwise from top left: a silk-floss tree (palo borracho or samu’u) in the Ayoreo village of Ebetogué painted with the colours of Olimpia football club in Asunción; Aquino Picanarei, a community leader of the Ayoreo settlement of Campo Loro, which was founded by the New Tribes Mission, a controversial evangelical Christian organisation based in Florida that changed its name to Ethnos360 amid allegations of abuse; a hut in the Ayoreo Totobiegosode community of Chaidí; a member of the indigenous Enxet community of Yakye Áxa goes in search of game into what were their ancestral lands The Bioceanic Corridor also threatens wildlife vital to the Ayoreo. More endangered animals will be flattened by speeding lorries, including slow-moving giant anteaters and the aguará guazú – a wolf-like canine. Wildlife tunnels under the road “mitigate the problem but not entirely, and there aren’t enough of them”, says Luis Recalde, a conservationist. Illegal hunting on Ayoreo territory has also intensified, says Enrique Pebi, president of the Union of Native Ayoreo of Paraguay. He contrasts the mass slaughter of giant armadillos, marsh deer, peccaries and jaguars by outsiders with the Ayoreo’s traditional consumption of some animals for subsistence. “They just use them for target practice,” he laments. Tapir bones in the undergrowth near Fortín Isla Po’i, a former base for Paraguayan troops during their 1932-35 war with Bolivia over possession of the Chaco. Locals say some outsiders shoot at animals for target practice Most concerning, locals say, is evidence that the highway is speeding up deforestation. This makes it even harder for the Ayoreo to hunt, forage for honey, fruit and roots, and gather medicinal plants; practices that are key to their survival and culture. Ayoreo villages near Carmelo Peralta accepted fishing boats and tractors in exchange for allowing a 30-mile road through their territory, says Pebi. “The things they’ve given us will wear out in five or six years,” he says. “I don’t know how many hectares we’ve lost for ever.” Meanwhile, amid a local property rush, Brazilian ranchers have bulldozed a track into Ayoreo land further along the Bioceanic Corridor, and started felling trees, leaders say, showing photos of clearances to the Guardian. The Ayoreo are now too afraid of being shot by foreign “invaders” – armed security guards on expanding nearby ranches – to forage alone, says Pebi. “We want to keep it as it is, our reserve,” he adds. “To go hunting, to get honey, to get homemade remedies. Everything’s there. We always say: it’s our only market.” A digger stands along an unsurfaced section of Paraguay’s Bioceanic Corridor. Until 2019, the remote region – which is the size of Austria – had no asphalt road More than 140,000 sq km (54,000 square miles), a fifth of the entire Chaco, has been felled since 1985. This accelerating deforestation has global consequences. The Chaco holds 14 times more carbon-dense biomass than previously thought, one recent study found. Smoke-blackened palms line the highway – testament to the uncontrolled, man-made blazes to clear land for cattle that have swept the Chaco. Unlike the “fishbone” pattern of deforestation along highways in the Amazon, deforestation in the Chaco clears huge rectangles, Nasa observed. Greater deforestation spurred by the new highway also threatens about 150 Ayoreo, in at least 10 small groups, living in voluntary isolation in the Chaco’s forests, say the leaders of settled Ayoreo communities. Excluding the Amazon, they are the only documented indigenous people in the Americas seeking to avoid contact with modern society. For 60 miles, the highway passes near the Patrimonio Natural y Cultural Ayoreo Totobiegosode (PNCAT), a 5,500 sq km Ayoreo refuge. Reports sometimes circulate that Ayoreo people choosing to live in isolation have been killed by interlopers, but are difficult to officially confirm because Paraguay’s authorities do not monitor their numbers, location or wellbeing, says Lovera. A lake at Fortín Isla Po’i. Severe drought struck the Chaco for several months in 2021. In September, the Paraguay River, which runs east of the Chaco, reached its lowest level since records began in 1904 A 2020 Earthsight report found that Brazilian ranching firms were illegally deforesting chunks of the PNCAT reserve and that leather sourced from the area has been used in luxury cars made by European companies such as BMW. Earthsight also singled out a supplier of the Chortitzer Cooperative – a huge cattle, grains and dairy company owned by the Mennonite community of Loma Plata, where the Bioceanic Corridor’s first stage ends. Florian Reimer, Chortitzer’s manager, told the Guardian that its associate had obtained environmental permits to raze parts of the forest. “We’re totally against illegal deforestation,” he insisted. Loma Plata – and the nearby Mennonite colony of Filadelfia – offer a vision of what the rest of the Chaco may soon look like. An orderly grid of roads encloses thin lines of trees. Indigenous peoples, uprooted by deforestation and forced conversion elsewhere in the Chaco, live marginal existences on the outskirts of town. Clockwise from top left: Enxet and Ayoreo workers at the Santa María estate, which covers about 400 sq km of the Chaco. In 2014, the hacienda was investigated for alleged human rights abuses against the indigenous community; the dairy factory at the Mennonite-owned Chortitzer Cooperative in Loma Plata; a Paraguayan soldier picks his way through trees near Fortín Isla Po’i; animal hides dry on the Santa Elisa ranch, which is on land belonging to the indigenous Enxet community of Sawhotamaxa Enlhet-speaking men, formerly far-ranging nomads, cluster on street corners waiting for a day’s labour. The women often engage in sex work. This carries no stigma in traditional Ayoreo culture, but violent assaults and murders of Ayoreo women by non-indigenous men have increased in recent years. Chortitzer spends about $1.5m every year on health and educational projects benefiting about 3,500 local families, says Patrick Friesen, Chortitzer’s communications manager.. “Our objective is to try to live together.” “When I started here in ’75, all this was forest,” says Augustino Lovero, an Enlhet employee of Chortitzer’s dairy plant. “The image of the Chaco is going to change. The asphalt will bring many people, with their factories.” In Ayoreo settlements near Loma Plata, leaders were also sceptical of the highway’s promised benefits. Basui Picanerei says his village of Ebetogue still lacks reliable drinking water and land titles. Above left: Augustino Lovero, 63, maintains the waste dump at the Chortitzer dairy plant, where his son also works. Lovero credits the Mennonites with teaching him how to operate machinery. Right, Mateo Sobode Chiqueno shows a plaque awarded to him by Paraguay’s senate in recognition of Nothing but the Sun, a 2020 documentary about his efforts to record Ayoreo history “The Bioceanic road brings a lot of danger for the Ayoreo,” says Mateo Sobode Chiqueno, an Ayoreo historian who has spent 40 years recording his people’s memories on to hundreds of cassette tapes. Lovera urges Paraguay to give indigenous communities land far from the road’s impact zone – or risk “genocide, willing or unwilling”. A Paraguay public works ministry spokesperson says the road project was diverted south to avoid several Ayoreo villages and the proposed bridge at Carmelo Peralta re-routed three kilometres north to avoid Ayoreo land. Near Loma Plata, the Bioceanic Corridor links with the Trans-Chaco highway, and will plunge deeper into the western Chaco in 2022. “The Chaco connects us to the world,” a billboard proclaims. The new highway “connects all the sufferings of many, and the good of a few, the businessmen,” counters De la Cruz, the Ayoreo leader from Carmelo Peralta. “And us, we’ll be left at the roadside watching them pass by.” Palms in the Chaco. Much of the primary vegetation has been lost in forest fires. About 3,250 sq km was burnt in northern Paraguay in 2019 Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Good morning. Lawyers for Prince Andrew and Virginia Giuffre, who has long accused the royal of sexual abuse, finally faced off in Manhattan federal court yesterday, as he attempted to dismiss her civil lawsuit. The arguments via videoconference came a day after the unsealing of a 2009 settlement between Giuffre and the late financier and sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. Andrew, who is not mentioned in the settlement, has contended that a clause in the settlement bars Giuffre from suing him. The judge, Lewis Kaplan, questioned lawyers for the prince closely over their claim that the settlement means Giuffre’s lawsuit should be dismissed. Giuffre, who accused Epstein and his ex-girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell of sexual abuse and forcing her into sex with Prince Andrew at age 17 – an accusation he vehemently denies – received $500,000 in her settlement with the late financier. Will the settlement agreement protect Prince Andrew? It’s too early to say but the judge did say, apparently speaking rhetorically: “The only people who could enforce it were Epstein and Giuffre.” When will the judge make a decision? Kaplan promised “a decision pretty soon”. Meanwhile, Prince Andrew is facing criticism for trying to use the clause to protect himself. More than 1,000 US public figures aided Trump’s effort to overturn election More than 1,000 Americans in positions of public trust acted as accomplices in Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn the 2020 election result, participating in the violent insurrection at the US Capitol on 6 January or spreading the “big lie” that the vote count had been rigged. The startling figure underlines the extent to which Trump’s attempt to undermine the foundations of presidential legitimacy has metastasized across the US. Individuals who engaged in arguably the most serious attempt to subvert democracy since the civil war are now inveigling themselves into all levels of government, from Congress and state legislatures down to school boards and other local public bodies. The finding that 1,011 individuals in the public realm played a role in election subversion around the 2020 presidential race comes from a new pro-democracy initiative that will launch on Thursday on the anniversary of the Capitol assault. What is the Insurrection Index? It’s an initiative that seeks to identify all those who supported Trump in his attempt to hold on to power despite losing the election, in the hope that they can be held accountable. How will the anniversary of the 6 January attack be marked? Joe Biden will mark the first anniversary of the deadly assault at the US Capitol this Thursday by honoring the bravery of law enforcement and will “speak to the truth of what happened”. US law professor condemned for ‘white supremacist’ comments by own dean The dean of the University of Pennsylvania’s law school has condemned one of his school’s own professors for making racist remarks about Asian people, saying that their recent comments were “xenophobic and white supremacist”. Prof Amy Wax, who specializes in social welfare law and labor and family economics law, appeared as a guest on the economist Glenn Loury’s podcast when she called the influx of “Asian elites” into the US problematic and made other racist statements, including a call for less immigration from Asian countries. In a scathing response, Dean Theodore Ruger acknowledged that while Wax’s comments were protected by freedom of speech and she held tenure at the college, they were “diametrically opposed to the policies and ethos of this institution”. What else did Ruger say about Wax’s comments? He said: “They serve as a persistent and tangible reminder that racism, sexism and xenophobia are not theoretical abstractions but are real and insidious beliefs in this country and in our building.” Will she keep her job? Despite the condemnation, Wax maintains her employment at the university. Ruger said Wax would be teaching only elective classes in future and would no longer teach required courses. Thank you Happy new year and thank you! With your help, we beat our $1.25m year-end fundraising goal. Contributions from our readers will support Guardian US reporting in 2022 on voting rights, the climate crisis, racial inequality and more. If you haven’t yet, it’s not too late to give. Support the Guardian today. In other news … The Mail on Sunday will pay the Duchess of Sussex just £1 in damages for invading her privacy by publishing a private letter. The court documents also formally confirm that the newspaper – and website MailOnline – has accepted defeat and will not be taking the long-running case to a supreme court appeal. Newly released video footage appears to show California police officers using a law enforcement dog to severely maul an Uber driver who fell behind on payments for the car he rented to do his job. In video footage, Ali Badr, a 42-year-old Egyptian immigrant, was not resisting when the dogs were released. Fossil fuel companies and firms that work closely with them are among the biggest spenders on ads designed to look like Google search results, in what campaigners say is an example of “endemic greenwashing”. ExxonMobil, Shell, Aramco and Goldman Sachs were among the top 20 advertisers. About 20 civilians have been killed and nearly 40 homes destroyed in a Myanmar village, the latest in a series of massacres allegedly committed by the military. The victims of the attack in late December were found in the north-eastern Sagaing region, online news outlet Myanmar Now reported. Don’t miss this: How to make 2022 the year you finally smash your goals Many of us have mid- to long-term goals that are ambitious, but (in theory) achievable with the requisite investment of time and effort. Maybe for you, it’s running a marathon – or a 5k. It might be losing a particular amount of weight, or completing a course in yoga or a foreign language. It could be a time-intensive project such as making a quilt or researching your family history. How can we make it happen? Experts explain all. … or this: Could 2022 be sportswashing’s biggest year? The year 2022 – which launches into the Winter Olympic Games in Beijing and ends with the World Cup in Qatar – is expected to be a great year for authoritarian regimes looking to cover up their atrocious human rights records. Over the course of a 12-month period, China, Qatar and Saudi Arabia, all of whom have been criticized for human rights violations, will use prestigious sports events to polish their public image on an international stage. Climate check: Californians could face $500 fines for wasting water under new rules Californians will not be allowed to water their lawns for 48 hours after rainstorms or let their sprinklers run on to the sidewalk under new, mandatory water-saving rules that could result in a fine of up to $500 a day. The restrictions, adopted by state regulators yesterday, come as California continues to struggle under drought conditions, despite a recent wave of heavy rain and snow. Weather patterns in California have become more unpredictable due to the climate crisis and the state climatologist Michael Anderson said forecasts showed January, February and March could be drier than average. Last Thing: A dog saved a hiker injured in the Croatian mountains by lying on top of him for 13 hours until they were rescued, according to local media. The dog, called North, kept Grga Brkic warm after he fell while out hiking and was unable to move. The other two hikers with him raised the alarm. First responders credited the eight-month-old alaskan malamute with having helped keep Brkic safe. “Friendship and love between man and dog have no boundaries,” Croatia’s mountain rescue service said in a Facebook post. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comIn 1983, Douglas Adams and John Lloyd published the classic satirical dictionary The Meaning of Liff, comprised of words for which there were no words yet. For instance: “Moffat, n., That part of a coat which is designed to be sat on by the person next to you on the bus”, or “Trispen, n., A form of intelligent grass. It grows a single, tough stalk and makes its home on lawns. When it sees the lawnmower coming it lies down and pops up again after it has gone by.” Novelty language books being an evergreen format, we are now offered The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows by John Koenig, the bound form of a long-running website, which is like a much more earnest and emo version of The Meaning of Liff. The presiding mood here is a lugubrious narcissism, signalled by defining various nuances of loneliness, anxiety, bittersweetness and things that are “poignant”. There is “haunting solitude” (“wildred”) or “complicated solitude” (“innity”). There are terms for microanalytical worries about one’s “quintessential self” or “inner self”. The star lexeme here, which the author fondly observes has entered some people’s online vocabulary since he proposed it some years ago, is “sonder”, defined as “the awareness that everyone around you is the main character of their own story”. More enjoyable are the less gloomy, even jaunty coinages, such as “justing” (“the habit of telling yourself that just one tweak could solve all of your problems”), “proluctance” (“the paradoxical urge to avoid doing something you’ve been looking forward to … stretching out the bliss of anticipation as long as you can”), and “bye-over” (“the sheepish casual vibe between two people who’ve shared an emotional farewell but then unexpectedly have a little extra time together”). It’s at such moments that the book overlaps with The Meaning of Liff in that fertile space of the funny-serious. At times the author expands a definition into a mini-essay on, say, “the heartbreaking simplicity of ordinary things” (“maru mori”), and can risk ending up offering the kind of kitsch uplift that ought to be embroidered on cushions: “Perhaps we should try keeping our eyes open while we pray, and look for the meaning hidden in the things right in front of us.” But then, as a fusion of the genres of mindfulness and wellbeing with the browsable vocabulary book, it might just be a work of commercial genius. The benefit the author claims for his work is that readers might feel less alone by seeing strange feelings they have experienced set out in black and white, and so realise that they are part of the great warp and weft of humanity. Indeed, but fiction has long done this without needing to indulge a mania for neologism. The satisfied reader might still wonder, then, whether we really need new words with which to label such an exquisite Farrow &amp; Ball range of emotional shades, or whether having a sufficiency of them would put a stop to the sentences of Proust, to literature itself. • Steven Poole’s A Word for Every Day of the Year is published by Quercus. The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows by John Koenig is published by Simon &amp; Schuster (£14.99). It will be published in Australia in March ($35). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.At least once a week April Wielputz jogs down Main Street in Greenville, California, as she has for years. But now the exercise takes her past piles of charred brick and warped metal that once constituted the 19th-century-era buildings of the historic downtown. Sometimes, depending on her route, she runs by the still-standing but empty high school where her eldest son was supposed to start his senior year this fall. The blackened trees, crumpled buildings and even the cleared lots, are a reminder of the Gold Rush town’s staggering loss. On a Wednesday evening in August, this rural settlement of about 1,000 people found itself in the path of California’s largest single wildfire. Before it grew to nearly 1m acres and became the first known blaze to crest the Sierra Nevada, the Dixie fire destroyed Greenville in about 30 minutes, wiping away more than a century of history, displacing hundreds of residents and inflaming fears in a region already shaken by years of deadly fires. “I saw what happened in Paradise,” Wielputz said, referring to the town about 80 miles away lost to the 2018 Camp fire, which killed 85 people. “But I never, ever thought this would happen.” The Dixie fire, sparked by a tree coming in to contact with a power line owned by the Pacific Gas &amp; Electric utility, burned near the close-knit community of cattle ranchers and loggers for weeks before the flames suddenly grew, surprising firefighters. Unlike Paradise and Berry Creek, where the North Complex fire killed 14 in 2020, no one died in Greenville. But as the climate crisis fuels increasingly destructive and intense blazes in the west, the mountain town is yet another northern California casualty. Five months on, Greenville and those who call it home are fighting to navigate their changed worlds and rebuild their community. Wielputz, who lost her home in the fire, is one of a few hundred people who have been able to return to the area – the majority of Greenville’s 1,100 residents are still displaced. She came back to Greenville as soon as officials allowed residents to return and bought a house, spared by the flames, on a hill overlooking downtown, just next to the home she lost. This town, with its sweeping mountain vistas, community spirit and soundtrack of passing trains, is home, she says, which is why she was eager to return, even with the rubble still piled up around town. “It’s still beautiful to me,” she said, pointing to the trees and the mountains. “Everyone’s like, ‘Oh my God, how are you handling it?’” she said while showing her mother the ruins of downtown. “It’s sad, but I’m gonna get used to it.” For some residents the sight of the destruction is still too painful. “It’s so depressing to drive through here, to see all the trees that are gone,” said Jerry Thrall, a 23-year resident whose home in Greenville survived. Marilyn Crouch, 69, spent most of her life in Greenville; her parents graduated from the local high school, as did she and her husband, high school sweethearts, and later their children. Since the fire destroyed her home, Crouch and her husband have moved into a trailer outside her son’s house in nearby Quincy. She longs to return to the community she treasures, but it’s difficult to see the town in its current state and the other parts of the region badly damaged. Traveling to the valley for an appointment, Crouch and her husband were taken aback by the stumps of dead trees along the highway, part of a massive tree removal project. “That whole piece of highway is just destroyed. I cried all the way home,” she said. “I didn’t want to go home that way. Because I didn’t want to go through Greenville.” Actually navigating within the town can be difficult with all the familiar landmarks burned away. Greenville was so small and close-knit that many residents got around not by street names, but by houses and who lived there. “That’s how you’d tell someone how to get somewhere. You didn’t know the names of the streets, you’d tell them ‘where Dick Hamblin lives, three doors down’,” Crouch recalled. But those houses are mostly gone. Cleanup is under way, though that process is expected to continue through January and much of the rubble still remains. While living in the area always came with challenges, it’s been particularly difficult since the fire. There was a housing shortage before, said Veronica Garcia, a spokesperson for Plumas Strong, a non-profit helping support residents after the fire, and now hundreds of people are still displaced. State and federal officials recently brought 14 trailers to the town to house fire survivors, but they’ll have to wait for longer-term solutions. Supply-chain shortages and inflation have made it difficult for local businesses and homeowners to start to rebuild, and for residents who have found housing to furnish their new homes. For those who have returned, cellphone reception and internet service are spottier than ever, residents say. Getting gas or mail requires a drive to Quincy, but the tree removal project along the highway has made a 30-minute journey into a sometimes two-hour trek. Though schools in Greenville survived, children are traveling to Quincy to attend classes. Sheriff deputies travel from nearby communities since the town’s substation burned down in the fire. “We’re facing the perfect storm of issues up here,” Garcia said. “There is a desperate need to have basic services back in this area.” It will take time but Greenville will come back, Garcia insists. Community members and the Plumas Strong group are working on plans that they hope will restore the town to its former glory, while also making it a safer place to live. “We want to be the model for how to build in a high-risk area successfully,” said Garcia, who was raised in Greenville and returned to help out after the fire. “We’re optimistic that we can rebuild with intent but also get our community members back as quickly as possible.” *** Doing so is not without challenges. Insurers were reluctant to cover houses and businesses in the area before the fire due to the risk, and the community had long relied on increasingly diminishing jobs in the logging industry. “Greenville wasn’t exactly a thriving community beforehand but it was incredibly, incredibly close knit,” Garcia said. “Life is gonna be different for a while. The intention we have now is to put our heads together and think of creative solutions to all the problems rural small towns face.” Todd Johns, the local sheriff who was born in Greenville, said he tries to be hopeful about the town’s future, but that seeing the limited progress made in nearby towns can be discouraging. “I was pretty optimistic until I saw how Paradise looks and that kind of crushed my hopes and dreams. My in-laws lost their home in the Camp fire so I know what Paradise was and what it is.” Those involved with the recovery efforts say they’re working with communities affected by the Camp fire and other blazes to see what lessons they can take from those disasters. Greenville was a deeply special place, both because of its stunning beauty and community spirit, residents say, and worth not just rebuilding, but building back better. “There’s this quality there and you can’t explain it,” said Sue Weber, the vice-chair of Plumas Strong. Weber, a former religious nun in Mother Teresa’s order, came for a three-month silent retreat and never left. “No matter who you are or what you hold, when the rubber meets the road, the community will gather around. I think that’s rare today.” While the future of the town is not yet clear, the close-knit nature that residents talk about appears intact. A Veterans Day parade attracted about 300 people to the streets of downtown. They lined up on sidewalks near the rubble to watch parade floats go by. A few weeks later hundreds headed to a Christmas lights parade in nearby Taylorsville, which was spared from the flames. In Taylorsville, friends met for drinks, children cheered as passersby threw candy into the crowd and announcers paid tribute to the firefighters and community members who fought the flames, providing a moment of normalcy in an unprecedented year. Wielputz rode in the parade on her family’s float. Afterward, her family planned to put Christmas lights up around their new house and decorate for the holidays. It feels right to be back, she said.Mark Wood overcame a “rough night” with a stomach illness to deliver his now customary 90mph-plus speeds and a precious breakthrough at the end of a stop-start opening day to the fourth Ashes Test in Sydney. For the second time in two innings, and in near identical fashion to the third Test in Melbourne, Wood got the better of Marnus Labuschagne when the world’s No 1 ranked batter edged behind for 28 to a ball that moved away from back of a length. “I had a bit of a rough night but I managed to keep just enough energy for the day,” Wood revealed after stumps. “I had a bit of a stomach problem but I’m hoping that with a good night’s rest and some food inside me I’ll be right as rain. “I’m delighted to get Marnus because he’s a top player. I know we’ve had this ‘bowl fuller thing’ but I think we have to hit the wicket hard and make them play as much as we can. Thankfully I made Marnus play, it wasn’t an easy ball to leave, and he managed to edge it.” Despite illness and fatigue, Wood was typically happy to play along with the notion that his battle with Labuschagne could become a similar Ashes rivalry to that of David Warner and Stuart Broad after their earlier duel swung back to the Englishman when claiming the opener’s wicket for the 13th time in Test cricket. “I’d love to have a Broad v Warner thing with him,” Wood said. “Anybody would love that when they think they’ve got a chance to get someone out. The ball before, Marnus hit me for four so I just tried to zone in a bit more. I knew the ball before was loose but I got this one spot on. “You want to test yourself against the best players. I’ve been a bit frustrated in that I’ve felt in good rhythm and have been bowling well in this series without getting the wickets I would have liked but to get big players like that out makes you very happy.” Warner, who has previously had the better of Broad during their encounters on Australian soil and contributed to the current 3-0 scoreline with scores of 94 and 95, became the latest home player to express surprise that his old nemesis missed out on the seaming pitches in Brisbane and Melbourne. “I really enjoy giving you guys a good story, which is fantastic and it builds up the game,” said Warner, reflecting on his earlier score of 30. “Me and Broady love it when we’re out there. It’s good fun, good funny banter. I tried to drive the ball too straight, that was my disappointment, but it’s awesome to see Broady back out there. “He’s a world-class bowler. Him and Jimmy Anderson bowling at us is great. Obviously, they would have been disappointed with some of these Test matches, not playing together, but that’s for their selection panel. It’s great to come up against the world’s best from England.”One year ago, he was frantically barricading the doors to the House gallery to keep out the violent mob. Today, he calls the insurrection a “bold-faced lie” and likens the event to “a normal tourist visit”. The story of Andrew Clyde, who represents part of my – heavily gerrymandered – liberal college town in the House of Representatives, is the story of the Republican party in 2021. It shows a party that had the opportunity to break with the anti-democratic course under Donald Trump, but was too weak in ideology and leadership to do so, thereby presenting a fundamental threat to US democracy in 2022 and beyond. Clyde is illustrative of another ongoing development, the slow but steady takeover of the Republican party by new, and often relatively young, Trump supporters. In 2015, when his massive gun store on the outskirts of town was still flying the old flag of Georgia, which includes the Confederate flag, he was a lone, open supporter of then-presidential candidate Trump, with several large pro-Trump and anti-“fake news” signs adorning his gun store. Five years later, Clyde was elected to the House of Representatives as part of a wave of Trump-supporting novices, mostly replacing Republicans who had supported President Trump more strategically than ideologically. With his 180-degree turn about the 6 January insurrection, Clyde is back in line with the majority of the Republican base, as a recent UMass poll shows. After initial shock, and broad condemnation, Republicans have embraced the people who stormed the Capitol last year, primarily referring to the event as a “protest” (80%) and to the insurrectionists as “protesters” (62%), while blaming the Democratic party (30%), the Capitol police (23%), and the inevitable antifa (20%) for what happened. Unsurprisingly, the vast majority of Republicans (75%) believe the country should “move on” from 6 January, rather than learn from it. And although most don’t care either way, one-third of Republicans say they are more likely to vote for a candidate who refuses to denounce the insurrection. The increased anti-democratic threat of the Republican party can also be seen in the tidal wave of voting restrictions proposed and passed in 2021. The Brennan Center for Justice counted a stunning 440 bills “with provisions that restrict voting access” introduced across all but one of the 50 US states, the highest number since the Center started tracking them 10 years ago. A total of 34 such laws were passed in 19 different states last year, and 88 bills in nine states are being carried over to the 2022 legislative term. Worryingly, Trump-backed Republicans who claim the 2020 election was stolen are running for secretary of state in various places where Trump unsuccessfully challenged the results. At the same time, the situation of the non-Republican far right is a bit less clear. While some experts warn that the militia movement, in particular, has turned toward more violent extremism, the violent fringes of the far right are also confronted by a much more vigilant state. This is particularly true for groups linked to the 6 January attacks, such as the Oath Keepers, which has faced increasing public and state scrutiny after 21 of its members were alleged to have participated in the attacks. Similarly, Proud Boys leaders are facing trial over the event, and some have agreed to cooperate with authorities in their investigations. After decades of the US government ignoring or downplaying the threat of far-right violence, President Biden has made “domestic violent extremism” a key concern of his new administration, regularly singling out white supremacists as “the most lethal terrorist threat in the homeland”. Partly in response to reports that former military personnel were prominently involved in the 6 January attack, the Pentagon has acknowledged “the threat from domestic extremists, particularly those who espouse white supremacist or white nationalist ideologies,” to the military and the country at large. This is not to say that the state is in control of the violent far right. While more than 700 suspected insurrectionists have been arrested, only some 50-plus have been convicted so far, mostly facing fines and probation, after judges rebuffed the DoJ. And media reports found that both the military and law enforcement have struggled to rid themselves of far-right ideas and supporters. But potentially violent far-right individuals and groups are now surveilled much more than they have been since 9/11 – we’re in a moment perhaps more similar to the short period after the Oklahoma City bombing of 1995, still the most deadly domestic terrorist attack in US history. In short, a year after the Capitol attack, US democracy is in a different but still fragile place. Most importantly, the extremists are no longer in the White House, encouraging and protecting the far-right mob. In fact, the state is more aware of and vigilant towards the far-right threat than ever before this century. The threat of far-right direct violence is probably less severe than before – not because the movement is weaker, but because the state is stronger. At the same time, the Republican party has become increasingly united and naked in its extremism, which denies both the anti-democratic character of the 6 January attack and the legitimacy of Biden’s presidency, and is passing an unprecedented number of voter restriction bills in preparation for the 2022 midterms and 2024 presidential elections. As long as the White House mainly focuses on fighting “domestic violent extremism”, and largely ignores or minimizes the much more lethal threat to US democracy posed by non-violent extremists, the US will continue to move closer and closer to an authoritarian future. Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia, the author of The Far Right Today (2019), and host of the podcast Radikaal. He is a Guardian US columnistA few days before Christmas, Joe Manchin appeared on Fox News to publicly retract his support for the Build Back Better Act. Even by the pathologically callous standards of Washington, it felt surreal to watch a politician jeopardize tens of millions of lives in a single 10-minute interview. But the stakes of his decision remain clear: without the act, the United States will fall far short of its climate goals, making a century of ecological collapse, economic devastation and civilizational upheaval not only more likely, but increasingly unavoidable. In the wake of the announcement, despair flickered across the internet. Friends called me in tears. My generation has watched our government fail again and again to enact meaningful federal climate legislation. But this latest betrayal is almost too much to bear. It feels like we are being forced to say goodbye: to our democracy, to our future, to the world we were told we’d inherit. If Build Back Better fails, Manchin may well be remembered as the man who killed the planet. Given the prospect of having to one day explain to his grandchildren why they can’t go outside in the summer, you think he’d at least attempt to marshal some plausible justifications. But his arguments collapse under the lightest scrutiny. His inflation fears have been thoroughly debunked, including by Larry Summers, the patron saint of inflation anxiety. His climate arguments are fundamentally unserious, anti-science propaganda copied straight from the big coal playbook. The most generous interpretation is that he’s a mulish egotist: a man who sticks to his guns, even when his guns are firing blanks. But the bulk of the evidence points to simple bad faith. Since joining the Senate, Manchin has personally grossed over $4.5m from coal companies he owns. In recent months he has received millions in campaign donations from Republican billionaires and fossil fuel executives who want to see Build Back Better die a slow, painful death. Meanwhile, he has ignored the pleas of West Virginia mothers, tuned out the counsel of his own pope and bulldozed the very coal miners he’s so often wielded as political props. In the light of day, his motives seem as obvious as they are depressing. Regardless of his true endgame, Manchin’s reversal raises a pressing question: what exactly is Biden’s strategy? He’s already forfeited his most obvious piece of leverage, allowing the bipartisan infrastructure bill to move forward without any promise of reciprocation. His “charm offensive” – an exercise in Beltway nostalgia, if not outright political delusion – has run aground on the brutal logic of contemporary petro-politics. When it comes to his signature policy agenda, his administration seems flustered, reactive and naive. And yet, the bill must not be abandoned. Executive action alone probably can’t deliver the lasting emissions reductions that climate science demands. If the first Democratic trifecta since 2009 fails to produce ambitious climate legislation, both party and planet will suffer catastrophic consequences. So Biden needs a new strategy, and fast. There are two basic options. The first is to take off the kid gloves and start playing hardball. If he doesn’t have any leverage, then he needs to get some, especially if Manchin is acting in bad faith. That means channeling Lyndon B Johnson and pairing noble intent with sharp elbows. Threaten targeted federal regulations that would cripple Manchin’s benefactors in big coal. Use the bully pulpit to call them out by name: Michelle Bloodworth, Chris Hamilton, Joe Craft, Jim McGlothlin – all the special interests ready to sacrifice my generation on the altar of their quarterly returns. Have the justice department revisit allegations that Manchin’s daughter, former Mylan chief Heather Bresch, played a personal role in criminally inflating the price of life-saving EpiPens (as if corporate fealty and misanthropic greed were a sort of family tradition). Dare him to defect to the Republican party, where he’ll either kiss the ring of the autocrat he voted twice to impeach or be eaten alive as a Republican in Name Only, or Rino. The second option is to publicly accept Manchin’s private counteroffer, get it to the Senate floor for a vote, and then dare him to renege. The $1.8tn counter-offer – which reportedly included universal pre-K, an expansion of the Affordable Care Act and $500 to 600bn in clean energy incentives – would fall short of what working people need. But it would offer some crucial support, while keeping America’s climate commitments alive. There’s a chance Biden could still circumvent Manchin on extending the child tax credit, which would lift millions of American children out of poverty. No state has benefited from the popular policy more than Utah, and Mitt Romney has indicated a willingness to negotiate. Progressives could blanket his state in ads on child poverty while the administration buttonholes him on specifics. Whichever path the administration chooses, they need to abandon their fixation on “projecting normalcy”. We are not living in normal times, and every American knows it. With each new failure, their genteel posture reads less like a steady hand and more like a form of sleepwalking. It’s time they communicated candidly with the American public and made clear what is actually happening. Manchin’s intransigence is not an unfortunate product of normal democratic deliberation. It is a perverse and dangerous attempt on the part of fossil fuel oligarchs to prevent the demos from protecting itself against climate change. Republicans’ lockstep opposition to clean energy investments supported by almost two thirds of American voters is not the product of legitimate policy disagreement, but of a party actively and transparently opposed to majoritarian democracy. As the Biden presidency enters what could be the final act of a political tragedy, the only way out is to break the fourth wall. Sound the alarm and enlist the public. Expose the actors standing between young people and a livable future; between working families and a dignified living; and between all Americans and their right to representation. If Biden wants to win the war for democracy, then he must summon the courage to name it – loudly and repeatedly. Otherwise, his base will remain as we were after Manchin’s announcement: demobilized, despairing and deeply, justifiably cynical. Daniel Sherrell is the author of Warmth: Coming of Age at the End of Our World (Penguin Books) and a climate activistLabour has accused the Ministry of Defence of wasting £13bn of taxpayers’ money since the Conservatives came to power on failed procurement projects, overspends and other administrative errors. The opposition published a 16-page dossier, which it said highlighted a string of examples of financial mismanagement, including £4bn of waste since 2019, the year the current defence secretary, Ben Wallace, was appointed. John Healey, the shadow defence secretary, accused ministers of having “no grip on the MoD’s finances” and said the scale of waste was “significant and systemic”. None of its 36 projects were rated green – “on time and in budget” – according to official Whitehall assessments, he added. The overspends were taken from MoD and other official documents, and some date back to flawed procurement decisions during Labour’s 13 years in government, which ended in 2010. Recent problems highlighted include: A £1bn overspend relating to the building of a new nuclear warhead manufacturing site at the state-owned Atomic Weapons Establishment in Burghfield near Reading. The National Audit Office, the government watchdog, warned in a 2020 report that the project was delayed by more than six years due to poor project management. Delays in the procurement of three additional Astute class nuclear-powered attack submarines, costing just over £1bn, which are intended to take the total fleet to seven by 2026. A cost of £595m incurred for no military benefit when the planned upgrade to the Warrior armoured vehicle, which was started in 2011, was scrapped in last spring’s defence review. By that stage, the programme, described as an “abject failure” by the Commons defence committee, was running seven years late. The MoD has faced repeated criticisms of its management of large contracts. MPs on the cross party public accounts committee said in November that the system of defence procurement was “broken” and they feared that overspends would eat up the £16.5bn extra in government money allocated last year. Current concerns centre on the introduction of the £5.5bn Ajax heavy armoured vehicle, which has been plagued by serious noise and vibration problems that its manufacturers are struggling to fix. Soldiers were put at risk of harm in testing, the defence procurement minister Jeremy Quin admitted last month. But problems with financial management at the MoD date back many years, including to Labour’s time in government. Delays and overspends during Labour’s time in office plagued the development of RAF Nimrod spy planes, cancelled by the Conservatives shortly after taking office in 2010. Waste on the programme is included in Labour’s dossier at a cost of £3.7bn, the largest single item identified. Also highlighted are £2.8bn of overspends relating to the development of the Queen Elizabeth and Prince of Wales aircraft carriers. The cost of building the Royal Navy’s biggest ever ships soared from an initial estimate of £3.9bn – when the project was commissioned under Labour in 2007 – to £6.4bn. Labour said it would commission the NAO to conduct an across-the-board audit of MoD waste, and make the department subject to a spending regime enforced by a newly created Office for Value for Money. “Reforming the department will not be easy, but this report takes a crucial first step,” Healey added. In response, the Ministry of Defence said it was “serious about investing in Defence modernisation” and said it was prepared to take “tough decisions to replace old equipment and halt programmes that no longer fit requirements” even if it meant writing off spending.It’s safe to say that it’s not a happy new year for Elizabeth Holmes, the founder of Theranos and – following a guilty verdict on four of 11 charges in a California court this week – a convicted fraudster. Holmes, you may remember, promised her devices could diagnose a plethora of health problems from a pinprick of your blood, gaining coverage from the media throughout the 2010s. We now know the technology Holmes hawked to investors, the media and the general public was seriously flawed. Theranos was founded in 2003 and collapsed in 2018, following a Wall Street Journal report by John Carreyrou that highlighted issues with the company’s test results. In court, Holmes was acquitted on three charges connected to patients who received erroneous test results, but as the Guardian’s Kari Paul writes, the case “marks a milestone for Silicon Valley – an industry that has for years evaded accountability in its pervasive culture of ‘fake it till you make it’ that encourages founders to make big promises, often with little proof.” British entrepreneur and investor Vikas Shah describes Theranos as “a very expensive canary in a coalmine. For the last decade, we’ve seen investors pile money into [unproven] business time and time again.” Such investment begets a vicious circle, in which the press and public play their own roles. Big money raises for hot new companies are fundamentally more interesting to journalists than dull business developments. We cover them enthusiastically (Forbes called Holmes the “next Steve Jobs”), which allows those companies in turn to raise more cash. Some companies even get to the point of publicly listing with great fanfare, then flopping as the share price sinks – often on the day they launch. It’s a pattern that’s happened too many times to mention, yet we still fall for it. I’m also minded to think of Holmes’ business, and others like it, in light of the manifesto of a relaunched WIRED magazine, published this week by recently arrived editor Gideon Lichfield. WIRED, of course, was a techno-utopian booster when launched in 1993. It heralded tech’s excellence, and captured the spirit of its time: a Jetsons-like promise for the future of the world, carried on tech’s broad back. Since then, we’ve all gone through the looking-glass. I often say I’m a tech-sceptic tech reporter, because like many I’ve been jaded by successive scandals and endless “jam tomorrow” promises of the likes of Theranos. More generally, many of us have become ground down by tech’s promise to radically rewrite our future, only to find that it’s little more than a rebranding of the past imbalances, designed to supplant one controlling power with another. The liberation of the media from a small cabal of editors resulted in the torrent of fake news and the polarisation of our planet on the likes of Facebook. What was meant to be a decapitation of the old leaders and a replacement with a flatter hierarchy actually just entrenched the power of the old guard, and made social media companies more powerful. The promise of removing the gatekeepers in the old world of entertainment has done that to a certain extent, but has ended up making Alphabet, parent company of YouTube and one of the world’s richest firms, even richer – all while a phalanx of creators produce content for free. Even within the creator economy, the idea of a democratising force didn’t end up that way. 96.5% of YouTubers don’t make enough to break the US poverty line, according to one analysis, while TikTok disburses only around five per cent of its revenue to the people who produce its content. All of which is to say: don’t believe the hype. Tech companies overpromise and underdeliver. They’ve spent decades doing it. They’re continuing to do it. Yet Lichfield’s essay is an interesting one, because it discourages us from thinking simply of things as wholly positive or wholly negative. After years of yo-yoing from tech idealism to tech scepticism, we shouldn’t immediately discount the promise technology has to reinvent our lives. “We’re at what feels like an inflection point in the recent history of technology, when various binaries that have long been taken for granted are being called into question,” he writes. It’s worth looking at the Theranos story through that lens. Yes, the company appears to have exaggerated or invented many of its claims. But there are a range of tech-first companies actually doing miraculous things in the field of medicine and diagnostics. The fact we’re able to shoulder the burden of the omicron variant of coronavirus is largely down to the likes of techno-utopian companies BioNTech basically inventing new techniques to manufacture vaccines at a scale never before seen. Tech overpromises, and tech coverage often too readily repeats unlikely claims. But technology is still significant. For every tech bro trying to rebrand PDFs as “literature NFTs” (which has more than a hint of Uber rebranding the bus), there are people who are doing legitimately exciting things. “The exciting part is we are genuinely at a time when technology is doing incredible things,” says Shah. “It’s not about being anti-utopian, but it’s about asking sensible questions. Is something fair and reasonable?” Healthy scepticism is no bad thing, then. It’s what keeps the vast majority of society from buying into the so-far illusory promise of Web3, another gleaming vision of the tech-enabled future that promises to decentralise control, but so far as resulted in a handful of people getting filthy rich by selling cartoonish JPGs. It’s what protects you from the endless number of scams and thefts that are dominating the world of NFTs at present. For years we have too readily accepted what tech founders and leaders tell us without thinking: “Is this really realistic?” Now, we’re running the risk of slipping too far in the opposite direction. The new challenge is striking the balance between the two. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.A new study from the University of Exeter has found skateboarding in middle age helps with mental health issues such as depression. We would like to hear from middle-aged skateboarders about their experiences. What does it mean to you and what are the benefits? What advice would you give to people who want to try skateboarding for the first time? Share your photos and experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Brighton have signed the Poland midfielder Kacper Kozlowski, who last summer became the youngest player to play at a European Championship. The 18-year-old has joined from Pogon Szczecin for £8m on a contract to June 2026 but will go straight on loan to the Belgian club Royale Union St-Gilloise. Kozlowski made history when, aged 17 years and 246 days, he came on for Poland against Spain at Euro 2020, breaking a record set less than a week earlier by England’s Jude Bellingham. “His style of play suits us and our style,” said Brighton’s manager, Graham Potter. “During my time here, we have done very well in recruiting players for the future and Kacper is a similar signing. “He will initially head out on loan, as it is important for him to continue his development, and he is keen to continue playing regularly. We will be watching with interest, as he is a very exciting young talent.” Kozlowski made his first-team debut for Pogon aged 15 years and 215 days as a last-minute substitute and has played six times for Poland. He was unable to train for almost six months from January 2020 after suffering injuries, including to his spine, in a car crash. Bournemouth are set to beat off Premier League competition to sign Fleetwood Town’s James Hill. The England Under-20 defender, who was called up to the England Under-21 squad last year before having to withdraw through injury, attracted numerous bids in this window amid interest from elite clubs across Europe, with Barcelona sending a scout to watch the 19-year-old in November. But Bournemouth are poised to land the centre-back, whose father, Matt, played for Bristol City, Preston and Sheffield United. The fee will represent a Fleetwood club record, surpassing the £1.25m they received for Jamie Vardy in 2012. Hill will undergo a medical on Wednesday and is set to be joined at Bournemouth by the Manchester United full-back Ethan Laird, who excelled for Swansea during the first half of the season. Laird is expected to join on loan. Bournemouth allowed the experienced centre-back Steve Cook to join Nottingham Forest on Tuesday after a decade at the club.Preet Chandi, thought to be the first woman of colour to complete a solo crossing on Antarctica, has finished her expedition to the south pole almost a week ahead of schedule. Chandi or “Polar Preet”, endured temperatures of -50C as she skied 700 miles across Antarctica in 40 days, seven hours and three minutes, narrowly missing out on setting a new world record by a woman for the trek. She finished just behind the time set by Johanna Davidsson of Sweden, who finished in 38 days, 23 hours and five minutes in 2016. Chandi, 32, is now the third-fastest female solo skier for the expedition behind Davidsson and Britain’s Hannah McKeand, who recorded a time of 39 days, nine hours and 33 minutes in 2006. She is also the first person to reach the south pole on foot in two years. Chandi, a British Army physiotherapist who lives in Derby, said it was surreal to reach her goal: “I made it to the south pole where it’s snowing. I’m feeling so many emotions right now. I knew nothing about the polar world three years ago and it feels so surreal to finally be here. It was tough getting here and I want to thank everybody for their support. “This expedition was always about so much more than me. I want to encourage people to push their boundaries and to believe in themselves, and I want you to be able to do it without being labelled a rebel. “No matter where you are from or where your start line is, everybody starts somewhere.” As well as freezing temperatures, Chandi endured wind speeds of up to 60mph and battled whiteouts while pulling a 90kg sled across sastrugi, parallel wave-like ridges on the hard snow caused by winds. She also suffered from exhaustion towards the end of the journey, as well as a persistent cough and sickness. Setting off on 24 November from Hercules Inlet, Chandi aimed to complete her trek in 45 days, carrying enough rations for 48 days. In the end she finished five days ahead of schedule, covering a daily average distance of about 17 miles. She spent years training for the trek, having previously completed a 27-day expedition on the ice cap in Greenland and taking part in ultramarathons, including the gruelling Marathon des Sables across the Sahara. Chandi said she hoped her journey would inspire young people, women and those from minority-ethnic backgrounds. Speaking to the Guardian during her training for the trek, she said people did not expect an Asian woman to attempt such an endeavour. “I am an Asian woman; I’m not the image that people expect to see out there,” she said. “People say the outdoors is for everyone and yes, it is. But if you come from a community that is not involved in it at all, or you don’t see anybody that looks like you doing it, it can be really hard.” After completing the trek, she plans to set up an adventure grant to help more women fund expeditions in what is often a male-dominated arena. “I have been told ‘no’ on many occasions and to ‘just do the normal thing’, but we create our own normal,” she said. “You are capable of anything you want.”Spicy and ear-tinglingly sour, this classic Thai soup is just what I fancy at this time of year: it’s something to cut through the pleasant, festive fug and reset the senses. Though shellfish are a common ingredient, this soup is almost endlessly adaptable, even for vegans: as long as it vibrates with flavour – aromatic lime leaves and lemongrass, warming galangal and fresh citrus – you’re on the right track. Prep 12 min Cook 15 min Serves 4 16 raw shell-on king prawns 1 dash vegetable oil 4 fresh makrut lime leaves 2 lemongrass stalks 2 thick slices galangal 2 bird’s eyes chillies 1 tbsp palm sugar, or soft brown sugar Juice of 1½ limes 2 tbsp fish sauce 1 handful coriander or Thai basil leaves, to serve 1 A note on the prawns You’ll need raw, shell-on prawns here. Frozen are fine, so long as they’re defrosted and soft enough to shell, but if your prawns are very large (or very small), adjust the quantities accordingly. If you can find only shelled prawns, use a litre of light fish or chicken stock (or even just water), and start from step 3. 2 Make a stock with the prawn shells Shell the prawns, retaining the shells and heads, and set aside the meat for the time being. Heat the oil in a frying pan over a medium-high flame, then fry the shells and heads, stirring regularly, until they turn a vivid pink. Add a litre of water, bring up to a lively simmer, then strain into a clean pan and discard the spent shells. 3 Prepare the aromatics Roughly tear the lime leaves (avoid using the dried kind here: frozen are fine, though, but fresh are infinitely preferable and fairly widely available). Bruise the lemongrass by pressing down on it with the flat of a large knife, then cut it into roughly 5cm lengths. Cut two thick slices of galangal – this ginger-like root is sold in specialist south-east Asian food stores and some large supermarkets, but use ginger if you can’t source any. 4 Infuse the stock Add the lime leaves, lemongrass and galangal to the stock pan, bring it back up to a simmer, then leave to bubble gently and infuse for five minutes. Meanwhile, finely slice the chillies, leaving the pith and seeds inside (depending on your taste for spice, add more, if you like). Slide the chillies into the broth and leave the stock to blip away for a couple of minutes longer. 5 Add the prawns Turn down the heat to the barest simmer, add the prawn meat to the broth and cook for about a minute, until just pink (be careful not to let the stock boil or to cook the prawns for too long, or they will turn rubbery). Take off the hob, stir in the sugar, lime juice and fish sauce, then taste and adjust the seasoning as necessary. 6 Serve with lots of fresh herbs Ladle the soup into bowls, making sure the prawns are evenly divided, then tear in the fresh herbs in generous quantities and serve immediately. It’s not traditional, but you can bulk out the soup by adding some cooked rice noodles if you want to make it a more substantial dish, or add other vegetables such as chopped tomatoes, mushrooms or whatever else takes your fancy. 7 Alternatives to shellfish If you’re not a shellfish fan, make this with good chicken stock, and add torn cooked chicken (or pork or turkey) at the end, just to warm it through. There’s also a more modern, richer variation of tom yum in which coconut or evaporated milk is added at the end of cooking: if that appeals, make only 750ml stock, and stir in 300ml coconut milk with the seasonings just before serving. 8 … or to veganise To make this vegan, use vegetable stock or water, and add two round shallots, peeled and cut into wedges, along with the aromatics in step 3. Add two deseeded and roughly chopped tomatoes and 200g chopped oyster, shiitake and/or chestnut mushrooms with the chillies. Vegan versions of fish sauce are available, and I’d recommend getting hold of some for this dish. 9 Other flavourings Vegan or not, you can also add some firm diced tofu instead of the prawns; I think it’s also rather nice with those fried tofu puffs sold in specialist south-east Asian food shops. Pick up a jar of nam prik pao while you’re there: this rich, sweet chilli paste, also available in vegetarian form, is a great addition to tom yum, and a great many other dishes besides. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoFrom the age of eight, I attended a little boarding school on the Derbyshire-Staffordshire border where I’d often get in trouble on a Sunday afternoon. The teachers would leave us to roam the edge of the grounds where we were supposed to pass time making fires, toasting marshmallows or playing cricket but my habit was to set out over the fences and stiles into the landscape and often, much to the teachers’ chagrin, no one knew where to find me. That was the point. To stand on unfamiliar ground and, for a moment, feel the world as something new brought with it a feeling I would crave and it formed a habit that stuck with me. By my mid-20s, I was a committed pedestrian, buoyed up by a privileged encounter on the streets of Whitechapel with east London’s resident visionary, Iain Sinclair, who warned against the underground as a way of getting around the city. He likened its subterranean networks to rabbit warrens that would cut us off from instinct and make it hard for us to know where (or who) we really are. Shuffling on fast feet between Aldgate East and Soho, or kicking back for a languorous Sunday stroll up to Parliament Hill, that was an insight I carried with me as I stumbled over Roman ruins and hidden histories of romantic poetry. Making sense of the city’s vast topography, walking became a way of life that, in turn, gave shape to an itinerant decade and I would ease myself into new locations the world over by setting out on foot to get lost and then find myself again in the backstreets of Ahmedabad or Isfhanan, Ramallah or Bari. And then beyond the towns and cities and beyond the scale of human history, I’d walk in the foothills of the Himalayas or on the desert plains of the Jordan Valley and find new depths of experience. I’d watch the monsoon end in thick fog rising up the mountainside near Dharamsala or see the seasons laid out in space at the point where the fresh air of Ein-Al-Hilwe (“sweet natural spring”) presses up close against the heat and dust of Jericho. These were landscapes to fall in love in and I did, discovering while walking a feeling of transcendence that moved me beyond the narrow quadrant of my own identity-story, nurturing a feeling of connection with something deeper in myself, and with the person beside me, and with the planet that contains us. By the time I returned to England in my mid-30s, I had got used to looking at walking as a way to cultivate a feeling of belonging. Back in Derbyshire, clearing out the house I grew up in, I was taken in by a community of Kashmiri hikers, the Kramblers, who had been thinking along similar lines. Home now in Rotherham, Sheffield, Salford, Oldham and Rochdale, each one of them was remembering a childhood in Mirpur where walking in the mountains had been an activity as natural as popping to the shop to pick up a pint of milk. Yet decades inhabiting an immigrant geography in northern England had turned them into dwellers of the cities and the suburbs – the “ghettoes” – cut off from the rugged rural landscapes that surrounded them. In response, and to reclaim something lost, they had begun to organise themselves, every Sunday, to get out together across the peaks and valleys of Edale, Dovedale, Malham, Monsal, Kinder Scout – to stand up to unconscious narratives about who belongs where and what land belongs to whom. They began to cultivate, by walking, a sense of belonging with the landscape of England that lies deeper than the surface layer of racist nationalism. And for me, walking with the Kramblers became a way of piecing together worlds torn apart by geopolitics. That experience strengthened a sense of belonging that, by the time I established my own home, in the landscape of south Devon, I knew could be cultivated here, too – along the coastal paths and forest floors that surround the River Dart. Here, walking now serves me (and my one-year old puppy, Dharma) as an essential daily practice. The world outside our front door is a refuge from a day of successive Zoom calls or from the intensity of a writing deadline. It’s a place where I can get out of my head. Where he and I can remember where we are (and who we are), recover a sense of our equilibrium. We watch the seasons change and sense the movement of the sun and the light around the moon. We witness the earth and when I get home I make a cup of tea. The flowers of spring can feel just like a miracle. We walk the same path, day after day, but every minute of every hour can feel like new. How to do it The Ramblers Association has a tool for finding local walking groups and All The Elements is a volunteer-run library of organisations which help diverse communities enjoy the great outdoors. Gay Outdoor Club is another great resource for finding local LGBTQ+ groups and events to help you connect with people who want to run, hike and ramble. When it comes to finding new routes, National Trails can show you the way or look at the National Trust’s survey of Britain’s 100 Favourite Walks from 2018. If you want to try being an armchair walker, read Frédéric Gros’s A Philosophy of Walking or London Orbital by Iain Sinclair.I still have the mixtape that transformed me, at 14, from a casual consumer of whatever music my friends liked into a zealous partisan of punk rock. It’s an odd little cassette: 60 minutes of music, cohesive enough to suggest that punk rock was a thing, but variegated enough to suggest that could be just about anything. There was, apparently, a whole ocean of music more or less like this stuff. All I had to do was dive in. Punk rock is, perhaps, an unusually fractious genre: for decades, punks argued about what – and who – was or wasn’t punk. They drew lines, divided subgenres into sub-subgenres, and sometimes performed rituals of excommunication. (Green Day, probably the most popular punk group of all time, were banned from their local club, and denounced as enemies of the movement by Maximum Rocknroll, the definitive American punk fanzine.) For a while, punk rock was all I cared about, but in the years that followed I was pleased to discover that punk wasn’t quite as unusual as I first thought: every musical genre is in some sense a community of musicians and listeners, which means that every genre is also a tribe, defined by tribal rules of inclusion and exclusion. And so when I set out to write a history of popular music, I decided to go genre by genre, hoping to explain how these communities endured, evolved and splintered. In Major Labels, I settled on seven “major” genres: rock’n’roll, R&amp;B, country, punk, hip-hop, dance music and pop. Of course, each of these contains multitudes, and one of the pleasures of writing the book was the chance to read, or revisit, countless works of single-minded musical scholarship: books that dive deep into a genre, or a scene, or a sound. This is one of the paradoxes of musical fandom: the more you cherish the ability to listen to a wide range of styles, the more grateful you should be to the musicians stubborn enough to find something they loved and stick to it. And the more grateful you should be, too, to the writers who were imaginative and perceptive enough to notice that something was going on, and write about it. 1. Deep Down in the Ghetto by Roger D Abrahams In 1964, a folklorist based in Philadelphia managed a neat trick: he published one of the most important books ever written about hip-hop, long before hip-hop actually existed. In this classic study, Abrahams records and analyses a trove of mid-century Black oral literature, setting down street-corner rhymes, tall tales and boasts – some of which are as violent, and as bawdy, as the rap records that shocked the world in the decades to come. 2. The Nashville Sound by Paul Hemphill Hemphill was not exactly a Nashville insider, which explains part of the charm of this book, published in 1970: he captured the genius and the weirdness of a country-music industry that was just starting to think of itself as such. Like virtually everyone who came after him, he noted that the genre seemed split between “traditionalists” and “the new breed”. He noticed that the town was full of performers who were “modernising the simple music of their rural southern childhoods and blurring the distinction between country and pop music” – and of course it still is. 3. Like Punk Never Happened by Dave Rimmer A very strange book: a sharp treatise on the aesthetics of pop, masquerading as a just-in-time biography of Boy George and Culture Club. In fact by the time this book was published, in 1985, Culture Club’s time at the top of the charts was pretty much over. Knowing this adds some wistfulness to Rimmer’s narrative. And it adds some context to his argument, which is that, in the aftermath of the punk explosion, a new “pop” sensibility emerged, rebelling against the punk-rock rebellion by steadfastly refusing to be rebellious. So what if it didn’t last? Who says great pop is supposed to last? 4. I’m With the Band by Pamela Des Barres When this book was published, at the peak of the hair-metal craze, some readers might have mistaken it for a gossipy compendium of backstage tales. The book’s subtitle is Confessions of a Groupie, but the main draw is the way that Des Barres, sometimes drawing from old diary entries, charts her evolution from a curious consumer of rock ’n’ roll records to an important participant in the scene that helped create the myth of the rock star. Her writing is precise and perceptive, affectionate but unsentimental. In one memorable passage, she remembers listening to Led Zeppelin II while hanging out in Jimmy Page’s hotel room. “I had to comment on every solo,” she writes, “and even though I believed the drum solo in Moby Dick went on endlessly, I held my tongue and went on pressing his velvet trousers and sewing buttons on to his satin jacket.” 5. The Death of Rhythm and Blues by Nelson George For much of the 1980s, George was a music editor at Billboard magazine, which gave him extraordinary insight not only into the genre of R&amp;B but the industry that nurtured it. This classic study is both a history and a manifesto – and also, more than 30 years later, a time capsule. George writes tenderly about the Black business owners who supported R&amp;B, and sceptically about the way that 80s R&amp;B singers (including Michael Jackson and Prince) found pop success, sometimes seeming to leave the genre behind. Was that really progress? 6. Black Noise by Tricia Rose This book, published in 1994, was one of the first academic investigations of hip-hop, although, like many of the books that came afterward, it was not entirely celebratory. Rose was devoted to hip-hop, but she was also devoted to the idea of hip-hop as a vehicle for resistance and emancipation, which means she can’t help but notice the ways in which it often failed to live up to these ideals. In describing (and sometimes decrying) the genre’s tendency to focus on “male predatory sexual behaviour”, and its existence within a network of white-owned, multinational businesses, she anticipated the way hip-hop would continue to delight and frustrate its biggest fans for decades to come. 7. Energy Flash by Simon Reynolds An enthusiastic and often contagious history of dance music, with a focus on pleasure: Reynolds conjures up not only how house and techno (and their many offshoots) evolved, but what it really feels like to love them. This feeling has not always been entirely organic: Reynolds pays close attention to the relationship between dance music and drugs, explaining how often, when the high changes, the beat changes, too. 8. Lords of Chaos by Michael Moynihan and Didrik Soderlind An intense, scary book about an intense, scary scene: black metal, which in the 1990s took heavy metal’s obsession with darkness and evil to its logical conclusion. Moynihan and Soderlind chronicle a world of murder, hatred and madness; even if you don’t have any interest in the bands (or in the 2018 Jonas Åkerlund film based on this book), you may come away with a new appreciation for what it means for music to be truly extreme. 9. Love Saves the Day by Tim Lawrence How do you capture a party? Often, you don’t: the revellers go home, the DJ packs up, people move on. But in this careful work of excavation, Lawrence shows how, in 1970s New York, casual get-togethers spawned glamorous nightclubs, and eventually an entire musical subculture, reconstructing the prehistory of disco, and gesturing toward all the sounds and scenes that came afterward. 10. Girls to the Front by Sara Marcus Riot grrrl was at least two things at once: a musical movement, which bloomed briefly in the 1990s, and a literary movement, sparked by fanzines, which jammed together punk rock and feminism, challenging and changing the identities of both of them. This book is an indispensable cultural history that emphasises both the strangeness and the sensibleness of riot grrrl, an unlikely movement that seems, in retrospect, inevitable. Major Labels by Kelefa Sanneh is published by Canongate. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Sony has revealed plans to start an electric car company, making it the latest electronics manufacturer to target the automotive sector. The Japanese tech firm is “exploring a commercial launch” of electric vehicles, and will launch a new company, Sony Mobility Inc, in the spring, its chairman and president, Kenichiro Yoshida, told a news conference before the Consumer Electronics Show in the US. Yoshida on Wednesday presented a prototype sport utility vehicle, the Vision-S 02, which uses the same electric vehicle platform as the previously announced Vision-S 01, a coupe that began testing on public roads in Europe from December 2020. “With our imaging and sensing, cloud, 5G and entertainment technologies combined with our content mastery, we believe Sony is well positioned as a creative entertainment company to redefine mobility,” he said. An increasing number of consumer electronics companies have looked into targeting the burgeoning electric car market. The success of the US electric carmaker Tesla has made it into one of the highest-valued companies in the world, and has spurred a host of potential imitators, ranging from traditional automotive companies to startups. Tokyo-listed shares in Sony Group rose by 3.7% on Wednesday, outperforming flat Japanese benchmark indices. Electric cars present fewer barriers to entry for potential new entrants because they have fewer moving parts, while autonomous cars (which are still in development) are expected to open a new opportunity to sell entertainment and services to passengers. Sony was the first company to commercialise the use of the lithium ion battery, which was invented by academics at the University of Oxford, and are now used by electric cars. The technology allowed Sony to become a leader in portable consumer electronics, such as camcorders, CD players and laptops. The tech company’s operations span from consumer electronics such as the PlayStation games console, smartphones and TV sets, to entertainment including music, games, and film production. It also has a semiconductors business that already targets the automotive sector. Apple, the consumer electronics firm that this week became the first company to hit a $3tn valuation, is aiming to produce a self-driving car by 2025, according to a November report by Bloomberg. Yet CES has also highlighted that the traditional manufacturers will not give up their market share easily. On Monday, Mercedes-Benz revealed a concept car that it said could cover 620 miles on a single charge, enough for a journey from Brighton on England’s south coast to Inverness in northern Scotland without stopping.When I was 21, a man considered to be an authority on literature suggested I not become a writer. It was a few days before I graduated from college with a degree in creative writing. The National Book award-winning writer who had taught our senior fiction seminar told me, quite gently, to give up on my dreams. I can picture so clearly that room where we sat together, him behind a desk, sunlight streaming in from the windows behind him. He was not happy to see me when I walked in the door. I was young and punk and weird and had big hair. He was 55, bearded, grey and bespectacled. All semester, he had barely critiqued my stories, remaining quiet in class as my peers rattled off suggestions and ideas. He returned printouts of my work with just a few scribbles added. And now here I was visiting him in his office, ready for the moment where he would tell me where I could improve, what paths he thought I should take. He asked me what I wanted to do after graduation, and I told him I wanted to write. He said: “You know, honey, not everyone makes it as a writer.” I walked out of his office, dazed and discouraged. I suppose I had wanted him to say: “You’re a genius. Let me make a few calls and get you an agent. Or a job that will set you on your way.” Perhaps he thought I didn’t have talent. Or, perhaps he saw me as frivolous. I was writing stories about sex and relationships and so-called domestic matters. I remember I wrote an entire short story about a woman waiting to get her period. He wrote big, sprawling novels that were about soldiers and war and violence. Maybe he didn’t enjoy teaching; he had never seemed excited to be there. To discourage someone from even trying, though? To say “give up” before I’d even gotten started? Writing is holy, as my friend Patricia Lockwood says. It is true that it is hard to make it as a writer, or any kind of artist, for that matter. But if you love to write, you should write forever. For years I have used this story as inspiration. He told me I couldn’t, and yet somehow I did anyway. He was an older man, negative and condescending. I’ll show him, I thought. But it is only recently that I realised that moment was actually radically freeing. I was probably not suited to be a writer in the way he thought was important. But that did not mean I was not suited to be a writer. In a way, he gave me a fresh start, a new year. The first of January of the rest of my life. In fact, he was telling me the truth as he knew it. The career path of a fiction writer in 1993 was defined but also limited. Achieving a master of fine arts degree, perhaps adjunct teaching, submitting to literary journals, the New Yorker, Granta,the Paris Review, every little journal across America, applying for grants and residencies, maybe working toward tenure. A lot of it sounded like the kind of work that I wouldn’t be any good at. But that was what was available at the time. There were no obvious workarounds coming out of the academic world. What I took away from him was that I would have to carve my own path. No problem, easy-peasy. I only had to fail a hundred times to get there, get terrible reviews until I got good reviews, go broke once or twice (OK thrice), toss out any idea of achieving conventional life goals, and essentially edit my very existence in service of being a writer. But I was that, after all, even if it took more than a decade to arrive there. I took dozens of jobs I could quit easily – and often did. I waited tables, tended bars and temped in a blur of offices across the US. I made so many mistakes, but I was always keeping my eye on the prize: the time to read and write and think. No matter what, I always found my way back to writing. That’s the part that kept me sane all along. Not selling a book or publishing a book but making the book in the first place. Finally, I landed in New York City. I worked in advertising, writing bits of terrible copy to keep the lights on. I went to readings and studied other writers. I started to give readings myself. I made a few zines. The whole time I wasn’t thinking about literary credibility. I just wanted to write because it was the thing I loved best. I was building this creative life without consciously knowing it. I found my way to the internet in the late 90s. I started as someone with a blog. It wasn’t the way you were supposed to do it at the time, but it was the way that made the most sense to me. There was no splashy short story debut in the New Yorker. But I attracted a readership, and worked my way into writing essays, more zines and then a short book with a small press, and then very blindly and naively writing a linked story collection, my first with a big press, 13 years after I had graduated from college. Things have gotten a little easier as time has gone on, but still I never relax. There is no coasting in a creative life; we are constantly adjusting, altering, tending our paths. And there’s a lot of insecurity: about money, your identity, your place in the world, your reviews, your relevance. A few things have helped me along the way: ideas or actions to continue stimulating my growth as a person and an artist. Travelling is one. I’ve driven across country, caught trains to different cities and ridden my bike all over New York City in search of a new cafe or a sculpture garden I hadn’t seen before. Even just walking everywhere I can has been helpful, eyes up, paying attention, watching, listening. And I have read constantly, outside my genre as well as within it. Reading is the surest path to understanding. It leads to a fullness within us. I focused on friendships, too, becoming part of a cohort I didn’t necessarily know I was developing – I have always just been so excited to meet other writers. I went to readings and drinks after literary conferences, sent emails and liked tweets because I wanted to. The extra gift is that these people end up being your best cheerleaders and critics alike. I found the ones who would tell me the truth, and who wanted me to succeed – and I have tried to be that person for them, as well. I looked for role models, too, when I was starting out. I looked up to the writers who led the way by being inventive in form or genre, or giving voice to characters of all kinds, or who smashed through glass ceilings or knocked down gates. I paid attention to them and was inspired by them. I could never have planned for it to work out the way it did. I have written eight books and will probably write at least a few more. I live a quiet life with my dog in a small house with a nice back yard where I have finally stopped killing everything I plant. I treasure my friendships and the endless pile of notebooks I keep filling, marvelling occasionally at how there are always, somehow, more words in the world. There is always a fresh start when I open a new notebook. It is always 1 January when I turn to the first page. I recently turned 50, nearly 30 years since that (now deceased) old teacher of mine told me I probably shouldn’t bother. I’m old enough to realise that there is one more important part to carving out your creative life: honouring your successes no matter the size. And honouring the bad moments too. Laying your burdens down. Building this writing life has always been about recognising what was holding me back so I could move on. One writer told me no. I honour his rejection. He said no, but I said yes. • I Came All This Way to Meet You by Jami Attenberg is published by Profile Books (£14.99). To order a copy for £13.04, go to guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Norman Mailer’s son has denied reports that the late writer has been “cancelled” over his controversialist views. Earlier this week, the journalist Michael Wolff, author of the Trump White House exposé Fire and Fury, claimed in an article for The Ankler that a planned collection of Mailer’s political writings to mark the centennial of his birth next year had been cancelled by Random House. According to Wolff, one of the reasons for the cancellation was “a junior staffer’s objection to the title of Mailer’s 1957 essay, The White Negro”. But the New York Times has now reported that the collection, including unpublished writings, has been acquired by Skyhorse, the independent press which also picked up Woody Allen’s memoir after it was dropped by Hachette, and Blake Bailey’s biography of Philip Roth after it was dropped by WW Norton. John Buffalo Mailer, told the paper that his father’s longtime publisher Random House had declined to make an offer for the book. While he said that “we would have liked to have done this book with them”, he speculated that the publisher turned it down “because this is the first commercial book of Norman’s that’s going to come out in the era we’re living in, and there’s going to be a lot of questions”. “They didn’t feel they were the right house to do this book right now,” he told the New York Times. “I don’t think they have any interest in trying to cancel Norman Mailer. You can’t cancel Norman Mailer.” Random House said in a statement that it was “factually incorrect that Random House cancelled an upcoming book of essays by Norman Mailer” and that the book was never under contract. Literary agent Andrew Wylie, representing the Mailer estate, told the New York Times that “Random House is proud to publish Norman Mailer, and intends to promote his work significantly for the centennial, in tandem with the publication by Skyhorse of the anthology”. Mailer died aged 84 in 2007. He was the recipient of two Pulitzer prizes, for his 1968 account of a peace march on the Pentagon, The Armies of the Night, and for his 1979 work The Executioner’s Song, about the life and death of a criminal, Gary Gilmore. Controversial and pugnacious, he was also known for stabbing his second wife Adele Morales with a penknife, puncturing her cardiac sac.Steven Toast is the Fellini of failure. He’s an actor who can empty a theatre faster than a teargas canister. He’s a more disastrous on-set presence than an Omicron outbreak. And – after six years – he brazenly swaggers back on to our screens this week, proving that it isn’t just a good man you can’t keep down. BBC Two’s Toast of Tinseltown is an incredibly welcome return for one of the best comic creations of the last 10 years. Toast (Matt Berry) has relocated to Hollywood, following three series of Toast of London – which saw him tailspinning through demeaning bit parts, mortifying scandals and doomed auditions since its launch in 2013. Now, Toast believes he will finally get his due, and the great wrong of his omission from the acting pantheon will be righted. There is one tiny problem, though: the acting pantheon doesn’t want him. He doesn’t even make it to the opening credits of Toast of Tinseltown’s first episode before a furious Larry David is yelling: “Are you serious? Is this guy a real actor?” To see Toast in action is to be treated to the enthralling spectacle of a man who unshakeably believes that he is one of the finest thespians of his generation, despite being the recipient of worst actor awards. For the whole of the first series, rotten-veg-hurling protesters greet him upon his entrance to the stage door of the production he’s appearing in – dubbed London’s worst play. He gets the kind of radioactive reviews that have sunk the careers of better men, has been cancelled by the literal PC police and was once buried alive by a maverick director. Toast wants to be the Milk Tray man, but ends up as Basildon Bond. He’s the ultimate fish out of water, an analogue actor in the digital age. Even his rivalries are the stuff of Greek myth – eternal conflicts played out by idiots. As the screen and stage work dries up, he is reduced to cornball voiceovers where he is tormented by the millennial inanities of hipster sound guys Danny Bear (Tim Downie) and Clem Fandango (Shazad Latif). Toast facing down these Urban Outfitters rejects who have him read out obscene hearing aid adverts, honking horns and whinnying like a horse offers a joy seldom seen on TV. You watch as the generation gap becomes a chasm. But the real joy is his ultimate rivalry with Ray Purchase (Harry Peacock)– a taller, leaner, more handsome Toast, who looks like a Reader’s Digest knitwear model. In the first episode of Toast of Tinseltown, the ludicrously OTT competition for a movie role and the affections of Mrs Purchase (Tracy-Ann Oberman) has Toast karate-chopping desks in half, with Purchase’s moustache writhing so furiously it’s in danger of leaping clear off his face. The raw physical presence of Peacock’s scenery-chewing Purchase bumping up against Toast’s unbridled contempt and hauteur make it an unmissable watch. Berry’s role as Toast is responsible for the best performances of his career. Some say that Matt Berry always plays Matt Berry and, admittedly, if you’re looking for the range of Daniel Day-Lewis, you will be disappointed. But this is to miss the point – Berry’s work is best seen as a single piece of performance art, a career-long excavation of a very specific kind of near-extinct masculinity – all Old Spice, coiffured hair and hammy glares. So of course there are deep echoes of previous characters: Doctor Sanchez in Darkplace, Douglas Reynholm in The IT Crowd, his perma-foiled suitor from Snuff Box. Toast, though, is the apex predator of Matt Berry characters. The rest are merely pale imitations. This is especially true given what a showcase Toast is for Berry’s unique musical output. Many episodes feature absurdist musical numbers that see him do things like duet with a moustachioed child version of himself about the shame of visiting a sex worker. Then there’s the surprisingly catchy masonic ritual ditty On the Square. Given the influence of co-writer/creator Arthur Mathews, there are characters and scenes that wouldn’t be out of place in Father Ted – although the prospect of a Ted/Toast cinematic universe seems likely to remain a pipe dream. Dreams are sometimes all we have, though, and the saga of Steven Toast is all about one man’s dream to achieve the recognition he manifestly does not deserve. That thick-eared tenacity is the main thing that makes him relatable. If you’ve ever felt out of your depth at work, bewildered by some aspect of youth culture or unjustly overlooked then all of a sudden, he starts to make sense. He’ll never quit. Deny it all you like, but there’s a bit of Toast in all of us.The DP World Tour – the recently rebranded European Tour – will grant permission to players to take part in the controversial Saudi International next month following weeks of intense negotiations. By the Monday deadline, between 30 and 40 members of the tour had requested releases to play in the Asian Tour-run event near Jeddah, from 3 February. It is sponsored by the Saudi public investment fund and carries huge appearance fees. Despite speculation of potential bans for European players who compete in the Saudi International, dismissed by some as little more than a cash grab, it is understood they should be informed this week that releases will be granted with conditions relating to future commitments to DP World Tour tournaments. Should those conditions not be met there is scope for disciplinary action, but player power has seemingly won the day. Until now, the Tour has only publicly stated that it is considering each player’s application on merit. The Saudi International has publicised a field including players such as Paul Casey, Tommy Fleetwood, Sergio García, Tyrrell Hatton, Shane Lowry, Henrik Stenson, Ian Poulter and Lee Westwood. All required DP World Tour grace. It remains to be seen how seriously, if at all, Stenson’s Saudi involvement harms his aspirations of being Europe’s 2023 Ryder Cup captain. Whether or not top golfers are independent traders or bound by membership criteria of tours has been the subject of much debate. The tournament was once the domain of the then European Tour, before Saudi Arabia’s attempts to make significant inroads into the professional game, saw them cold-shouldered by that body and the PGA Tour. Saudi Arabia’s hefty financial commitment to golf has included Greg Norman being hired as head of an investment group, which will spearhead lucrative events on the Asian Tour and has aspirations of a breakaway league. Given the finances on offer, player heads have been turned. The PGA Tour has confirmed members could play in the Saudi International if conditions are met, specific to the future staging of the Farmers Insurance Open if played on the same date. There was then an expectancy Europe would follow suit – the Tours have a strategic alliance – but the situation was less straightforward for an organisation which seeks tournament commitments from players in umpteen countries. In theory, the DP World Tour also has more to fear in regards to a talent drain towards a Saudi-backed scheme. It is also expected the DP World Tour has granted a small number of releases pursued by members wanting to feature in the Singapore Open, which sits directly against the Abu Dhabi Championship this month.About this time 28 years ago the star of Swindon Town’s only season in the top flight finally started scoring. Jan Åge Fjørtoft had been signed in the summer of 1993 for a club‑record £1.3m to spearhead Swindon’s attack on the Premier League but he failed to find the net in the first half of the campaign and was on his way out until a goal in an FA Cup third-round replay against Ipswich in January 1994 triggered a dramatic change in his fortunes. But not, alas, in those of Swindon, whose elan going forward could not offset ramshackle defending. The club wound up being relegated after conceding 100 goals, the first top‑flight team in 30 years to reach that undignified milestone and still the only team to do so in the Premier League era. “I almost get tears in my eyes when I talk about my first goal in that January,” says Fjørtoft, a 54-year-old pundit for television channels in Germany and his native Norway, before Swindon play Manchester City in the Cup’s third round on Friday. He cherishes his memories of Swindon and of a season in which he and his team endured harrowing lows while trying, and sometimes succeeding, to play stylish and enterprising football. “We conceded 100 goals, finished bottom and are considered the symbol of a side not doing well in the Premier League but we weren’t a bad side, we were not that far away,” says Fjørtoft. “We were a very good football team with a lot of good players and we were quite confident on the ball. To be fair, we were useless at defending.” Swindon had won promotion to the top flight with such brio that their manager, Glenn Hoddle, was hired by Chelsea, leaving his assistant, John Gorman, to plot their assault on the Premier League. He was determined to stay faithful to their slick passing approach. Signing Fjørtoft was supposed to add a sharper tip to their attack. To be fair, he was useless at first. Swindon did not win until they beat Queens Park Rangers 1-0 in their 16th league match, by which time Fjørtoft, still goalless, had been dropped. “In the first game of the season at Sheffield United [lost 3-1], I got a knock,” says Fjørtoft, bought after four free-scoring seasons with Rapid Vienna. “I had never been injured in my life and that was the start of a bad circle for me. I kept on playing because I was desperate to get that first goal and contribute to our first win. We were suffering heavy losses and it became the first time in my life that I didn’t score goals. I started to doubt myself. When you start losing your self-confidence, you make compromises in the way you play and then you kind of drag yourself further into the dump. By the time of that win against QPR, I was struggling. “Then Christmas Eve of 1993 was the lowest point of my career. I played for Swindon reserves against Wycombe Wanderers reserves on one of these fantastic facilities you have in England with like 12 pitches next to each other. It was cold and windy, I was freezing to death and I was the worst player on the pitch. I remember I came home and opened the door and said dramatically to my wife: ‘Have a look at me now because no one can ever get lower in their football career than I am now.’” Paradoxically, Fjørtoft was thriving on the international stage. But to retain his place in the Norway side for the 1994 World Cup he needed to improve his club form, so he negotiated a loan to Lillestrøm. “I had agreed it with them but then came the Cup game against Ipswich.” Fjørtoft scored in a game Swindon lost 2-1. “The next morning I went into Swindon town centre to get something for my wife and I saw posters for the local paper with the headline ‘Please don’t go, Jan.’ It was all over the place. That was an unbelievable moment.” An amazing transformation took place. Suddenly flush with confidence, Fjørtoft cancelled the loan and became convinced he would open his Premier League account against Tottenham four days later, in Swindon’s 27th league game. “After 20 minutes [the Spurs goalkeeper] Erik Thorstvedt, who was my roommate with the national team, got injured and as he was being carried off I went up to him and screamed ‘Fucking coward!’ because I somehow knew I was going to score my first goal in the Premier League. I thought he wasn’t daring enough to stay on.” Fifteen minutes later Fjørtoft did indeed score, flicking the ball over Colin Calderwood before thrashing it past Thorstvedt’s replacement, Ian Walker. The floodgates opened: in the final 16 games of the season Fjørtoft scored 12 goals, a tally bettered only by Southampton’s Matt Le Tissier. “I developed a very good understanding with Nicky Summerbee, who was one of the best crossers of the ball I played with,” says Fjørtoft. “I used to say I had no clue why I couldn’t score in the first half of the season and then scored for fun in the second half but now, when I look back, I see it’s about that circle you get into with a lack of confidence.” It was not enough to save Swindon. Although they scored more goals than Aston Villa and Coventry, who both finished in the top half, their inability to plug their leaky defence meant they won five of 42 matches. Their heaviest defeat came in March when they lost 7-1 at Newcastle. “We were sitting on the bus on the way home and Shaun Taylor – our captain and warrior – said: ‘Well at least Andy Cole didn’t score.’ And I said: ‘Every other Newcastle player did!’ The next day John Gorman – who I love – came to me and said: ‘Jan, we did some great passing yesterday.’ That sums up our season. We loved our game. We just wanted to play. “You could call it naive, that’s probably the right analysis, but [Gorman] was a romantic. He really loved passes: if we made five passes, it was almost like three points for him and I say that in a positive way. He just loved to play football. I think it’s cool you have guys like that in the game. “The other thing to say is that if we were a team who had played very disciplined and sat back and all that, I’m not sure we would have got more points.”The Women’s Championship club Coventry United have avoided liquidation after an agreement in principle to sell the club’s shares was struck at the 11th hour. The businessman Lewis Taylor, the founder and managing director of the energy company Energy Angels, is poised to take over Coventry, who said on 23 December that they were going into voluntary liquidation. That process, overseen by the accountancy firm BK Plus, was due to be completed on 4 January. But BK Plus said on Wednesday that those instructions were terminated at 4.52pm that day. Thirty players and staff were due to have their contracts of employment terminated at Coventry, who are halfway through their first season as a fully professional club. Richard Tonks, insolvency practitioner at BK Plus said: “Notice of the liquidation caused understandable disappointment to everyone connected with the club, not least the players and staff. Notice of the proceedings also gathered a lot of external interest and concern, and resulted in offers to try and save the club from parties in the UK and abroad.” Tonks added: “We were pleased to be part of the process resulting in the agreement of heads of terms to sell the company’s shares … Clearly, a sale still needs to be finalised and we remain on hand to support all of the relevant parties with a view to completing a sale as soon as possible.” The Women’s Championship season has been on a winter break but is due to resume this weekend. Taylor, whose company sponsors Wolves Women in the third tier, told Sky Sports News that he had held virtual meetings on New Year’s Day with the manager, Jay Bradford, and the players. “We’ve had a really positive response from the squad,” he said. “We will shore the situation up very quickly and get the players paid for a start.”Growing up, trips to the theatre for me involved squinting at the stage, unable to follow what was happening. Being partially sighted, plays have felt out of my reach. But now here I am standing on the stage at Curve theatre in Leicester, running my fingers along the delicate gold sequins of a costume for A Chorus Line. There are around a dozen of us at this pre-show talk for visually impaired people, which gives us a chance to familiarise ourselves with the performance we’ll be watching in an hour’s time. Before the pandemic, this pre-show talk would have taken the form of a touch tour, where we’d get to feel more of the costumes and set. Today we can only touch two costumes due to Covid safety precautions, but even through the thin gloves we wear, I can feel the texture, the snag of chiffon and sequins, and see details up close. Our guide, Nadine Beasley for Talking Sense Audio Description Services, tells us how the bright lighting in the show’s finale will make these outfits dazzle. We see several other costumes as Beasley talks us through the rack of leotards and checked shirts, telling us which outfit belongs to which character. She also describes the set and gives us the background to A Chorus Line. Beth Hinton-Lever, who plays Bebe in the show, pops in to introduce herself and gives a helpful description of what she will look like on stage. The talk leaves me with a grounding in the play, the set and its characters, and I feel tentatively hopeful that it’ll help me follow the action. Many theatres offer accessible performances, with adaptations from sign language and captioning to dementia-friendly and relaxed viewings. I asked artist Jamie Hale, who recently directed CRIPtic Pit Party at the Barbican, about theatre access. They told me about some of the barriers they experience, such as lack of wheelchair access, and having to phone to book accessible tickets. While there have been improvements, the inclusion of more disabled people in the industry, Hale says, would increase theatre’s accessibility. Tonight’s performance of A Chorus Line will be audio-described by Beasley, giving a live account of the action, delivered via headsets that still allow us to hear everything happening on stage. Other audience members won’t hear the audio description. We return to the auditorium about 20 minutes before the show. While I fiddle with the volume on my headset, Beasley reads us an audio introduction. She describes the stage layout again, everything from the large mirrors at the back to details such as the 1970s-style red telephone pinned to the left wall. She also runs through the main characters, describing their hair, faces, eyes, clothes and how they carry themselves. It’s a colourful explanation: we learn that the character Mike “moves with a youthful swagger, sporting a cheeky smile” and Sheila “smoulders like a 1930s femme fatale”. Still, I’m nervous about whether I’ll be able to follow the play once it begins. Soon the stage is filled with figures dancing. From my seat three rows from the front, I can see the flow of people moving, and Beasley’s description helps me make sense of it. She explains the choreography throughout the show, the “arms flailing, feet tapping”, “undulating twists”, pirouettes and leaps, characters sashaying across the stage, the shapes they cast with their bodies. It brings their movements to life in my mind. She describes other actions, such as characters stepping forward or leaving the stage, and expressions too – characters’ eyes locking, or them fidgeting nervously. She captures the tenderness of the moment when Zach and Paul hug, describing the warmth of their embrace. I feel the weight of it with the same strength as fully sighted audience members. The commentary feels natural, never distracting from the action or dialogue. I recognise outfits from the pre-show talk, and spot Bebe quickly, remembering how Hinton-Lever described the character’s long red hair. During the finale, my mind goes back to the look and feel of the golden costumes, and how Beasley said they sparkle in the light. One of the hardest things about watching theatre growing up was not being able to tell which character was speaking. When you can’t see people’s lips move, voices hang unaccounted for, detached from physical form. When the pace allows, Beasley says the name of a character before they speak or sing. And this, perhaps more than anything, makes a huge difference for me. For the first time, I’m able to follow a play. And it’s a revelation. I can enjoy theatre! I feel included. I am part of this shared experience. As I leave the auditorium and hand back my headset, I have joyously entered a new world, one I once felt I didn’t belong in but am now excited to explore.The UK government is to investigate the health risks posed by tattoo inks after the EU introduced a ban on a range of substances used in pigments on the grounds they are hazardous. The ban, which came into force on Monday, has caused a crisis in the tattoo industry across the bloc, with trade associations warning it will “criminalise” artists and threaten the entire sector, which is already reeling from closures through the pandemic lockdowns. The law does not apply to the UK as it came into effect after Brexit was sealed in January 2020 but it poses one of the first tests for the UK’s approach to regulation of laws affecting consumers since it achieved independence from the bloc. The law limits the use of certain chemicals the EU says are hazardous, with some linked to cancer, reproductive difficulties and skin irritation, and which are contained in mixtures for tattoo inks and permanent makeup. It is estimated that 54 million people across the EU have tattoos and the industry had a year to prepare for the ban. The tattoo artist Tin-Tin, who heads the French tattoo industry union SNAT, told Reuters the new rules would drive people to parlours that do not respect the legislation. “It’s ridiculous. It’s like taking the flour from a bakery, it’s as stupid as that. If we don’t have any colours or ink to work with, what are we going to work with?” he said. Dolores Murray, who owns Wild Cat Ink in Dublin, told RTÉ radio in Ireland the ban would affect about 4,000 substances used in tattoo inks, including isopropyl alcohol, a disinfecting lotion used in the process. She read a statement from the European Society of Tattoo Pigment Research that said the ban was not argued sufficiently and would lead to the criminalisation of tattoo artists. “What we are looking for is a little time to try and get this whole mess sorted out,” she said. A worker at one tattoo parlour in London said they had heard about the ban but had been given “no information” as to whether or not it applied in the post-Brexit UK. EU laws up to January 2020 were incorporated into domestic law but those agreed since are not. However, the UK said it would take the scientific research in the EU into consideration. A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), which is responsible for the UK’s registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals (UK Reach), said: “UK Reach allows the UK to make its own decisions on the regulation of chemicals that are based on the best available scientific evidence, ensuring that chemicals remain safely used and managed. “The government has asked the Health and Safety Executive [HSE] to prepare a dossier to review the risk posed by certain substances in tattoo inks and consider the case for introducing any restrictions,” said the spokesperson. The UK government asked the HSE last March to consider the case for imposing any restrictions. Defra said this was because the ink in tattoos could sometime cause health effects, most commonly skin reactions, such as irritation or sensitisation. It added that the restriction proposal “will consider … but is not limited to, substances that can cause cancer, are dangerous to reproduction, skin sensitisers and irritants”. It would introduce its draft restriction dossiers in spring 2022, after which there would be a public consultation, it said. Defra added that if evidence showed there was an unacceptable risk to human health, it would impose bans on certain inks.Tony Blair’s former defence secretary Geoff Hoon has claimed he was told to burn a memo from the attorney general that cast doubt on the legality of the Iraq war. In revelations that critics say cast further doubt on the decision to award the former prime minister a knighthood, Hoon recalled in extracts from his recently published memoir that Blair’s chief of staff had instructed him to burn the document. Hoon wrote in his memoir, See How They Run, that he had had been under pressure from Mike Boyce, the chief of defence staff, to provide him with clear legal direction that his forces could take action in Iraq, in lieu of a UN resolution authorising force, the Daily Mail reported. He claims to have received a copy of complex advice from the then attorney general, Lord Goldsmith, which was “very long and very detailed legal opinion”. He wrote: “I was sent a copy from Downing St under conditions of considerable secrecy. I was told that it was for my eyes only and that I should not discuss its contents with anyone else. I had no idea who else had received a copy.” Hoon said the advice was “not an easy read” and concluded that the Iraq invasion would be lawful only if the prime minister believed that it was in the UK’s national interest to do so. “It was not exactly the ringing endorsement that the chief of the defence staff was looking for, and in any event, I was not strictly allowed to show it to him or even discuss it with him,” he wrote. “Moreover, when my principal private secretary, Peter Watkins, called Jonathan Powell in Downing St and asked what he should now do with the document, he was told in no uncertain terms that he should ‘burn it’.” Hoon said the document was not burned. “I agreed that we should lock the document securely into an MoD safe to which only he had access. For all I know it is probably still there.” Powell told the Daily Mail he had not ordered the advice to be burned and described it as a separate “minute” that he had asked Hoon to destroy on Goldsmith’s request. In his memoir, Hoon also describes the humiliation of being sacked as defence secretary two years later, saying Blair phoned him to tell him the news rather than meet face-to-face. More than 700,000 people have now signed a petition to rescind Blair’s knighthood, awarded by the Queen in the new year honours list. But the decision to award him the honour was defended by the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, who said on Tuesday it was “not a thorny issue” to give the award to someone who had served a long term as prime minister. “I understand there are strong views on the Iraq war. There were back at the time and there still are, but that does not detract from the fact that Tony Blair was a very successful prime minister of this country and made a huge difference to the lives of millions of people in this country,” Starmer said.The annual Golden Globes ceremony has been unable to find a broadcasting partner or any celebrities willing to present or collect its awards after a Hollywood boycott over its diversity and ethics scandal, resulting in a pared-down event with the emphasis on philanthropy. According to Variety, the Globes’ talent bookers have failed to persuade any big Hollywood figures to attend the 2022 edition of the awards ceremony, a hitherto glittering annual event that traditionally kicked off the lucrative awards season. In March 2021 more than 100 public relations firms announced they would withdraw cooperation with the Globes, a series of high-profile Hollywood figures, including Tom Cruise and Scarlett Johansson, made stinging public criticisms, and TV network NBC cancelled its broadcast of the 2022 edition. In a statement on its website, the Golden Globes parent organisation Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA) said that the ceremony would go ahead on Sunday at the Beverly Hilton hotel, and planned to “shine a light on the long-established philanthropy work of the HFPA, showcasing a range of grantees during the program”. The HFPA also said event will also “discuss” the Reimagine Coalition, an initiative announced in October 2021 and set up in conjunction with civil rights group the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) to “increase diversity, equity, and inclusion across the global entertainment industry”. No press will be allowed inside the ceremony, and no red carpet will take place. Audience members will be required to wear masks, and follow strict Covid guidelines including proof of vaccination and negative tests. It has yet to be announced whether the ceremony will be livestreamed. The HFPA has been engulfed in crisis since the LA Times ran an exposé on the eve of the 2021 Golden Globes, accusing the organisation of a lack of diversity in its voting membership as well as “ethical lapses” in the way it conducted its business. The Golden Globe nominations were announced in December by guest presenter Snoop Dogg; Kenneth Branagh’s Belfast and Jane Campion’s The Power of the Dog lead field with seven each.The EFL has granted Liverpool’s request to postpone their Carabao Cup semi-final first leg at Arsenal on Thursday amid an escalating Covid outbreak at the club. Liverpool submitted the request on Tuesday on the grounds of player availability and a rising number of positive tests among the squad and staff. The assistant manager, Pepijn Lijnders, who has been in interim charge of the first team while Jürgen Klopp is in isolation, subsequently tested positive along with more players and staff. The club closed their first-team training facility on Wednesday after consultation with the relevant public health authorities. The EFL said the postponement was down to “a severe outbreak of Covid infections” among Liverpool’s staff and players. The first leg of the tie will be played at Anfield next Thursday, when the second leg was due to take place, and the return leg the following Thursday. “The EFL has been in regular dialogue with the club over the past 48 hours in an attempt to understand whether the tie could proceed but significant developments over this period have resulted in the club reporting an ever-increasing number of Covid cases,” the league said. “Having now fully reviewed the circumstances involved, the league has accepted Liverpool’s request after determining, albeit reluctantly, that a postponement was the only option as the club looks to mitigate against the further risk of infection amongst its squad and staff alongside ensuring public health was protected by not travelling from Liverpool to London.” Liverpool’s first-team training facility is expected to be closed for at least 48 hours, which would affect preparations for the FA Cup third‑round tie at home against Shrewsbury on Sunday. The club’s development squads have separate facilities at Kirkby and could be utilised against the League One side in the event of Liverpool being short of first-team players. Aston Villa were forced to resort to similar measures for last season’s third-round tie against Liverpool after their entire first team “bubble” was placed into isolation. Nine Liverpool players were missing at Chelsea last Sunday, and Mohamed Salah, Sadio Mané and Naby Keïta have subsequently reported for the Africa Cup of Nations. In addition to Lijnders, who received his result on Tuesday night, the club have reported further positive tests for Covid among players and staff overnight and on Wednesday morning. “Liverpool Football Club would like to place on record its thanks to the EFL and Arsenal for their understanding, as well as supporters of both clubs, as we continue to navigate through this challenging period,” the club said. Harrogate had to forfeit a first‑round match against Rochdale this season after a Covid outbreak in their squad. Under EFL rules any rearranged game must take place before the next round starts and whereas Harrogate were unable to manage that, there has been scope for Liverpool to fit in both legs before the final. When Leyton Orient forfeited their third-round tie against Tottenham last season a different set of rules were in operation. The Premier League is to end mandatory PCR testing for players and staff, with the changes coming into effect from Thursday. Clubs will be expected to conduct lateral flow tests every day in training and the day before matches, with a positive result requiring confirmation from the more precise PCR. Last month the league introduced a twice weekly PCR regime, then added daily lateral flow testing in response to the Omicron variant of Covid. But despite record levels of infection and 94 positive cases in the last round of testing completed over the new year weekend, the changes do conform with current government guidance on testing, which is placing more emphasis on LFTs for individuals without symptoms.Forecasters say “thundersnow” that could disrupt travel and cause power outages is expected to hit the UK as a band of sleet, hail and snow showers passes through the country. The Met Office issued three yellow warnings for dangerous weather conditions, including lightning strikes from isolated thunderstorms and as much as 10cm of snow falling on the highest ground, from 10am on Thursday until 11am on Friday across Scotland, Wales and northern England. In the Scottish Highlands, from 8pm on Thursday until 11am on Friday there will be “frequent sleet, hail and snow showers may lead to some disruption to travel during Thursday night and Friday morning”, with longer journey times expected for some roads and railways, icy patches and possible brief power outages. In the south of Scotland, including Glasgow, and in parts of Northern Ireland and in England north of Manchester , snow will cause some travel disruption from 10am until 4pm on Thursday, according to a separate warning. The Met Office said there would up to two hours of snow in many areas with a risk of temporary slushy accumulations above 100 to 200 metres and strong winds leading to temporary blizzard conditions in higher areas. The Met Office said Thursday would be dry and cold to start across the UK, but with a band of cloud, wind and rain spreading eastwards, with this falling as snow in some areas although this will not remain for long. After an unseasonably warm few weeks, including a record-breaking New Year’s Day in which temperatures of 16C were recorded in London, the UK’s first widespread frost of the winter is expected to hit in the coming days, with overnight temperatures set to fall below freezing on Wednesday. The wet and snowy conditions will give way to sunnier and milder weather over the weekend, especially in the east, albeit with some outbreaks of blustery showers. Met Office spokesperson Grahame Madge said: “At the moment we’ve got a ridge of high pressure leading to clear skies. Into the early hours of tomorrow morning we’ll start to see a weather front approach from the west, bearing in mind conditions will have been intensely cold overnight with frost and freezing fog in southern parts of England. We’ll get this frontal band of precipitation working east, then as that cold air bumps into the weather front moving in we’ll see a line of snow along that front.” He said “thundersnow” would be caused by the difference between the cold front arriving from the west, reaching the ground that has been warmed by unseasonable temperatures. He added that the conditions were driven by the same meteorological conditions as storms in summer but that it can sound distinct, as it is muffled by snow.People are being urged to register the results of home Covid tests after the announcement that follow-up PCRs will be suspended for asymptomatic people with a positive lateral flow test in England. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said the shift reflected the high accuracy of the tests and prevalence of coronavirus, which means the chances of false positives are low. However, the new system will rely more heavily on people registering their own positive test result. A spokesperson said: “From the 11th, we would really encourage people to register results, especially if they’re positive, there is a greater need for that.” Lateral flow test results already feed into official daily Covid case numbers and, in England, represented almost a third of reported cases on 31 December. Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter, the chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at the University of Cambridge, said: “It will become much more important that people report positive lateral flow tests otherwise nobody will know what’s going on. There’s already a problem with daily cases, with people not getting tested or not reporting results.” The change will apply only to those in England taking routine lateral flow tests who do not have any symptoms of coronavirus, and they must still report their result on gov.uk and self-isolate for the minimum seven days. Anyone with any of the three main Covid symptoms listed by the government, which are a high temperature, persistent cough and a loss or change to sense of smell or taste, must self-isolate, take a PCR test, and await the results. UKHSA said lateral flow devices (LFDs) were most effective for people without symptoms, with 80% accuracy in finding the people with high viral loads who are most infectious. The agency added that for every 10,000 lateral flow tests carried out, there are likely to be fewer than three false positive results. The agency added that this approach replicated the one taken between January and March last year, when confirmatory PCR tests were also suspended. Jenny Harries, UKHSA’s chief executive, said: “While cases of Covid continue to rise, this tried-and-tested approach means that LFDs can be used confidently to indicate Covid-19 infection without the need for PCR confirmation.” There are a small number of exceptions to the change, including people eligible for the £500 test-and-trace support payment, people participating in research and surveillance programmes, and the 1 million people at risk of becoming seriously ill from coronavirus who have been contacted by the NHS. The care minister, Gillian Keegan, told the Today programme that the change was intended to reflect the “accuracy and the amount of lateral flow tests” rather than expressly to curb staff shortages. She said there were “no immediate plans” to reduce the seven-day minimum isolation period down to five if a negative lateral flow is obtained, but added that it was “a reasonable question to ask” and one that was being considered by scientists. About 1 million people are thought to be isolating due to Covid, causing widespread absences and disruption across essential services, including healthcare, police and food processing. Hospitals are reporting that they are struggling to cope with staff absences, with several declaring critical incidents and 17 in Greater Manchester saying they would suspend some non-urgent surgery as 15% of staff were off sick. An internal memo from the North East ambulance service foundation trust suggested that call handlers recommend people suffering from a heart attack or stroke get a lift into hospital from friends or family. Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, told the Today programme that healthcare absences were averaging at about 10%, with Covid the biggest reason, but that this figure was much higher in some hospital trusts. He approved of the plans to remove the confirmatory PCR “as long as it’s based on the science” and not on “politics and blind hope”, and welcomed any measures that could ease pressure on hospitals, which are asking staff on leave or rest days, or who are recently retired, to come back. • This article was amended on 6 January 2022 to clarify that high temperature, persistent cough and a loss or change to sense of smell or taste are the three main Covid symptoms listed by the government.Twelfth night, and the following day’s Epiphany, is a time of ancient traditions: the adrenalised juggling of overdrafts, a ritual squabble with my best friend about whether frangipane, star of French Epiphany cakes, is tasty or terrible, and the dreary stripping away of any remaining Christmassy bits. Time to take down our favourites: the entirely featureless loo roll tube (a relic of some abortive “craft” project), the blue papier-mache lightbulb, origins unknown, the pink plastic owl that sees into your soul, and the inexplicable army of ornamental Scottie dogs, none of them bought by me. My husband will carefully wrap the tangled fairy lights around the ancestral copy of Super Picsou Géant (a French comic about Scrooge McDuck), as he has since time immemorial, and that will be that, fun over. There is, though, something invigorating about it. Sure, comfort and joy is nice, my inner zealot whispers, hairshirt rustling, smelling of bicarb and white vinegar, but have you seen this nice new broom? There are some seasonal things I am looking forward to putting away along with the decorations, and not all of them will be allowed out of the loft next year. Not knowing which day it is Listen, it’s time to get a grip. Today is definitely Wednesday, or maybe Thursday, or Friday. I have already missed one recycling collection, which ruined my entire (Tues?)day. From now on, I will just accept the verdict of whichever global corporation sold me the expensive device in my hand, even though, yes, it feels like Sunday for the ninth day running. Pregame LFTs Obviously I won’t stop taking rapid tests, assuming they are ever easier to get hold of than a Christmas Tickle Me Elmo in 1996. And there’s a certain satisfaction to be derived from a whole new swathe of the population getting to experience the special trepidation formerly associated with taking a pregnancy test. But by this point I need a very good reason to poke another stick at my tonsils rather than staying home and unblocking the sink. I’m so unused to social situations now, it’s not as if my open-mouthed silent staring adds anything to the party anyway. Wrapping paper Wrapping paper is on the brink of seeming as mad as smoking in restaurants or pouring sewage into the sea (oh, hang on – we still do that). You covered gifts in virgin paper (227,00 miles of it annually in the UK, apparently), then threw it in the bin? Sure, Grandma. I said I wouldn’t wrap this Christmas, but in the end decided to finish my existing stock, cack-handedly defying geometry and good taste, sausage fingers fighting with the elusive split ends of the sticky tape. The end result was pitiful, and when I took my bag of de-taped non-foil papers to the dump, I was instructed to put it in landfill anyway. Next year it’s newspaper (the only way my family would see anything I write) or nothing. Food hoarding A combination of Covid/Brexit scarcity and seasonal hysteria turned me into a shameful monster last month, not hoarding food for my family, but from them. Having snagged three bags of my favourite Lentil Waves crisps (yes, it’s all unbridled decadence chez Beddington), I hid them in my sock drawer. I also concealed the fancy olives behind a jar of piccalilli and the only promising clementines in my coat pocket. As I typed that, I remembered the chocolates hidden in my desk drawer (just checked – still there, still delicious). I have no idea what is wrong with me. I have never experienced scarcity; I am just a selfish, greedy pig deranged by 20 months of pictures of empty supermarket shelves. Enough. Bingeing television I feel confident that a lot of dark, boring hours lie between us and whenever things get less bleak (2026? Never?), so I cannot just go on consuming television as if it was an infinite resource. I need to learn to consume entertainment sustainably. For every fresh episode of something prestigious with Olivia Colman or the joyfully silly Tina Fey sitcom Girls5Eva, I am committing to five repeats or even – gasp – a conversation. Reduce, reuse, recycle. That sinking feeling when you hear the prime minister is holding a press conference The clutching dread, the impotence, the fury – the minute most of us see that lectern we’re triggered. I want to take that feeling, wrap it in newspaper and slide it into the darkest, dampest, most spider-infested corner of the loft. But unlike the beloved loo roll tube and lightbulb, I’m praying it doesn’t come out again. Emma Beddington is a freelance writer. Adrian Chiles is on holiday.My play began in a flash of inspiration, but it would take me 10 years to finish it. At one point I completely discarded it as a failed project, then Hampstead theatre’s Roxana Silbert inspired me to go back. Covid interfered and the production was delayed, making me fear it might never see the light of day; then BBC Radio 3 included my adaptation in their Drama on 3/Culture in Quarantine series. Now, finally, the play has a full production at Hampstead theatre. I have a history of burning manuscripts that don’t please me, but luckily this one had escaped the fire. I grew up in Somerset, first in Glastonbury, then in a small village on the edge of the Somerset Levels. Back in Glastonbury in 2009 I went to see an exhibition at the Rural Life Museum about Cecil Sharp and folk music. Sharp collected songs from 1903 until 1924, and founded what is now the English Folk Song and Dance Society. In the exhibition there was a photograph of John England, a gardener who had sung to Sharp what is purported to be the first song he ever collected, The Seeds of Love. There was another of a singer who had lived in my own village. Then I saw the images of two sisters from a village near mine, Louie Hooper and Lucy White, who between them sang over 100 songs to Sharp. Folk-song collecting was a growing movement in the early years of the 20th century, driven by a desire to rescue these songs before they were lost to the tail end of the Industrial Revolution, when machines would work the land and the sewing would be moved into factories. Sharp published many of them, arranging them for piano and editing the lyrics so that they were suitable for a middle-class audience. He tidied rhymes and rhythms and then placed his name on them, copyrighting them. At the time this wasn’t seen as an egregious act. The two sisters gave Sharp over 100 songs, yet their names were nowhere, their stories untold. The images of the sisters kept coming back to me. I did some research and learned that they were the daughters of a well-known singer who would have sung these songs to her children, songs that they knew by heart. I started to imagine what it might feel like if your body contained that many songs, enough to sing for days without repetition. I write both drama and prose, and ideas are born inside their form: this was definitely a play, about the human voice, about live song. I found an incredible transcript of a 1940s interview with Louie Hooper, then in her 80s, where she talked about her love for music, how she listened to birds and rain, found musical patterns in their sounds, and how she sat by the older people in the village and “caught” their songs. She fascinated me. It is always the untold story, the silent voice that captures my imagination. Meanwhile my research quickly revealed Sharp as opinionated and ferociously ambitious – Sharp by name, sharp by nature. He was virulently against women’s suffrage, and had refused to collect songs from black American singers. He published many of the songs that he collected in Somerset and beyond all under his name, and promoted himself as the expert on folk song, building a career on other people’s work. It would be easy to write a play that dismantled him, and yet there was a problem. Sharp had another side: he had great respect for the country people who sang, and managed to collect about 5,000 songs that, were it not for his writing them down in his notebooks, would otherwise have been lost. That dissonance would be at the heart of the play. I now had the story, but as the themes started to become clear, the complexity of the subject matter became overwhelming. The songs were also being gathered at a time when it was felt that England lacked a great classical composer. Since Purcell (who died in 1695), all the new music had been European and we were considered “Das Land ohne Musik” – the country without music. Sharp and his collecting peers hoped that these folk songs would stimulate composers to create a new classical music based on them, and place England at the centre of classical music once again. Sharp furthermore saw these songs as having the potential to “refine and strengthen the national character” in the years before the first world war. This nationalism was the theme that caused me the most problems: it made me think about my feelings about my own country. The play is clearly about England, her songs and her landscape; I was writing it at a time when I felt a sense of nationalism rising as we headed into and out of the Brexit referendum, and, also, as the world around me was changing and questions were starting to be asked about the history of our country houses and artefacts in museums. History became more interesting and much more complex as it became more rigorous and more inclusive of others’ narratives. Sharp found “his” England very near where I am from. My imagination was born in my village in Somerset, and I have a creative attachment to the land. I look back on my life there with an extraordinary sense of richness, but I don’t know what to do with these feelings. How do I express that love without being nationalistic? And how do I express that love, knowing that to romanticise the past is to ignore the fact that there was an intolerance to difference and a casual racism in my own village where in 1977 dogs were still named the N-word. I have come to see that the play is my way of working through those questions. Every time I write it is to find out what I think. Sharp raided the villages for the songs on which he built his career, yet he also saved the songs. The play demanded that I find a way to show those two dissonant facts in the same story. I also needed to find a way of showing that I love the place where I was born, without ignoring the complexities of that place and my feelings about it. As Louie Hooper says in my play: “Everyone loves their country. It’s just the bit of land where we was born, what we first see and smell. It’s the stories, the songs.” The songs Sharp collected did lead to many types of new music, including the big folk revival in the 60s, which still feeds folk musicians today; it also led to new classical music from Holst, Vaughan Williams and Butterworth, which in turn inspired Benjamin Britten. We owe all of this to Sharp, but we also owe it all to a pair of little-known sisters who lived on the edge of the water, right in the heart of the Somerset Levels. • Folk by Nell Leyshon is at Hampstead theatre until 5 February.An eight-year-old girl has died and eight children have been injured after wind gusts lifted a bouncy castle metres into the air at a fair in eastern Spain. Emergency services were called to the fairgrounds in Mislata, a municipality on the outskirts of Valencia, on Tuesday evening. Minutes earlier, horrified witnesses had watched as the fair’s inflatable structure became airborne, throwing several children on to the ground. “All of a sudden I saw it rise into the air,” one witness told reporters. “I saw the kids that were in the air, I think they fell onto another inflatable structure. There was a young girl on the floor, unconscious.” She and others rushed to help out. “Fairgoers, the families, passersby – we were all doing what we could to help.” Nine children were taken to hospital, two of them in a serious condition. Firefighters shared photos showing pieces of the deflated castle scattered across the fairground, adding that a search had been carried out to ensure that no children were trapped in the structure. On Wednesday Mislata officials said one of the children, an eight-year-old girl, had died of her injuries. A four-year-old remains in hospital. “A very sad day for Mislata,” the city’s mayor, Carlos Fernández Bielsa, tweeted. The city declared a period of official mourning until Friday and said all remaining Christmas festivities, including a Three Kings parade planned for Wednesday, would be cancelled. “We would like to offer our sincere condolences to the family and friends of the child who lost her life. She was only eight years old,” officials said. They said police were investigating to clarify the facts and determine the responsibilities, if any, of the company that set up the fair. The death comes weeks after six children died when a gust sent a bouncy castle 10 metres (32ft) into the air in Tasmania. The incident, which is under investigation, prompted calls for better regulation of safety standards on bouncy castles. “Things like this should never happen,” Prof Rebecca Ivers, the head of the school of public health at the University of New South Wales, said, adding it was well known that the structures were prone to being lifted by gusts of wind. In 2019, two children died when a tornado-like wind swept through a fair in China. In 2018, a British couple were convicted of manslaughter by gross negligence after the death of a girl on a bouncy castle in Norwich. In November, a court in Spain sentenced a couple to a year in prison after an inflatable structure at their restaurant was carried for metres by strong winds in 2017, killing a six-year-old child and injuring six others. The court found that the structure had not been fully anchored to the ground. “The tragic accident was a direct consequence of non-compliance with assembly, safety and supervisory measures,” it said.A man who killed his younger brother with a kitchen knife after a drunken row about the way the dog was spoken to has been told he must serve at least 21 years in jail. A court heard that William Campbell, 26, had been binge drinking vodka in the pub for more than five hours on the evening of 17 June last year. His brother Samuel, 24, had drunk at least a bottle of Jim Beam bourbon and was listening to music in the back garden of the family home in Silksworth, Sunderland. William arrived home and was told by his mother that Samuel was waiting up to share a drink with him. Jailing Campbell for life, Judge Paul Sloan QC, the recorder of Newcastle, said what had followed was a “totally insignificant” row. He added: “It would seem that you took exception to the way your brother had been talking to his dog.” The court heard he went to the kitchen, took a sharp, sheathed knife from a drawer, returned to the garden and stabbed his brother in the chest in the presence of their mother, who had earlier tried to act as peacemaker. Defending, Nicholas Lumley QC read from a statement provided by the brothers’ father, Eddie Campbell, which described how the pair had grown up extremely close to each other. “There was sibling unrest, of course there was,” said Lumley. “But for the most part this was a loving, supportive relationship with the two of them sharing a room for so long without serious difficulty.” However, the judge said there was a history of violence which “went well beyond spats that can occur between brothers”. He also pointed to William’s initial claims that he had acted in self-defence, followed by testimony that the stabbing was accidental. A jury at Newcastle crown court last month found Campbell, a council worker of Stokesley, North Yorkshire, guilty of murder after a week-long trial. Afterwards DCI Jane Fairlamb, of Northumbria police, said: “This is a terribly sad case that has seen a family torn apart in the most devastating of circumstances.” On Wednesday, Samuel’s partner, Alice Gray, a teacher, read a statement describing how the murder had “utterly devastated my life and broken my heart beyond anything I knew possible”. She added: “I visit Sam’s grave every day and have done since he passed away. I just can’t sit at home in an empty house when he isn’t there with me.” Gray said she had been prescribed sleeping pills and antidepressants, which she had been told she may never come off. The judge said he had no doubt that Campbell, who has autism, bitterly regretted what had happened and wished to atone for it. But he said the minimum term Campbell should serve before a Parole Board could consider him for release was 21 years.Anti-fogging sprays and cloths often used to prevent condensation on eyeglasses from wearing a mask or on face shields may contain high levels of potentially toxic PFAS “forever chemicals”, according to a new study led by Duke University. Researchers tested four of the top-rated anti-fogging sprays as well as five top-rated anti-fogging cloths sold by Amazon. In all nine products, experts found fluorotelomer alcohols (FTOHs) and fluorotelomer ethoxylates (FTEOs), two types of per- and polyfluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS). PFAS have been dubbed as forever chemicals due to their longevity in the environment. “Our tests show the sprays contain up to 20.7 milligrams of PFAS per milliliter of solution, which is a pretty high concentration,” said study lead Nicholas Herkert, a postdoctoral researcher at Duke’s Nicholas School of the Environment. Exposure to some PFAs – perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) in particular – have been linked to cancer, thyroid disease, fertility complications and other health problems. Herkert noted that FTOHs and FTEOs have not been studied extensively, so scientists do not know what health risks they could pose, but research currently suggests that FTOHs inhaled or absorbed through the skin could break down in the body and become toxic, long-lasting PFAs. The FTEOs used in all four anti-fogging sprays were also analyzed in the new study and exhibited substantial cell-altering toxicity and conversion to fat cells during lab tests, said Herkert. “It’s disturbing to think that products people have been using on a daily basis to help keep themselves safe during the Covid pandemic may be exposing them to a different risk,” said Heather Stapleton, a distinguished professor of environmental chemistry and health at Duke. Stapleton initiated the study after reviewing the ingredients in a bottle of anti-fogging spray she bought for her 9-year-old daughter. Stapleton noted that the other eight products did not have their ingredients listed, making it virtually impossible to tell if they contained toxic chemicals until they were analyzed using equipment from her research laboratory. This study, conducted by Herkert and Stapleton with researchers from Duke University, Wayne State University, and the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, is only the second ever to focus on FTEOS. The researchers published their peer-reviewed study on 5 January in the journal Environmental Science &amp; Technology. Herkert and Stapleton said that more research would be needed to expand on initial findings, with larger studies involving tests on living organisms being the next step. Studies that include a larger sample size of sprays and cloths could also help identify other unknown chemicals being used in these products. “Because of Covid, more people than ever, including many medical professionals and other first-responders, are using these sprays and cloths to keep their glasses from fogging up when they wear masks or face shields,” said Stapleton. “They deserve to know what’s in the products they’re using.”Influence is not a word readily associated with St Jacques, the Gypsy quarter of the city of Perpignan. Yet, on a recent chilly night shortly before 8pm, the ineffable hand of influence is behind an outbreak of street theatre on the plane tree-lined oblong of Place Cassanyes. People are arriving in droves. By 7.50pm, there must be more than 200, mostly young men, in rowdy clusters. Smoking, yelling, stretching, one group doing can-can legs: it’s like Fast &amp; Furious without the automobiles. One man in a red Adidas tracksuit is trying to line everyone up across the square’s breadth. A beacon in a sea of dark casual-wear, the influencer known as NasDas – St Jacques born and bred – is responsible for this circus. The previous night, NasDas posted to his 1.2 million followers a picture of one of his posse holding up a crinkled €500 bill, followed by footage of a previous Place Cassanyes footrace. Tonight is a rerun, only with a bigger prize. But this time the turnout is far bigger, too. Streaming live on Snapchat, he’s antsy: “On my mother’s life, I didn’t expect this kind of crowd – from Avignon, from Marseille, from everywhere.” NasDas – real name Nasser Sari – has achieved the feat of becoming France’s No 1 Snapchat influencer from one of the country’s poorest neighbourhoods. Perpignan is the last French Mediterranean city 20 miles (32km) north of the Spanish border; rising up a hill at the back of its town centre is St Jacques, a tightly packed, roughneck enclave on a medieval street grid where 60% of households live in poverty. Three-quarters of a population numbering somewhere 3,000 and 7,000 are Catalan Gypsies; the remainder, coexisting sometimes tensely with their neighbours, are Arab – including the 25-year-old NasDas, whose parents emigrated from Algeria. When outsiders go to St Jacques, they often see only the omnipresent rubbish. But NasDas saw life, beauty and humour in his daily surroundings. A few years ago, he began shooting the street shenanigans and characters around him: “I didn’t want to be No 1, or even to be a Snapchatter or an influencer. I’d just get my phone out at the cafe: ‘Who’s going to pay? You? You never pay!’ And I realised that people liked watching my daily life.” He began adding semi-dramatised skits, like one spoofing banlieue arrivisme, in which his posse abscond to Barcelona with his credit card and hit the luxury boutiques – while he receives a stream of obscene receipts on his smartphone back home. By mid-2020, his sly observations and charm had won him tens of thousands of followers. Caught in a smartphone window, NasDas has a genial, almost Fozzie Bear-ish charisma riffing with his catchphrase: “La chiennété!” (which translates as something like “Doglife”). Strangely, among France’s many influencers, hardly any are chronicling its quartiers populaires (working-class neighbourhoods) like this. “You go on Snapchat, and it’s people in thongs, next to luxury buildings and nice cars – all the same things,” says NasDas’s manager, a 32-year-old who appears in the videos anonymously as the “masked man”. There are rappers, dancers, humorists and makeup artists from those places – but few instances of people simply documenting daily life. Nordine Idri, a 17-year-old from Marseille who recounted his former life as a drug-network lookout on YouTube, is another isolated example. Cinema about the cités (estates) – from La Haine to Intouchables to Girlhood – has tended to be steered by outsiders (2019’s Les Misérables was a rare high-profile example told by the residents themselves). But it seems surprising that social media, where all the technology needed fits into your pocket, hasn’t produced more chroniclers of the quartiers. Maybe the impulse in those impoverished places is more towards the aspirational kind of influencing. NasDas likes flashing the cash, too. But the extraordinary thing is that he seems to give most of it away – he forks out banknotes on his feed almost every day. By summer this year, he was Snapchat’s top influencer in France (or so he claims – Snapchat won’t confirm with exact figures) and had successfully monetised his operation with commercial contracts and product placements: for dentists, online CV apps, iced tea, luxury cars, all sorts. He estimates that he gives away about 80% of what he earns – most of it privately, he says. Developing St Jacques is his main priority; with handouts, through education (he encourages truant kids to go to school and organises street clean-ups for his Snap feed) and by promoting local businesses. The day before the race, this social-media Robin Hood sits sipping a café noisette at a table on Place Cassanyes. He is six feet tall, easygoing in the flesh compared with his antic Snapchat persona, but authoritative too. He says people coming from all over France for selfies with him proves that he has changed St Jacques’ image. As we talk, two brothers from Grenoble step up for a moment with their hero. But NasDas acknowledges that his neighbourhood won’t change overnight: “There’s a reality you shouldn’t hide. The level of violence is still quite high, unfortunately. In my eyes it’s too high, because I can’t stand violence.” In August a 23-year-old man was shot and killed outside a takeaway only metres away. On NasDas’s finger is a gold lion signet ring. Maybe it stands for his mother, whom he describes as a “lion”. She is where he gets his sense of social responsibility from; she raised him and his four siblings solo after his father died when he was 10. They lived two floors above the abandoned police station on the corner of Place Cassanyes that became St Jacques’ key drug-dealing point. Some of his peers were earning €300 a day when he was 16, but she battled to keep him out of the trade. Now, with his newfound fame, he’s taking St Jacques under his wing. *** At Perpignan’s funfair, the dusk sky has faded to dark ochre as the Day-Glo lights of the rides obscure the stars. Team NasDas is trying to do a “low-profile” trip, so he can chaperone his young niece and nephew. At least, as low-profile as you can be when you and your right-hand man, Samos, are dressed in matching white tracksuits. At the entrance, people are already peeking and whispering: “Il y a NasDas” (his niece is helpfully wearing a “NasDas la Chiennété” T-shirt). Soon they’re sidling up for a non-stop stream of photos. Next to the waltzers, we get bogged down by fans and well-wishers for nearly 20 minutes. “He’s so funny,” gush a couple of twentysomething local women. “He doesn’t give a damn.” During hundreds of interactions, NasDas is staunchly friendly – but there is a weary lag in his eyes. He admits he has struggled with his breakneck rise to fame, and the constant requests for money and help: “There was a point I thought I was going mad. I just wanted to go and drink a coffee like everyone else, and I couldn’t.” When he began having anxiety attacks, his managers took him out to the countryside to get things in perspective. A couple of sessions with a therapist later, he got back on the horse. Milling around him at the funfair is most of Team NasDas: Samos, the rail-thin, broken-toothed pal who often serves as his stooge in the videos; Tounsi, a burly, gruff twentysomething who is the only one NasDas was close to prior to fame; 4BDV, an urchin-like 17-year-old who looks 12 and whom NasDas took into his house after he showed up in St Jacques after crossing the Mediterranean from Algeria by boat (the influencer is applying to be his legal guardian); only Billy DZ – ill, apparently – isn’t present. Now there is an entire infrastructure supporting the team: a total of 40 people – including two Paris influencer agencies – looking after technical support, event bookings, commercial opportunities and strategy. And NasDas is sizing up the world beyond social media; he will soon appear on TV talkshows, Netflix has contacted him about a possible documentary, and he plans to perform a one-man show at Paris’s 3,000-seater Olympia venue next year. Even those things could be just the beginning. NasDas likes to use his feed to flex his social conscience, beyond handouts for the residents. He has often criticised Perpignan town hall’s management of St Jacques; dysfunctional and corrupt under previous administrations, but now with an extra vindictive edge under Louis Aliot, the only far-right Rassemblement National mayor of a major French city. The influencer recently turned his smartphone on the case of an eight-year-old taken into police custody (along with 4BDV) after being spotted on CCTV with a plastic pellet gun. Parking charges imposed in September on Place Cassanyes – which many residents can’t afford are another of NasDas’s targets. Whether it’s judicial or economic, he sees the intended effect in straightforward terms: “It’s repression.” Now that NasDas has become a public figure, the town hall has begun taking notice of him, he says. “I think they’re even more offended because I’m not asking for their help. It disturbs them: a young Maghrebin who doesn’t ask for help and succeeds in sorting out the neighbourhood.” (The town hall did not respond to requests for comment.) But he could have the perfect reply. He plans to stand for the national assembly in June elections to attempt to become one of four MPs for Pyrenées-Orientales, the département of which Perpignan is capital. “I want to shatter the cliches,” he says. “I’m young, of colour, someone who dares. I want to annoy people a bit. To show France who we are.” Pyrenées-Orientales has about 350,000 registered voters; if only a portion of NasDas’s followers vote for him, he could be Snapchatting from parliament this time next year. The pressures on NasDas aren’t just from the outside. St Jacques has a long history of unhealthy dependency on community figureheads with privileged access to power. Going back to the 1970s, there have been claims that patriarchs among some Gypsy families in St Jacques traded the community vote for political favours. Cash sums and white goods were allegedly distributed after elections; latterly jobs and influence over the long-mooted renovation of this tumbledown district. Now NasDas, through the power conferred by social media, is the one with influence – in every sense. There can be no doubting his deep solicitude for St Jacques, but you wonder whether he can withstand the pressures he will probably face from inside his neighbourhood. Just before the race, as we’re talking, he is collared by a community “big brother”, who harangues him in Arabic. Ten minutes later, he turns up again, demanding that NasDas speak to someone on the phone. What was that about? Apparently, the man is one of several intermediaries, including the man on the phone and someone else in prison, who are facilitating a product placement on Snapchat for a business in Paris. He was trying to get NasDas to lower his fee to €5,000, so he can take a larger, €3,000 cut of the original price. The influencer insists it is just an isolated case; that he experiences virtually no open jealousy, and 99.99% of St Jacques is behind him. But you suspect that this coveting of the money and publicity NasDas is generating will increase as his star rises. In any case, he is irate: “It’s the people from here who you drag you down. People in prison who drag you down.” Half an hour later, on the racetrack of Place Cassanyes, another kind of people management is required. At 8.05pm, the square is heaving. “Disperse!” insists NasDas – and the throng loiters on all four sides, trying to look as inconspicuous as 300 people gathered for the same reason can. Five minutes later, NasDas has called off the race. Three policeman on bikes are mingling among them; Tounsi reckons it’s a warning shot across the bows. With Aliot watching, there can’t be any slip-ups. The disappointed crowd starts filing away. Grinning incredulously – as if wondering how all this has happened – NasDas retreats to a cafe to stream his reactions. He’s going nowhere: “I was in St Jacques before social media, I’m here during social media, and I’ll be here afterwards too.”Jon Needham looks like a copper. Tall, broad and imposing, he works in a lifetime offender management unit, where he deals with serious and organised criminals. So when he speaks, his gentleness comes as a surprise. “I joined the police because I was passionate about helping people,” he says. “It sounds like a cliche to say you want to make a real difference, but I genuinely mean it.” Needham gets paid for working with “nominals” – people who are on the police database (“That’s what the police call them, I call them people,” he says). But he is also transforming how his colleagues deal with victims of rape and sexual assault. It took him until he was 45 to tell the story of the abuse he suffered as a child in foster care. In 2019, he detailed to a group of 70 officers from his own force, the City of London, how he was treated by the criminal justice system after he went to court. “I wanted police officers to see what it’s like from the voice of the survivor. After what I’ve lived through, I thought, well, if I can use that to help people in a positive way, that’d be great.” The number of people being convicted for rape is at a record low – just 1.6% of the 52,210 rapes recorded by police in England and Wales in 2020 resulted in a charge or a summons – and confidence in the criminal justice system is at rock bottom, so the work has never been more urgent. In June, a government report into the staggering decline in rape prosecutions, which have plummeted by 70% since 2016-17, prompted ministers to apologise unreservedly to rape survivors, saying they were “deeply ashamed” that thousands of survivors had been failed on the government’s watch. New plans promised to switch the focus of police investigations away from the credibility of victims, who have been subject to “digital strip searches”. These include having mobile phones taken away and text messages unrelated to a case being used against them in court – as well as notes from counselling and therapy being used to undermine cases. Instead, the focus will be on the perpetrator, the report claimed. The report is progress, Needham says, but he is not going to wait for the system to transform itself. The stories of survivors, like him, have to be part of the solution. Needham was seven when he was taken into care, after his father was imprisoned for a crime he is still not able to talk about. “It was horrendous,” he says. “It just destroyed our family. My first memory is of a knock on the door and two coppers being there. They came in, the next minute my dad was in handcuffs, and then he was gone for years. The victims of crime are not just people who have been abused or robbed or hurt, it’s their families, and the families of the criminal – innocent family members who have to go through the torture of going to prison to visit them.” His mother, with five children and no money, became seriously mentally ill, and so the children were removed and put into care. His foster carers were quite elderly but seemed nice people. “Not my cup of tea, but you know, they are not your family so it’s not a pleasant experience,” he remembers. His bedroom was small, with a sash window. But there was another bedroom at the front of the house, and it was here that Needham says a much older boy raped him, almost every week, for about a year. Talking about the abuse as an adult, Needham is calm and matter-of-fact. Back then, he had no one to tell, he didn’t think he would be believed, and the older boy made terrifying threats about what would happen to him if he told anyone. The abuse went on for a year, until his father came out of prison and Needham went to live with him. “We had mattresses, a toaster, a kettle and a washing machine and that’s all we had for about a year, but for me, it was great. I thought ‘this is better than foster care’ – it was like an adventure: we had a back garden.” He taught himself to play the guitar and went to music school, but dropped out and played in bands. Through his 20s, he worked in a range of jobs, from property maintenance to retail, never sticking to one thing. “I was in the wilderness for many years,” he says. “I didn’t think I could do anything or was worth anything.” When a friend suggested he would make a good police officer, he initially thought it was impossible – he was dyslexic and had no qualifications. But after applying, and failing several times, he made it into the force in 2009. “It felt amazing, almost like validation, even though I knew the training would be tough,” he says. “But I suffered a lot from impostor syndrome, and even now I look over my shoulder and wonder if it’s real.” He recently got a commander of commendation award for dealing with serious prolific offenders, having been given a commissioner’s commendation award in 2018 for professionalism and bravery in dealing with a violent offender. “It does make me feel like I finally belong and deserve to be here. I’m getting there,” he says. Needham didn’t disclose what had happened to him as a child when he joined the force – he had still told no one – but, after joining the police, the feeling that he had a responsibility to report his abuser grew. “I felt guilty about not reporting it for years,” he says. “I thought: ‘This guy must have gone on to do it again.’” So he picked up the phone. Two officers came to his house. “They did a video statement – it was the first time I’d ever fully recounted the story – and they forgot to press record. It’s not a criticism of the officers, but I mention it now in my talk to officers – make sure you know the equipment and make sure you know it’s working.” He adds that, for survivors, constantly having to relive their trauma just compounds the damage. “When you do decide to come forward, you sort of mentally prepare yourself, there is an adrenaline high. If you get off that rollercoaster and then have to get back on, it will bring back memories and you can suffer from PTSD.” Needham was called several times by the investigating officer in the case, asking if he was sure he wanted to go to trial. “It felt like he was trying to talk me out of it,” he says. “I’m sure that wasn’t the case, but that’s what it felt like. So I said, ‘Yeah, I’m determined.’ Why would I report it if I’m not going to go through with it?” When his day in court arrived, Needham saw his attacker again for the first time since he left foster care. He declined to use a screen or give evidence by video link. “I said to the officer: ‘I want to look the guy in the eye. Whatever happens, I’m going to sit there and I’m going to look at him and tell the jury what he’s done to me.’” Needham had worked in the police for years by this time, and was accustomed to tough questioning, but found the defence barrister particularly confrontational. “I felt like I was on trial,” he says. “They’re just constantly trying to trip you up on every single thing. He asked me about care homes in the area and whether I’d visited any of them, trying to deliberately confuse me. The barrister was very snotty, very intimidating. I remember standing there, shaking; I was petrified. “I think, emotionally, I was not ready for it, because you’re never ready for these things. By the end, I felt traumatised.” After a week-long trial, the jury was released and took two days to come back: the result was hung. Six months later, he was back in court again. He started getting panic attacks. “I sort of pretended I didn’t have all that, you know, because I’m in the police service, I wanted to be tough.” But when giving evidence, he broke down. “I cried like a baby, I know it sounds … the judge paused it for a little while, and then went back in and finished my evidence. Afterwards, I thought, I’ve left everything I’ve got in that courtroom, and I’ve done everything I can, psychologically, emotionally, physically. And if I don’t get a result then the system’s not working.” The case went to a hung jury a second time. The man he said had attacked him walked free. “I’d been walking up and down my living room for days and they couldn’t come to a decision. It was a nightmare, even now it makes my skin crawl to think about it.” Needham’s mental health collapsed. “I went home and stayed in my bedroom for three months. Pretty much just shaking, jumping at noises, you know […] I wouldn’t go out, I didn’t eat, I was sleeping all day and up all night. I was really angry for about six months, asking what had gone wrong, what I could have done to convince them. I felt disbelieved, like I was a criminal – like every part of my life had been under the microscope. I was mortified.” He was diagnosed with PTSD, signed off work for three months, and started the long process of getting well. “Having counselling was the best thing I ever did: I just talked and talked to this poor lady. She was an amazing, amazing person.” Since that final trial, Needham has rebuilt his life. He met his German wife, an engineer, in 2014, at a blues club where he was playing, and she helped to make him laugh again. “She’s incredibly supportive of the work I do and appreciates me being open about my past,” he says. “I said to her when we met that I’m looking forward, not back. You can’t drive a car if you’re looking in your rear-view mirror.” He also has a positive relationship with his daughter from a previous relationship. In addition, he mentored 13 to 15 year olds with the Prince’s Trust. “They started by calling me ‘the Feds’,” he says. “By the end of the term, I had them dressing up in police forensic kits and uniforms, completing mock crime scene inquiries, asking me about how to join up, and calling me Officer Needham or Sir.” At the end of July he spent 24 hours locked in a cell to raise money for the Survivors Trust. With the charity’s support, he is now developing a network of trained victim survivor ambassadors, available to visit all 43 police forces in England and Wales, to give survivors a voice and provide vital insight to officers working on sexual abuse cases. “I didn’t get closure at the trial but I’m glad I did it,” he says. “I felt the justice system had no empathy. It’s not about people. To me, it felt more about just getting through the caseload they had. I was just another case number on their paper. And that’s what I’m trying to change – hopefully, the work I do now will have more impact than one conviction. “I’ve been through the system, I’ve been through hell and back. I’ve hidden in my bedroom for three months, I’ve had to be dragged out. But I can tell my story – about how I’ve got from that to where I am today”. He says the recent government rape review means “we are getting support from the senior level. It’s been a battle against the wind, but we have momentum now.” He pauses for breath, and lets out a short laugh. “I’m so passionate about it, I’m going to keep on going until we get the system we need,” he says. “Now I’ve started talking, no one is ever going to shut me up.”To call Omicron’s rise in the UK “precipitate” is to violently understate matters. Daily case counts have broken the record set just the day before over and over again. Yesterday they hit over 218,000. Amid such an astonishing surge of infection, consequences are unavoidable. Despite consistent evidence suggesting that Omicron causes somewhat less severe illness, especially in vaccinated and boosted people, numbers like this wreak their own havoc. Even if Omicron were half as virulent as Delta, but infected four times as many people, twice as fast, that’s still a wrecking ball aimed at a teetering healthcare system. The NHS is already seeing staff shortages from illness and quarantine, and weighing the possibility of reducing or cancelling services. Businesses are similarly struggling. And customers seeking to avoid infection are voting with their feet. Boxing day sales traffic in London was down 67% from pre-pandemic levels in some areas, showing that you don’t need a lockdown to have an economic impact. The virus will do it for you. Amid the inquests into how the UK came to be caught flat-footed yet again in the face of a new variant, there’s the pressing question about what to do right now. The single most important thing at the moment is boosters. And at least a first dose for anyone who inexplicably is yet to receive one. Protection from severe infection among those who have been boosted appears very good, and we think it kicks in quickly. We are in a race with Omicron here, and anything that slows down the virus helps. Decreasing the overall rate of new cases will mean more people get boosted before they are infected. And if fewer people are infected there will also be more people available to deliver the shots and do other vital work. But while vaccines are the most important part of the strategy to blunt Omicron’s impact, they are not enough by themselves. We still need to support isolation for those infected, quarantine for those exposed, rapid tests to identify cases, and promote masking in public places. All of these need urgent support from the government. Frankly, it’s a travesty that amid all the events of the last two years there’s isn’t yet mandatory sick pay, and generous support for anyone who needs to isolate after testing positive for Covid. The shortening of isolation requirements to 7 days following a positive test – along with two negative antigen tests – might not be perfect, but it is defensible if we are seeking to maintain a workforce and avoid a shutdown of society by default, and to maintain essential services. Early evidence suggests that for many Omicron breakthrough cases, the period of infectiousness is shorter. So even if a person is still shedding detectable virus, they may be a low infection risk to others. Indeed, rapid antigen tests are widely believed to be a guide, if an imperfect one, to whether a person is currently infectious – even if they don’t catch every Covid case. So making them widely available will also help avoid further infection from any people shedding virus for a longer period. These tests are useful, but likely to be in short supply – as seen over the Christmas period. If that happens, we must consider when they are most effective. Infections in young people are less likely to be serious than those in older people. So rapid tests are best used to avoid introducing the virus to vulnerable older networks. Use one before seeing older relatives – and just before. The rate with which viral load – and thus infectivity – can increase with Omicron is impressive. And the longer the period since your last negative test, the less likely you are still negative. On top of that, everyone should be issued with a good quality mask and instructions on how to use it when indoors in public. There is no reason the government could not do this, but masks have become a flashpoint in the culture wars. The politicisation of mask use makes about as much sense as politicising gravity. Concerns from some infectious disease professionals about improper mask use are also misplaced. A bunch of people using unfitted N95s and not trained in their use, will still transmit far less to each other than a group using cloth masks or worse, nothing at all. Any prescriptions for how to slow Omicron will be met, I am sure, with fury from those determined to pretend either that the virus does not exist or that its consequences are minor. I appeal to those people to talk to the dedicated healthcare staff who have worked to save the lives of those suffering from Covid throughout the pandemic. Every booster that reaches a person before Omicron does, helps them. All the ferment and fury about the damage of lockdowns, usually from profoundly uninformed sources, many of whom are not acting in good faith, has always missed an essential point. Epidemiologists like myself have always been about reducing harm. Like risk, we cannot eliminate harm entirely, but we can takes steps to avoid the very worst consequences. These measures should accomplish that. Data from South Africa shows that as rapidly as Omicron hits, it starts to decline shortly thereafter. And so at least we think the surge will be short, and before the spring it will be largely in the rearview mirror. It won’t be pretty, but it will be quick. Dr William Hanage is a professor of the evolution and epidemiology of infectious disease at Harvard and the co-director of the Center for Communicable Disease DynamicsLike many great adventures, Tux and Fanny begins on a quiet afternoon. Our two oddly named protagonists decide that they would like to play a game of football, but disaster strikes: the ball is flat. Our quest is simple – find a way to reinflate the football. Can we find a pump? This first challenge is the route towards hundreds of other tiny mysteries in the labyrinthine world of Tux and Fanny’s house and surrounding gardens, each stranger and more delightful than the last. There is a tree growing up through the floor. The antenna on the roof is broken. There is a door in the wall where there shouldn’t be and strange figures are coming through. All is absolutely not what it seems. To categorise this as a point-and-click adventure, or an exploration game, or a puzzle game feels wrong, though it incorporates elements of all three genres while subverting them at every turn. The player wanders around as Tux, Fanny, the cat or the flea that lives on the cat’s back, and even the rewards for your problem-solving have a dreamlike feel to them. Some puzzles contain whole worlds of their own: an entire readable copy of Moby-Dick is hidden on the shelf, as are many tiny comics and zines that are a joy to browse through. There is a plethora of micro-games, found on floppy disks around the house and garden, which you can play on the desktop computer in the living room. These micro-games have silly names such as Skull Legs and Puzzle Tractor, but they are purposeful and even occasionally poetic in their execution. The visual style is noteworthy – it changes often, depending on which of the many queries we as players are trying to solve. Sometimes it is a simple, blocky pixelated world. Sometimes it is animated in watercolour, sometimes computer-generated, sometimes it is stop-motion, sometimes it is all of those things at once. It is never the same for long. Tux and Fanny began as a long series of tiny films by director and writer Albert Birney. It feels very personal, which tempers the surrealism and grounds what is a weird experience. The stranger parts of the game are sometimes the most poignant: the narrative journey of the flea on the cat’s back is quite moving, for example, which caught me off guard. While we might find the pump for the football early enough in the long and surprising afternoon we are playing through, we find many other incredible things. We categorise birds, paint and sell pictures on the internet, float down a river on a tyre and shatter the fabric of reality and paste it back together. Tux and Fanny is unique and gorgeous: a strange treasure. • Tux and Fanny is out now; £8.When Stuart Broad took David Warner’s edge on the first day of the Sydney Test, into the slip cordon to be safely clasped, it felt like something clicked into place. This was the scent of a familiar dish, or YouTubing a favourite scene from a movie. The reassurance of the familiar, and the rightness of something that should be just so. At the same time, there was the unmistakable sense that thousands of people across the world were shouting at their television sets that they had told you so, or told someone so, and why had nobody listened? Warner’s 2019 Ashes immolation at the torch of Broad is the stuff of forever. Ten innings, 95 runs, a single-figure series average. Among cricket lovers, it lives on with the potency and permanence of a race memory. Broad was the tormentor for seven dismissals of the 10, coming around the wicket to the left-hander, angling the ball in, using his mastery of English conditions to make it seam and swing from a length so full as to be always threatening. Sometimes it came in to hit pads or stumps, sometimes away to take the outside edge, even drawing nicks when an increasingly flummoxed Warner tried to leave the ball. In the current series, then, when Broad was left out in Brisbane and in Melbourne, there was widespread bewilderment. Why would England forgo the weapon that could wipe out Australia’s prolific opener? Perhaps because it was a different year in a different country. The bowler had twice before played series against Warner in Australia. Across all five Tests in 2017-18, Broad didn’t dismiss him once, while Warner repeatedly set the tone and averaged 63. In 2013-14, Broad got him four times, but only after the opener had made enough runs to average 58. Even previous series in England had not gone Broad’s way: no wicket in 10 attempts in 2015, where Warner made five half‑centuries and averaged 46; one dismissal in six innings against the junior version in 2013. In emphasising the dominance of 2019 on the one hand, you also have to concede that in all their other contests Warner has played 15 Tests for six Broad dismissals, three centuries, 12 half-centuries, and an average of nearly 49. But it could have been different at the Gabba, right? Where Broad got him out twice in 2013? Yes, got him out for 49 and 124. Admittedly the 2021 Gabba had greenness and juice in the surface, and that duel could have been compelling. The question about whether there was a psychological hangover from 2019 would have been tested. Audiences were denied the intrigue of that contest, and that is a shame in itself. It doesn’t mean the whole series would have been different. Broad bowled to Warner the next week instead, in Adelaide. Warner made 95. Even if Broad had been picked in Brisbane, England would presumably have stuck to the plan of batting first. Which brings us back to the problem that England’s batting is currently nowhere near the standard to function in international cricket. Broad’s prowess with the stick would not have improved upon Brisbane’s first-day debacle. Among all of the arguments that have played out before and during each Test about the choice of bowlers, England have had a batting collapse in every innings: 10 for 147, eight for 74, eight for 86, nine for 144, eight for 124, and 10 for 68. Stuart Broad can’t change that. Stuart Broad can’t defend that. Wasim Akram, Malcolm Marshall, and Robocop fused with a bowling machine can’t defend that. Even bowling magic cannot transform batting coal into gold. So when one old combatant dismissed the other on the first day at the SCG, there was an echo of what might have been had they gone head-to-head to start the series. There was also an echo of what might have been had the work of Broad and company been given support by the rest of their team. That edge into the slip cordon could be the starting point of a mighty bowling surge on the second day, and it still won’t matter a jot of ink in the scorebook unless England can find some runs to go with it. Broad bowling to Warner in Brisbane was never going to change everything. It can’t change anything unless something else changes first.There’s a moment in The Lost Daughter, Maggie Gyllenhaal’s adaptation of the Elena Ferrante novel which stars Olivia Colman, where I gasped out loud and swore at the character. Colman’s Leda, a professor holidaying in Greece alone, is conversing awkwardly with a pregnant stranger. “Children are a crushing responsibility,” she says, by way of a conversational coda. The bluntness of Colman’s delivery meant that I was laughing as I gasped, but still: everyone knows it to be on some level true, but you don’t go around saying such things to pregnant women. Or at least, you shouldn’t. The Netflix film is a fairly faithful adaptation of the 2006 novel; it holds the same capacity to shock while bringing out new feelings and elucidations. The moment in the film where one of Leda’s daughters cuts her finger and repeatedly begs her mother – a younger Leda, played by Jessie Buckley – to kiss it better, is far more emotionally affecting than when described in the slim, interior novel. “Poor creatures who came out of my belly,” Leda narrates in the book, and as a cinematic audience at times we are inclined to agree with her. Because what sort of mother abandons her children, as Leda does? Is maternal ambivalence still a taboo? Some insist that it is, though a woman failing to love her children as society deems she should is hardly a new story, either in literature or reality. Maternal cruelty is still shocking, whether it comes in the form of a performance of Medea or another heartbreaking headline case of child murder or neglect. For some, even having mixed feelings about motherhood warrants punishment. Rachel Cusk’s 2015 adaptation of Medea at the Almeida theatre featured a chorus of “conforming yummy mummies”; Cusk herself was castigated by such a chorus for A Life’s Work, her 2001 book which committed the crime of being honest about how exhausting and miserable it was to have a baby who cried unceasingly (hardly a controversial revelation, or at least not by today’s standards). “Again and again people judged the book not as readers but as mothers,” Cusk later wrote. In recent years there has been a proliferation of awareness-raising about maternal ambivalence, especially postnatal depression. Courageous women have spoken out and written about it, defying what Cusk describes as the tendency of the communal to prevail over the individual when it comes to motherhood. These women are brave because the voices that contradict a powerful cultural myth are so often castigated. Eventually these voices formed their own chorus, and the taboo itself is weakening, or at least it seems that way to me. Yet these works maintain an emotional force, perhaps because now, with our greater understanding, we know just how close so many mothers have come to being driven mad by it. Perhaps, we worry, our own mothers were. It is not a comfortable feeling, and The Lost Daughter is not a comfortable film. Leda is not held up for judgment by us, though at times the audience may of course judge her. In a recent adaptation of Nancy Mitford’s The Pursuit of Love, maternal abandonment is played for laughs in the form of the character of “The Bolter”, Fanny’s mother, who flees any form of commitment. It is tonally entirely different to The Lost Daughter, but again, simple judgment is the least interesting reaction one can have. It feels less scandalous, these days, to admit that women can have other interests besides childrearing, and that finding a way to reconcile making art, in particular, with the division of domestic labour is a worthy source of creative exploration. Works such as Lara Feigel’s Free Woman, which explores Doris Lessing’s maternal ambivalence (she abandoned two of her children) as well as her own, have added to this conversation, as have novels by Sheila Heti, Jenny Offill, and Avni Doshi, among others. Yet the death of Joan Didion saw a resurgence of the Caitlin Flanagan article in which she puts Didion’s childcare arrangements under the microscope. “Where was Quintana when Didion was living at the Faculty Club, or finishing her novels at her parents’ house, or bunking down in the Haight”, Flanagan asks. “Not with her mother.” Those four words drip with judgment. “The children stared at me,” Leda narrates towards the end of the novel The Lost Daughter. “I felt their gazes longing to tame me, but more brilliant was the brightness of life outside them, new colours, new bodies, new intelligence, a language to possess finally as if it were my true language, and nothing, nothing that seemed to me reconcilable with that domestic space from which they stared at me in expectation.” Ferrante remains the empress of maternal ambivalence. It comes down to language. In The Days of Abandonment, the narrator Olga describes the experience of breastfeeding: “I was like a lump of food that my children chewed without stopping, a cud made of a living material that continually amalgamated and softened its living substance to allow two greedy bloodsuckers to nourish themselves.” To read such words still feel like a forceful, visceral refutation, a scream in the face of the prevailing narrative. Many women will no doubt read those lines and reflect, “that isn’t how it was for me.” But I hope that we are moving away from a place where one woman’s experience is taken to automatically undermine another’s. Most women will not abandon their children as Leda does, but many of us know that a more complex rendering of motherhood on screen and on the page can only be a good thing for us all. After all, it is when feelings are deemed unutterable that they become suffocating. Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnistEverton have appointed the club legend Graeme Sharp to their board as a non-executive director. Sharp, the second-highest goalscorer in Everton’s history and a club ambassador since 2000, will be involved in all football-related decisions but is not a replacement for the former director of football Marcel Brands. It is understood Sharp’s appointment to the board was planned before Brands left Everton last month amid widespread criticism of Farhad Moshiri’s ownership. Everton announced a strategic review into all levels of their football operation after Brands’ departure and that remains ongoing. Sharp, 61, will continue in his role as the club’s players’ life president but relinquish his other duties to work on the board. The former Scotland international said: “This club is in my blood. Joining the board and being able to play a part in shaping Everton’s future is one of the greatest honours of all. I look forward to working with my fellow board members and take my responsibility as a custodian of our great club very seriously.”Reduced timetables are to be brought in across Great Britain’s entire railway network by the middle of this month to deal with Covid staff shortages and to match falling passenger numbers. Train operators said passengers should check before they travel, with more companies due to introduce temporary timetables after moves from ScotRail, LNER and others in December. The industry body the Rail Delivery Group (RDG) said the reduced schedules would be introduced by 16 January for every operator to make services more resilient and reliable for passengers. The RDG said the changes would also offer better value for taxpayers in the face of declining usage and fare revenue during the pandemic. It did not give a date for when normal service would resume. However, unions warned that the current crisis around the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant should not be used as cover for long-term cuts, while passenger representatives called for first and last services to be maintained throughout. High levels of staff absence during the latest wave of Covid infections led a number of operators to cancel services in the run-up to Christmas, starting with ScotRail, which was particularly affected because of Scotland’s rules on self-isolation for contacts as well as infected people. ScotRail brought in a temporary reduced weekday timetable this week, with 150 fewer services a day. CrossCountry has cut about 50 trains a day, while Southern will not run trains to its normal London terminus, Victoria, for the rest of the week. Transport for Wales and Greater Anglia have switched to amended timetables, while TransPennine Express, South Western, Northern and others are warning of short-notice service changes. The RDG’s director of people, operations and railway strategy, Susie Homan, said: “The temporary timetables that rail companies are putting in place, with government support, will help ensure more reliable services with fewer short-notice cancellations so that we can continue to get people and goods to where they need to be. “The government has supported the railway with over £15bn since the start of the pandemic, and it makes sense to better match the number of trains that are running with the number of people travelling, so that the industry gets the most out of every taxpayer pound and doesn’t take more than its fair share of public money.” Official figures show passenger numbers had fallen back to just over 50% of pre-pandemic levels before Christmas. However, the TSSA union demanded guarantees that the cuts would only last for the duration of the Omicron wave, with the instruction to work from home where possible making passenger numbers fall rapidly. The general secretary, Manuel Cortes, said: “We really fear that the Tory government is using temporary timetables as cover to reduce services so they can then implement cuts of £2bn on our railways.” He said the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, should “give passengers copper-bottomed guarantees that rail services will return back to their pre pandemic level as soon as we have any kind of return to normality”, adding: “Failure to do so would be a clear signal of what many fear are this government’s real intentions – cutting train services.” The RMT general secretary, Mick Lynch, said: “No one should underestimate the impact that Covid is having on transport staff and there is a logic to adjusting services accordingly. However, any attempt to use this crisis to cynically bulldoze through permanent cuts to services and staffing levels would meet the stiffest resistance from this trade union.” The passenger watchdog Transport Focus said that amending timetables was a pragmatic response if it would prevent chaotic last-minute cancellations. However, Anthony Smith, the chief executive, added: “Services must still meet the needs of those who have to travel, especially key sector workers. “Operators must protect first and last services, provide enough space to keep passengers at a safe distance from each other, and flexibility so that tickets can be used on alternative routes or times.”Nicola Sturgeon has cut Scotland’s self-isolation period from 10 to seven days, after sustained pressure from businesses and opposition parties to address soaring staff absences. The first minister told MSPs on Wednesday her government’s highly cautious stance on the 10-day isolation period was being softened after data from hospitals suggested the Omicron variant was less medically severe than feared. Sturgeon also confirmed Scotland would adopt a new rule on taking PCR tests announced in England earlier on Wednesday, to cut the number of PCR tests being taken unnecessarily and to conserve supplies. She said the requirement for someone with a positive lateral flow test to immediately book a PCR would be dropped, as long as they did not have symptoms. That new rule will come into force on Thursday 6 January, rather than 11 January as in England. Ministers in England and in Wales cut self-isolation to a week in December after deciding the impact of extended self-isolation on public services and businesses was not outweighed by Omicron’s risk to health and critical care services. In a recalled session of the Scottish parliament, where she faced heavy criticism over the quality of NHS data in Scotland, Sturgeon said adults could end their self-isolation after seven days if they had no fever and had had two negative lateral flow tests. Close contacts will not have to self-isolate if they are fully vaccinated, have no symptoms and record negative tests every day for seven days, under new rules which take effect from midnight on Wednesday. Anyone not fully vaccinated will need to remain in isolation for 10 days – a measure expected to drive up vaccination rates. She acknowledged the new rules were “more proportionate and sustainable and less restrictive”. Sturgeon’s move came after Scottish hospitals said their services were under significant strain because of staff absences. The train operator ScotRail cut hundreds of services this month owing to staff shortages. Hospitality companies and retailers have struggled to stay open, and have complained bitterly about the impact on their businesses. While Scotland has recorded its highest-ever Covid infections – 20,217 on Monday, a figure partly inflated by results delayed by the holiday weekend – rates of critical illness have remained stable. There were 1,223 people with Covid in hospital on Wednesday, more than double the number seven days ago, but the number in intensive care remained stable, at about 52 or 53 people a day. Five more people had died after a positive Covid test, taking the total under that measure in Scotland to 9,872. The first minister came under pressure from opposition parties over the quality of government data after it emerged that John Swinney, her Covid recovery minister, had used old survey figures to defend Scotland’s restrictions. Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, said Swinney had used “misleading data for scoring petty political points” on Tuesday after he quoted Office for National Statistics survey results from mid-December to claim infection rates in England, at 1 in 20, were twice those in Scotland, at 1 in 40. Sturgeon confirmed the latest ONS data showed Scotland’s estimated infection rate was 1 in 20 last week, compared with 1 in 15 for England. English regional data was more varied, from 1 in 10 in London to 1 in 30 in other regions. It was 1 in 25 in Northern Ireland and 1 in 20 in Wales. She denied Swinney had used misleading figures but acknowledged “this isn’t a competition”. Sturgeon was warned by Alex Cole-Hamilton, the Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, and Jackie Baillie, deputy leader of Scottish Labour, that she risked losing political support unless the quality of the evidence she relied on improved. They said Swinney had also wrongly promised new data would be published on Wednesday to show how many patients were admitted because they had Covid, rather than for other medical reasons. Public Health Scotland said it hoped the figures would be released on Friday. English data suggests a third of Covid-positive patients were hospitalised with other medical complaints. “Transparency has ebbed away,” Cole-Hamilton said.Hundreds of care homes are closing their doors to new admissions because of the rapid spread of Omicron, increasing pressure on embattled hospitals that are unable to discharge patients into the community. Of the homes operated by MHA, one of the largest not-for-profit care providers in the UK, 70% have now shut their doors to new residents because of Covid outbreaks and staff shortages. At Four Seasons Healthcare, one of the largest private operators, 40% of homes it operates have recorded two or more cases, which means, under government guidance, they should not accept new arrivals. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, described the trend as “very concerning” and said hospital bosses were reporting that delayed discharges were significantly adding to pressure. “This isn’t good for patients as we know patient outcomes deteriorate if patients are medically fit to discharge but can’t leave hospital,” he said. He said it was also making it more difficult to find room for patients including serious cases coming via accident and emergency departments. On Wednesday, Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said temporary settings may need to be set up to get people out of hospitals, many of which have declared critical incidents amid a staff absence rate of 10% on average across England. “This issue of staff absence is not just in the hospitals; it is in primary care and community care and of course in social care,” Taylor said. “If you have people in hospital who don’t need to be there, that adds another pressure to an already challenging situation.” Some health trusts have already set up temporary care facilities on floors of hotels with live-in staff recruited from abroad, including in Bristol and Plymouth. Different local health teams have been advising care homes affected by outbreaks to close to new admissions for 14 or 28 days. The shutdowns come as Covid deaths in care homes jumped more than 50% in the last week of 2021, according to official figures, but they still remain far lower than in earlier waves. Sixty-five people died from Covid in England’s care homes in the week to 31 December compared with about 1,850 in the peak of the January 2021 wave, apparently confirming hopes about Omicron’s relative mildness and the effectiveness of the vaccine. Sam Monaghan, the chief executive of MHA, which has closed 62 of its 89 homes to new admissions because of Department of Health and Social Care guidelines around outbreaks, said: “The current rules around outbreaks mean that care homes find themselves closed to new admissions, leaving older people staying in hospital longer than necessary or not getting the care that they need.” Vic Rayner, the chief executive of the National Care Forum, said: “This isn’t just difficult for hospitals, but also for unpaid carers who are under enormous pressure and won’t be able to get respite or find places for their loved ones to get the round the clock care they really need.” At MHA 10% of staff are currently unavailable for work, mirroring the situation in the NHS where medical students are being primed to be deployed on wards. To get staff back to work, Taylor has urged the government to consider dropping the period of isolation after a positive test from seven to five days “if the science indicates it is safe”. HC-One, the largest private care home provider, said 869 staff – about 4% of the workforce – were off with either a positive test or awaiting results, while about 500 residents had tested positive, or 3%. MHA is also calling for the government to ease restrictions on visitors into homes that are in outbreak, which are currently supposed to be limited to a single essential caregiver for up to 28 days after the outbreak begins. “Once an outbreak is declared (often involving only two cases of Covid), everyone living in these homes can have essential care visits but no broader friends and family may visit for up to four weeks,” Monaghan said. “Meanwhile, in the general population, if we test negative six and seven days after a positive Covid test, we may return to socialising straight away. This is a huge disparity and it is time for the government to look again at the scientific evidence and review whether these differing approaches are really needed.”Shoppers in Britain had to pay more for their Christmas groceries as price inflation jumped to 3.5% in December, according to retail industry figures that showed a sharp rise in the price of beef, savoury snacks and skincare in particular. Grocery price inflation added nearly £15 to an average monthly bill over the festive period, according to analysts at the data firm Kantar. The monthly increase was the sharpest since January 2018, bar a short period in spring 2020 when retailers suspended promotions to keep products available during panic buying at the start of the coronavirus pandemic. While the prices of some items – including fresh bacon, bath and shower products and spirits – have fallen in recent weeks, Kantar found grocery price inflation accelerated in December, up almost 1.5 percentage points on the 2.1% level seen in November. Christmas spending pushed total grocery sales to £11.7bn in the four weeks to 26 December – just 0.2% below the record established at the end of 2020, when supermarket sales benefited while pubs and restaurants were closed because of Covid restrictions. Fraser McKevitt, the head of retail and consumer insight at Kantar, said: “People seized the chance to enjoy Christmas with friends and family after last year’s muted festivities. The data suggests that, while there weren’t formal rules in place across the UK this year, many people celebrated at home again due to Omicron.” Despite the spread of the Omicron variant, shoppers returned in greater numbers to supermarkets to fill their trolleys, with the largest number of in-store visits in December since March 2020. In comparison, online sales fell by 3.7% compared with a year earlier, accounting for just over 12% of total sales. The busiest shopping day of the year was 23 December – typically a bumper day for pre-Christmas spending. Analysts viewed this as evidence of shoppers’ confidence that supply chain disruption earlier in the year would not prevent them from being able to buy their turkey, brussels sprouts and Christmas pudding at the supermarket. Tesco, Britain’s biggest supermarket chain, maintained dominance over its rivals during the crucial Christmas trading period, increasing its market share to 27.9% over the 12 weeks to Boxing Day. This marks an increase of 0.6 percentage points on a year earlier. Retailers found it challenging to beat the record for pre-Christmas sales set in 2020, when hospitality venues had to close and could only serve takeaway food and drink in some areas of the UK. However, sales rose among all the leading supermarket chains compared with the final 12 weeks of 2019. Discounters Aldi and Lidl experienced a slight improvement to their market share, as did Waitrose. The online grocer Ocado, which has a joint venture with Marks &amp; Spencer, was the only retailer which grew its sales compared with a year earlier. Consumers splashed out on premium ranges, taking sales of supermarkets’ own-brand luxury products to record levels, as shoppers spent £627m in December alone – an increase of almost 7% for such items compared with 2020. Traditional treats such as mince pies and chocolates proved popular, but sales of newer plant-based foods also grew before Veganuary, a period when consumers promise to only eat vegan food during the first month of the year.In the 1970s I lived in SoHo in New York, which is not far from the Bowery, but the two districts were like separate universes. SoHo was full of artists and creative types but the Bowery was known as the place where you ended up when you were at the bottom of the barrel. There were a lot of flophouses and a lot of alcoholism and drug use. It was the darkest place in New York City for a long time. The Bowery Mission is a Christian rescue centre for homeless people. Only men are allowed to stay overnight but it feeds anybody. I used to go there around Thanksgiving and Christmas time to help serve dinner. The face-to-face contact and interactions I had with people meant that I always felt a real connection with them, and it also made me grateful for what I had in my own life. In the 1990s there was a lot of focus on homelessness in New York City and money and public attention were put towards trying to end it. And then, in the early 2000s, the interest faded. It’s not that the problem went away – on the contrary – but for some reason we weren’t talking about it any more. That bothered me, so I thought to myself: what can I do? I figured as a photographer I could create something that brings a little attention to these people and their situation. So I contacted the Bowery Mission and asked to do some portraits of the centre’s regular users. They gave me a room upstairs to work in. If you want to get a meal at the Bowery Mission, you have to also attend a religious service. So I’d wait until people had eaten and listened to the sermon and were chilled out and relaxed and only then would I approach to ask if I could photograph them. I needed to be very careful because in a lot of ways these people are very fragile, but I was also surprised by how much – had I not known they were homeless – I would have never guessed their circumstances. My plan was to focus on faces and eyes, because we so often walk down the street and see somebody and we don’t want to actually look at them or engage. Not to sound corny but I was interested in trying to get into their story and their soul. I was interested when couples arrived at the centre as it was clear that they lived together on the streets. These guys were such a great pair. When they smiled, I was like: that’s the picture. I shot with something called an Octabank, which is like a gigantic umbrella that’s about six feet wide and means that the whole face is beautifully lit. It’s more often used in fashion photography. A lot of pictures of homeless people are really sad. I didn’t want to do that. There is some joy in these people, and that’s what I wanted to show. That’s why I lit it the way I did. And from the poses I wanted to get the depth of feeling of them as humans but I also wanted to get over the fact that you would hang with some of these people – they’re cool! I choose deliberately not to publish their names out of consideration for their privacy and because I wanted to focus on the faces and humanity of the people captured in the moment in the project. With these two it was clear that they had each other, and that was pretty much it in their lives at that point. I wanted to give a sense of what their relationship felt like. I was trying to get them to centre themselves in front of the camera, and just be who they were and not try to do anything special or performative. Many of us are only a couple of steps away from something like homelessness. I was feeling helpless about a situation in my city that I thought was terrible and a life condition I saw every day when I walked out of my door. The worse the situation becomes the more it is normalised and your sense of helplessness is eventually numbed. I exhibited the work in the Mission headquarters in Midtown. We blew up eight or nine of the photographs to around 6ft by 4ft. You’re looking at these huge eyes and faces and the impact of having all those pictures in one room was pretty overwhelming. I think they felt really special having all the lights and cameras and attention on them when doing this project. I hope that feeling lasted for a while. Bill Bernstein’s CV Born: New York City, 1950. Trained: Self-taught. Influences: Avedon, William Klein, Arbus, Leibovitz. High point: “Documenting Paul McCartney on the road 1989-2005.” Low point: “Hasn’t happened yet.” Top tip: “Have something to say before you start shooting.”If you find news websites too overwhelming, too fast and too full of distractions then this might be the solution: a recreation of the BBC’s Ceefax service featuring up-to-date headlines, an accurate weather map and the latest stock market prices. Nathan Dane, 20, has spent the last six years building a simulation of the BBC’s defunct text-based information service. It takes in data from the BBC’s existing website and repurposes it in the distinctively blocky font that was ubiquitous on television sets during the 1980s and 1990s. “It’s as close a recreation as I can make it,” said Dane from his home in Enniskillen, Northern Ireland, where he has a separate screen at his desk for showing news headlines from his recreation of Ceefax. “I do find it really useful myself. If I’m sitting in work eating my lunch I can just stick that on and get up to date. You’re not flicking about between websites – you have all the information you need on a page but without all the distraction.” At its peak, tens of millions of Britons used BBC Ceefax and its commercial equivalent, Teletext, to check news headlines, find travel information or wait an infuriatingly long time for a quiz answer to be revealed. Individual stories were often split across multiple pages, meaning it could take minutes to fully comprehend an article if you were unlucky enough to load halfway through a piece. Only a few sentences of text fitted on each screen, forcing writers to develop the skills to produce concise stories. But the limitations and slowness of a system designed in 1974 may be increasingly attractive in a world of unlimited choice, while the cluttered advertising-heavy designs of many modern websites have made people nostalgic for the simplicity of Ceefax. The BBC closed the original Ceefax service as part of the transition to digital television broadcasts, with Northern Ireland being the last region of the UK to lose access. “We had Ceefax in this part of the world until 2012, which is probably the only reason I remember it,” said Dane, who works for a digital signage company. “I have a great interest in all the old broadcast-TV type stuff. It’s really the service that I remember looking through when I was wee.” Dane’s recreation features a weather map (page 401) based on data from the Met Office that accurately recreates the current forecast on a map of the UK using the limited Ceefax colour palette. The Premier League football table (page 324) is up to date. A selection of national, foreign and local stories can be accessed through the headlines section (page 101). Some fans have also set up YouTube streams looping through Ceefax pages with muzak in the background, recreating the way the BBC used to fill overnight schedules on its channels. The small but thriving online Teletext community, which is centred on a group on the chat service Discord, already helps run a separate long-running service called Teefax – although it does not use the same BBC styling. There are also dozens of teletext artists who challenge themselves to use the limited colour palette. One of them, Dan Farriond, said: “It’s a great gateway because it’s very simple, it’s built on 1970s technology, it’s simple to get your head around technology-wise. It’s the pure aesthetic of it and the simplicity. You only have a limited number of colours. A lot of the design decisions are made for you.” Dane, who runs his Ceefax server from his home, said his service was remarkably stable. When Facebook went offline in November he proudly tweeted a story about Mark Zuckerberg’s company with the caption: “Ceefax, however, remains unaffected.”Stock markets are somewhat mixed today after the record run seen in the last couple of days in Europe and on Wall Street. US stocks have turned negative despite strong jobs data from ADP, and an upbeat US services survey from IHS Markit, while European shares are still pushing higher, with the UK’s FTSE 100 index up 0.26%, Germany’s Dax 0.4% higher and the French and Italian indices rising 0.7%. Our main stories today: Thank you for reading. We’ll be back tomorrow. Take care - JK US services firms registered another steep expansion in business activity at the end of 2021, according to the latest PMI data from IHS Markit. Its US services business activity index fell to 57.6 in December, down from 58.0 in November and similar to the flash estimate of 57.5. The upturn eased slightly to the slowest for three months, but was supported by a sharper increase in new business. The rise in new orders was the fastest for five months, as demand conditions strengthened. Although firms sought to expand workforce numbers to tackle strong growth in backlogs of work, labor shortages and challenges retaining staff hampered progress, with employment rising only marginally. Nevertheless, hopes of further upticks in demand drove business confidence to the highest since November 2020.Meanwhile, soaring wage bills and greater supplier prices led to the steepest increase in cost burdens on record. Charges also rose markedly, albeit at the softest rate for three months amid reports of competition for customers. Returning to soaring gas prices... Households in Europe are set to pay an average of 54% more for energy than they did two years ago, due to soaring natural gas and power prices across the region, according to Bank of America, as reported by Bloomberg. The average residential consumer will spend €1,850 euros on energy this year, up from €1,200 in 2020, analysts at the bank said in a research note. The biggest increases will be in Italy and the UK, where bills will jump by about €950. Europe’s energy crisis is hitting households, sending bills rocketing and pushing many into fuel poverty. Policymakers are under pressure to find ways to shield consumers while not sending energy suppliers into bankruptcy. Of the European Union’s 27 members, 20 have acted to soften the blow for the most vulnerable consumers and households - most effectively via tax cuts, according to the European Commission. “We see a return to early-2021 price levels as unlikely in 2022,” wrote the analysts, including Harry Wyburd and Karen Kostanian. Even if this were to occur, “it would likely be too late to avert significant cost increases which have already been locked in via hedging.” On Wall Street, US stocks are mixed after the opening bell. Dow Jones up 40 points, or 0.1%, at 36,840 S&amp;P 5 flat at 4,792 Nasdaq down 66 points, or 0.4%, at 15,556 Michael Pearce, senior US economist at Capital Economics, has looked at the US jobs figures in detail, and predicts that the picture will darken in January because of the spread of Omicron. The stronger 807,000 gain in the ADP measure of private payrolls in December suggests some upside risk to our estimate that the official figures released on Friday rose by a more modest 350,000. Regardless of how strong the December figures are, however, the widespread absenteeism caused by the rapid spread of the Omicron variant means the official non-farm payroll employment tally could fall outright in January. The breakdown suggests that the acceleration in private payrolls to 807,000 in December, from 505,000, was widespread. The manufacturing sector added 74,000 jobs, construction payrolls rose by 62,000, while services employment increased by 669,000, including a 246,000 rise in leisure and hospitality payrolls. While that broad-based strength is consistent with the continued downward trend in jobless claims over recent weeks, the continued strength of leisure and hospitality payrolls is a little difficult to square with the high-frequency evidence that suggests activity dropped back last month. The most recent nationwide surge in Omicron cases has triggered widespread cancellations and closures, as already short-staffed businesses are hit with a wave of staff calling in sick. Most of those absentees will still be paid and therefore counted as employed this month. But a significant minority who do not have access to paid sick leave will not, potentially knocking hundreds of thousands off the official non-farm payrolls tally in January. Because the ADP survey counts anyone on the payroll as employed, however, whether they are paid or not, a big discrepancy could emerge between the two employment measures. US companies hired twice as many people as expected in December, according to figures from the payroll processing firm ADP. CNBC has summarised the key points: Private job growth totalled 807,000 for the month, well ahead of the Dow Jones estimate for 375,000 and the November gain of 505,000, according to ADP. Hiring was broad-based, though leisure and hospitality led with 246,000 new positions. Businesses with 500 or more employees accounted for the bulk of the gains in December, adding 389,000 jobs. Soaring gas and other fuel prices have brought down the government in Kazakhstan. Reuters reports: Kazakhstan declared emergencies in the capital, main city and provinces on Wednesday after demonstrators stormed and torched public buildings, the worst unrest for more than a decade in a tightly controlled country that promotes an image of stability. The Cabinet resigned but that failed to quell the anger of the demonstrators, who have taken to the streets in response to a fuel price increase from the start of the new year. An Instagram live stream by a Kazakh blogger showed a fire blazing in the office of the Almaty mayor, with apparent gunshots audible nearby. Videos posted online also showed the nearby prosecutor’s office burning. Earlier on Wednesday, Reuters journalists saw thousands of protesters pressing towards Almaty city centre, some of them on a large truck. Security forces, ranked in helmets and riot shields, fired tear gas and flash-bang grenades. The city’s police chief said Almaty was under attack by “extremists and radicals”, who had beaten up 500 civilians and ransacked hundreds of businesses. A presidential decree announced a two-week state of emergency and night-time curfew in the capital Nur-Sultan, citing “a serious and direct security threat to citizens”. States of emergency were also declared in Almaty and in western Mangistau province, where the protests first emerged in recent days. Authorities appeared to have shut the country off the internet as the unrest spread. Netblocks, a site that monitors global internet connectivity, said the country was “in the midst of a nation-scale internet blackout”. Kazakhstan’s reputation for political stability under three decades of one-man rule by former leader Nursultan Nazarbayev helped it attract hundreds of billions of dollars of foreign investment in its oil and metals industries. The price of its dollar bonds plunged by nearly 6 cents, the worst showing since the height of the coronavirus market collapse of 2020. President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev accepted the government’s resignation on Wednesday following the protests, which have spread from the provinces to main cities since price caps on liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) were lifted on New Year’s Day. Speaking to the acting Cabinet, Tokayev ordered the price hikes reversed and new caps placed on the cost of other fuels. The unrest is the biggest test yet of Tokayev, 68, who took power in 2019 as hand-picked successor to Nazarbayev, a former Communist Party boss who had become the longest-serving ruler in the former Soviet Union by the time he stepped down. Nazarbayev, 81, still retains substantial authority as head of the ruling party and chairman of the security council. Kazakhstan is a close ally of Russia, and the Kremlin said it expected the country to quickly resolve its internal problems, warning other countries against interfering. Atameken, Kazakhstan’s business lobby group, said its members were reporting attacks on banks, stores and restaurants. US drugmaker Pfizer and Germany’s BioNTech, which partnered on a Covid-19 vaccine (which was the first to be approved in the world at the end of 2020), said today that they would jointly develop an mRNA-based vaccine for the prevention of the viral infection shingles. The companies expect to begin clinical trials of the shingles jab, which will combine Pfizer’s antigen technology with BioNTech’s messenger RNA platform technology, in the latter half of this year. If successful, the vaccine will go head to head with GSK’s two-dose vaccine Shingrix, which was approved in the US in 2017. It generated £2bn in revenues in 2020. Shingles develops in older adults who had chickenpox when they were younger; it’s painful rash that clears up within in a month in most cases but can sometimes lead to longer-lasting nerve pain. Fossil fuel companies and firms that work closely with them are among the biggest spenders on ads designed to look like Google search results, in what campaigners say is an example of “endemic greenwashing,” writes Niamh McIntyre, one of our data journalists. The Guardian analysed ads served on Google search results for 78 climate-related terms, in collaboration with InfluenceMap, a thinktank that tracks the lobbying efforts of polluting industries. The results show that over one in five ads seen in the study – more than 1,600 in total – were placed by companies with significant interests in fossil fuels. Sony has revealed plans to start an electric car company, making it the latest electronics manufacturer to target the automotive sector, reports my colleague Jasper Jolly. The Japanese tech firm is “exploring a commercial launch” of electric vehicles, and the new company, Sony Mobility Inc, will launch this spring, its chairman and president, Kenichiro Yoshida, told a news conference before the Consumer Electronics Show in the US. Yoshida on Wednesday presented a prototype sport utility vehicle, the Vision-S 02, which uses the same electric vehicle platform as the previously announced Vision-S 01 coupe that began testing on public roads in Europe from December 2020. Inflation in Italy has gone up, to the highest rate since August 2008. According to Istat preliminary data, the headline measure edged up to 3.9% year-on-year from 3.7% in November. Core inflation, stripping out volatile energy and fresh food, increased to 1.5% from 1.3% in November. After an average 0.2% contraction in 2020, inflation went up by 1.9% in 2021, the highest annual rate since 2012 when it had reached 3%. ING economist Paolo Pizzoli said: Energy prices were the undisputed inflation driver over 2021 and the lagged effects of these mean we shouldn’t expect to see a deceleration in headline inflation before the second quarter of this year. All of Europe’s main stock indices are now in positive territory, but investors appear cautious after the chunky gains seen in the last couple of days that lifted the pan-European Euro Stoxx 600 index to record highs over two consecutive days. The FTSE 100 index in London is back at levels last seen just before the Covid-19 pandemic started, in February 2020. After the final eurozone private sector surveys this morning, we will get ADP job numbers for the US at lunchtime, followed by the final readings for the US private sector surveys, and the Federal Reserve minutes of the last policy meeting, out at 7pm GMT. UK’s FTSE 100 up 16 points, or 0.2%, at 7,521 Germany’s Dax up 102 points, or 0.6%, at 16,255 France’s CAC up 40 points, or 0.55%, at 7,357 Italy’s FTSE MiB up 114 points, or 0.4%, at 28,068 And here’s a timeline: five key moments from the trial that shook Silicon Valley, from our west coast tech reporter Kari Paul. Here is our profile of Elizabeth Holmes, once regarded as the next Steve Jobs. Our wealth correspondent Rupert Neate writes: Just six years ago Forbes magazine declared her the “the world’s youngest self-made female billionaire” and the “next Steve Jobs”. Now, Elizabeth Holmes, 37, founder of the collapsed blood testing company Theranos, is facing decades in prison after being found guilty of conspiring to defraud her investors out of billions. Holmes, a university dropout with no medical training, had fooled regulators and some of the world’s richest people, including Rupert Murdoch, Henry Kissinger and Larry Ellison, into believing she had figured out a way to test for a range of health conditions with just a pinprick of blood. But the tests did not work, and the company was accused of often faking the results. One patient testified that a blood test revealed they were miscarrying when they were pregnant; another said they were given false-positive results for HIV. Our west coast technology reporter Kari Paul, for Guardian US, has looked at the wider ramifications of the Elizabeth Holmes trial. The founder of the now-defunct US blood testing firm Theranos was found guilty on Monday of fraud, concluding a high-profile trial that captivated Silicon Valley and chronicled the company’s missteps. Experts say the fraud charges could open up the tech industry to further scrutiny, making startups tread more carefully. The former CEO’s loss marks a milestone for Silicon Valley – an industry that has for years evaded accountability in its pervasive culture of “fake it till you make it” that encourages founders to make big promises, often with little proof. “Silicon Valley has thus far been famously been resistant to much prosecutorial activity, because its business model assumes you are going to take an aggressive, optimistic view of your product or service to attract investors,” said Jack Sharman, a white-collar defense lawyer at Lightfoot, a law firm in Alabama. “And if that product or service succeeds, you’re not a fraudster, you’re a visionary,” he added. Jo ventured into the City, London’s financial district, on Tuesday, when many people returned to work after the festive break. This is what she found: As the bells chimed one o’clock in the City of London on Tuesday, the typical lunchtime exodus from the offices in the capital’s financial district was barely a trickle. A handful of workers left the Bank of England on Threadneedle Street on their lunch breaks, but most of the scattering of people were dressed for a day shopping or sightseeing rather than sitting behind their desks. In normal times, Tuesday would have marked the first day back in the workplace after the Christmas festivities for millions of the nation’s office-based employees. Despite data suggesting that the Omicron Covid-19 variant is less severe than other versions of the virus, coupled with figures indicating that cases in the capital have stabilised, staff at most large offices appeared to be continuing to work from home. The travel industry is calling on UK ministers to remove all remaining Covid testing requirements for international travellers. It argues that they are damaging the travel sector and will not affect the spread of the Omicron variant, reports my colleague Joanna Partridge. Manchester Airports Group (MAG) and the trade body Airlines UK said in a joint statement that research they commissioned into travel restrictions supported the position that the removal of travel testing requirements would not affect overall cases rates and hospitalisations in the UK. The two organisations said the research showed that domestic rather than international restrictions would be the only way to reduce Omicron’s spread within the country. France, Europe’s second-biggest economy, fared better. Services growth weakened slightly from November but was the second-quickest since June. The services business activity index fell to 57.0 from 57.4 in November, still indicative of a sharp expansion. The composite index, which comprises manufacturing and services, was at 55.8 in December, down slightly from November’s 56.1 but still pointing to strong growth in France’s private sector. The recovery in Germany, Europe’s biggest economy, stalled in December. A slightly faster rise in manufacturing output during the month was offset by a decline in services activity caused by a resurgence in the pandemic and renewed virus containment measures. The services business activity index moved below the 50 no-change mark to 48.7 in December, from 52.7 in November, pointing to a decline in the sector, albeit at a more moderate rate than those seen during the first ad second waves of the pandemic. Firms are under considerable pressure to raise their prices, due to higher energy, staff, raw material and transport costs. The rate of input price inflation was the second-fastest on record, behind that recorded in November. The survey stretches back to mid-1997. Countries ranked by Composite PMI: Ireland 56.5 nine-month low France 55.8 (flash: 55.6) two-month low Spain 55.4 8-month low Italy 54.7 two-month low Germany 49.9 (flash: 50.0) 18-month low The latest snapshot of the eurozone private sector from IHS Markit is out. Following a brief pick-up in November, economic growth in the euro area eased to a nine-month low in December, resuming a slowdown trend amid a resurgence of Covid-19 infections. This had a notable effect on the service sector, restricting growth in both activity and new business. Manufacturing output growth remained subdued as supply-related disruptions continued to impede production schedules, the survey showed. Final Eurozone Composite Output Index: 53.3 (Flash: 53.4, Nov Final: 55.4) Final Eurozone Services Business Activity Index: 53.1 (Flash: 53.3, Nov Final: 55.9) (Any reading above 50 indicates expansion; any reading below points to contraction.) The German carmaker BMW achieved record sales of more than 2.2m vehicles from its BMW brand in 2021, outstripping 2019 sales despite the global chip shortage. Sales chief Pieter Nota revealed the record-breaking sales figure in an interview, and BMW confirmed it to Reuters later. The BMW group, including the Mini and Rolls-Royce brands, “achieved solid sales growth” last year, Nota said. We expect further profitable growth into 2022. The carmaker is due to report full annual results next week. On financial markets, European shares have lost steam after kicking off the new year with record highs (on the Euro Stoxx 600). The FTSE 100 index in London has opened slightly lower at 7,502, while Germany’s Dax has edged 0.16% higher to 16,178 and France’s CAC and Italy’s FTSE MiB are flat. UK customers spend a record amount on the grocers’ premium own-label brands -- a sign that people pushed the boat (or trolley?) out for Christmas after another trying year. Premium own-label sales broke records, jumping 6.8% year-on-year to £627m over the four weeks to 26 December. Higher-end fizz and still wine were among the popular products. Kantar explains: Sparkling and still wine sales grew 22% and 18% respectively, while crisps surged by 31%. Tesco’s Finest and Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference are easily the largest premium own-label ranges, but we saw the fastest growth from other ranges such as Asda Extra Special and Iceland Luxury. Kantar has also dug into our Christmas spending habits, and reports that sales of mince pies jumped 7% year-on-year, while Christmas chocolate sales rose 8%. There was also a boom in plant-based foods, as more people embrace veganism. But sprouts, a traditional festive favourite, slipped in popularity. Kantar’s Fraser McKevitt says: It looks like people came prepared for indulgent celebrations and indigestion remedy sales also rose by 8%. More bitter was the decline in sprout sales, which dipped by 3%, but the traditional green hasn’t fallen out of favour just yet as almost half of all households in Britain served them up in December. We saw new dietary trends coming through in the data and plant-based foods proved particularly popular this year, even before Veganuary gets underway. Chilled vegetarian ranges increased sales by 6% while their frozen equivalents were boosted by 4%. The busiest shopping day of the year was 23 December, Kantar reports, with UK supermarkets seeing their busiest month since the start of the pandemic. FraserMcKevitt, head of retail and consumer insight at its Worldpanel Division, says: Food and drink spend peaked two days before Christmas. The real driver of bumper sales on 23 December wasn’t online though, as we saw the largest number of in-store visits since March 2020 this month. Shoppers clearly trusted that supermarkets shelves would remain well stocked, and they didn’t feel the need to rush out much earlier to get their favourite festive treats. Alongside Christmas indulgence, rising prices also pushed up shopping budgets, Kantar adds. Grocery price inflation reached 3.5% in December, adding nearly £15 to shoppers’ average monthly grocery bill. Kantar says: We saw prices rise faster for a short while in spring 2020 when promotions were cut to maintain product availability, but before that you would have to go back nearly four years to January 2018 to see inflation running higher. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Supermarket giant Tesco has outperformed its rivals over the crucial Christmas period, as the omicron variant led people to avoid hospitality venues and eat more at home. The UK’s largest grocer grew its market share to 27.9% over the 12 weeks to Boxing Day, an increase of 0.6%, according to data just released by market researchers Kantar Worldpanel. Online grocer Ocado also had a good Christmas - it was the only retailer to grow sales versus last year, while every major grocer increased sales compared with pre-pandemic levels of 2019. Aldi, Lidl and Waitrose also grew their market shares by 0.3%, 0.2% and 0.1% respectively. Overall, take-home grocery sales dropped by 3% in the last 12 weeks compared to 2020, when lockdowns forced people to eat at home more. But spending is still higher than pre-pandemic, with sales 8% stronger than in 2019. And in December, people spent nearly as much in the supermarkets as a year ago. That highlights how the slump in indoor dining, the cancellation of Christmas parties, and the move to home working has led to more eating at home. Spending at groceries shot up in December, Kantar reports, as Omicron fears deterred people from eating out. People seized the chance to enjoy Christmas with friends and family after last year’s muted festivities, and grocery sales hit £11.7bn over the month of December. This lofty spend figure is down just 0.2% on record 2020 sales, when several areas faced restrictions, and the data suggest that while there weren’t formal rules in place across the UK this year, many people celebrated at home again due to the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Tesco’s grocery sales in the 12 weeks to December 26 fell by 0.9% compared to 2020, while rivals Sainsbury’s Asda and Morrisons saw their sales fall by 4.4%, 3.9% and 6.5% respectively. Also coming up Later today we discover how eurozone companies fared last month, as the omicron wave hit Europe. European stock markets have opened lower, with the FTSE 100 dipping by 18 points after rallying by 120 points to fresh 22-month highs yesterday. The agenda 9am GMT: Eurozone services PMI for December 1.30pm GMT: US private sector payroll report from ADP 3.30pm GMT: EIA weekly oil inventory figuresAston Villa want to sign Philippe Coutinho on loan from Barcelona and have contacted the player’s agent with a view to negotiating a deal. Coutinho is ready to leave the Camp Nou and Villa are understood to be one of three Premier League suitors. The 29-year-old joined Barcelona from Liverpool for an initial £106m in January 2018 but the move has not worked out and he spent the 2019-20 season on loan at Bayern Munich. Coutinho, who can operate as a wide player or attacking midfielder, has started only five games this season, the most recent of those a month ago. He tested positive for Covid last week but was said by Barcelona to be in good health. The Brazil international had five successful years in the Premier League with Liverpool, and Villa believe they could get him to spark again. Barcelona have made attempts to sell him since summer 2019 without finding a buyer. Steven Gerrard, a teammate of Coutinho while the pair were at Anfield, is expected to be backed in his first transfer window in charge of Villa. A defensive midfielder and reinforcements at full-back are among his targets.It is perhaps the biggest American star to visit Preston in years. A “spectacular” shaggy-crested belted kingfisher has drawn several thousand people to a nature reserve in Lancashire for one of the bird’s few recorded UK sightings in more than 100 years. The North American bird usually migrates to Mexico or the Caribbean for winter but is thought to have ended up in Preston after getting blown across the ocean by an Atlantic storm. Nick Moran, of the British Trust for Ornithology, said it was only the fifth recorded sighting of a belted kingfisher in the UK since 1908 – and the first “truly twitchable” one in years because of the length of its stay. The striking-looking bird was first spotted in October but has drawn interest from birdwatchers across the country after seemingly taking up residence at Brockholes nature reserve in Preston. George Shannon, who recorded one of its earliest sightings, said he was blown away when the belted kingfisher landed in front of him: “I got my binoculars on it and genuinely couldn’t believe the image I was seeing. I thought ‘it’s a belted kingfisher but it can’t possibly be a belted kingfisher’. My heart was pounding out of my chest.” It is only the second time since 1908 that a belted kingfisher has been recorded in the UK outside Cornwall or the Isles of Scilly, where they usually make landfall. Tony Baker, a local site manager at the RSPB, said he went to see the bird before Christmas along with 300 to 400 keen birdwatchers – but estimates it will have been seen by “several thousand” people by now. “A lot of birdwatchers become very interested in chasing rarities and adding new species to their life lists and this is one of those that turns up very, very rarely so it generates an enormous amount of excitement,” he said. “Apart from the fact it’s very rare, it’s also a fairly spectacular species that everybody can appreciate. It’s a terrific thing to see.”Italy is returning a fragment belonging to the Parthenon’s eastern frieze to Greece in a breakthrough deal that could renew pressure on Britain to repatriate the 2,500-year-old Parthenon marbles removed by Lord Elgin in the early 19th century. The marble fragment, which depicts the foot of a goddess, either Peitho or Artemis, peeking out from beneath an elaborate tunic, is currently held at the Antonino Salinas Regional Archaeological Museum in Palermo, Sicily. It was originally bought by the University of Palermo from the widow of Robert Fagan, the British consul for Sicily and Malta, after his death in 1816. The artefact is being returned on a four-year loan as part of a cultural exchange agreement between Sicily and Greece, with the intention for the loan period to be extended by a further four years. However, the move back to Greece could eventually become permanent. In return, the Acropolis Museum in Athens will loan the Palermo museum a 5th-century BC headless statue of the goddess Athena, as well as an 8th-century BC amphora. The deal, which includes an exchange of cultural initiatives between the two museums, comes after several years of negotiations between Sicilian and Greek authorities. “Sending back to the context of its origins a small, but significant, fragment belonging to the Parthenon has a very strong symbolic value,” said Sicily’s councillor for culture, Alberto Samonà. “It is also a response to the international debate [about the Parthenon artefacts]. But I don’t want to get into that debate. For us, this is a gesture of friendship – Greece and Sicily are two areas of the Mediterranean that share a common story.” The fragment was loaned to Greece in 2002 and in 2008. Samonà said the latest transfer could become permanent, but that it would be up to the Italian culture ministry to take the measures needed to make that happen. It is not known how Fagan, an amateur archaeologist, acquired the fragment, although one theory suggests it might have been given to him by Elgin, the British aristocrat who excavated the bulk of the ancient Parthenon marbles between 1801 and 1804 before selling them to the British Museum in 1816, where the artefacts are currently on display. Greece has long fought for the marbles to be repatriated from the UK. In November, the Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, demanded that Britain return the marbles to Greece, while at the same time offering to loan some Greek historical treasures to the British Museum. In response, Downing Street said returning the marbles was a matter for the British Museum. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, had previously said the marbles would remain in Britain, arguing that they were legally acquired.Back in 2005, Ashley Giles played what is still one of my favourite Test innings, when he made 59 on the fifth day of the fifth Test at the Oval. It was his top score in Test cricket at the time his team needed it the most. And because it was played in the shadow of Kevin Pietersen’s 158 at the other end, it went almost unnoticed. Which felt characteristic. Giles always seemed like that team’s Guildenstern, a steady lower-order bat and a spinner who often didn’t turn the ball at all. We called him the Wheelie Bin because of his ungainly action, or the King of Spain, because of a misprint on a souvenir mug. He hated the nicknames, and, understandably enough, resented the idea that he was being laughed at. Because, of course, he took his game seriously. He had to. Giles operated on the reaches of his own talent, and it was hard work out there. There was a prickliness to him that occasionally burst into the open. Like the time he marched into the press box in 2007 and confronted a journalist who had teased him in print for having the “temerity to remark that Tendulkar’s batting prowess had waned a little”. Giles didn’t like that at all. The journalist explained he was only being ironic. “What’s irony?” Giles shouted. You could hear some of that side of him in his latest interviews in Australia where, as the England and Wales Cricket Board’s managing director of men’s cricket, he had to try to explain how and why England had managed to make such a mess of an Ashes series for which they had spent two years planning. It was an odd interview, which contained criticisms of previous England teams (“in the 90s that was accepted as normal for England leaderships and they got away with it, we set our standards much higher than that”), of “armchair selectors”, of England’s spinners (“we’ve got to have a spin resource that allows us to bowl much more overs of spin”), of fast bowlers (“we need a variation in our bowling attack but we need pace”), and of batsmen (“with first innings scores of 147, 236, 185, we’re not winning many Test matches”), as well as digs at county cricket (“I think there is a dearth of leadership and in the county game”) and the international schedule. Giles also said he was at peace with the idea that he was accountable for it all. He just didn’t sound like he believed it. He came across as thin-skinned and indignant that he wasn’t being given more credit for his own modest achievements. “When I came into the job we were fifth in the world in Test cricket, third in the world in Twenty20 cricket and No 1 in the world in ODIs. We’re now fourth, first in T20 and second in ODIs.” Now Giles is working on his review of what went wrong. He said he didn’t want to go into his ideas for “how I want to take this team forward and improve our red-ball cricket”, but he still gave a good idea of what his conclusions are likely to be. “It’s been an extraordinary year and I think we can look at the cricket-specific stuff but we also need to look at the other stuff, particularly having 18 scheduled Test matches,” he said. “It’s a huge amount of cricket we’re playing and in a time of Covid it’s been pretty horrendous at times.” The players are reaching “their very top limit” of what they can deal with. On top of that, Giles said, what is needed now is systemic change, collective responsibility, and collective solutions. “We can make whatever changes we want. You can change me, change the head coach, change the captain. But we’re only setting up future leaders for failure.” Which underplays the degree to which getting the leadership team in place could transform the sport in this country. In the short term, the difference between a good side and a bad one often is as simple as a change in the coach and the team culture. Just ask Eddie Jones. And the simple truth is, everything is better in English cricket when the England team are winning. If Giles is right and more systemic change is needed, the pressing question is whether, given his track record in the job, he is the right man to lead it, given that he made such a mess of the (well-intentioned) rotation policy, and the mistake of binning the head selector to load more responsibility onto the coach. Same goes for Tom Harrison, the ECB’s chief executive, who, though not directly responsible for the England team’s performance, has had a hand in the congested schedule, the collapse of the Pakistan tour, the mismanagement of the racism scandal, and who also blew a ridiculous amount on a needless launch of a divisive new competition, the Hundred, which is now the single greatest obstacle to sorting out the first-class cricket schedule. And yet Harrison continues. As for Giles, he looks now like he did as a player; a man trying hard to prove he can do it but who has gone as far as he can on the talents he has. “This is a good bunch of guys here,” the 48-year-old said. No one ever said they weren’t. No one ever said that was the point, either.This is such a quick meal to make – under half an hour from start to finish. The lemon juice and zest through the dressing adds a wonderful citrussy hit, rounded out by the parmesan. Everything you need to make this recipe is available at ocado.com, including many own-range ingredients – in packaging that’s been redesigned to use 27 tonnes less plastic each year. Instantly shop all these ingredients from ocado.com/parmesanandbroccoliorzotto Parmesan, broccoli and lemon orzotto Prep 10 min Cook 10 min Serves 2 For the orzotto 180g orzo 200g frozen peas 200g Tenderstem ½ tbsp olive oil For the dressing 1 lemon, juice and zest 2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 30g parmesan, freshly grated 1 tsp sea salt flakes Freshly ground black pepper Place the Tenderstem in a bowl, and tip a kettle of boiling water over them. Leave to blanch for two minutes, then drain well. Bring a pan of salted water to the boil, and cook the orzo for 10 minutes, stirring occasionally. Add the peas for the last two minutes of cooking. Check that the pasta is just al dente, then drain, reserving half a cup of the cooking water. Meanwhile, mix the lemon juice and zest, extra virgin olive oil, almost all the parmesan, the sea salt and freshly ground black pepper in a bowl. Heat a griddle pan on a high heat. Dress the broccoli with a little olive oil, and then griddle for three-four minutes on each side until lightly charred. Stir half of the lemon dressing and the cooking water through the orzo. Halve the griddled broccoli lengthways, and then dress with the remaining lemon and parmesan mixture. Divide the orzo into two bowls, top with the broccoli and remaining grated parmesan and a little freshly ground black pepper, and serve. Top with toasted hazelnuts if you wish, and serve with a green salad. Ocado.com has more choice than any other supermarket, including an extensive range of vegetarian and vegan options.A Palestinian man on a hunger strike in protest against detention without charge has agreed to end his fast after a deal was struck for his release owing to fears of unrest if he died. Hisham Abu Hawash, 40, a construction worker from Dura in the West Bank, had previously served time in an Israeli jail after pleading guilty to terrorism offences related to membership of Islamic Jihad. He was rearrested and has been held without charge or trial for more than a year, and began refusing food in August. His lawyer said on Tuesday night that Abu Hawash had agreed to end the 141-day strike – believed to be the longest by a Palestinian prisoner since 2013 – after a deal was reached between Israeli and Palestinian Authority (PA) officials to release him next month. A medical team from the International Committee of the Red Cross that visited the prisoner last week said he was in “critical condition”, warning of “potentially irreversible health consequences and possible tragic loss of life”. The deal comes amid mounting support for Abu Hawash in the West Bank and Gaza Strip in the form of street demonstrations, along with a widespread campaign for his release on social media, where pictures of the gaunt prisoner lying in a hospital bed have circulated widely. Islamic Jihad, the second-largest militant group in Gaza, had threatened revenge if he died in custody, and Hamas called the issue a “red line”. The married father of five, who denies being a member of Islamic Jihad, is being held under Israel’s practice of administrative detention, which allows suspects’ arrest for renewable six-month terms without charge or access to the evidence against them. Israel says the measure – which is also practised by the PA – is necessary for foiling terrorist attacks and to avoid revealing sensitive intelligence sources. Rights groups allege it is used excessively and routinely by Israeli authorities and denies individuals the right to due process. Abu Hawash’s release date of 26 February will mark the end of his current six-month detention period, a compromise struck with PA officials that allowed Israel to claim it had decided not to renew his detention, rather than shorten it. In return, the PA agreed to ensure the prisoner “will not return to terrorism”. After accepting the terms of the deal, Abu Hawash, who had begun to lose consciousness for long periods of time, broke his fast on Tuesday night with a few sips of tea. He had previously refused all medical intervention and stopped consuming small amounts of sugar and salt six weeks ago. He was transferred to an Israeli civilian hospital on 26 December and will remain there under armed guard until his release. The news was met with celebrations across the Palestinian territories on Tuesday night, while the Prisoners’ Club, which represents former and current Palestinian prisoners, hailed the strike as a victory. It said Abu Hawash had previously spent eight years in Israeli prisons, more than half of it in administrative detention. Palestinians in the occupied West Bank are subject to Israeli military courts, while Jewish settlers in the territory answer to the civilian justice system. According to the Palestinian rights group Addameer, 500 Palestinians are currently being held under the measure.Maureen Lipman has criticised the casting of Helen Mirren as Golda Meir in a forthcoming film about the former Israeli prime minister, saying that the character’s Jewishness is “integral”. In comments reported by the Jewish Chronicle, Lipman said she “disagreed” with Mirren’s casting. She added: “I’m sure [Mirren] will be marvellous, but it would never be allowed for Ben Kingsley to play Nelson Mandela. You just couldn’t even go there.” Meir, who died in 1978, was Israel’s prime minister between 1969 and 74. The new film, called Golda, directed by Israeli film-maker Guy Nattiv is set during the Yom Kippur war in 1973 and started shooting in November 2021. Production stills showing Mirren under heavy makeup were released, with Mirren, who is not Jewish, commenting: “Golda Meir was a formidable, intransigent and powerful leader … I only hope I do her justice!” The Jewish Chronicle’s piece cited a number of controversial instances of “Jewface”, including Tamsin Greig’s recent suggestion that she ‘probably’ should not have been cast in the sitcom Friday Night Dinner and the row over a stage production of the musical Falsettos in 2019, which contained no Jewish cast or crew members. It also quoted actor and comic Sarah Silverman’s comments on the mooted casting of Kathryn Hahn as Joan Rivers in a TV series: “Right now, representation fucking matters. It has to also finally matter for Jews as well. Especially Jewish women.” In contrast, the playwright and director Patrick Marber was quoted in the Jewish Chronicle article as objecting to the primacy of “lived experienced” in casting decisions, saying: “I fucking hate that expression. Because ‘lived experience’ is sort of a denial of what creativity is and denies the actor the fundamental challenge and right to become someone else to impersonate another human being from another time, from another culture from another religion and another sexuality and other gender.” Marber added: “I think a Gentile can play a Jew and a Jew can play a Gentile. I don’t like it when someone plays a Jew and gets it wrong. [But] I don’t like quotas.”A New York biology teacher is facing up to four years in prison for allegedly giving a Covid-19 vaccine to a 17-year-old boy against his mother’s wishes – and despite not being a trained medical professional with authorization to do so. Laura Russo, who teaches at Herricks high school on Long Island, reportedly administered the jab to one of her son’s friends after he asked for it. The teen’s mother had not wanted him to be inoculated against the deadly virus and did not consent to the injection. Video published by NBC New York allegedly shows Russo giving the shot at her residence in Sea Cliff, a village on Long Island. “There you go, at-home vaccine,” someone says in the background. The boy later told his mother what had happened. She alerted the police, who arrested Russo on New Year’s Eve after finding that she was not a medical professional and was not authorized to give vaccines. Russo has been charged with unauthorized practice of a profession under New York state education law, a felony offense that carries a sentence of up to four years, the Washington Post reported. She has been released and is expected to appear in court on 21 January, police said. District officials for the Herricks public schools said the incident was not school-related and Russo “has been removed from the classroom and reassigned pending the outcome of the investigation”. It is unclear how Russo obtained the vial of an approved Covid-19 vaccine, which only medical professionals and healthcare facilities are able to order, according to the Post. Experts frown upon unauthorized Covid-19 vaccinations as generally dangerous and ill-advised, given the complexities of administering the jab. Intramuscular injections like the Covid-19 vaccines require specific training even for medical professionals, and the mRNA technology can break down if it is not stored and handled correctly. “Besides being illegal, it’s just not a smart thing to do,” Aaron Glatt, the chair of the department of medicine at Mount Sinai South Nassau, told NBC New York. “An authorized, licensed professional should be providing vaccines to know how to give them properly – to make sure if there’s a complication, that can be dealt with immediately and very efficiently.”Emmanuel Macron faced criticism from political opponents and heated scenes in parliament on Wednesday after he gave a deliberately provocative warning to unvaccinated French people, saying he would make their lives as difficult as possible by curbing their access to spaces such as cafés and restaurants. A crucial parliamentary debate on introducing a proposed Covid-19 “vaccine pass” for entry to areas such museums and long-distance trains was to resume on Wednesday afternoon. The debate had been suspended just before 2am on Wednesday as lawmakers expressed outrage at Macron’s newspaper interview in which he said the 5 million people who had not had vaccines against the coronavirus were “irresponsible” and that he really wanted to “put them in the shit” by making their daily lives as complicated as possible. The French government spokesman, Gabriel Attal, warned there would be a “supersonic” rise in Covid cases in France in the coming days and that infections were reaching stratospheric levels in the Île-de-France area around Paris as well as some in other regions. He said the situation in hospitals could worsen in the coming weeks. On Wednesday, France registered a record number of 335,000 infections over the previous 24 hours. The government, in a hardening of current rules, is seeking to make it mandatory for people to show proof of Covid-19 vaccination to enter cafés, restaurants, museums, cinemas and theatres, or to use long-distance trains. Repeated disruptions and clashes in parliament, as well as hundreds of proposed amendments, are leaving the government struggling to push the law through before its deadline of 15 January. In an interview with readers of Le Parisien newspaper published on Wednesday, Macron, the French president, deliberately used the verb “emmerder”, which is derived from the word “merde” or “shit” and is widely used in France and considered vulgar slang. He said that he “really wanted” to put the non-vaccinated “in the shit” by making their lives very complicated and “limiting as much as possible their access to activities in social life”. Macron said: “We have to tell [the unvaccinated] ... you will no longer be able to go to a restaurant, you will no longer be able to go for a coffee, you will no longer be able to go to the theatre, you will no longer be able to go to the cinema. We will continue to do this, to the end. This is the strategy.” He explained that he could not force French people to get vaccinated on pain of prison or fines but life could be made very difficult for them without a vaccine. In parliament, opposition parties slammed Macron’s choice of language as unfit for a president and worrying in terms of voting through the new law. Christian Jacob, president of the opposition, rightwing Les Républicains party, told parliament: “A president cannot say such things ... I’m in favour of the vaccine pass but I cannot back a text whose objective is to put French people in the shit.” Damien Abad, from the same party, slammed what he called unworthy, irresponsible and premeditated remarks which showed “childish cynicism”. On the left, there was outrage over more of Macron’s comments, when, referring to unvaccinated people, he said that when some people’s freedom threatened those of others they became irresponsible, adding: “Someone irresponsible is not a citizen.” Mathilde Panot, head of the parliamentary group for the left’s La France Insoumise party, told the house: “We won’t keep debating a text you presented as a protection of the French people and which is in fact a text to put a part of the French population in the shit and which has invented [the notion of] stripping French citizenship – by saying irresponsible people are no longer French citizens.” Macron is expected to seek re-election in the presidential elections this April. However, his key challenger, Valérie Pécresse, of Les Républicains, told French TV that he was dividing the nation by making some citizens seem better than others. “It’s not up to the president of the republic to pick out good and bad French people,” Pécresse said. France needed a government to “unite people and calm things down”, she added. But government figures and Macron allies stood by the president’s calculated choice of words and the strategy to make daily life very hard for unvaccinated people. Macron is no stranger to rows over off-the-cuff comments or slang, telling interviewers last month that he regretted some of his comments of the past five years, saying: “I’ve learned to have a lot more respect for everyone.” But the vehemence of his comments about unvaccinated people and his deliberate choice of hard language was aimed at his own electorate, which is almost entirely vaccinated, and it was also a pre-election message to address the widespread exasperation at the Covid crisis in France. Although France has historically had more vaccine sceptics than many of its neighbours, it has one of the highest Covid-19 vaccination rates in the EU. A majority of people is in favour of vaccination; about 90% of French people aged 12 and over are vaccinated. The number of unvaccinated people in French hospital critical wards is higher than those who are vaccinated, and the health minister has said that the small minority of unvaccinated people in France, numbering around 5 million, is too many. Christophe Castaner, a key Macron ally and head of his grouping in parliament, said: “The president’s comments gave clarity, and we need that at this difficult moment for the country.” Castaner said that the president was giving a view that lots of French people shared. Olivier Véran, the health minister, told parliament the aim of Macron’s entire interview was “the protection of the French people”. Marc Fesneau, minister for parliamentary relations, said: “We need unvaccinated people to hear the message being sent to them by the government, parliament and the president – which is a message of responsibility.”Name: David Attenborough. Age: 95. Appearance: Our most beloved national treasure. Why are we talking about David Attenborough? I love him. Oh no, is this bad news? It’s fine. He’s still with us. Luckily. Luckily?? I don’t know how to break this to you, but Attenborough has had an accident. He’s been injured. I don’t know if I can take the stress. Who is responsible for this? Who? It was a cactus. Right, that’s it. Time to punch a cactus in the face. Don’t be stupid. Attenborough wasn’t ambushed in his bed by a cactus. He was filming a new show, and touched one. It stabbed him even though he was protected by thick gloves. Why would you want to touch a cactus? To prove how dangerous they are. Point proved, I guess. And also because Attenborough is as hard as nails. He was once in a boat that got caught in an Indonesian whirlpool. He trapped a caiman in Guyana. He’s been crawled over by a bunch of wild mountain gorillas. He has met cannibals, and was knocked unconscious while filming dolphins in the Bahamas. There’s tough, and then there’s Attenborough. I know, but he’s 95 years old now. We should protect him. We are protecting him. He hurt his hand filming the new BBC series The Green Planet. It is exclusively about plants. You can’t get less dangerous than that. Tell that to the cactus. OK, fine, so I lied. In fact, according to Attenborough, The Green Planet will remind us that plants are often as dangerous as animals. Really? Yup. He has said of the series that “plants fight one another, plants strangle one another and you can actually see that happening”. Great, now I’m terrified of my garden. But don’t be worried about Attenborough. No human being on the planet has done more to educate the public about the incredible world we live in. Putting himself in harm’s way for a living has enriched humanity. He has taught us all so much. I’m pretty sure we already knew that cacti were spiky, though. But have we ever seen someone submit to their spikes like this? Couldn’t it have been someone less wonderful? But what would be the point of that? Attenborough was able to give a detailed explanation of the evolutionary benefit of having spikes. If it had been someone like Piers Morgan, he would have just spent a morning writing 3,000 angry tweets about wanting to cancel cacti. Do say: “David Attenborough has taught us to love all life on Earth.” Don’t say: “Except for cacti, which should all be burned to death.”OUR CUP RUNNETH OVER The League Cup has always been a strange one. It’s got three handles for a start, and doesn’t have a lid you can wear as a hat. What’s the point, then? Well, it was conceived in the early 1960s by erstwhile Football League boss Alan Hardaker (Little England) in the petty hope of distracting clubs from the new-fangled European scene, a gambit which it would be fair to say had limited success. As a result, the competition has struggled somewhat for an identity ever since. Po’ League Cup! League Cup’s a-cold! Having said that, The Fiver has always loved it, despite its myriad dignity-stripping associations with hot brands such as Rumbelows, Littlewoods, Woolies, Timothy Whites, Bejam, MacFisheries, Our Price, Do It All, Dolcis, Owen Owen, Panda Pops, Pint of Heavy, Double Cream, Eggs, Yogurt, Beef Dripping, Wang, Mr Tom, Percy Pig and Players No 6. The same can’t be said for Liverpool, though, whose attitude towards their two-legged semi-final with Arsenal has, from the get-go, been ambivalent at best, ever since Jürgen Klopp raised the possibility of deciding it instead by a quick game of rock, paper, scissors. Bob Paisley and Joe Fagan, masterminds of the club’s 1980s four-in-a-row Milk Cup domination, will be churning in their graves. Liverpool have now got their wish, sort of, in so much as Thursday evening’s first leg at the Emirates has been postponed. This is due to a severe outbreak of ennui at Anfield, though a significant number of players and staff, including both Klopp and his assistant Pep Lijnders, have also gone down with Covid, which doesn’t help. Consequently, the second leg at Anfield next week will become the first, the fixture at Arsenal will now be played on 20 January, and coronavirus fall-guys Leyton Orient are guaranteed to trend for the next fortnight on Social Media Disgrace Twitter, as if people don’t have enough to be up in arms about in the real world. Romelu Lukaku, back in Chelsea’s squad for Wednesday’s game against Spurs in the other semi, sends his thanks for taking the heat off. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray from 8pm GMT for hot Carling Cup MBM coverage of Chelsea 2-1 Tottenham. QUOTE OF THE DAY “We conceded 100 goals, finished bottom and are considered the symbol of a side not doing well in the Premier League but we weren’t a bad side, we were not that far away. We were a very good football team with a lot of good players and we were quite confident on the ball. To be fair, we were useless at defending” – Jan Åge Fjørtoft gets his chat on with Paul Doyle about Swindon’s doomed top-flight season, the day he hit rock bottom and how he bounced back. FIVER LETTERS Um … Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Rollover. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Chelsea boss Tommy T will fine Romelu Lukaku despite accepting his striker’s apology for that interview. “To the fans I’m sorry for the upset I’ve caused,” sighed the Belgian in one of those in-house club videos they have the temerity to call “exclusive”. “You guys know the connection I have with this club since my teenage years. Also to the manager I apologise, and to my teammates and the board. I want to move on forward from this.” Women’s Championship club Coventry United have avoided liquidation with barely hours to spare after an agreement in principle to sell the club’s shares was struck. “We will shore the situation up very quickly and get the players paid for a start,” cheered businessman Lewis Taylor. Juventus say Aaron Ramsey will do one from Turin in the January window, doubtlessly pr1cking up ears on Tyneside, where Kieran Trippier has already arrived to complete his £12m move from Atlético. It’s a transfer window so naturally there is Philippe Coutinho news: it says here that Aston Villa are trying to lure him on loan. Poland midfield tyro Kacper Kozlowski has joined Brighton from Pogon Szczecin for £8m. “His style of play suits us and our style,” tooted Graham Potter as he sent the 18-year-old straight on loan to Royale Union Saint-Gilloise. Japan international Hayao Kawabe is, er, hopping over from Grasshoppers to Wolves before, er [Fiver clutches for straws after cornering itself], slyly heading back to finish the season there. And Everton hope the appointment of club legend Graeme Sharp to their board will ease the current disquiet around Goodison Park. “This club is in my blood,” roared Sharp. STILL WANT MORE? Which players have appeared on club calendars in years they did not even play for them? The Knowledge has the answer. Antonio Conte needs to give Daniel Levy a nudge, according to David Hytner. Everton have a new shiny right-back but what they really need is some wins, writes Andy Hunter. Paul MacInnes thinks the €uropean $uper £eague could actually have been a good thing for football. Here’s why. Let the Mill provide your fill of the latest transfer gristle. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! IT’LL BE TOUGH TO TOP THIS IN 2022Several miles south of the small town of San Juan, Texas, beyond acres of onion fields, orange groves and other cash crops sits a historic cemetery and the site of the beginning of a slow decay of American soil. I hadn’t been to this area for more than a year because of the pandemic, and I was startled at how different this remote part of Texas had become. The most obvious change is the steel 18ft-high bollard fencing, among the last vestiges of Donald Trump’s glorious border wall with Mexico. Trump visited this site in June with Governor Greg Abbott to tout his accomplishments in controlling the border and to praise Abbott for taking up the anti-immigrant baton that resonates so well with the conservative voting base in Texas. The last time I came to visit this spot, no wall existed and the historic cemetery – the Eli Jackson cemetery – was under a 24-hour vigil by a Native American tribe called the Carrizo/Comecrudo, as well as other supporters who feared a border wall would destroy sacred burial land and a sacred piece of history. The Eli Jackson family built this cemetery, designated a historic landmark by the state, on land owned by Nathanial Jackson, Eli’s father. Nathaniel was a slave owner from Alabama who fell in love with and married one of his slaves, Matilda Hicks, before the two fled to the banks of the Rio Grande in 1857 and settled on the border with Mexico. Nathaniel was known for his generosity to visitors and his ranch soon began a relatively unknown line of the vaunted Underground Railroad in which fleeing slaves escaped servitude and, with the Jackson family’s help, fled to Mexico where slavery was forbidden. The Carrizo/Comecrudo tribe and its descendants also claim this area and, with the permission of the landowners, set up a camp in January 2019 to fend off any wall construction. Many of the inhabitants who camped out said they were veterans of the Keystone pipeline protests in northern Minnesota. And given the supply tent and other facilities that were erected adjacent to the Eli Jackson cemetery there was a suggestion that organizers hoped that a similarly large protest would develop in south Texas to fight the border wall. And despite a 24-hour vigil, often by as few as one or two diehard protesters in heat and cold for nearly a year in 2019, the efforts to protect the cemetery fell victim to Covid in 2020. As federal construction crews erected Trump’s wall ever closer to the cemetery, the landowners finally told the protesters to vacate. Soon, a large sign declaring the cemetery closed and camping prohibited was posted and the steel bollards marking the wall’s arrival began to overtake the horizon less than 100 yards from the burial grounds. When I returned to this remote site, about a mile from the Rio Grande, the first thing I noticed was a road to get over an earthen flood levee and back to the cemetery was closed; a sign said the area was now a construction zone, a Trump border wall just a few yards east of the road. I found another road that circled around to the cemetery. The protesters’ area of encampment, once a cleared field, was now the site of overgrown vegetation, leaving little evidence of human habitation for the better part of a year, suggesting the border wall decay has begun. It’s a decay that marks the beginning of a no man’s land: virtually uninhabitable, threatening because of its isolation, essentially a chunk of US territory that might as well belong to Mexico. That’s because in south Texas the term border wall is a misnomer because of the unpredictability of the Rio Grande and a treaty with Mexico. While the great river is dammed and channeled along its international path through Texas, the Rio Grande can still bite back with massive and unpredictable flooding. One attempt to mitigate the threat resulted in a treaty with Mexico that was signed during the Nixon administration that prevents either side from altering the flow of the river with land impediments – something like a border wall. To protect from flooding in south Texas, a long, mostly earthen levee generally follows the route of the Rio Grande from about a mile away. So, while border walls in Arizona and California may straddle the border with Mexico, those in south Texas are typically located atop or adjacent to the levee system, meaning that this so-called protective barrier is ceding about a mile of US territory behind the wall, effectively creating a no man’s land. It was true under the wall that was built by the George W Bush administration and it’s true of the walls that were erected during the Trump administration. Beyond the threat the creation of a no man’s land has to private homeowners and their property values, this region is also rich in ecological sites along the river. One of these, called the Southmost Preserve, is a thousand-acre wildlife preserve home to one of the only two remaining large stands of native Mexican sabal palm. More than 900 acres of that preserve is now in a no man’s land south of a Bush wall and locals generally avoid it because of the potential danger a no man’s land poses. Another Bush wall runs near the historic Hidalgo Pumphouse Museum and World Birding Center in the city of Hidalgo. Several nature trails run behind this area. But many of those trails are now behind a border wall and impassable or too dangerous to enter. Critics had predicted that a Trump border wall in this region would have the same no-man’s-land result. What I didn’t realize was how quickly the negative effects of this isolated land would be felt. Aside from all the warnings to keep out when I recently visited the Jackson cemetery, there was an emptiness in this area that I had never felt before. An isolation that hinted at vulnerability. The irony of this situation is that Texas, a state that brags about its commitment to property rights, continues its fight to finish the border wall. But I noticed that there was one section of the Trump wall that was about a mile long in this area. Then there was a mile-long gap before another section of wall began. So, this barrier effectively did little to deter unauthorized immigration because the migrants simply need to walk a mile or two in either direction to go around the wall. But this barrier, this big, beautiful wall, as Trump called it, that was built to protect US citizens from the “invasion” of migrants, was only truly effective at something else: keeping US citizens away from the no man’s land that it created and ceding the territory to Mexico. Carlos Sanchez is director of public affairs for Hidalgo county, Texas. He was a journalist for 37 years and has worked at the Washington Post and Texas Monthly magazine, as well as eight other newsrooms. He can be reached at borderscribe@gmail.comMillions of customers of Virgin Media and Virgin Mobile are facing price increases in spring, with TV and broadband subscribers having to pay £56.40 more a year for the services from 1 March. A change in the terms and conditions for Virgin Mobile customers will introduce an annual price rise of 3.9% above January’s RPI inflation rate for their calls. Currently, prices increase each year in line with RPI. The latest RPI figure, for November, was 7.1%, and if inflation remains at this level customers will face a double-digit price increase, coming into effect in April. The increases come against a backdrop of rising prices, which has prompted economists to predict that 2022 will be the “year of the squeeze” for UK households. Virgin Media said the price rises would allow it to keep up with demand from customers, who have increased their data use dramatically since 2019. At the end of last year, customers were on average using 40% more data than in 2019, an increase driven by a switch to working from home and spending more leisure time in their living rooms. However, customers with Virgin Media’s Oomph bundled deal, which includes the mobile service alongside broadband, will be excluded from the mobile price change. So too will vulnerable customers, including those on the company’s Essential broadband package for people receiving universal credit, or its Talk Protected landline offer. A Virgin Media spokesperson said: “While we recognise a price change is never welcome, with rising costs and our customers using their services more than ever, we are reviewing our pricing to fuel further investment in our network and services, both now and in the future. “We’re committed to providing brilliant services and excellent overall value, and consistently give our customers more for their money than anyone else.” Virgin Mobile customers have their payments split into two parts, one to cover the cost of their handset and one to cover airtime, and it is only the latter that will go up. For a customer currently paying £35 a month for an iPhone 12 and watch with an airtime plan with 12Gb of data, £25 a month pays for the devices and will not be affected. The other part of the deal will go up. If RPI remains at 7.1%, this will add £1.10 a month to their bill.Stephen Colbert Seth Meyers and Jimmy Fallon cancelled their week of shows on Tuesday after both tested positive for Covid-19, leaving Stephen Colbert as the only late-night host on the air, as Trevor Noah and Jimmy Kimmel remain on holiday. Meyers and Fallon join the over one million new cases of Covid reported in the US on Monday – a record high, though case reporting was delayed because of the holiday weekend. “See, it’s not really that bad,” Colbert said. “It’s like when an exterminator says, ‘don’t worry, a thousand rats didn’t just move into your breakfast nook. It was just one rat, who gave birth over the weekend to a thousand rats.’” The Omicron fifth wave of Covid has forced school districts in Newark, Milwaukee, Cleveland and Atlanta to shift back to remote learning. “No! I long for the good ole days when our kids could safely go to school to butt-chug tide pods,” the Late Show host joked. “Obviously this is a big strain on parents,” he continued, as some were given just hours of notice for the school closures. “Parents need emergency childcare help now,” he said. “I am calling on the federal government to release our strategic reserve of mothers-in-law. You know their motto: ‘I see you’re too busy to empty the bathroom trashcan …’” Nevertheless, Colbert continued, certain Republicans continue making idiotic comments about Covid, such as Senator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, who told a radio show on Monday: “Why have we assumed that the body’s natural immune system isn’t the marvel that it really is? Why do we think that we can create something better than God in terms of – in terms of combating disease?” “OK, yes, I get it – God created our immune systems. He also created Ron Johnson, so he has been known to shank it,” Colbert responded. “So he raises the question: does the Lord want you to have the vaccine? I don’t know, but take Ron Johnson’s advice, and you might have a chance to ask God face to face.” And in other news, Apple became the first company in history to reach a $3tn market value on Monday – larger than the gross domestic products of Britain and India, and more valuable than all of the world’s cryptocurrencies “but not even half as annoying”, said Colbert. The California-based company has been on a steep growth trajectory in recent years, hitting the $1tn valuation in 2018, then $2tn in 2020 and a year and a half later, $3tn. “Hopefully, with that kind of cash, they can finally afford to fix that bite in their logo,” Colbert quipped.The former Labour peer Nazir Ahmed has been found guilty of serious sexual assault against a young boy and the attempted rape of a girl when he was a teenager in the 1970s. Lord Ahmed, 64, was found guilty on Wednesday of buggery against a boy in Rotherham, and twice attempting to rape a girl. Buggery was the legal term for the specific sexual assault at the time of the offences. He was charged alongside his two older brothers, Mohammed Farouq, 71, and Mohammed Tariq, 65, but both were deemed unfit to stand trial. A woman told a jury at Sheffield crown court that Ahmed attempted to rape her in 1973 and 1974, when the defendant was about 16 or 17 years old, but she was much younger. The former politician was also found guilty of a serious sexual assault against a boy under 11 in 1972. The jury was played a recording of a telephone call between the two complainants, made by the woman after she went to the police in 2016. Tom Little QC, prosecuting, told the jury that the call was prompted by the man contacting the woman by email saying: “I have evidence against that paedophile.” Ahmed claimed the allegations were a “malicious fiction” but the prosecution said the call showed they were not “made up or concocted”. In the recording, the woman said to the man: “What they did to you was utterly wrong and it’s time now to seek justice for the little boy who could not protect himself.” Ahmed, who denied all the charges, was found guilty on Wednesday of two counts of attempted rape and one of buggery. Appointed a life peer by Tony Blair, Ahmed resigned from the Labour party in 2013, and retired from the House of Lords in 2020 but has retained his peerage and title of Lord Ahmed of Rotherham. His brothers Farouq and Tariq faced charges of indecent assault in relation to the same boy that Ahmed abused and, also on Wednesday, the jury found that they had carried out the acts alleged. The judge, Mr Justice Lavender, bailed Ahmed to appear at the same court for sentencing on 4 February. Rosemary Ainslie, of the Crown Prosecution Service, said the verdicts clearly showed “that no matter the delay between the offences and the trial, and the defences raised, they could be sure that the accounts of the victims were credible and true”. “One of these defendants held a position of power, influence and responsibility for some time in the House of Lords but this case clearly illustrates that where there is sufficient evidence, even in challenging cases, the CPS will bring a prosecution, put evidence before a jury and see rightful convictions”, she added. A previous trial collapsed last year due to errors made by the prosecution. Ainslie conceded that “disclosure failures should not happen”, but the case showed the challenges faced in dealing with “huge amounts of information” and proper disclosure to the defence to allow a fair trial. “But the case also shows our determination to admit problems, overcome them and pursue the case, and the court’s ability to ensure the defendants receive a fair trial and their victims see justice,” she added. • This article was amended on 21 January 2022. An earlier version described Ahmed as a “former peer” and the “former Lord Ahmed of Rotherham”. While he is no longer a Labour peer, having resigned from the party in 2013, he is still a life peer and retained his title after retiring from the House of Lords.When Omicron crept in paramedics shrugged off reports it was a mild strain. We knew chaos was coming. New South Wales stats have confirmed our entrenched pessimism; the past four weeks have been the busiest in the 126-year history of the NSW Ambulance service. The health minister and premier have issued pleas to the public to stop making unnecessary calls. NSW Ambulance is about to launch a “save 000 for emergencies campaign” to help battle the 50% increase in callouts. Inspector Kay Armstrong addressed the record-breaking increase in demand by warning “we have a lot of exhausted paramedics out there” due to time-wasting calls. In the last four days I’ve been called out to countless people asking for rapid tests, or wanting our opinion on the best testing sites. One man who couldn’t find a test said he was feeling too sick to line up for five hours. He requested we take him to hospital as he’d heard they routinely test all presentations. Once tested he planned to leave hospital and get a lift home with his son, who’d follow in the car behind. I politely informed him he was abusing an already overburdened system. We’re used to people using us as Uber drivers but it’s never been this absurd. The testing bungle, and the refusal by the Morrison government to subsidise rapid antigen tests, means people are turning from anxious to desperate to know if they’re positive – even if it doesn’t change their isolation requirements. Sometimes our patients greet us with complaints about wait times followed by a look of surprise and fear when we tell them they’re not sick enough to transport to hospital. I never imagined when I joined this job that I’d be telling people who genuinely believe they are dying that they are perfectly fine to look after themselves at home. Moreover, every patient we leave at home puts us at risk of personal liability as paramedics are now registered with AHPRA – the national health regulator – but it’s a risk we shoulder to reduce pressure on a health system on the brink of collapse. While it’s great to inform the public about saving 000 for emergencies, simply calling it “time wasting” does not adequately represent the toll taken on us. Every callout requires a thorough assessment and extensive, detailed paperwork. You can’t just type “time waster” on your paperwork and move on. Our energy and empathy are being exhausted; we’re suffering compassion fatigue. You may get a grumpy ambo at your door who has nothing left to give but don’t take it personally – that’s how we turn up at our own doorsteps. Just ask our families. Last outbreak the biggest gripe was this excruciating but necessary PPE. This time around our concerns are far more insidious. Calling it burnout would be putting it mildly, this now feels like a slow roasting. We didn’t join the job for fame or fortune but the fact that we had to fight the NSW government’s proposed pay freeze while fronting a pandemic only added to the feeling our personal sacrifice isn’t understood or appreciated. No other industry would expect their workers to accept a doubling of their workload on top of a massive broadening of scope, responsibility and risk without appropriate remuneration. Paramedics are compliant, we keep our heads down and silently get on with the job, because we know speaking out could cost us our job. If frontline health staff spoke out it would fill the void of misinformation created when government messaging contradicts health advice. We’re the ones caught in the middle, we’re living this. We are the everyday experts who are resigned to fate, now too busy looking for an escape to care too much about anything else. I don’t know one person at work who isn’t formulating some sort of exit plan by leaving Sydney, leaving their role or leaving the job altogether. This is true of brand-new trainees right through to management. We’re all re-evaluating. Talking to colleagues in the hospital, the same can be said for doctors, nurses, clerical and cleaning staff. Hardly a system coping, Mr Perrottet. My annual leave has been postponed twice, I need a break. The fulfilment and pride I used to feel simply by making someone feel better is fading. I still do my best to show warmth and compassion but while I smile with my eyes, under the mask I’m limp. I’m torn between the job I love and the overwhelming urge to make a hasty exit. We are standing at the precipice of a mass exodus of paramedics who are willing to turn their backs on their calling. The loss of the most impressive, highly skilled and pre-eminent bunch of people I’ve ever met would take a toll on this state which no announcement about boosting paramedic numbers could ever replace; the human toll. The writer is a paramedic in south west SydneyFor Phil Johnson, the licensee of Aireys Pub, keeping the hotel open seven days a week at what should be peak season has instead become a “day-by-day proposition”. During summer the hotel’s lawn, which boasts spectacular views of the sea and sunset, is usually packed with holidaymakers who have flocked to the Victorian surf coast town of Aireys Inlet to escape Melbourne’s heat. But this year the pub’s takings are on target to be down by about 20% over summer due to a combination of staff being unable to work because they fear they have Covid and people staying away because they don’t want to catch it. The pub is among businesses grappling with a staff shortage crisis gripping hospitality and tourism operations from Victoria to Queensland, as skyrocketing Covid cases caused by the Omicron wave and a shortage of testing keeps workers away from their jobs. Johnson said the hotel had also struggled to find staff in the run-up to Christmas because two normal sources of labour – backpackers and cooks who come from overseas on skilled migration visas – were unavailable due to the pandemic. “We have 40, 45 staff over this peak period,” he said. “At the moment I’ve probably got about 10 with Covid or suspected Covid, which is making life really hard.” He said workers have been unable to confirm whether they have it because of the long waits for PCR tests at the nearest site, about 30km away in the Geelong suburb of Torquay, and the unavailability of rapid antigen tests. “A few people have had like one or two, but I was in Geelong this morning, just going through Chemist Warehouse, but I can’t find any,” he said. “Our kitchen’s good, which is good, so it’s just the front of house that we’re struggling with. It’s just a day-by-day proposition at the moment.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Some customers are also staying away, even though Aireys Inlet appears to be as full of people as usual – no short-term rentals are available in the town this week, according to booking website stayz.com. “We are not as busy as we thought we’d be because a lot of people are being cautious,” Johnson said. “It seems like a few families down here got it, so they’re staying away. And a lot of the oldies who we’d normally see just aren’t coming because I think they’re obviously, rightly, concerned.” He said the fall in business so far was “not great, but not the end of the world”. “If we come to a grinding halt next week, then we’re going to be in a whole lot of pain, but touch wood we’ll just keep going.” Staff shortages have hit tourism and hospitality operators across Victoria and the country, with reports of restaurants shut in nearby Lorne. On the other side of the bay, Hotel Sorrento, which services millionaire’s playground the Mornington Peninsula, closed suddenly on New Year’s Eve “due to health &amp; safety reasons”, operators said on social media. It will reopen from midday on Friday, the hotel said on Tuesday. Up north, the luxury Intercontinental resort on Hayman Island, in Queensland’s Whitsunday islands, has cancelled tourist bookings because staff are in isolation, while the restaurant industry in holiday hotspot the Gold Coast has reportedly ground to a halt. Staff shortages have also hit domestic travel, with flight numbers at less than 80% of what was seen in January 2019, before the pandemic hit, according to data compiled by rating agency Fitch. “It’s very dramatic, staff shortages that are really starting to bite now,” Daniel Gschwind, the chief executive of the Queensland Tourism Industry Council, said. He said the sector had suffered from a lack of labour even before the pandemic, with cooks, chefs and hotel managers in short supply, although the Queensland industry brought more than 30,000 people back to work last year. “The reality is we’re still short of what we need now,” he said. “It is now made worse because with Omicron spreading, which we anticipated, it is taking staff out of jobs. “That has actually now led a number of operators to operate at reduced hours or just close completely because they haven’t got enough staff.” He said difficulties getting PCR tests were making the situation worse. “Getting a test is a challenge and getting the result is a further problem because it’s not as if they arrive in 24 hours any more, it takes days,” he said. “We wanted the borders to open and we knew we had to take that step but it makes it so much harder.” He said two years of international borders being closed had also cut off the flow of working holiday visa holders, international students and skilled visa holders on which the industry had relied. “People have all kinds of views about that but the reality is that the Australian economy was fuelled by thousands of international workers,” he said. Karma Lord, the director of the Hospo Voice division of the United Workers Union, said workers wanted to get back but were concerned about being put in potentially unsafe situations. “Now, with Omicron cases rising around Australia, many hospitality workers are struggling to get back to work because they’re in isolation or sick with Covid-19,” she said. The industry relied too much on casual workers, Lord said. “It’s time hospitality jobs were well paid, secure and reliable jobs that workers can count on,” she said. “It’s terrible that many hospitality venues are having to shut their doors due to rising case numbers and staff shortages, but it’s also terrible that so many workers in hospitality have never had access to paid leave when they’re sick or need to care for loved ones, let alone know how many hours they will work week to week.”One of New South Wales’ major regional hospitals had to source its own triage tent, is sending Covid tests six hours away due to a lack of space for its own diagnosis machine, and has had positive patients wait 30 hours to be transferred to a designated hospital for those with the virus. Doctors at the Tweed hospital, which is 1km from the Queensland border in northern NSW and serves a hinterland that includes Byron Bay, are even donning personal protective equipment to drive home, in their own cars, asymptomatic Covid-positive patients because taxis won’t take them. Kristin Ryan-Agnew, president of the local branch of the Nurses and Midwives Association and a senior nurse at the hospital, said local Covid cases were tripling daily, much faster than the 5o% growth in new cases reported for NSW as a whole on Wednesday. As a result of increased presentations to Tweed’s emergency department, nurses were doing “double shifts every day” with one day off before resuming the toil. “They’re going to fall over in a screaming heap,” she said. “They will not be able to manage.” Eighteen staff, many of them senior, have resigned since December out of a roster of about 150, citing burnout and the better conditions offered over the border. Queensland offers $1,800 a year for nurses’ education, a Covid bonus – both absent in NSW – and higher wages, Ryan-Agnew said. “They were really top-notch, really good quality staff, and they can walk up to the Gold Coast and they’ll just completely snaffle them.” As Guardian Australia reported on Wednesday, nurses at Lismore Base hospital – the destination for Tweed’s Covid patients needing treatment – are also struggling to cope with a surge in medical needs. The Tweed hospital is buckling under spiking demand for care and a lack of trained staff and appropriate equipment. A senior manager, for instance, had to phone around themselves and then purchase the triage tent prior to Christmas after months of pleading to the health department, Ryan-Agnew said. The tent, though, remains far from adequate, with no toilet, forcing potentially Covid-positive patients – and anyone waiting for PCR testing to cross the border – to traipse through the main hospital lobby. “You can have people with heart conditions, sick kids, elderly, frail, all sitting there waiting to be seen, and you’ve got a potential Covid patient walking through the waiting room,” Ryan-Agnew said. Patients with chest and severe abdominal pain, septic children and adults should be in beds not a tent without nursing care, staff said. Earlier this week, one Covid patient had to wait 17 hours before being transferred to Lismore, while another patient had to wait 30 hours before being moved on Wednesday. The nurse manager shares office space and air-conditioning with two beds set aside for Covid patients with no air-locked space for changing PPE. “We have bottles of hand sanitiser sitting on top of overflowing bins, flapping Covid tent flaps compromising PPE,” another staff member, who requested anonymity, said. “We also continue to struggle getting adequate PPE and supplies, certain masks run out, no hair coverings and no disposable blood pressure cuffs.” A Northern NSW Local Health District spokesperson said a “transportable treatment area” had been set up to treat Covid-positive patients without serious illness so they didn’t need to enter the hospital. “As with any month in a large organisation there has been some staff turnover, however, this is not different [from] other months or years,” the spokesperson said. “These positions have been filled with new staff, casual staff, and any potential shortages can also be filled with staff between wards and facilities. “Our workforce across northern NSW has been increased and upskilled, with more than 265 staff attending surge training in intensive care, emergency care and immunisation specialties to provide additional capacity if needed. “We regularly review our stocks and supply chains of resources, including PPE and pharmacy items, to ensure adequate supplies.” According to Ryan-Agnew, some of Tweed’s problems were partly self-inflicted. Pathology North, the department’s regional pathology unit, offered to supply Tweed with a BD MAX machine used to conduct Covid tests on the spot. That would save sending the results three times a day for what can be a six-hour journey. “We just needed the scientists to use it because you have to have doctors to be able to read the results,” Ryan-Agnew said, but the hospital management refused to set aside space to house it. “We still don’t have the BD MAX. That’s been argued for months and months and months.” Do you know more about pressure in the healthcare system? Contact peter.hannam@theguardian.com. You can remain anonymous.Importers of already-approved Covid rapid tests say they are being frustrated by long regulatory delays blocking them from selling the devices for home use, further strangling supply at a time of peak demand. The Morrison government has faced sustained criticism over its failure to shore up supplies of Covid rapid tests ahead of the current Omicron wave, including by companies critical of the slow regulatory approval process. Currently, Australia’s health regulator, the Therapeutic Goods Administration, needs to separately approve the same rapid Covid test for use in two different settings: at home through self-testing, or at various points of care under the supervision of a health practitioner of staff member. Approvals for home tests were slow to commence and are still lagging badly behind. Just 18 tests have been approved for home use, while 59 rapid antigen or lateral flow tests have been approved for use in care settings. Suppliers who already have approval to supply rapid tests in point of care settings are facing months-long delays to obtain the regulator’s green light to sell the same devices for self-testing, despite the fact they have already been deemed safe and reliable, and generally only require a tweaking of packaging and instructions. One importer said they had been waiting three months for the TGA to examine the instructions included in the box of their already-approved rapid test, to ensure they were suitable for home use. “That is a source of frustration for many importers,” he said. “You would think that maybe if the TGA was to say to us ‘this is what your insert has to say’, we would say exactly that and away we go.” “But in the meantime we are communicating backwards and forwards and have been doing so for some time.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning An analysis of registers published by the TGA shows 26 suppliers of rapid antigen or lateral flow tests are currently approved to sell tests for use in point of care settings, but not for home use. Not all of those 26 suppliers have applied for approval to sell their tests for home use and some rapid tests require the use of special instruments, not available in a home setting, to properly obtain a result. The TGA said it is prioritising the assessment of self-tests, but suggested delays were often caused by applicants. “For most applications received by the TGA, there is missing information that requires additional submissions from suppliers which in turn, extends the finalisation of the regulatory review and approval process until the information is submitted and then assessed,” a spokesperson said. The spokesperson said self-tests must comply with minimum standards, including performance criteria and information on labelling and instructions for use that can be easily understood by consumers. In cases where approval for point of care tests already existed, suppliers wanting to sell the same test for home use must provide additional information and change instructions for use to enable self-testing, the spokesperson said. Instructions written for health professionals contained assumed levels of knowledge that were “not suitable for consumers or lay-persons”, the TGA said. The supplier is also required to show how they would provide support for self-testing, including, for example, through instructional YouTube videos. Suppliers must also provide usability testing by untrained, unsupervised users. “The TGA’s assessment process ensures that Australians can be confident that the tests they are using are safe, perform as intended, with the relevant steps and support provided to consumers who purchase them.” One test distributor said the approval process for an at-home Covid test had taken several months, despite the TGA having previously approved another supplier to sell identical tests for home use. “It’s just so difficult and it’s taken far too long,” the distributor said. They said tests cost about AUD$3.50 out of China, plus freight, warehousing and distribution costs. National cabinet agreed on a plan late Wednesday evening to give disadvantaged people small cash payments to cover the cost. The agreement will provide up to 10 rapid antigen tests free to more than six million concession card-holders, but everyone else who is not a close contact of a case and symptomatic will still have to pay. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, dismissed growing calls for universal free access to rapid testing kits, at odds with Labor leader Anthony Albanese, who on Wednesday called for rapid tests to be made freely available. “We have considered the options and it is clear that this is the simplest, most efficient, fairest and most responsible way to fix the mess that Scott Morrison has made of testing at this critical juncture of the pandemic,” Albanese said.We’re Tommy Dassalo and Karl Chandler, and we make a living as hosts of comedy podcast The Little Dum Dum Club. The internet gave birth to us, and it can end us. Guardian Australia has certain rules about what we can submit as the “funniest things we have ever seen on the internet” and according to them, it’s not appropriate to just send in a bunch of clips of our comedian friends where we re-voice them and make them say negative stuff about vaccines. So instead, we’ve sent in a bunch of other junk. Catch you at the end for a plug. 1. Dave Chappelle on Kramer Neither of us are very big consumers of standup specials on the streaming services, but this short clip of Dave Chappelle at the Laugh Factory is a massive favourite – in which he kinda defends Michael Richards’s infamous set there. “Hang in there, Kramer!” has become an essential, multi-purpose catchphrase in most elements of our lives. But most of all, it’s just fun to imagine that we live in a world where Dave Chappelle literally thinks that Michael Richards’s name is Kramer. 2. The ‘India’ prank calls to 2SM Prank calls were trolling before we had the internet. In 2006, a bunch of people – including Sam Mac, before he was a Gold Logie-nominated weatherman – were listening to a quiz segment on Sydney radio station 2SM and heard a caller mistakenly guess “India” to a question. The caller was then berated on-air by host Graeme Gilbert for guessing such a wrong answer. The natural next step for Sam Mac et al, of course, was to get everyone they knew to call in and guess “India” to every question that was asked – for the next million years or so. We both became obsessed with this. We discovered it just before we shared a car in a four-hour traffic jam, and the word “India” was possibly 70% of our conversation. Sam Mac should’ve won the Gold Logie for this. 3. I Think You Should Leave: Driver’s Ed sketch Tim Robinson’s I Think You Should Leave is easily the funniest sketch show of the last few years – and this sketch is a really great taster of what you can expect. To be completely honest, we’d probably both pick the courtroom sketch from season two, but we had to submit clips that are officially available online. So go watch that sketch on Netflix and then pretend that you’ve seen it embedded in this article. Tables! 4. Jackass Forever: movie trailer We get it, it’s incredibly stupid to put a movie trailer in the list of funniest things we’ve seen. But: as if this movie isn’t going to rule. Its release date getting bumped back from last October to this year is probably the worst thing to have happened to us in 2021. Although watching it in a packed theatre at the moment is probably a dumber stunt than anything they actually do in the movie. 5. Final 2 This is a longtime personal favourite of Tommy’s. An animation student put together an animation showreel of Dobby from Harry Potter – a decent way of showing off his skills – but then went the extra mile by inserting himself into the video and writing a little scene between himself and Dobby, where they seem to be in love with each other? Which, as far as I can remember, is not canon in the Harry Potter universe. He’s also recorded Dobby’s dialogue on what seems to be the world’s cheapest microphone, and then filmed all of his parts in a public park, so you can see people walking their dogs through the background. No hate though, because the animation is great and is far better than anything I could do (after dropping out of animation school after eight months). 6. Kay’s Cooking: avocado on toast Kay is a lovely lady in the north of England who videos herself learning to cook the most basic of foods. She’s intriguing and eminently likable but boy oh boy does her food look like a sack of crap. In this particular episode, she’s trying to make avocado on toast for the first time ever. However, she’s mistakenly used an eggplant instead, and is confused when she tries to mash the rock-hard innards of this “avocado”. It sounds bad, and it looks even worse. She’s since relabelled the video as “aubergine on toast”, to save face. Kay, you can’t fool us, especially by using the fancier term “aubergine”. 7. Succession but everyone wants some of Logan’s M&amp;Ms Another Tommy pick. It seems like everyone loves Succession at the moment, but I don’t know if very many people have seen this clip. This guy is unbelievable. Doing even one of these characters so spot-on would be impressive, let alone the whole cast. I have a very limited range of impressions – I think the only way I’d be able to pull off a video like this is there was a prestige HBO drama where every role was played by Dave Hughes. 8. Seinfeld A few years ago, we were giddy off the back of selling out a live podcast at the Sydney Opera House and being invited to do a live podcast at the most exclusive comedy festival in the world, Just For Laughs in Montreal. We had a meeting with a major radio station in Melbourne, thinking, “Here we go. We could get a radio show here.” Instead, the executive who was going to meet with us pulled out without explanation and sent in some guy who knew nothing about us (or much else), and ended his meeting with two comedians, in the year of 2017, by asking us, “Have you ever seen Seinfeld? That guy is funny.” So, we’d like to pass that suggestion on to you guys. Have you ever seen Seinfeld? If not, here it is. 9. Norm MacDonald on Saturday Night Live Weirdly, the official Saturday Night Live YouTube account has no clips of the late, great Norm MacDonald hosting Weekend Update: one of the best and most influential bits of comedy in the last 25 years. So instead, I (Karl) am gonna supply this stupid, weird sketch that I love so much in tribute to Norm. Most of the cast in this sketch were fired after this 1995 end-of-season episode (Adam Sandler, Chris Farley, Jay Mohr), and others were demoted (Norm and David Spade), and it’s clearly written by dead men walking. It’s SO dumb and the audience appear to HATE it. But what do people know? NOTHING. 10. The Little Dum Dum Club Seems a little silly to promote everyone else to people out there who, more than likely, don’t even know our own stuff. So, here’s our stuff. It’s the story of the time I (Karl) annoyed an open mic-er who was trying to get a gig at my weekly comedy night by relentlessly insisting he bring Dave Hughes along, despite the fact he clearly didn’t know him. And we told it on our show to Hughesy, who loved it. Stupid, pretty funny and a decent summation of the last 11 years of doing this podcast. The Little Dum Dum Club’s long-delayed live recording of their 500th episode takes place on 15 January at the Athenaeum Theatre, Melbourne. Listen to their podcast hereIt’s healthy, tasty and easy to make. With split pulses or lentils as its main ingredient, dal is a good source of protein, fibre and iron, making it the comfort food you can enjoy freely without feeling disgusting afterwards. I first discovered dal during an extended camping trip in the Northern Territory in 40C heat. As the main storage option was the boot of the car, that narrowed down the meal options somewhat. A two-step dal mix that could be heated up on the camp stove in minutes soon became the star dish on a menu that otherwise consisted of two-minute noodles, pasta and jar sauce and bland tinned soup. And back in the city, with the many options that refrigeration and a fully fledged kitchen affords, dal remains a staple. An everyday dish across India, there are seemingly endless varieties to try (many of which are vegan), from refreshing tomato or light coconut-based dals to rich dal makhani (which means butter in Hindi). Plus you can easily adapt it and add whatever veggies need using up. Many don’t require the dal to be soaked first and can be cooked in under 30 minutes. If you’re less of a guts than me and have leftovers, I hear it lasts well in the freezer too. I suggest finding one or two that work for you and sticking with them. That way you can skip having to choose a recipe and write a list before you go shopping and cook it, as it’s somewhere in that process that I usually replace one of those steps with “get takeaway”. My go-to recipe is Meera Sodha’s quick coconut dal in her book East. She came up with it shortly after having a baby when she was “still a little broken and exhausted”: so, you know, manageable for those of us with regular energy levels but who are less advanced in the kitchen. The yellow soupy goodness topped with a zingy tomato sambal is very satisfying. And if that’s too tricky, grab the pre-prepared packet dal next time you go to the supermarket.Addressing children’s mental health is “more complex” than blaming social media and requires investment in social housing and supports through schools, the children’s commissioner has said. Anne Hollonds spoke to Guardian Australia in a wide-ranging interview about Australian governments’ responses to Covid-19, and a suite of new measures at the federal level to tackle bullying online. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has made the affect of social media on youth mental health a focus in the lead-up to the 2022 election, campaigning on online safety and arguing reforms are needed, particularly to prevent harassment of women and girls. Hollonds said she “absolutely” supports the legislation to unmask anonymous social media trolls, the social media inquiry and regime of eSafety commissioner content takedown orders as measures that put “the best interest of children as the first priority” in the “unregulated” digital world. But Hollonds warned that a decade-long increase in mental health problems including self-harm, which predates the Covid-19 pandemic, has other social and economic dimensions. “There are some people who might like to say ‘oh it’s all the fault of social media’. “That’s often the go-to answer as to why kids have mental health problems. I wouldn’t deny it has an effect but it’s not as simple as that, it’s more complex.” Australian Institute of Health and Welfare data shows in any given year 20% of Australians experience mental ill health and that, even before the pandemic, three-quarters of Australians with mental ill health were under 25. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning One in four Australian teens reported experiencing psychological distress in 2020 and parents have warned that the pandemic and lockdowns have made it harder to find help. Hollonds said poor youth mental health is a “long-term increasing trend” which Covid has “opened our eyes to in a way we can’t ignore” due to a “spike where there were extended lockdowns”. “It’s something that obviously worries me hugely … you just have to ask how bad does it have to get before we recognise that we need to make children a national policy priority?” In addition to the way living in a digital world has “changed the experience of childhood”, Hollonds nominates the financial pressure from the cost of housing and inadequate support systems as causes. “For example the education system … for the kids who are struggling, perhaps the old style education system where it’s just about academic learning is not really doing enough for kids,” she said. “I think Covid has shown schools are about much more than academic learning that can be replaced by zoom. “By closing schools we actually added pressure to the distress of kids.” One of the main lessons from the pandemic is that schools “should be the last to close and the first to reopen, because of their importance in the overall wellbeing of children”, Hollonds said. “In my view … we’ve under-estimated school as a community hub of support for the wellbeing of kids and their families.” Hollonds said that some other developed countries had better integrated the health and education systems making it “easier for people to get help they need”. Hollonds said the cost of housing and the “spike in costs during Covid” was also a deeply worrying factor that emerges from her consultation with children, young people and their families. “It’s those areas with low incomes, higher poverty and disadvantage … outside CBDs, in rural and outer urban areas – [they are] precisely the areas where rents have become unaffordable [during the pandemic].” Hollonds called on governments to address “under-investment in social housing over decades” and to look at economic drivers of housing costs. Her comments back calls from other experts for more comprehensive mental health supports and higher income supports to tackle the youth mental health crisis. In November the former Labor premier of South Australia, Jay Weatherill, who’s now chief executive of Minderoo Foundation’s Thrive by Five initiative, accused the Morrison government of neglecting to assess the affect of the pandemic on young children, with current policies labelled “a series of crisis responses”. The latest Naplan data has found that Australian schoolchildren’s basic literacy and numeracy skills were relatively unscathed during first year of the Covid-19 pandemic, but gaps are widening between city students and those in regional and remote areas. Guardian Australia previously reported concerns from teachers that the compounded effects of two years of intermittent learning in some areas are only just beginning to become apparent, especially for younger cohorts (up to grade 2) that are not captured by the Naplan dataset.The pleasure of watching a streak of positive habits accumulating on a whiteboard has become almost a dependency for me. So much so, I debated packing it in my suitcase for a short trip away. But the humble whiteboard has a more portable, sophisticated upgrade: the guided journal. A few years ago I thought the trajectory of these workbooks – designed to probe or organise different facets of your behaviour or health – had probably peaked. Back then, deluxe hardbacks lined the shelves of stylish stationery chains (Kikki K favoured own-brand pastel numbers: Happy, Thrive, Dream Life), while Urban Outfitters displayed quirky titles (Moon Journal, My Adorable Cat) from the lineage of Keri Smith’s 2007 Wreck This Journal in the gift section, alongside moustache mugs and line-drawn temporary tattoos. But the upswing is far from over, and the scope has become ever broader. There are journals designed to delve deeply into hobbies, or straighten out specific personality kinks. Some favour style over substance – expensive hardbacks with minimal prompts – while others offer a wealth of theory between exercises. Bianca Jafari is a product development executive at Thames and Hudson, focusing on gift products: puzzles, stationery, games and, in the pipeline, guided journals. She says journals are no longer just the domain of niche or self-help publishers. The bigger publishing houses are basing journals on their bestsellers, such as Mark Manson’s The Subtle Art of Not Giving a F*ck Journal (HarperCollins) and Michelle Obama’s Becoming: A Guided Journal for Discovering Your Voice (Penguin). “Producing a guided journal is a no-brainer because they can use content that they already have,” says Jafari. “For example, the Michelle Obama journal is a big win for Penguin because they already own the images. They’ve already got data that says that the content is a bestseller. There’s already an audience that exists.” That’s all well and good for the publishers, but can guided journals really live past the punter’s first flush of good intentions, or are they destined to be abandoned as quickly as a teenage girl sets aside the diary she received for Christmas, into which she poured her New Year resolutions? I decided to try a few. Journals to clean up specific areas of your life “Some journals are interest-based to help you practise a craft, like astrology, or manage your veganism or gardening,” says Jafari. Since none of those are areas of concern for me, I unearthed some that are applicable to many of us as a new year begins. Collective Hub, from Australian publisher Lisa Messenger, puts out books and journals aimed at entrepreneurs. Know Your Numbers is one such product – a chunky hardback that works hard for the money with budget templates, saving tips, start-up launch advice and income tracking tables. Several publishers offer journals dedicated to going alcohol-free, including Sober As F*** (based on Sarah Ordo’s memoir); the 90-day journal Dear Alcohol, I’m Breaking Up With You and the Alcohol Experiment Journal, based on the bestselling book This Naked Mind by Annie Grace. I tried the Declutter Challenge (Mango Publishing) by Cassandra Aarssen, which suggests you “Namast’ay home this weekend and declutter some junk”. Cynics will say this paperback isn’t helping by adding to your hoarding, but Aarssen does actually invite you to bin it, on the final (120th) page. Her “30 quick steps” to organising your home draw on mindfulness, visualisation and gratitude. As a way to avoid the long-overdue pruning of my garden hedges, I list “six awesome things about decluttering my home” and draw the things in my lounge-room that make me the happiest in the cartoon picture frames provided. I do chuck some things from the drawers into a box in the car port, but a few days later it’s Christmas Day and I receive a whole variety of future landfill. Then the Declutter Challenge joins the teetering pile of journals on my desk, presumably for ever. Goal-oriented journals The line between habit-tracking books, such as bullet journals (which focus on to-do lists, logging completed tasks, and the steps towards achieving various-sized goals) and guided journals has blurred to near indistinction. “Many people associate habit trackers with the new year and downloading a few apps and promising to drink more water,” says Jafari. She believes that they are satisfying, but that commitment to a guided journal is “more special”. “You can sit with it over enough time to block everything else out … and you pour yourself into it.” One such hybrid is the Australian creation The Resilience Agenda, a “mental fitness diary” that provides strategies for achieving said fitness; though your main task is to identify each day’s three top priorities to help you reach your goals. James Clear’s bestselling Atomic Habits has been turned into the Clear Habit Journal; while Adelaide United’s football club captain Stefan Mauk has created the Inner Game, to help athletes with goal monitoring and preparation. I tried out Mindset. Reset, from Perth-based finance professional turned life coach Alisa Pettit. Promising to focus on “the non-fluff emotional stuff”, she’s delivered a generous amount of theory among the exercises. There’s still plenty of scribbling to do, and I find this the most productive journal yet. I look at the hierarchy of 10 areas of my life and find I’m tanking on “spirituality” and “community”. I’m encouraged to analyse how blame, justification and lack of responsibility have so far scuppered my goals. Then there’s the goal-setting itself. Pettit has designed three contracts that you can stick to the mirror, based on your short-term, middle-term and long-term goals. Mine are choreographing a pole-dance routine by February; developing an open mic comedy set in three months and entering a bodybuilding competition within 12 months. Serendipitously, I see they could all feed into one another. Tough-love journals Finally, there are the journals that go for the jugular, either suggesting urgent reflection is needed – such as with Me and White Supremacy by Layla Saad – or tackling tough topics, such as Grief, A Guided Journal by Australian marriage celebrant Jo Betz, written after she lost her husband, and Susan Buniva’s Successful Co-Parenting with a Toxic Ex. “These are quite different to the self-help journals, because they’re quite intrusive,” says Jafari. “Like the Judgement Detox Journal [by Gabrielle Bernstein], which asks, ‘Why do I feel the need to judge, and what happened in my own life that makes me confident to judge someone else?’” I tried Cheaper Than Therapy (Running Press), to which no author is credited, unless you include the nods to Freud and Jung. Inside are Rorschach inkblot tests, dream analysis, word association tests and methods to actualise your worst self, and 120 prompts, hopping from the distant past, to the past week, to your general psyche. As the foreword says, none of this is to be taken “super-seriously”. I decide this journal might be a good vehicle to tackle my pornography use (very healthy or very unhealthy, depending on how you look at it), via prompts such as “Do you feel worthy of scorn? Why or why not?” and “What’s your sexual fantasy? OK. Now tell me the real one? What do you think that means?” as well as the quiz “How psychosexual are you?” (“Do you ever pee yourself a little?” “Do you relentlessly chew gum?”). The answers are enlightening but, obviously, are to remain as closely guarded as my search engine results.I love the ocean but in the last two years, I haven’t seen her much. Now the world’s gotten a little bigger, all I want to do is be by the water. Sup – or standup paddleboarding – is the closest you can get without actually getting wet. You cruise along, admire the view, find a nice spot for lunch. You can dip in, dip out – hell, you can take a rod if you want, or do some downward dog on your board. Humans have been supping a long time – records go back to as early as 3,000BC, but the modern iteration was born in Hawaii in the 1940s, when surfer John Ah Choy could no longer get up and down on his board. He started to use a paddle to help him get out to the waves, his kids picked it up, and like many water-related activities that come from that island, it spread quickly across the globe. Paddleboarding is now a common feature in most Australian waterways. It’s often cited as the fastest growing water sport – and when you do it, you can tell why. For starters, you can learn almost instantly. You just hop on the board and when your balance is right, if you feel comfortable, you stand up. Simple. Nic Cooper has been supping for years now. He loves it so much he’s made it his job – taking travellers around Victoria to the best spots. “I’m hardcore into it. But I’m not I’m not one of those that goes on, like, marathon Sups or anything like that. I just love being out in the ocean and just chilling,” he says. “I see it as relaxation.” Cooper says he’s never had a student who couldn’t do it – some stay on their knees, but given you’re cruising past turtles, dolphins and kangaroos, it’s still a good time. “Depending on your balance and stuff like that, you can get pretty good at it within a few hours,” he says. Egalitarian in its demands, Cooper says all ages and most body types can Sup. “I think it’s made water sports accessible for everyone.” Once you’ve got the basics, you need to finesse your technique to get the most out of each stroke. While this isn’t essential for beginners, it’s a must to compete in a race, or to Sup your way along a river for a few days. This requires “bending your knees as you go forward and … leaning down on your paddle … to get the most propulsion as possible,” Cooper says. “Even giving your paddle a little twist as it exits at the back will have less push on the water and therefore it’ll be a more efficient stroke.” More advanced Sup-ers can even ride them like surfboards. Before we set out for a lesson on Melbourne’s waterways, Cooper’s best advice was “never look back”. Which of course, I forgot when a turtle swam under me. I swivelled around and went very quickly from standing up paddleboarding to falling down paddleboarding. But I stayed dry, and luckily out of the frame of our fast-moving photographer. Despite the tumble, a sense of calm prevailed – it is like valium in a water sport. As we drifted on the ocean just off Mt Martha beach, shadowed by peninsula “shacks” that would cost a cool $2m, I asked whether the sport was as egalitarian in price as it is in skill. How much does it cost to sit on a board for a hit of bliss regularly? Not much, or quite a lot, says Cooper. The cheapest, easiest way for those who want to try it is to book a Sup session or hire a board at the beach. Depending on where you are, board hire can be about $30 for 60 minutes. If you want a lesson to make sure you’ve got the basics – or to mine your guide for the best spots – it’ll cost about $60 for an hour. As for buying your own gear, it depends what you want to do with it. “If they want to go on these huge trips – 20, 30km along the coastline or whatever – then they’re going to want a long, thin touring board,” Cooper says. For activities like yoga, he suggests something wide and stable. The cheapest Sup I could find online was a blow-up one going for $200 – without a pump. Price differences from there are about quality, ease, and weight – the more expensive boards blow up quicker, last longer and are substantially lighter, Cooper says. He warns to avoid the cheapest new boards “because it’s just going to break”. A high quality board new will cost about $900, but secondhand options are the best way to score a bargain. Supping isn’t a solo sport, either. Aficionados can join their local clubs and even plan holidays around the activity. “You can take them in a backpack so you could go to some really awesome places … Once you’re confident and you know you’re not going to fall off, then you can go anywhere really.” This piece was supported by Visit Victoria and Wild Adventures Melbourne.Almost 200,000 more Covid cases have been reported in the UK, as an infection survey revealed one in 10 Londoners had Covid towards the end of last year. On Wednesday, 194,747 daily confirmed Covid cases were reported for the whole of the UK – reflecting the number of infections picked up by testing – with 150,232 cases reported for England alone. The figure does not include reinfections for most of the countries in the UK, and reflects cases by date reported, rather than by specimen date. While the UK total is lower than the 218,724 cases reported the day before, Tuesday’s data included figures covering a four-day period for Northern Ireland and a two-day period for Wales. Data released on Wednesday also reveals that in England there are 15,659 Covid patients in hospital, up from 15,044 the day before. Wednesday’s figure marks a 50% rise in a week. Figures for Scotland also reveal a continued increase in the number of Covid patients in hospital, with 1,223 reported on Wednesday. Data was not available for Wales or Northern Ireland. A further 334 deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test were reported in the UK on Wednesday – a figure last exceeded in early March. However, Wednesday’s figure includes a backlog in reporting from NHS England, going back to 1 January, as well as two days’ data on deaths from Scotland. The data comes as it was revealed one in 15 people in England had Covid last week, rising to one in 10 in London. According to figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), based on swabs collected from randomly selected households, an estimated 3,270,800 people in England, or about 6% of the population on average, had Covid in the week ending 31 December. The week before the figure was about one in 25, or 4% of the population on average. Infection levels also rose in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland in the most recent week, with the latest estimates suggesting that about one in 20 in the former two countries had Covid in the week ending 31 December, and about one in 25 for the latter. In the week before the figure was about one in 40 for all three countries. For all countries in the UK, Omicron is now the dominant coronavirus variant. The results reveal infection levels in England differ by age and region although they have risen across the board: levels were highest in those aged from school year 12 to 24 years old, at about one in 10 people in this age group. However, levels were almost as high in other age groups including those aged two to school year 6 and those aged 25 to 34 where about one in 15 were estimated to have had Covid in the most recent week. By contrast the figure was about one in 45 for those aged 70 and over. In terms of regions in England, London had the highest infection levels, with about one in 10 estimated to have had Covid in the most recent week. However the team note there are hints the situation may be shifting. “In the last few days of 2021, the trend in the percentage testing positive was uncertain for those in London who are secondary school ages and those aged 25 to 49 years, which may mean that infections are no longer increasing among these ages in London, but it is currently too early to suggest if this is a continuing change in trend,” the team write. The lowest levels of infection were found in the south-west, where one in 30 are estimated to have had Covid in the week ending 31 December. “We continue to see infections across the UK increase, with Omicron now the dominant variant across all four nations,” said Sarah Crofts, the head of analytical outputs for the Covid-19 Infection Survey. “There are early signs of a potential slowing of infections in London in the days before New Year’s Eve. However, it is too early to suggest this is a change in trend overall.”Official data shows the number of people getting boosted in the UK fell to just over 100,000 on Sunday, compared with highs of more than 900,000 before Christmas when on some days people were queueing for hours to get vaccinated. Asked about the slowdown, the government’s vaccine minister, Maggie Throup, said the Christmas break and public holidays were key factors. So will this week see higher numbers coming forward or are there other factors at play? What proportion of people are eligible for a booster? Almost 60% of over-12s have had their booster or third dose. But only half of the remaining 40% have had their second dose and it is notable that there wasn’t a dramatic uptick in the number of people coming forward for first and second doses in the pre-Christmas vaccination campaign. Since a three-month gap is needed between doses, the ceiling for boosters will remain at 80% of over-12s well into the spring. How many people have had to wait because they’ve tested positive for Covid? People need to wait 28 days after testing positive to be eligible for vaccination. So the huge surge in cases – 2 million were estimated to have had Covid in the week before Christmas – will have inevitably meant a large number of people postponing their booster. Figures on how many people this affected are not available. But the highest rates of Covid, with one in 15 people aged 25 to 35 estimated to be infected in England last week, also coincide with the age group that would be roughly due for their booster if they had their previous vaccinations on schedule. What happens if you get boosted while not realising you have Covid? The general guidance, not just for Covid, is not to have a vaccination if you’re running an infection. Clinical trials automatically discount people who test positive, so there is not much evidence on exactly how the immune system responds to an infection and a booster at the same time. There aren’t any known harms associated with the combination, aside from the obvious one of putting health professionals at risk if you attend a clinic while infectious. Since infection also boosts antibody levels, there is likely to be less benefit to getting a booster at the same time. It is possible that the side-effects of a booster, on top of mild Covid symptoms, might feel a bit worse, but there is no suggestion that this would be a clinical concern. With the move to lateral flow tests (LFTs), how will positive results be recorded if people don’t have to get a follow-up PCR? Fom 11 January in England, and from 6 January in Scotland, people who receive positive LFT results will be required to self-isolate immediately and won’t be required to take a confirmatory PCR test. In theory, all LFT results, including negative ones, are already supposed to be reported via the government’s test-and-trace system and feed into daily case numbers. In practice, a much smaller proportion of LFT results are reported compared with PCR results, which are automatically entered into the system when processed in the laboratory. However, cases are already running far above the numbers being confirmed by PCR testing and the UK is already relying on other methods, such as the Office for National Statistics Infection Survey, to assess levels of prevalence.The aviation and travel industry has welcomed the scrapping of pre-departure tests for people travelling to England, which it had claimed were unnecessary and hugely damaging to the sector. Boris Johnson announced on Wednesday afternoon that the requirement would be lifted from 4am on Friday, along with the need for travellers to self-isolate on arrival until they receive a negative PCR test result. He said – as the industry had argued – that the latest Covid variant Omicron was “so prevalent these measures have a limited impact on the growth in cases while continuing to pose significant cost to our travel industry”. Arrivals in England will now need to take a lateral flow test no later than the end of day two, in line with the previous rules. Tim Alderslade, the chief executive of the industry body Airlines UK, said: “This is a hugely welcome move at a critical time in the booking season for passengers, and will provide a massive boost to those wanting to travel abroad or come to the UK this year. People will now be able to book knowing that – for the fully vaccinated – all emergency testing restrictions have been removed. “Today marks an important step towards learning to live alongside the virus, helping passengers and the travel sector look ahead to what will be an all-important spring and summer season.” Research commissioned earlier by Airlines UK and Manchester Airports Group suggested the removal of travel testing requirements would not affect overall rate of cases and hospitalisations in the UK. The two organisations said the research showed that domestic rather than international restrictions would be the only way to reduce Omicron’s spread within the country. Travel association Abta said the decision to reduce the testing requirements was “extremely welcome” but warned that the “damage had already been done”. The Business Travel Association urged the government to come up with a “robust plan for future variants that does not mean closing our borders and strangling our sector once more”. Ministers introduced additional testing requirements in late November and early December because of fears about the spread of the newly identified variant. Under the rules in place until they revert on Friday, all passengers arriving in the UK have had to take a pre-departure Covid test in the two days before setting off, although slightly different time limits apply in the four countries, as well as a PCR test within the first two days after their arrival. Manchester Airports Group (MAG) said passenger numbers at its airports fell by more than 30% in early December after the introduction of new testing requirements. MAG’s chief executive, Charlie Cornish, said after Johnson’s announcement that the airport group looked forward to “working with government on a roadmap for the removal of all remaining restrictions, in order to help our prized aviation sector enjoy a full recovery”. Global airline body Iata said the change was “long overdue”. Its director general, Willie Walsh, said: “It’s now time to look again at the overall scheme and remove testing entirely for vaccinated travellers.” • This article was amended on 5 January 2022 to clarify the details about pre-departure Covid tests for people entering the UK.As long as they live in Bristol, the three men and a woman cleared this week of toppling the statue of Edward Colston may never have to buy their own drinks again. Jake Skuse, 33, Rhian Graham, 30, Milo Ponsford, 26, and Sage Willoughby, 22, played key roles in tearing the statue of the 17th-century slave trader from its city centre plinth, dragging it to Bristol harbour and throwing it in the River Avon. On the first day of their trial last month, hundreds of supporters applauded the Colston Four, as they have come to be known, as they arrived at Bristol crown court. On Wednesday they were found not guilty of damaging the statue, bringing their chapter in the saga to a close. But their actions, considered to be one of the most significant and symbolic acts of public dissent in Britain this century, sent shock waves that are still being felt nationally and globally. The toppling of Colston – which came just two weeks after the murder of George Floyd by Derek Chauvin, a Minneapolis police officer, sparked antiracist protests around the world – exploded like a cultural hand grenade. It catalysed a nationwide reassessment of the symbols of Britain’s imperialist past. Within six months nearly 70 tributes to slave traders, colonialists and racists were removed across the UK, a Guardian tally found, as conversations intensified over which historical figures were appropriate for public veneration. Reverberations were felt as far away as the US where, at the funeral of Floyd himself, Rev Al Sharpton referenced the protest as symbolic of changing attitudes to race, saying: “I’ve seen grandchildren of slave masters tearing down slave masters statue; over in England they put it in the river.” And it triggered outrage on the right. Dozens of so-called “statue defender” protests across the UK culminated in a chaotic rally by football fans around the statue of Winston Churchill in Trafalgar Square. Impassioned commentators compared protesters to a “woke Taliban” and warned of efforts to erase British history. “We cannot now try to edit or censor our past,” the prime minister tweeted. But as much as it was a trigger for a broader debate, the toppling of Colston’s statue was also the culmination of a uniquely Bristolian story. Erected in 1895, 174 years after Colston’s death, the bronze likeness celebrated a man regarded by some as the city’s philanthropic patron saint. He had given his name to three schools in the city and half a dozen roads, and a number of Bristol’s most ancient institutions owed their existence to his largesse. Every year celebrations were held in Bristol cathedral in Colston’s name. Leading pupils from the schools that bore his name were taken on pilgrimages to see a clump of his hair and his nails preserved like relics in the city’s Merchants Hall. A plaque attached to the plinth on which Colston’s statue stood celebrated him as “one of the most virtuous and wise sons” of Bristol. But concerns had long been raised over his presence. Looming over the heart of south-west England’s most multicultural city, Colston had served as a potent reminder that its wealth was raised off the backs of enslaved people. Giving expert evidence in the trial, the historian David Olusoga described how Colston had made his fortune as shareholder, and eventual head, of Britain’s most-important slave-owning enterprise, the Royal African Company. During his tenure, it kidnapped and enslaved an estimated 85,000 Africans, including 12,000 children. “For me, it was symbolic of power and lack of respect, and the position of black people as a community,” Ros Martin, a playwright and activist for many years with the Countering Colston campaign, told the Guardian. She said she felt the trial was an “appalling injustice” but that she felt buoyed up by “the fact that [the defendants] are four young white people feeling empathy and showing empathy and getting people to think”. “It’s moving beyond being a bystander, which is required from all of us,” Martin said. Throughout the 10-day trial, the public gallery was packed with locals, many of whom cheered videos shown in court of the moment Colston fell. Martin was there, and other supporters and friends of the defendants. But others, such as Douglas Peden, a local lawyer, and his two daughters, had come to watch history play out in the courtroom. “It’s the symbolism of it,” Peden said, admitting he also supported the defendants. “It’s property and ownership up against freedom of expression.” The feeling was reflected elsewhere in Bristol. Outside a pub in Bristol city centre after court one evening Jodie Lily, from Exeter, told the Guardian she knew at least 10 people who were present when the statue was toppled. “It’s only those four because they got their faces,” she said. “That piece of shit should have been taken down.” The bare facts of the case were not in question. Giving evidence, the defendants proudly recounted the roles they played. But they denied criminal damage, arguing their acts were justified by the offence caused in Bristol by the statue. It was a high-risk legal strategy, given that support for the toppling of Colston was not universal, even in Bristol. A week after the statue was felled, a counter protest by the empty plinth drew a 300-strong crowd, including a banner reading “all lives matter”. Concerns were felt across the UK. Polling by Policy Exchange found nearly half of people opposed the way the statue was toppled, compared with a quarter in support, while YouGov found that although a slim majority supported Colston’s removal, just more than one in 10 thought it was done in the right way. Nevertheless, change has since come in the wake of Colston’s toppling. Colston Hall, Bristol’s major events venue, changed its name – finally fulfilling an undertaking first made in 2017 – to the Bristol Beacon. Colston’s name was removed from pubs, buildings and roads. The 275-year-old Colston society was disbanded and his image was removed from stained glass windows. But at the same time, culture war battle lines were drawn, and the government sensed a populist win. Skuse, Graham, Ponsford and Milo have been cleared but new measures in the government’s police and crime bill will allow courts to send people found guilty of damaging a memorial to prison for 10 years. As critics have pointed out, someone caught defacing a statue could, under the proposals, be jailed for longer than someone found guilty of rape. As for Colston himself, since being fished out of the River Avon by Bristol council, his statue has found his way to the city’s M Shed museum, where it has been transformed, according to Olusoga, into “the most important artefact” of the story of Britain’s relationship with its brutal slave history. There, the statue of the old slave trader lies supine, with red paint daubed on its eyes, mouth and hands. Its coattail and staff are missing. It is surrounded by placards from the day it was pulled down and across its 17th-century robes is scrawled “BLM”.Due to the pandemic, households in the UK have been hit by the highest rate of inflation for a decade with it hitting 5.1% in November 2021. We would like to hear about any increases in the cost of goods, services or items you have spotted across the country. Whether it’s school meals, activities or items from your local supermarket, share your tips with us. How to get in touch You can fill in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Covid-19 hospitalizations among children in the US are soaring, fueled by the Omicron variant and the holidays, and adding pressure to already-strained health systems and schools. An average of 672 children were being hospitalized every day in the US, as of 2 January - more than double the average just a week before. And the rate is rapidly increasing. Cases are also rising. There were more than 325,000 new cases among kids in the week ending 23 December, a 64% increase from the previous week and nearly double the cases two weeks earlier, the American Academy of Pediatrics reported on Monday. The increases appear to be driven by the more contagious nature of the Omicron variant and low vaccination rates among children over the age of five years old. As with adults, early evidence appears to show that Omicron also largely causes mild illness in kids. Nonetheless, experts are urging the use of every possible precaution, including tests, masks, vaccinations and even temporary delays in reopening schools to curb both cases and staff shortages. “We have about four times as many children admitted currently as we have had in any other wave,” Dr Elaine Cox, the chief medical officer for Riley Children’s Health in Indiana, told reporters on Tuesday. They are also seeing the severity rise among the children who are admitted to the hospital, Cox said. “So there are more of them, and they are sicker.” More than half the hospitalized children have had to spend time in the intensive care unit, and at least 40% of those kids need to be put on a ventilator, she said. More than 1,000 kids have died in the US from Covid during the pandemic so far, according to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). More than 830,000 people have died in the US from Covid so far. In New York, hospitalizations among kids quadrupled. In Washington DC, children’s hospital admissions have roughly doubled. In Texas, children’s hospitalizations were described as “staggering”. In Alabama, cases were “like a rocket ship”. In Louisiana, one doctor said: “We’ve never seen anything like it.” In Ohio, one associate professor of internal medicine and pediatrics critical care recently told ABC news: “We’re on fire.” Hospitals are shooting past the peaks of previous surges, many of them driven by the Omicron variant. In South Africa, children and teens accounted for 17% of hospital admissions during the Omicron wave, compared to 4% during the second wave and 3.5% during the third, which was fueled by the Delta variant. Cox said she had also seen a sharp uptick in cases among pregnant people and newborns. In addition to Covid, hospitals are also seeing a dangerous wave of RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) and the flu this year, creating a triple threat of respiratory illness. At the same time, health workers are also getting breakthrough infections with Omicron, creating staff shortages. “We have significant numbers of our staff who are becoming ill with Covid, so they can’t work,” Cox said. Indiana is one of the states calling in the national guard to help with hospital care and logistics. School systems across the country are also balancing soaring cases, among students and staff, and weighing virtual options. Leaders of Chicago public schools, the country’s third-largest school network, canceled classes on Wednesday after the teachers’ union voted to switch to remote learning due to the surge in Covid cases. In late December, Joe Biden urged the widespread use of tools to combat the virus, including tests and vaccines. “We can keep our K-through-12 schools open, and that’s exactly what we should be doing,” he said. In Washington DC, which has some of the highest rates of Covid in the country, all students and staff are now required to take a rapid test before returning to school – one of the few districts in the country with this requirement. But schools in neighboring Montgomery county, Maryland, which has also been hit hard with new cases and hospitalizations, are recommending, not requiring, tests for students and staff. Tests have been difficult to find in many places. “We have tools now that we didn’t have last year, that will allow us to keep schools open if we deploy those tools in the best possible way,” said Brian Castrucci, who is the president and CEO of the de Beaumont Foundation, a former state and local health official, and the parent to school-aged kids in Montgomery county. “We’re dealing with trying to make sure that schools are operational, that there are enough bus drivers, there are enough teachers,” Castrucci said. Educators and health officials worry that a return to school during a time of unprecedented spread could lead to the involuntary closure of schools due to staff shortages and contribute to rising cases, especially in places that aren’t able or willing to institute precautions. “It is mind-boggling some states have a [mask] mandate ban, or do not do enough to keep our kids safe,” said Tony Yang, executive director of the Center for Health Policy and Media Engagement at George Washington University, who has researched mask mandates in schools. Yang strongly favors in-person school with precautions in place. “Students should go to school in person,” he said. “But you have to do that safely.” In places where cases are particularly high, even where some precautions are in place, schools could choose to extend winter break to avoid staff shortages during the worst of the January peak, Castrucci said. “The number one thing is, we have to use every resource we have to keep kids in school in person over the long term,” he said. “And right now, we have to make a risk calculation as to whether this is the right moment to bring kids back from the holiday.” Vaccines are another key tool, said Diego Hijano, a pediatric infectious disease doctor at St Jude children’s research hospital in Memphis, Tennessee. “Vaccination matters in terms of hospitalization and outcomes,” he said. Most of the hospitalized kids around the country are unvaccinated, and Hijano had not seen a vaccinated child hospitalized for Covid – even though he works with many children who are at risk because of other medical conditions. Hospitals overwhelmed by Covid can lead to worse care and outcomes for children suffering from other causes, he said. “If a kid has appendicitis and needs a bed for the surgery, they may not get it because the hospital is flooded with Covid,” Hijano said. “As a country and society, we shouldn’t allow even one death that could be prevented.”The European Union’s top diplomat has pledged “full support” to Ukraine on a visit to the frontline of the country’s war with Moscow-backed separatists. Josep Borrell is the first EU high representative for foreign policy to have visited the Donbass region since war broke out nearly eight years ago. “We are here first to reaffirm European Union’s full support to Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,” he told journalists. “Any military aggression against Ukraine will have messy consequences and severe costs,” he said, echoing recent declarations of EU leaders. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, who accompanied Borrell on a helicopter trip to the Luhansk region, hailed the visit as historic. It was, he said, a “sign of Ukraine-EU unity in the face of elevated Russian threats”. Borrell visited Stanytsia Luhanska, a village and crossing point on the frontline that has endured years of shelling in the conflict with Russian-backed separatists. Tensions have escalated as tens of thousands of Russian troops have massed along the border with Ukraine. “The conflict on the borders is on the verge of getting deeper and tensions have been building up with regard to European security as a whole,” Borrell said. The EU has been searching for a role in the conflict before a series of crucial meetings next week aiming to reduce the temperature between Moscow and the west. Officials from Russia and the US will gather in Geneva next Monday, followed by a Nato-Russia council two days later, with talks then moving to the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Meanwhile Germany has stepped up its own diplomacy. Berlin is sending German chancellor Olaf Scholz’s foreign policy adviser, Jens Plötner, to Moscow, and on Wednesday, the foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, met the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, in Washington to present a common front on Ukraine. “We jointly reiterated that Russian actions and activities come with a clear price tag, and a renewed violation of Ukrainian sovereignty by Russia would have severe consequences,” Baerbock said. She did not specifically address the question of whether the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline project would be blocked in the event of a Ukrainian invasion, but did say Germany would abide by an agreement with the US last summer that Russia would not be allowed to use energy as a political weapon against Europe. “We agreed on this, together with our European partners, that we would take effective measures together with our European partners, should Russia use energy as a weapon or should it continue its aggressive acts against Ukraine,” Baerbock said. Blinken said the pipeline gave the EU leverage over Russia, rather than the other way round. “If Russia renews its aggression toward Ukraine, it would certainly be difficult to see gas flowing through it in the future,” he said. Paris is dispatching Plötner’s French counterpart, Emmanuel Bonne, to Moscow, while France’s foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, called for close cooperation among Europeans in relations with Russia. “A demanding dialogue with Russia on the basis of parameters that we judge conform to our collective security interests is useful and necessary to reinforce strategic stability in Europe,” he said in a statement issued on Wednesday. Le Drian is due to host EU foreign ministers in Brest next week for further talks on how to handle relations with Moscow. Earlier this year, France and Germany provoked fury among other EU members by calling for a summit with Vladimir Putin. Poland and the Baltic states rejected the idea, arguing it would not change the Russian president’s behaviour. Instead the EU agreed to explore further economic sanctions against Russia, but a paper on that subject drawn up by EU officials is yet to see the light of day. Despite Ukraine’s pleas for preventive sanctions, EU officials oppose revealing any possible actions against Russia, fearing it could deepen tensions. Discussing sanctions would also be likely to exacerbate divisions among EU member states on how to respond to Russia. The EU and US blame Moscow for provoking a crisis by massing tens of thousands of troops at the border with Ukraine and have threatened “massive consequences” if Russia invades. The Kremlin has called for guarantees that Ukraine will never be a Nato member and says the alliance should remove troops and weapons from EU member states bordering Russia, demands dismissed as unacceptable by European leaders.1636: Edward Colston is born into a merchant family in Bristol. In 1680 he becomes becomes a leading shareholder in the Royal African Company, which has a monopoly in the trade in enslaved people. He dies in 1721, having donated about £70,000 – equivalent to millions in today’s money – to Bristol, helping to establish a number of the city’s oldest institutions. 1895: A statue of Colston is erected in Bristol “by popular subscription”. A plaque attached to its plinth says: “Erected by the citizens of Bristol as a memorial to one of the most virtuous and wise sons of their city.” Attempts to raise money for the memorial from Bristolians are largely unsuccessful and the monument ends up being financed by the wealthy Bristol publisher James Williams Arrowsmith. 1921: Rev H J Wilkins publishes a short book based on archival research that acknowledges Colston as a slave trader. Wilkins is the first in the modern era to question the image built around Colston and to ask if such veneration is appropriate for a man who traded in human beings. 1973: In response to historical silence surrounding the 600th anniversary of Bristol as a city and county, Derek Robinson writes A Shocking History of Bristol, exposing Colston as a leading financier of the slave trade and drawing attention to his continued celebration in annual rituals. May 1996: Complaints pour in after Bristol’s Festival of the Sea fails almost entirely to mention the city’s role in the slave trade, with multicultural arts groups launching a counter Anti-Festival of the Sea. The Bristol trip hop band Massive Attack announce they are boycotting Colston Hall over its association with the slave trader. January 1998: The first direct action against the Colston statue takes place, with “fuck off slave trader” painted on the statue overnight in red paint. Days later a Bristol councillor, Ray Sefia, said he could understand why the statue was targeted. “It’s like having a monument to Hitler,” he told the Bristol Post. “We have to be very clear about Colston’s role in the slave trade.” September-October 2007: Protests outside Colston Hall are orchestrated by activists angry at the venue being used to host events celebrating the bicentenary of the end of the slave trade. The protests, some months after renewed calls by civil rights campaigners to rename the hall, come as a number of public debates are held re-examining Colston’s legacy. July 2018: Bristol council agrees to attach a new plaque to the Colston statue to make clear his “active role in the enslavement of over 84,000 Africans”. However, after an intervention by Bristol’s Society of Merchant Venturers, the wording of the plaque is watered down. Bristol’s mayor, Marvin Rees, responds to the re-wording by blocking its installation. October 2018: The Bristol MP Thangam Debbonaire calls for the removal of the statue of Edward Colston. Days later an art installation made up of concrete figures depicting enslaved Africans packed into a slave ship appears in front of the statue of Colston. 25 May 2020: A Minneapolis police officer, Derek Chauvin, kneels on the neck of George Floyd, an African American man, for eight minutes and 40 seconds until Floyd is dead. The murder, which is captured on video, sparks worldwide anti-racist protests under the banner of Black Lives Matter. 7 June 2020: The statue of Colston is pulled from its plinth, rolled to Bristol harbour and thrown into the River Avon by a crowd of thousands taking part in a Black Lives Matter protest. In the following days, Colston girls’ school removes a half-size replica of the statue, his name is removed from buildings in Bristol and his likeness taken from church stained glass windows. In London the mayor, Sadiq Khan, orders a review of statues connected with slavery in the capital. 25 January 2021: Jake Skuse, Rhian Graham, Milo Ponsford and Sage Willoughby are charged with damaging the statue and plinth “with each other and others unknown without lawful excuse”. 13 December 2021: The Colston 4 go on trial at Bristol crown court accused of criminal damage. 5 January 2022: All four defendants are cleared of criminal damage after jurors are urged by the defence to “be on the right side of history”. Source: Bristol Radical History GroupThousands of Tigrayans are being deported from Saudi Arabia and held in secret detention sites in Ethiopia, according to Human Rights Watch. In a new report, the international rights organisation says it has identified two detention sites where thousands of people from the war-torn Tigray region of Ethiopia are being mistreated and forcibly disappeared. The sites, identified via satellite imagery, videos and witness accounts, in the towns of Semera and Shone are most likely used to detain Tigrayan deportees, HRW said. The HRW report also includes testimony from returnees who claim that they were abused and beaten while in custody in Saudi Arabia. “Tigrayan migrants who have experienced horrific abuse in Saudi custody are being locked up in detention facilities upon returning to Ethiopia,” said Nadia Hardman, refugee and migrant rights researcher at Human Rights Watch. “Saudi Arabia should offer protection to Tigrayans at risk, while Ethiopia should release all arbitrarily detained Tigrayan deportees,” she said. Hundreds of thousands of Ethiopians have migrated over the past decade, travelling by boat across the Red Sea and then by land through Yemen to Saudi Arabia. The causes of this migration include conflict, economic hardship, drought and human rights abuses. In January 2021, the Ethiopian government announced it would cooperate in the repatriation of 40,000 of its nationals detained in Saudi Arabia. About 40% of the returnees from Saudi Arabia between November 2020 and June 2021 were Tigrayan, according to HRW. The 23 Tigrayans interviewed for the report are undocumented migrant workers who were rounded up in Saudi Arabia and say they were also subjected to abuses there, including beatings and overcrowding. Many spent up to six years in formal and informal detention facilities in the kingdom. After being deported to Ethiopia, they were held in facilities throughout the country, HRW said: in centres across Addis Ababa; in Semera, Afar region; in Shone, in a state known as Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ region; and in Jimma, Oromia region. Trhas*, a 33-year-old Tigrayan woman who was deported from Saudi Arabia in December 2020, told HRW that Ethiopian federal police stopped her at a checkpoint at Awash Sebat, Afar, and put her on a bus to what she describes as a “military camp” in Shone. “We asked the federal police for food and water and the toilet, but we were beaten if we left our seats,” she said, describing the 36-hour bus ride to the camp. “They said, ‘Bandits don’t need food.’” In 2021, the Guardian exposed Saudi Arabia’s mass mistreatment of undocumented African migrants, exacerbated by the pandemic, at al-Shumaisi detention centre near Jeddah. Detainees interviewed at the time said they were subjected to a litany of abuses including insufficient food and water, unsanitary conditions, denial of medical care, and extortion by the centre’s guards. Nearly all interviewees said that Saudi authorities had arrested and detained them because of their irregular immigration status, but that the authorities did not provide legal justifications for their detention, nor allow them access to a lawyer or to challenge their detention. Prolonged detention without access to judicial review violates international law. Saudi Arabia is not party to the United Nations’ Convention on Refugees, and has long drawn international criticism for not having an asylum system. “Saudi Arabia should stop contributing to this abuse by ending the forced return of Tigrayans to Ethiopia and allowing them to seek asylum or resettlement in third countries,” said Hardman. A conflict in the Tigray region, in Northern Ethiopia, between Ethiopian federal government and allied forces and those affiliated with the region’s former ruling party, the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) began in November 2020. Since then, rights groups and the media have documented numerous abuses including massacres, mass displacement, sexual violence, arbitrary arrests and blocking of humanitarian relief. The Saudi Arabian government’s Centre for International Communication and the Ethiopian government’s Communication Service did not respond to requests for comment. *Names in the HRW report have been changed to protect the identity of those interviewed. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The Göteborg film festival is no stranger to stunts. It has previously featured screenings for a single audience member at a North Sea lighthouse, as well as “coffin screenings” in which lucky viewers were interred inside a sarcophagus to enhance their sensory empathy. This year, festival directors are planning to put the entire audience under by hiring a hypnotist for three gala screenings. Ahead of Swedish premieres for Apichatpong Weerasethakul’s Memoria, Shirin Neshat’s Land of Dreams and Christian Tafdrup’s Speak No Evil, a hypnotist will appear on stage to “transform the audience’s state of mind in accordance with the mood and theme of the film”. Organisers said the spell would be broken after the screening. They did not comment on what would happen if the hypnotist became unavailable between the opening or closing credits – or what the effect would be on audience members who might, for instance, need to access the bathroom during the film. Memoria, whose running time is nearly three hours, is the most prominent among the films: a near dialogue-free English language debut for its Thai director with Tilda Swinton playing seemingly the only person on Earth able to hear new sonic booms. Göteborg artistic director Jonas Holmberg explained that the experiment was intended to “raise questions about submission, transgression and control” made more pertinent during the pandemic. “Watching a film in the cinema can be extremely hypnotic,” he added. ““At home, with a tablet, it is much harder to maintain the focus you need to get really absorbed by a film. The Hypnotic Cinema is both a tribute to and an extension of the experience of watching films at the movie theatre.” The Goteborg film festival runs for 10 days from 28 January.A “vaccination doubt line” set up by doctors in the Netherlands is receiving up to 1,000 calls a day from people who are still unsure whether or not they should get jabbed against the coronavirus. The helpline, originally launched as a local service in November by Robin Peeters, an endocrinologist at the Erasmus medical centre in Rotterdam, and Shakib Sana, a GP, was given a national number last month and has been inundated with inquiries. Staffed mainly by volunteer medical students from rooms made available in the university hospitals of Utrecht, Amsterdam, Nijmegen, Maastricht and Rotterdam, the service has met “an extraordinary response”, Peeters said. He told the Dutch public broadcaster NOS that there appeared to be more “doubters” than anti-vaxxers among the unvaccinated population. “The more you can help people come to a decision and limit hospital admissions, the better,” he said. Peeters said callers to the line, which is open from 8.30am to 4.30pm, fell into three main categories. First, those with questions about their individual medical situation: whether the jab would make their migraines worse, or interact with their medication. There were also a large number of questions about pregnancy and fertility and Covid-19 vaccines, as well as possible side-effects. The answers to many such specific questions could not be found on government information websites, he said. “The strength of a telephone helpline is that people can call anonymously and ask independent medical professionals,” he said. “People get their information from all sorts of unreliable sources, so there’s a need for independent advice.” Before Christmas the line received 4,400 calls over five days, Dutch media have reported. The students log every question they receive, and have access to a database containing fully referenced answers to the most common queries. Whenever they are unsure about an answer, they can contact specialists such as immunologists, gynaecologists and allergists – for more specific information. “The aim is to give every caller an appropriate and correct answer,” Peeters said. Conversations with the few committed anti-vaxxers who call are kept as short as possible, with the students trained to always ask whether the caller has a specific medical question. If not, they move on to the next caller. The objective is expressly not to pressure anyone into getting vaccinated, Peeters told the Gelderlander newspaper. “We want them to come to their own decision – we just want them to base it on correct information,” he said.The forthcoming economic crisis analysed by the Resolution Foundation (UK households warned of ‘year of the squeeze’ as cost of living soars, 29 December) is partly based on a view that wage growth is stagnant. This is true for a wide range of employees but not necessarily for all. In fact, earnings growth in the year to October was 4.9%, matching consumer price index inflation, in part buoyed up by labour market shortages. If we follow the Office for National Statistics’ breakdown of sectors, average earnings in the private sector grew by 5.4% in the year to October, while in the public sector the growth rate was 2.7%. So 2022 is set to be yet another tough year for public sector employees. Further analysis of the different parts of the private sector shows average earnings growing by 7.7% in the finance and business services sector, contrasting with a low rate of 2.8% in manufacturing. Pay growth for some is quite strong, while for others it is very weak and certainly below the rate of inflation. Alastair Hatchett Incomes Data Research • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Pablo Neruda may have won the Nobel prize for literature in 1971, but newly opened archives in Stockholm reveal the judging panel’s concerns about the Chilean poet’s “communist tendencies”. The list of writers in the running for the Nobel prize, and the deliberations of the secretive members of the judging panel at the Swedish Academy, are kept confidential for 50 years. But the newly opened archives show that, although 1971’s winner Neruda was praised by the prize-givers for “a poetry that with the action of an elemental force brings alive a continent’s destiny and dreams”, behind the scenes some members of the Swedish Academy were hesitant. They questioned how works such as Neruda’s odes to Stalin fitted with Alfred Nobel’s stipulation that the prize go to “the person who shall have produced in the field of literature the most outstanding work in an ideal direction” – according to journalist Kaj Schueler, who researched the Swedish Academy’s documents from 1971 for the Swedish newspaper Svenska Dagbladet. While the Nobel committee chair Anders Österling praised Neruda’s “poetic natural power and dynamic vitality”, he questioned whether “the increasingly dominant communist tendency in his poetry is compatible with the purpose of the Nobel prize”. Neruda, known for his passionate, romantic poetry, was also a leftwing politician and diplomat, and close friend of President Salvador Allende. Neruda died days after Augusto Pinochet’s military coup in 1973, under circumstances that have since been investigated. “A writer’s way of thinking – whether Marxist, syndicalist, anarchist or something else – belongs to his free right. However, Neruda is fully politically involved, including through his hymns to Stalin and other purely propagandistic achievements. On that basis, I have reservations about his candidacy, without, however, wanting to firmly reject it in advance,” wrote Österling in 1963 – an opinion that he continued to hold in 1971, according to Schueler. Österling had previously spoken out against the candidacy of Ezra Pound because he “propagates ideas of a nature that is definitely contrary to the spirit of the Nobel prize”, and Samuel Beckett, because of his nihilism. Österling was eventually persuaded of Neruda’s merits, and Beckett won the prize in 1969, but Pound never did. The opening of the archives also shows that WH Auden, James Baldwin, Philip Larkin and Jorge Luis Borges were all nominated for the 1971 award. Auden made the shortlist, along with Patrick White, André Malraux and Eugenio Montale. White (in 1973) and Montale (1975) would later win, but Malraux and Auden never did. The list of 90 writers nominated for the 1971 Nobel includes just one woman: the Estonian poet Marie Under.My grandmother Maureen Byrne, who has died aged 86 of lung cancer, was devoted to her family and was a much-loved member of the Irish community in Wood Green, north London. She was a devout Catholic and followed the words often attributed to Mother Teresa: “If you want to change the world, go home and love your family.” Born Ann Dalton in Cabra, Dublin, but always known as Maureen, she was one of nine children of Annie (nee Foy) and Michael Dalton, a tailor. Two siblings died in infancy and her mother died when Maureen was 10. Maureen was educated in Dublin. She was always fiercely protective of her siblings. According to family legend, once, when her sister Carmel was bullied at school aged eight, Maureen, just a year or two older, confronted the perpetrators. At the age of 18 she contracted tuberculosis and spent three years in isolation. After recovering, in the late 1950s Maureen joined thousands who moved from Ireland to London in search of work. She took various jobs, including, for a time, at a chocolate factory. In 1960, while visiting her brother, Maureen went to the Queen Adelaide pub, Shepherd’s Bush, where she met the head barman, a quiet Waterford man named Tony Byrne. They married in 1960 and settled in Wood Green. Tony worked as a cleaner on the London Underground. Maureen and Tony had five children. When they had all started school she went to work part-time at Zetters football pools in Clerkenwell. As the children grew up and married, Maureen loved their wives, husbands and partners as though they were her own. She went to St Paul’s Catholic church in Wood Green for more than 60 years and made many friends in the Irish community. At the local community centre Maureen joined other women of a similar age; they encouraged each other to take up exercise and they all enjoyed the companionship on offer. Maureen was an avid watcher of Coronation Street and Emmerdale, and a fan of Catherine Cookson novels. She loved to entertain people and to make them laugh, enjoyed a pint of lager, and had a keen sense of mischief. When asked by a grandchild why she never went to confession, Maureen responded: “I have never sinned, so I have nothing to confess.” In recent years Maureen had suffered from thyroid illness and diabetes, and underwent heart surgery. She was diagnosed with lung cancer in 2018. She never lost her zest for life or her sense of fun. Maureen is survived by Tony, their five children, nine grandchildren, five great-grandchildren, and by a brother, Kieran, and sister, Carmel.“Your bumper guide to the unmissable music, shows, films and more in the year ahead”, announces the front of your G2 print section (3 January), heralding your 2022 culture preview articles. I have a family and a job; there’s already a pile of books from Santa and the last series of Doctor Who to catch up with. I need to sleep sometimes, and every now and then I quite like doing nothing at all. May I be cut some slack on the missability front? Tim Sanders Leeds • Goodness. Susan Cooper’s The Dark is Rising and John Masefield’s The Box of Delights both mentioned in your leader about literature (31 December). These books have been this 90-year-old’s essential reading for many decades. Just add Alan Garner’s Elidor and the Weirdstone series to Pullman and Tolkien, and her cup is likely to overflow. Yvonne Whalley Sherburn in Elmet, North Yorkshire • My father was a builder, so it made sense when I heard “lino’s the kingdom, the power and the glory” (Letters, 3 January). In my head I still have that celestial image. Jenny Moir Chelmsford, Essex • As a member of a churchgoing family in Putney, I was, from a young age, familiar with Psalm 23. I was also sometimes taken to town from Putney Bridge on the District Line. It was only after we moved to the north when I was nine that I found out that the psalm did not say “in Parsons Green he leadeth me”. Charlie Davison Colchester, Essex • Re whether Brexit is to blame for the absence of Easter eggs in supermarkets (Letters, 3 January), I can report that Cadbury’s Creme Eggs were present and correct in the Co-op in Pangbourne on New Year’s Day. I bought two. Jane Gregory Emsworth, Hampshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Turn on the radio or scroll down your phone and the big headlines belong to Covid. But when this latest version of the plague drops off the front pages, another story is set to take its place – and this one will hang around for most of the year, setting the terms of trade at Westminster and possibly deciding Boris Johnson’s future. The cost of living is about to shape our politics in a way that it hasn’t for decades. You can spot the buildup this week, from Keir Starmer’s warning of a crisis to Tory backbenchers clamouring for Johnson to act now on high fuel bills. And you can already see the misery in the stories about how Britons now wrap themselves up in blankets and turn on their hairdryers to keep warm, rather than run the central heating. Over the next few weeks, the crisis will only grow. On 7 February the energy watchdog, Ofgem, sets the new maximum price for energy bills. Utility firm bosses are warning that the cap could easily go above £2,000, twice what it was last winter. Experts at the National Energy Action charity have warned that fuel poverty could rise to its highest levels since John Major was in No 10, with about 6 million households having to choose between heating and eating, or paying the bus fare or buying sanitary pads. This means 2 million households, which as recently as last autumn were still keeping their heads above water, will sink when the new cap kicks in on 1 April. At just that point, taxes go up too. National insurance will rise, as will council tax across much of the country, alongside a stealth increase in income tax bills. Put all that together and the Resolution Foundation warns that the average household stands to lose an extra £1,200 a year. To this we can add the effect of higher petrol prices. These bills will pile up while wages and benefits are falling in real terms. It is a recipe for widespread deprivation and massive political turbulence. It also blows apart the electoral coalition that handed Johnson his landslide. In true-blue Woking, only 6% of households are in fuel poverty; in Workington, by contrast, which went Tory only in 2019, that proportion is nearly 14%. My bet has long been that boring old economics will inflict far more damage on Boris Johnson than baroque politics. Most critics of the Sun King have spent the days since 2019 attacking his rule-breaking, his brinkmanship with Brussels, his sheer bad behaviour. Until the revelations about the parties at No 10, hardly any of it landed with a public that is wearily well used to a political class trashing norms to fill its boots; just ask the Right Hon Member for Greensill Capital. But all those voters, left unmoved by 42-point headlines and stinging op-eds, are far more likely to be mobilised by the largest tax burden in 70 years, swingeing cuts to frontline services and surging inflation. No wonder the government can barely quell its anxiety. The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, has been meeting energy bosses in a series of emergency summits, the latest held on Wednesday, while Chancellor Rishi Sunak’s team has been grumbling to journalists about having to stump up for any of this. Still, with only a month to go before the Ofgem announcement, no deal is on the table. What’s odd is that Johnson has himself pledged one such remedy. Co-writing an article in the Sun less than a month before the EU referendum of 2016, he vowed that Brexit would mean the end of VAT on fuel bills. “We will be able to scrap this unfair and damaging tax,” Mr Leave wrote . “It isn’t right that unelected bureaucrats in Brussels impose taxes on the poorest and elected British politicians can do nothing.” A whole two and a half years since becoming prime minister, he has done precisely nothing. This week he squirmed on TV that cutting VAT was a “blunt instrument” that wouldn’t direct help towards those in most dire financial need. Fancy that! If only someone had warned us that this guy reneges on a deal. But if Starmer wants to capitalise on this moment, he needs to do far better than make nothingy speeches larded with abstract nouns and bedecked with flags. Labour wants to scrap the 5% VAT rate on energy bills, but in truth it’s small change: £10 back on a £200 monthly bill. Better would be to call for a windfall tax on gas and oil companies, which have been making a killing as fuel prices rise, and direct that money to the least well-off. If Labour can take that position early and loud enough, they’ll reap rewards when the Tories copy them. They can also point to the failures of the energy market – the collapse of 26 suppliers and the consolidation of their customer base back into the hands of the big six – as grounds to try something new: to use the public sector to direct more investment into nationally secure renewables. This is a generation of politicians that has never faced an inflation shock but is nevertheless haunted by the mythology around what happened in the 1970s. With good reason: Thatcher used that episode finally to dismantle the Keynesian welfare state and to exile the left for more than a decade. The right is already reheating those old arguments about how inflation and higher interest rates must mean reduced public spending, and how taxpayers don’t want to pay for “green crap” and reducing poverty. It is essential that the left counter those points now. This isn’t the 70s, and there is no danger of a wage-price spiral. This is a workforce that has just emerged from the worst squeeze on living standards since Napoleon marched across Europe – and it is just about to enter another one. It’s not the labour force that isn’t working: it’s the markets and the supply chain. Those are what need to be fixed. Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnist and senior economics commentatorThe US has imposed new sanctions on the Bosnian Serb leader, Milorad Dodik, a television station under his control and two other officials for “significant corruption and destabilizing activities”. The sanctions, involving asset freezes and visa bans, follow Dodik’s threat to withdraw Serbs from the Bosnian national army and other state-level institutions, potentially destroying the 1995 Dayton peace treaty and opening the way for a return to conflict. Official statements accompanying the sanctions focus on the corruption which US officials say underpin Dodik’s political posturing. “His divisive ethno-nationalistic rhetoric reflects his efforts to advance these political goals and distract attention from his corrupt activities,” a Treasury statement said. “Cumulatively, these actions threaten the stability, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of BiH and undermine the Dayton Peace Accords, thereby risking wider regional instability.” It said Dodik had handed government contracts and monopolies in the Serb-run half of Bosnia, Republika Srpska (RS) to close business associates. “With his corrupt proceeds, Dodik has engaged in bribery and additional corrupt activities to further his personal interests at the expense of citizens in the RS,” the Treasury said. Dodik has already been sanctioned in 2017, for obstruction of the Dayton accord. The new measures are wider, criminalizing financial donations to him, and targeting Alternativna Televizija, a television station based in Banja Luka, the biggest town in the RS. The channel is privately owned by a company closely linked to Dodik’s family, the Treasury said, and operates as Dodik’s personal propaganda outlet. “Dodik has awarded ATV-related contracts directly to members of his family, which he has used as yet another avenue for corruption,” the Treasury said. “He has funneled money directly from public companies to ATV for corrupt purposes.” Dodik shrugged off the sanctions telling a local media outlet: “If they think that they will discipline me like this, they are grossly mistaken.” A Dodik adviser, Milan Tegeltija, was also banned from entering the US. The US secretary of state, Tony Blinken, said Tegeltija had used his former role as head of the state-level judiciary for “corrupt acts that included using his political influence and official power for his personal benefit”. A Bosnian Muslim, or Bosniak, party leader, Mirsad Kukić, was also targeted in Wednesday’s sanction. He is accused of using his role as manager of the publicly owned Banovici mine and his seat in parliament to use “political influence and official power for his personal benefit”. Although the effect on sanctions on Dodik are reduced by his limited financial exposure in the US, Daniel Serwer, a former US special envoy to Bosnia, said they still represent a setback for Dodik. “They do have a psychological impact. The question of how strong the financial impact is,” Serwer said. “Basically this prevents designated individuals from international financial transactions, almost all of which go through the US in one fashion or another.” He added: “The sanctions, in addition to targeting Dodik and Alternativa, are a warning to other politicians and companies, who may have more to fear than Dodik.”Keir Starmer, while approving a knighthood for Tony Blair, notes that Iraq remains an issue for many (UK government urged to rescind Tony Blair’s knighthood, 4 January). The problem is that elevating the former prime minister to the Order of the Garter is an official attempt to say that the Iraq war doesn’t matter any more. The current Labour leader had it right when, as a QC and human rights lawyer, he wrote in the Guardian on 17 March 2003 that “flawed advice does not make the unlawful use of force lawful”. Many of us remember the point; it’s a pity Sir Keir seems to have forgotten it. Keith Flett Tottenham, London • In 1928, a particularly useless, irresponsible and profligate Lord Lonsdale was made a Knight of the Garter by George V, an act described by a courtier of the time as “sheer tomfoolery”. At least Lonsdale didn’t lead us into unnecessary wars, but now we have Tony Blair, who did. I realise that the Garter is in the Queen’s personal gift, but how can her advisers be so out of touch with the mood of the nation? This year Tony Blair, next year Boris Johnson? Dr Patrick Hoyte Wootton Courtenay, Somerset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.An Italian mafia boss on the run for 20 years was tracked down to a Spanish town after being spotted on Google Street View. Gioacchino Gammino, a convicted murderer listed among Italy’s most wanted gangsters, was arrested in Galapagar, a town near Madrid, where over the years he had married, changed his name to Manuel, worked as a chef and owned a fruit and vegetable shop. Sicilian police carried out several investigations in their search for Gammino, 61, and a European arrest warrant was issued in 2014. The fugitive was traced to Spain, but it was Google Street View that helped to pinpoint his precise location. The navigation tool, accessible through Google Maps, had captured an image of two men chatting outside a fruit and vegetable shop called El Huerto de Manu, or Manu’s Garden, in Galapagar. Police believed one of the men closely resembled Gammino, but his identity was only confirmed when they came across a listing for a nearby restaurant called La Cocina de Manu or Manu’s Kitchen. The shop and the restaurant are now closed, but the police found a photo of Gammino, dressed in his chef’s garb, on a still-existing Facebook page for La Cocina de Manu. He was recognisable by the scar on the left side of his chin. The restaurant’s menu included a dish called Cena Siciliana or Sicilian dinner. Gammino was arrested on 17 December but the details surrounding his capture did not come to light until they were reported by La Repubblica on Wednesday. The details were confirmed by the Palermo prosecutor Francesco Lo Voi, who led the latest investigation. “It’s not as if we spend our days wading through Google Maps to find fugitives,” he told the Guardian. “There were many previous and long investigations, which led us to Spain. We were on a good path, with Google Maps helping to confirm our investigations.” After 20 years in hiding, Gammino thought he had managed to sever all his ties with Sicily. Upon his arrest, he reportedly told police: “How did you find me? I haven’t even called my family for 10 years!” Gammino belonged to a mafia clan in Agrigento, Sicily, which was caught up in a bloody feud with Cosa Nostra, Sicily’s main mafia network, in the 1990s. He was first arrested in 1984, when he was investigated by the anti-mafia judge Giovanni Falcone, who was assassinated by the mafia in a car bomb in 1992. Gammino was wanted for murder and various other mafia-related crimes. He was arrested for a second time in Barcelona in 1998. He had been serving a life sentence at Rebibbia prison in Rome when, in 2002, he managed to escape during the commotion of the making of a film at the prison. It is not the first time a mafia fugitive has been caught with the help of the web. In March last year, Mark Feren Claude Biart was captured in the Caribbean after appearing in YouTube cooking videos. Biart had been on the run since 2014, when Italian prosecutors ordered his arrest for trafficking cocaine in the Netherlands on behalf of the Cacciola clan of the ’Ndrangheta mafia. Until his arrest, Biart had been leading a quiet life among the Italian expat community in Boca Chica in the Dominican Republic. Although the YouTube videos of him flaunting his cooking skills never showed his face, police said he was betrayed by the distinctive tattoos on his body. In 2019, police arrested a mobster with the Camorra mafia organisation while he was eating pasta with his two cats sitting beside him in an apartment in the outskirts of Naples.Comparing the experience of European education systems in handling the Covid-19 pandemic is doubtless instructive (Masks in schools: several EU countries already enforce them in primaries, 3 January). Your article presents the salutary examples of countries such as France, which imposed a mask mandate on all pupils over 11 last November, and Belgium, which since December has required all pupils over six to be masked. However, as an educational comparativist usually based in Japan, I read reports like this while inwardly screaming: “What about east Asia?” There has been some lurid coverage in the UK press of China’s draconian lockdowns. But we see very little discussion of the very different cases of Taiwan, South Korea and Japan, which have managed the pandemic far more effectively than their western counterparts, and with far less disruption to schooling. This is especially so in Japan, where all primary and secondary pupils have worn masks at school (including in the classroom) since the onset of the pandemic. During that time, Japanese pupils have missed a total of just four to five weeks of face-to-face teaching. Edward Vickers Kyushu University, Japan; visiting professor, UCL Institute of Education • In light of the reintroduction of face coverings to secondary school classrooms this week, it is of course true to say teenagers are resilient, demonstrating endless adaptability. But spare a thought for deaf schoolchildren who can’t lip-read or understand facial expressions when face masks are being worn. They have faced challenge upon challenge since the start of the pandemic, isolating during everyday life, facing cancelled exams and enduring online lessons without subtitles. Thousands of deaf secondary-aged pupils will be filled with a sense of dread about the reintroduction of face coverings in class as they return to school. Public health should always be prioritised, but deaf children’s inclusion in society matters too. We cannot continue to see deaf children falling behind their classmates and their mental health suffering where a few simple adjustments and more sensitivity from the public would make all the difference. Jo Campion Deputy director of advocacy, National Deaf Children’s Society • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.For years, Nursultan Nazarbayev has been used to performative adoration from the citizens of Kazakhstan. The country’s leader for nearly three decades, he was showered with praise and adulation at showpiece events, and his image smiled down from billboards across the country. When he stepped down in 2019, he was able to choose his successor, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, and kept significant power as head of the security council and general behind-the-scenes powerbroker. He retained his official title of Elbasy, or leader of the nation. Astana, the capital city he ordered built in the heart of the Kazakh steppe, was even renamed in his honour. To Nazarbayev, it must have seemed like he had found an answer to the problem vexing ageing autocrats across the region: how to step aside in old age without risking retribution. Vladimir Putin and others were doubtless watching with interest. The events of the past few days might suggest that different lessons should be drawn. Statues of Nazarbayev, meant to be monuments to his legacy, have been torn down by protesters. Instead of chanting “Elbasy”, many angry Kazakh protesters are now chanting “Shal ket” – or “Old man, out!” Discontent at poverty, inequality and corruption led to increasing unrest in the country in recent years, and much of the anger is directed at Nazarbayev himself, who for so long appeared untouchable. Among Central Asia’s vicious and repressive autocrats, Nazarbayev always seemed the most nimble. Born in 1940, he rose through the ranks of the Communist party and became Kazakhstan’s first leader on independence. He managed to hold the country together during the 1990s, and later to avoid the extreme repressive violence of his peers in Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, while also avoiding the revolutionary sentiment of Kyrgyzstan. When 16 people were killed in 2011 protests, he solicited advice from Tony Blair about how best to spin the violence. He charted a delicate geopolitical course in the years after Kazakh independence, remaining friendly towards Russia, while also courting western leaders and energy companies, who turned a blind eye to the lack of democracy and instead focused on securing lucrative contracts in the country. Western lawyers, accountants and advisers helped the new Kazakh elite invest their fortunes in London mansions and Swiss villas. His daughter and grandson are believed to own £80m of London property. Nazarbayev also engaged a steady stream of western architects and urban planners to build his new capital city. In 2010, Nazarbayev, perhaps with one eye on the clock, ordered scientists to investigate the creation of an “elixir” that could prolong human life. Eventually, it seems, he accepted the inevitability of the human ageing process and announced in 2019 he was stepping aside. Last year, the director Oliver Stone made a hagiographic film portrait about Nazarbayev’s time in office, named Qazaq: History of the Golden Man, and numerous statues to the retired leader were erected across the country. Now, his image has become a lightning rod for discontent. On Wednesday, Tokayev announced he was replacing Nazarbayev as chair of the security council, and there were rumours on Wednesday that Nazarbayev might leave the country for “medical treatment”. It is not clear yet how the unrest in Kazakhstan will evolve, and what role Nazarbayev will play in them, but it seems certain that the events of the past few days will alter the historical legacy he had imagined he would leave.John Harris may be correct to frame the avoidance of vaccination by a significant portion of the UK population as the consequence of mistrust in authority or government (Understanding, not judgment, should shape our response to those who remain unjabbed, 2 January). However, I and many millions of others do not trust this government at all, but we still accepted vaccination. Social factors may explain the existence of vaccine avoidance, but they do not justify it. Under UK laws, no degree of inequality allows a car driver to transfer to the right side of the road in protest against a mistrusted government. True freedom is the liberty from being harmed by others, regardless of whether those actions are deliberately harmful. The freedom to “innocently” spread disease is not a fundamental right. The enormous human cost of supporting unvaccinated and seriously ill patients in hospital is having a direct impact on all our lives. It is time to take the moral high ground: celebrate the vaccinators and publicly avow that vaccination is good, that being vaccinated is a public duty and that failure to comply by any citizen without adequate medical reasons is a dereliction of that public duty. Dr Patrick Byrne Bermondsey, London • John Harris refers to the supposed “coercing [of] people into getting vaccinated using stringent Covid passports”. Having a Covid passport allows people to access certain defined services; if they don’t want to be vaccinated they won’t have access, but no one is forcing them to such access. In any case, there are many actual constraints on people that are a vital part of society, such as wearing seatbelts. No one is being coerced into being vaccinated; this is simply the price for taking part in normal society. Dr Richard Carter Putney, London • Maybe the unvaccinated do deserve our empathy, not judgment, but understanding and feeling their pain doesn’t solve the problem. The fact remains that they endanger themselves but, much more importantly, everybody else through their potential viral transmissibility. Insisting that access to certain venues and activities are limited to the fully jabbed might indeed imply a negative judgment, but surely avoiding this possible offence is much less important than protecting the national community as a whole? Dr Bill Jones Beverley, Yorkshire • John Harris risks oversimplifying people’s understanding of why some of us – around five million adults according to his article – remain unvaccinated in the UK. While there is plenty of evidence that people from particular communities mistrust the public institutions that wish to see them vaccinated, this certainly isn’t the case for all five million of us. As a white, middle-class public servant, I can’t really be considered “historically mistrustful” of institutions, nor am I reckless, but I do have my own sincerely held reasons for not wanting to be vaccinated, none of which are derived from “online cults”. Actually, I don’t want judgment or empathy, I just want there to be safe spaces for debate to take place, where people need not fear being labelled cranks. This includes within national newspapers like the Guardian. As it is, Mr Harris merely continues to promote the prevailing discourse – that in an ideal world everybody would be vaccinated. Paul Martin Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.My aunt Anne Mobbs, who has died aged 84, was a community organiser and activist who was fully committed to promoting social justice. Born into a Jewish family in Tottenham, north London, Anne was one of the five children of Miriam (nee Weinberg), a seamstress, and Nathan Wrightman, a carpenter. She and her two sisters were evacuated to Cornwall during the second world war, and after finishing her schooling she worked in secretarial roles at Granada TV, the BBC World Service and the National Film Theatre. Inspired by the formation of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in 1958, she quickly became an active CND member until, with her husband, David Mobbs, a biochemist and Communist party member whom she married in 1959, she moved to Nigeria in 1960 with their young children. David lectured at the University of Ibadan while Anne was employed by the university’s drama school and helped to organise film and theatre festivals. That work led her into contact with the writer Ken Saro-Wiwa, and years later she was involved in protesting against his execution by the Nigerian military. Anne and her family also lived in Ghana and Zambia, and in Zambia she raised funds for the African National Congress. It was when Anne returned to the UK in 1971 and settled in Oxford that she became part of my life. Growing up under Margaret Thatcher, I was heavily influenced by Anne’s commitment to help those who were suffering in the harsh political climate. She also supported successful campaigns to get Oxford city council to disinvest its pension fund from apartheid South Africa. In her work as an assistant community relations officer in Oxford, from 1975 onwards, she helped to win racial discrimination cases and to organise support for initiatives celebrating black culture. From the late 1980s onwards, Anne was Oxford city council’s Fun in the Parks festival organiser, booking music, bands, circus acts, comedians and stalls. She also helped to set up the annual Oxford international women’s festival, raised the profile of the Oxford bail support group, set up by Asylum Welcome to secure release of those held at Campsfield House detention centre, and was a driving force behind the closure of the centre – garnering support from the band Radiohead. Even in retirement Anne could not resist getting involved, supporting a local group in the Jericho area of Oxford, where she lived. Anne and David separated in 1973 and divorced two years later. She is survived by her children, Keir, Ruth and Amanda, five grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.More than 40% of Americans still do not believe that Joe Biden legitimately won the 2020 presidential election despite no evidence of widespread voter fraud, according to a new Axios-Momentive poll. The poll, released on the eve of the first anniversary of the attack on the Capitol by a pro-Trump mob, found that 55% of those surveyed believe Biden won the election. That figure has barely changed since Axios’s poll from 2020, published shortly before the insurrection. That poll, published in 2020, found 58% said that they accepted Biden as the legitimate winner of the presidential election. Despite Biden’s inauguration, the attack on the Capitol and the multiple investigations that have debunked the lies pushed by the former president that the election was stolen, the poll suggests that the same level of doubt persists. “It’s dispiriting to see that this shocking thing we all witnessed last year hasn’t changed people’s perceptions,” Laura Wronski, senior manager for research science at Momentive, told Axios. A majority of Americans also said they are expecting a repeat of the deadly 6 January attack in the next few years. The polls, conducted from 1 to 5 January of this year, surveyed nearly 2,700 adults, and found nearly 57% – about half of Republicans and seven in 10 Democrats – believe that events similar to the attack are likely to occur again. In addition, nearly two-thirds or 63% said that the 6 January attack has at least temporarily changed the way they think about their democratic government. A third said that those changes are temporary. Nearly as many, 31%, said that those changes are permanent. About 37% of those surveyed said they had lost faith in American democracy (48% of Republicans and 28% of Democrats), while 10% said they had never had faith in the system. Forty-nine percent said they did have faith. Fifty-eight per cent of Americans said they supported the investigative work of the House select committee investigating the riot. Eighty-eight percent of Democrats support the inquiry, compared with 58% of independents and 32% of Republicans. Just slightly more than half of American adults, 51%, said individuals associated with the insurrection should face criminal penalties if they refuse to comply with subpoenas. Republicans have also been revealed to be three or four more times as likely as Democrats to say voter fraud is a problem in their state, despite such claims being thoroughly debunked. Wronski said she believes the results of the poll shows either “Biden hasn’t done enough” to push back against disinformation, or “it shows that he never had a chance”. She added: “The partisan division is still the story.” • This article was amended on 6 January 2022 to correct the breakdown by party of responses related to support for the House select committee investigation, and faith in American democracy.Two entrepreneurs with no apparent background in healthcare have made £20m – and could make tens of millions more – after landing roles as middlemen between the UK government and a US firm that won £3.7bn of contracts to supply lateral flow tests. Charles Palmer, whose background is in property, and Kim Thonger, a former shoe retailer, are the co-owners of Disruptive Nanotechnology, a business that had just £85 in the bank and debts of £3,592 at the end of 2019. Accounts filed at Companies House last month show that the firm’s net assets soared to £20.5m during the year to 31 December 2020, including the first nine months of the coronavirus pandemic. Disruptive Nanotechnology, trading as Tried&amp;Tested, describes itself as the exclusive UK and EU distributor for rapid antigen and antibody tests made by California-based Innova Medical Group. Palmer’s wife, Dr Rachel Limbrey, is the chief medical adviser at Tried&amp;Tested, as well as working as a respiratory consultant at University Hospital Southampton. Innova has won nine contracts worth a combined £3.7bn to provide tests, thanks in part to Operation Moonshot, the plan by Boris Johnson’s former adviser Dominic Cummings to roll out mass daily testing to reduce the need for strict Covid restrictions. Innova’s chief executive, Daniel Elliott, has said that Disruptive Nanotechnology co-owner Thonger, who founded the company in 2016, “worked tirelessly” to help Innova win the first of its contracts. Elliott said UK officials were “very surprised” by the quantities Innova could supply during discussions that took place in August 2020. “I think that was the ‘A-ha!’ moment for them because they were tasked with what felt like an impossible task,” he said. “We had multiple calls within a 24-hour period. And they kept asking: can you really do this?” A leak of confidential documents in September 2020 revealed the existence of Operation Moonshot, which a briefing paper described as the “only hope” of avoiding a second national lockdown. Launching Moonshot shortly afterwards, Johnson described the plan as giving people the “freedom to mingle” and return to normal. Within weeks, Innova had its first contract, for five shipments between September and early October worth £103.6m. As that one ended, a second, much bigger contract was signed for £496m. They did not go out to tender because of the “extreme urgency” and global demand, according to the contract notice. On 18 December, a third UK contract was published with Innova for £226m. Disruptive Nanotechnology, based in Harrow, north-west London, reportedly receives “a few pennies” for each test supplied by Innova, an arrangement thought to be the reason for the £20m increase in its net assets, first reported by the Daily Mail. But this year could prove even more lucrative. The combined value of Innova’s contracts for 2020, the year in which Disruptive Nanotechnology enjoyed its increase in assets, is £978.5m. Innova has won more than £2.7bn of new testing contracts since then, while the company says it has also provided tests to the public sector, indicating it could be in line for an increase in assets of tens of millions of pounds this year, amid high demand due to the Omicron variant. While the UK government has embraced Innova’s lateral flow tests, regulators in the company’s domestic market, the US, have not. The US Food and Drug Administration recalled Innova’s tests last year, citing concerns about their reliability. Innova has said that the tests are effective. Neither Thonger nor Palmer, who appear to have been instrumental in securing the supply of Innova’s tests, has a background in health or medicine. Thonger worked in marketing and branding for a series of shoe companies, including Dr Martens and Dune, for more than 20 years. Palmer was a chartered surveyor who started his own property company. Thonger founded the business in 2016 but it has never published full accounts due to its tiny size. It previously marketed a technology called LightCleanse that it claimed could be used to clean bacteria and viruses in the air and on surfaces, using nanoparticles of titanium dioxide. It is unclear whether LightCleanse is still functioning but a mobile number listed on the website is no longer active. Palmer became a director of Disruptive Nanotechnology in June 2020, shortly before it began talks with the government, and took a 50% stake in the company at some point during that year. A spokesperson from Disruptive Nanotechnology said: “Disruptive Nanotechnology provides goods and services to hundreds of clients, across many sectors, including vital national infrastructure, oil and energy, education, finance, healthcare, manufacturing, events, sport, retail and media. “Our terms of business with those clients are generally commercially sensitive, therefore we do not comment, except to say it is certain that the Guardian staff and readers benefit at some point during their day from those clients being open and active. “Partly due to our efforts, LFTs [lateral flow tests] have been widely available in the UK since September 2020. We know, and are proud, that lives and livelihoods have been saved as a result.” The Guardian has approached Thonger and Palmer for comment.Downing Street has said that more than 20 NHS trusts have now declared critical incidents - but argued that this is not a “good indicator” of NHS performance. (See 5.26pm.) This came a day after Boris Johnson faced criticism from some health leaders for allegedly making light of the difficulties the NHS is facing, saying the country could “ride out” the Omicron wave. But the head of NHS Providers, Chris Hopson, said he agreed that counting critical incidents was not the best way of measuring the pressure on the NHS. (See 6.07pm.) The aviation and travel industry has welcomed the scrapping of pre-departure tests for people travelling to England, which it had claimed were unnecessary and hugely damaging to the sector. Almost 200,000 more Covid cases have been reported in the UK, as an infection survey revealed one in 10 Londoners had Covid towards the end of last year. Boris Johnson and Angela Rayner have clashed over energy prices and the wider cost of living in the first prime minister’s questions of the year, during which Johnson made a series of false statements to advance his arguments. Reduced timetables are to be brought in across Great Britain’s entire railway network by the middle of this month to deal with Covid staff shortages and to match falling passenger numbers. Hundreds of care homes are closing their doors to new admissions because of the rapid spread of Omicron, increasing pressure on embattled hospitals that are unable to discharge patients into the community. Nicola Sturgeon has cut Scotland’s self-isolation period from 10 to seven days, after sustained pressure from businesses and opposition parties to address soaring staff absences. That is all from me for today. But our Covid coverage continues on our global live blog. It’s here. Two health experts have said No 10 was right to say critical incidents are not a good indicator of NHS performance. (See 5.26pm.) This is from Dave West, deputy editor of the Health Service Journal. And this is from Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, is taking questions from MPs following his statement on schools. He did not have anything major to announce – it was more of an update – but here are the key lines. Zahawi said new research from his department showed mask wearing in school did reduce transmission of the virus. At the weekend the government announced that secondary school pupils in England would be told to wear masks in class. Zahawi told MPs: The UKHSA [UK Health Security Agency] have said this will help reduce transmission at a time when rates of infection are so high with the Omicron variant. My department has also looked at some observational data from a sample of 123 schools where face coverings had been in use in the autumn term and found that there was a greater reduction in Covid absence compared to those where students didn’t wear face coverings. Zahawi also said his department is researching the impact of wearing masks on children. He said staff absences in schools were expected to increase. He said: Schools will be suffering some degree of staff absences. At the end of last year the figure was about 8% of staff off, and that is probably likely to rise with increasing cases in school and of course young people as we return to school. He said Ofsted was encouraging schools badly affected by staff absences to ask for inspections to be deferred. Inspections were not taking place in the first week of term anyway, he said. He said that two Conservative MPs, Caroline Ansell and Jonathan Gullis, are among the former teachers who have returned to the classroom to help cover for absent members of staff. The FT’s Jim Pickard has compiled a list of false or misleading claims from Boris Johnson at PMQs today. The Downing Street lobby briefing took place after the start of the PM’s statement. Here, from PA Media, are the key points. No 10 said that more than 20 NHS trusts have now declared critical incidents - but that this was not a “good indicator” of NHS performance. The PM’s spokesman said: We know that there are a number of trusts that have reported critical incidents. I believe it’s more than 20 currently, but that number will fluctuate. But again, those critical incidents can vary in terms of their scale, some can relate to one part of the trust, some can be across the whole trust. So it’s not a good indicator, necessarily, of NHS performance at any one time. The spokesman played down the significance of the report that one ambulance service is asking some patients to consider getting a lift to hospital (see 11.28am), saying that this was just one trust and that “the public will still receive the quality of care they expect from the NHS”. The spokesman said that, if the government wanted to extend the plan B restrictions beyond 26 January, MPs would get to vote on them. The spokesman said Johnson personally undergoes “fairly regular testing” for Covid. But he would not say if this was daily, or if the PM always did a test before going to the Commons. The spokesman said the latest report from Lord Geidt, the PM’s adviser on ministerial standards, was due “shortly”. Geidt has been considering whether he was misled by the PM when he conducted his initial investigation into the refurbishment of Downing Street flat. It was reported last week that Geidt will conclude Johnson did not break the ministerial code. But in the Sunday Times (paywall) Tim Shipman claimed the Geidt report would be more critical than those reports implied. Shipman wrote: No 10 appears to have convinced Geidt that he was misled inadvertently. But his report will be tougher on Johnson’s lack of judgment than reports last week suggested. It will reveal letters between Geidt and Johnson, which are said to be “coruscating”. Felicity Buchan (Con) asks if the government will drop the work from home guidance at the earliest opportunity. Johnson says it will be dropped when it is safe to do so. But he says the plan B rules will expire at the end of January. Asked when the terms of reference of the Covid inquiry would be published, Johnson told MPs that under the Inquiries Act it was up to the new chair of the inquiry, Lady Hallett, to start drafting terms of reference herself. Back in the Commons Fay Jones, the Tory MP for Brecon and Radnorshire, said that on Friday she would be holding her team meeting in a pub. That was because, under Welsh government rules, they could not meet in the office. She described this as “ludicrous” and asked the PM if he agreed. Johnson said he was trying not to be critical, but he said there were some “eccentricities” in policy elsewhere in the UK. This is from Alastair McLellan, editor of the Health Service Journal, on the latest hospital admission figures for London. According to the government’s dashboard, 401 Covid patients were admitted to hospital in London on Monday, the most recent day for which figures are available. Here are the most recent admission figures. The figures also show that for the first time in this wave the number of Covid patients in hospital in London has passed 4,000. It was 4,074 at 8am this morning. That is close to a four-fold increase over the past month. Clive Betts (Lab) asks Johnson why tests were locked away in a warehouse during the holiday period. Johnson says the government is delivering up to 900,000 tests packs per day. It is doing its best to meet demands. To listen to Labour, he says, you would not realise the UK is doing more testing per head than any other country. Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, has posted a thread on Twitter giving a few more details of the announcement from the PM earlier about pre-departure tests for people coming to England from abroad being scrapped. (See 3.56pm.) It starts here. Johnson claims it is “untrue” to say cancer operations are being cancelled. In response to a question from Mark Harper, the Tory chair of the lockdown-sceptic Covid Recovery Group, Johnson repeats his point about the plan B measures expiring on 26 January. He says he is confident the situation will be much better than. But the government will continue to use vaccines and therapeutics (medical treatments) to counter Covid, he says. This is what Boris Johnson said to Steve Baker a few minutes ago when he suggested the life would get back to something “much, much closer to normality” by the end of the month. (See 4.22pm.) Johnson said: My plan is that is the one that we have in place. It is it is to get on with plan B ... it expires on 26th of this month. By then we hope to have greatly increased the already extraordinarily high number of people in this country who have not only been vaccinated but who have been boosted .... All we need to do now is increase that number of boosted members of the population and then as Omicron blows through - and it is very much my hope and belief that it will - I do believe that we will be able to get back to something much closer to normality. That doesn’t mean that there won’t be further challenges. But I think that life will return to something much, much closer to normality. It won’t be necessary to have the restrictions that we currently have in place. Business, investors will have all the confidence that they need. Steve Baker (Con), a leading Tory lockdown-sceptic, asks the PM to bring forward a plan for getting back to normality. Johnson says the plan B measures will expire on 26 January. He says before then the government wants more people to get boosted. He says 34 million have been jabbed already, but there are 9 million more to go. After that life will return to something “much closer to normality”, he says. Back in the Commons Greg Clark (Con) asked the PM if he favoured giving fourth jabs to essential workers, as they are doing in Israel, given the way the effectiveness of the booster fades after 10 weeks. Johnson says the JCVI is keeping the case for fourth jabs constantly under review. The government has published the latest UK Covid figures on its dashboard. It has recorded 194,747 new cases and 334 further deaths. The figure for new cases is more than 20,000 below the record figure recorded yesterday (218,724), but still the second highest figure on record. But the total number of new cases over the past week is now 40.1% up on the previous week. Yesterday the equivalent figure was 50.9%. The figure for deaths is the highest daily figure since the Omicron wave struck, but, as Prof Chris Whitty warned at the press conference yesterday, it is artificially high because deaths were not being reported over the new year holiday period. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, says it is the UK government that is out of step. Scotland, and the other devolved governments, are being more cautious, he says. Theresa May, the former PM, commends Johnson for not introducing new restrictions in response to Omicron. New variants will emerge, she says. How will the government respond? Johnson says May is right. We cannot respond to every variant by “reaching endlessly for lockdown”. In the future we need multivalent vaccines that can deal with all variants, he says. In response Johnson claims that it is Labour that is attacking the record of civil servants, on testing. Labour always wants to run down this country, he says. He says Rayner claimed the UK did not have diagnositic capabilities. That is wrong, he says. He says it is thanks to the testing regime that Keir Starmer has had to isolate, and Rayner is here today. Labour would have kept the country in lockdown from 19 July, he claims. And he says Labour frontbenchers wanted tougher restrictions after Omicron emerged. That would have dealt a body-blow to the economy, and to the government’s ability to fund the NHS. Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, says Labour supports plan B staying in place. It was only passed with Labour votes in the first place, she says. She says the PM should be straight about the state of the NHS. It is shocking how long people are having to wait for an ambulance, she says. She asks why people have not been able to get test. It is lucky that Labour-led Wales helped out by providing some to the UK government. And she asks why the PM is allowing Tory MPs to attack hard-working public servants. (This is a reference in particular to Tory MPs criticising health experts like Chris Whitty.) Johnson is making his Covid statement now. He starts by repeating many of the points he made in his press conference last night. But he also confirms that from 4am on Friday pre-departure tests will no longer be required for people arriving in the country. (See 11.53pm.) And the requirement to self-isolate on arrive until receipt of a negative PCR test will also be lifted. Instead a negative lateral flow test will be acceptable, he says. He says this is the system in force in October last year. PMQs is over, but Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, says Boris Johnson denied saying he was not concerned about inflation. But Beth Rigby, Sky’s political editor, has just tweeted the clip in which he did say that, she points out. The Speaker says Johnson can respond if he wants to. Johnson takes to his feet, but ignores Rayner’s point and goes straight into the Covid statement. Here are the key quotes from the exchange earlier. Rayner said: In October the prime minister said that fears about inflation were unfounded, but working people across the country are starting the new year facing rising bills and ballooning prices, so how did he get it so wrong? Johnson replied: Of course I said no such thing because inflation is always something that we have to be careful about, but what we are doing is making sure that we protect the people of this country throughout what is unquestionably going to be a difficult period. Sir Edward Leigh (Con) says the government is reportedly considering relaxing visa controls from India to help get a trade deal. Does the PM agree that people did not vote for Brexit, to control immigration from Europe, to see it go up elsewhere. Johnson says trade deals are not like that. But he broadly agrees with Leigh on immigration. Labour wants uncontrolled immigration, he says. Sammy Wilson (DUP) asks the PM to review VAT on energy bills. And environmental levies are sometimes spent on “madcap” ideas. He asks for a review of them. Johnson says the energy price cap is still in place. The government wants a better supply of cheap energy, he says. Labour neglected this when in power, he says. Andrew Selous (Con) says developers are allowed to build 14,000 new homes in his constitutency, without anyone having to provide more GPs. Johnson says this should not be allowed. The government is increasing the number of GPs, he claims. This is from Ed Davey, referencing what happened at PMQs earlier (see 3.27pm) and a niche Twitter tradition. Andy McDonald (Lab) asks how the PM expects people to survive on £96 per week sick pay. Johnson says the government has allowed statutory sick pay to be paid from day one, so that has made the system more generous for people who have to isolate. And he says more than half of workers get more than the statutory minimum. Liz Saville Roberts, the Plaid Cymru leader at Westminster, says her mother was diagnosed with dementia before Christmas. She says her on Monday, but now faces being separated from her because of the restrictions on visiting. This is particularly harsh for people with dementia, who benefit from contact. People with dementia have human rights, she says. Does the PM agree? Johnson expresses his sympathy. He says the rules are there to protect people in care homes, and some visits are allowed. He says he will fix up a meeting on this. Jeremy Hunt (Con) says Johnson was right to “hold his nerve” and not introduce restrictions before Christmas. He asks the PM to back his proposed amendment to the health bill on NHS workforce planning. Johnson says the government has increased NHS staffing. The Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, calls Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, but calls him Ed Balls. Davey asks about heating bills. Millions of people will go hungry and cold this year. Johnson says, with regard to Davey’s claims, “balls” is the word. He points out that Davey was an energy minister himself. Sir Bob Neill (Con) asks the PM to congratulate the Tory-led Bromely council, which has seen the fastest improvment in children’s services. Johnson does. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, asks about last week’s Resolution Foundation report saying people face a £1,200 hit from higher energy prices and tax bills. Johnson claims, unlike other European economies, the UK has been able to keep people in work. Blackford says Johnson is talking nonsense. We have had the year of Tory sleaze. Now it’s is the year of Tory squeeze, he says. The SNP government has doubled child payments to help people out. Will the PM match that? Or will he push children into poverty. Johnson says Blackford is talking nonsense. He says the government has protected the poor. The chancellor’s measures were progressive. He claims income inequality is down in this country, and poverty is down. That is because the government gets people into jobs. Rayner says prices are soaring out of control. Inflation has serious consequences for people’s lives. We need serious solutions. Instead we have this PM, and his incompetent leadership. Every time he is faced with a problem, he denies the problem and blames someone else. Johnson says it is Labour incompetence that has held the country back. Labour’s failure to invest means the UK does not have cheaper, cleaner energy. He claims the UK has the most open economy in Europe, and the fastest economic growth in the G7. Rayner says the rising cost of living is an iceberg ahead. People face a £1,200 hit. Will the PM change course, or plough on towards what will be a disaster for thousands of families? Johnson says the UC change in the budget will make a single mum with two kids better off. People are seeing increases in their pay packets, he claims. Rayner says the government has put up taxes. “VAT on energy bills make gas and electricity more expensive,” she quotes. Those were the PM’s words. So will the PM stand up to the chancellor and cut VAT on fuel. Johnson again cites the warm homes discount, the winter fuel payments, the cold weather payments. And he says Rayner wanted to stay in the EU. But Labour now has the effrontery to want VAT lifted from energy bills - which could not have happened if the UK had stayed in the EU. Rayner says she has heard there may be a vacancy at No 10 soon. Maybe she should be aspirational. The government shut a gas storage facility, and it has let prices go through the roof. Can’t the PM see what is happening? Families are picking up the tab for his incompetence. Johnson says Rayner talks about energy; she has more energy than Starmer. He talks again about measures in place to help the low paid. He says the universal credit change in the budget was worth £1,000 to the low paid. He repeats his point about Labour favouring lockdown. Rayner says the government is shambolic. The PM said wage rises would offset inflation. They won’t. What will the PM do about inflation? Johnson refers to one of Rayner’s titles, shadow secretary of state for the future of work. We all know what future job she wants, he jokes. He says when Omicron struck, Labour wanted a roadmap to lockdown. If the government had followed that advice, no one would be working. Angela Rayner, who is standing in for Keir Starmer, says in October Boris Johnson said fears about inflation were unfounded. But now costs are rising. Why did he get it so wrong? Johnson claims he said no such thing. He cites government measures that have helped the low paid. (In fact he did tell the BBC in an interview that he was not worried about inflation.) Jamie Wallis (Con) says Sadiq Khan in London and the Welsh government show Labour administrations want central governement to bail them out. Johnson says every Labour government has left office with unemployment higher. Boris Johnson starts by wishing all MPs a happy new year. He says thanks to the vaccination programme, the government managed to ensure people could still celebrate Christmas. PMQs is starting soon. When it’s over, Boris Johnson will deliver a Covid statement, and so I won’t have time for the usual PMQs verdict. Here is the list of MPs down to ask a question. John Swinney, Scotland’s Covid recovery minister, has been accused by the Scottish Conservatives of using inaccurate Covid data “to score petty political points” after he used old Office for National Statistics figures to talk-up Scotland’s cautious strategy. Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, challenged Nicola Sturgeon over Swinney’s insinuation in a BBC Radio Scotland interview on Tuesday that the caution as justified because Scotland’s Covid infection rates were half that in England: they were, he said, 1 person in 40 in Scotland, compared to 1 in 20 in England. But it emerged Swinney had used old ONS figures from a survey conducted in mid-December and published before Christmas – figures from a period when the current Covid restrictions were not in force. Sturgeon confirmed on Wednesday the latest data, published by the ONS just as she addressed MSPs, was very different. That showed Scotland’s estimated infection rate was 1 in 20. In England the estimate was 1 in 15, but that figure disguised very significant variations between English regions – which are of more comparable population size to Scotland’s. The highest rates were in London, at 1 in 10, compared to 1 in 30 in the south-west England. In Wales, where Covid isolation rules have been lighter than Scotland’s, the rate was also 1 in 20 and in Northern Ireland, 1 in 25. Ross said: Tackling this virus isn’t a competition but John Swinney tried to make it one. So why has the minister for Covid recovery using misleading data for scoring petty political points? Sturgeon denied Swinney had done so. He had used the most recent data available, she said. She said ONS figures still showed it was worse in England “but this isn’t a competition,” she acknowledged. “We all have to make the decisions and judgements we think are necessary to navigate the safest course” through the pandemic. And here are figures from the ONS dataset showing the estimated coronavirus infection figures in England last week by age group. Age two to school year 6 - 1 in 15 School year 7 to 11 - 1 in 15 School year 12 to age 24 - 1 in 10 Age 25 to 34 - 1 in 15 Age 35 to 49 - 1 in 15 Age 59 to 69 - 1 in 25 Age 70 plus - 1 in 45 Here are some more figures from the dataset released alongside today’s ONS report (see 2.17pm) with the estimated coronavirus infection figures for regions of England last week. These are figures for 28 December. North-east - 1 in 20 North-west - 1 in 15 Yorkshire and the Humber - 1 in 15 East Midlands - 1 in 20 West Midlands - 1 in 15 East of England - 1 in 20 London - 1 in 10 South-east - 1 in 20 South-west - 1 in 30 Andy Burnham, mayor of Greater Manchester, is holding a press conference. There is a live feed here. As my colleague Josh Halliday reports, Burnham opened by saying there has been a tenfold increase in the over-60s infection rate since early December. Nicola Sturgeon has cut Scotland’s self-isolation period from 10 to seven days, after sustained pressure from businesses and opposition parties to address soaring staff absences. The first minister has softened her government’s highly cautious stance on the 10-day isolation period after hospitals data suggested the Omicron variant is less medically severe than first feared. Ministers in England and in Wales cut it to a week in December after deciding the impact of an extended self-isolation period on public services and businesses was not outweighed by Omicron’s risks to health and critical care services. In a recalled session of the Scottish parliament, Sturgeon told MSPs people could end their self-isolation after seven days if they have no fever and have two negative lateral flow tests. Close contacts will not be expected to self-isolate if they are fully vaccinated, have no symptoms and record negative tests every day for seven days, under the new rules which take effect from midnight on Wednesday. She acknowledged these new rules were “more proportionate and sustainable and less restrictive”. Sturgeon’s move came after Scottish hospitals warned their services were under significant strain due to staff absences and ScotRail, the main trains operator, cut hundreds of trains this month and is operating a reduced timetable due to staff shortages. Hospitality companies and retailers have struggled to remain open, and complained bitterly about the impact on their businesses. While Scotland has recorded its highest-ever Covid infections figure of 20,217 on Monday – a figure partly inflated by results delayed by the holiday weekend – critical illness rates have remained stable. There were 1,223 people in hospital on Wednesday, more than double the number seven days ago, but the number in intensive care has remained relatively stable, at around 52 or 53 people a day. Ministers have so far failed to state whether they were hospitalised because of Covid or were found to be Covid-positive after admission for another reason. Sturgeon said the latest ONS data suggested that 1 in 20 Scots had had Omicron last week (see 2.17pm), a figure similar to the rates in many English regions. The rate before Christmas had been 1 in 40. She went on: The proportion of people with Covid is likely to be even higher than that now, a few days later – and I would anticipate that we will see continued growth in the level of infection as work and school resume after the holiday period. In short, Covid is significantly more widespread now than at any stage in the pandemic so far, and will almost certainly become even more so in days to come. This, of course, has extremely serious implications for the NHS and social care. But it also has a severe and increasing impact on the economy and other critical services. The Office for National Statistics has just published the latest figures from its Covid infection survey. These cover the week ending Friday 31 December, and they show Covid rates increasing in all four nations in the UK. The ONS says: In England, the percentage of people testing positive for coronavirus (Covid-19) continued to increase; we estimate that 3,270,800 people in England had Covid-19 (95% credible interval: 3,163,500 to 3,377,500), equating to around 1 in 15 people. In Wales, the percentage of people testing positive for Covid-19 continued to increase; we estimate that 157,900 people in Wales had COVID-19 (95% credible interval: 138,900 to 179,600), equating to around 1 in 20 people. In Northern Ireland, the percentage of people testing positive for COVID-19 continued to increase; we estimate that 72,900 people in Northern Ireland had COVID-19 (95% credible interval: 56,800 to 90,100), equating to around 1 in 25 people. In Scotland, the percentage of people testing positive for COVID-19 continued to increase; we estimate that 238,000 people in Scotland had COVID-19 (95% credible interval: 209,300 to 268,000), equating to around 1 in 20 people. This means more than 3.5 million people in the UK had coronavirus last week. The ONS also says Covid rates were going up in every region of England last week, with rates as high as one in 10 in London. Covid-19 infections continued to increase across all regions of England, with the highest percentage testing positive in London (1 in 10) and the lowest in the South West of England (1 in 30); there were some early signs in the last few days of 2021 that infections may no longer be increasing in London, but it is currently too early to suggest if this is a continuing change in trend. Nicola Sturgeon says Covid cases are continuing to rise. She will announce changes to self-isolation and testing, she says. And existing restrictions will remain in place this week. She starts with the latest figures. There are 16,103 new cases, and 26.9% of tests were positive, she says. She says there are 1,223 Covid patients in hospital. That is up 71 from yesterday, but up 544 from last week. She says 42 people are in intensive care. And there have been five more deaths. The Irish government has decided antigen or PRC tests are no longer a pre-requisite for vaccinated travellers coming from Great Britain or elsewhere. The restriction was introduced in December but will be removed from tomorrow - but will still apply to those who have not been jabbed. The taoiseach, Micheál Martin, told reporters it was because the Omicron variant “now constitutes about 96% of all cases” and the test was no longer necessary. This is from my colleague Severin Carrell, following up from his post at 1.28pm. Downing Street has sent journalists its readout from this morning’s cabinet. These statements are notoriously bland, but if you interrogate them hard enough, you can normally extract some insight. Here are the three things we’ve learnt from today’s offering. On Covid The readout says: The prime minister opened cabinet with an update on the current spread of Omicron ... The government acted swiftly as Omicron emerged, introducing proportionate restrictions and massively expanding the booster rollout, becoming the most boosted country in Europe. The prime minister said the UK’s balanced approach, together with new evidence that Omicron is less severe than Delta, meant it was right to maintain the plan B measures, with a further review before the regulations expire on 26 January. Even with these measures in place, England would remain one of the most open economies in Europe. This means: Boris Johnson is feeling vindicated by his decision not to bow to pressure from Sage, and the opposition, before Christmas to tighten restrictions, and today’s Commons statement may sound like a victory lap. On public services The readout says: The prime minister then set out his commitment to delivering on the public’s priorities during the coming year. He emphasised that 2022 must be the year of delivery for our public services and that we need to show progress in a number of key areas such reducing NHS backlogs, delivering the Plan for Jobs, reforming the skills system, creating more new green jobs and cutting crime. This means: Newish prime ministers often promise a “year of delivery”. It means they realise people think their record so far has been a bit disappointing. Unlike Johnson, though, normally they don’t have a pandemic as an excuse. On the cost of living The readout says: Cabinet then discussed ongoing support available for those impacted by global price rises. The chancellor said government had acted quickly to introduce the [universal credit] taper cut, worth around £1,000 to those in work at the bottom end of earnings. On top of this he said government had increased the minimum wage and frozen fuel duty. On energy bills specifically, he said the energy price cap remained in place, along with the warm homes discount and winter fuel payments. The government had also brought in a £500m household support fund to support millions of vulnerable people over the coming months. This means: The government knows cost of living is a problem, but so far it has not got anything new to offer that will help people. Here are more details about the announcement from the UK Health Security Agency about confirmatory PCR tests being abandoned for people with no Covid symptoms. (See 12.40pm.) Lateral flow tests have an estimated specificity of 99.97%, UKHSA says. That means, for every 10,000 people tested, no more than three people are likely to receive a “false positive” - a positive result when they are in fact negative. The suspension of confirmatory PRC tests for England is temporary, UKHSA says. It does not say how long the new regime will last, but it points out that the same thing happened last year, when confirmatory PRC tests were abandoned between January and March. People who have to isolate after a postive lateral flow test will still be contacted by Test and Trace, UKHSA says. Asymptomatic people with a positive latera flow test will still be required to get a PCR test if they fall into one of three categoriess: people wanting to apply for the £500 test and trace support payment; people participating in Covid surveillance report; and around one million people who are at particular risk who are potentially eligible for new treatments. Fresh questions about the Scottish government’s very cautious stance over the Omicron variant have emerged after Public Health Scotland apparently denied it would be publishing data on how many people have been hospitalised because they have Covid. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, has refused to cut Scotland’s self-isolation rules from 10 days to seven in line with the rules in place forEngland and Wales, arguing that the Omicron’s very high infection rate could overwhelm Scottish hospitals. She is likely to finally relax them in a statement to MSPs shortly. The latest headline data shows the number of people in Scottish hospitals has doubled over the past week to 1,147 on Tuesday: that appears to support the case for caution. But the latest English data suggests a third of Covid-positive people in hospital south of the border were admitted for other medical reasons, and not because they were ill with Covid. That suggests the Omicron variant is having a lesser impact on NHS resources than previous variants and could support demands for less onerous rules in Scotland. John Swinney, Sturgeon’s deputy first minister, has promised recently that Public Health Scotland, a government agency, would release Scotland’s data Covid-positive patients on Wednesday. The political journalist Chris Musson, of the Scottish Sun, has reported that PHS has denied it plans to do so. That is likely to fuel opposition criticisms later over whether Sturgeon has had the right evidence to justify her ultra-cautious stance and questions over whether that has caused unnecessary harm to Scottish public services, hospitality outlets and businesses. The Commons authorities have confirmed that Boris Johnson will deliver the statement on Covid at 3.30pm, after PMQs. After that there will be two more statements: from Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, on the return to school (starting after 4.30pm); and from Anne-Marie Trevelyan, the international trade secretary, on the trade deal with Australia (starting after 5.30pm). Hugh Pym, the BBC’s health editor, says the UK Health Security Agency has confirmed that confirmatory PCR tests will no longer be required in England from 11 January for people without symptoms who get a positive lateral flow test. (See 9.12am.) Wales has recorded 21,279 new Covid cases, Public Health Wales reports. That is the second highest ever daily total, according to the UK Covid-19 Statistics website. This chart, from the Public Health Wales dashboard, summarises two key trends. Over the Christmas period (from 25 to 31 December) the positivity rate - the proportion of tests turning out positive - was 51.6%. Pre-departure Covid tests for people flying to the UK from abroad are likely to be scrapped, PA Media reports. PA says: The move would be a major boost for holidaymakers planning winter sun breaks and the beleaguered travel and tourism industry. The testing rules for international travel will be discussed at a meeting of the cabinet’s Covid-19 operations (Covid-O) committee on Wednesday. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, is understood to be pressing for a relaxation of restrictions to help the airline sector. There have been calls to drop the requirement for even fully vaccinated travellers to take a PCR test after arriving in the UK - but such a move may be opposed by the Department of Health and Social Care. Research commissioned by Manchester Airports Group (MAG) - which owns Manchester, Stansted and East Midlands airports - and trade body Airlines UK indicated that removing all international travel testing would not affect the spread of the Omicron variant in the UK. The analysis, conducted by Oxera and Edge Health, concluded that domestic restrictions would be the only way to reduce Covid cases related to the strain. Passenger numbers at MAG airports fell by more than 30% from early December, following the introduction of the tougher testing requirements. The UK government is in charge of the rules for England, but in the past changes affecting England have generally been adopted in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland too because of the impracticality of trying to enforce different rules in different parts of the UK. A fire station in Gosport, Hampshire, was left with no firefighters available one night after Christmas because of staff absences, the local Fire Brigades Union has said. The FBU has highlighted this as just one example of how the spread of Omicron is affecting services. Gosport was particularly badly affected on 28 December, when firefighters had to be moved from another station to cover, but the FBU says there have been other examples in the county of fire stations being left short-staffed, with some fire engines being unavailable. Mark Chapman, FBU regional secretary, said: The service is at an absolutely threadbare level of cover. We even had one fire station essentially left without any firefighters, having to borrow firefighters from another station. As Omicron takes grip across the country that’s something we’ll continue to see in Hampshire and the Isle of Wight and more widely. The North East ambulance service has said it is still asking some patients to get a lift to hospital instead of waiting for an ambulance, despite a health minister saying this is unacceptable. (See 9.33am.) Dr Mathew Beattie, its medical director, said the service would usually move up and down an escalation plan as demand for crews increased and decreased, but the decision was taken on New Year’s Eve to go straight to its highest level. That meant telling patients on calls that were not potentially life-threatening, and where the ambulance was delayed, that they could choose to get a lift to hospital. Beattie went on: Under normal circumstances, we would move up and down our clinical escalation levels reactively as each point is triggered or demand reduces. The measures we took over the bank holiday weekend were implemented because we have seen activity fluctuating dramatically with surges in demand. This was an incredibly difficult decision to take, but when patients are waiting an average of an hour for an ambulance that should be responding within 18 minutes, there is a risk for them coming to harm if they cannot get to hospital quickly. As PA Media reports, Beattie said the service was now using its regular escalation plan, but that some patients are still being asked to consider getting a lift to hospital. Our performance has not returned to normal and it is still taking us too long to get an ambulance to patients, unfortunately due to this patients remain at risk, which is unacceptable. Where it is safe we will continue to ask patients to make their own way to hospital. However, we would never ask anyone to drive themselves to hospital with a life-threatening illness. According to the latest Office for National Statistics death figures for England and Wales, there were 13,010 deaths registered in the week ending Friday 24 December - 610 more than the previous week, and 12.7% more than the five-year average for this time of year. That amounts to 1,462 so-called “excess deaths”. But the ONS also says that in the week ending 24 December only 4.5% of deaths (591) involved Covid being mentioned on the death certificate. The week before it was 6.1% of deaths (755). Yesterday Sajid Javid, the health secretary, ruled out cutting the minimum isolation period from seven days to five days, which is what it now is in the US. It has already been reduced from 10 days. But this morning Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said he would favour relaxing these rules further “as long as it is based on the science”. He told the Today programme: Hospitals who have declared critical incidents, for example, are essentially reaching out to staff who are on leave, on rest days or even recently retired and asking them to come back to wards, so the situation is desperate - any way of getting staff back into hospital is a good thing. But on the other hand, if staff come back into hospital and are infectious, that’s completely counterproductive because that is going to mean more sickness in the hospital and for staff, so this can’t be led by politics or blind hope - it has to be led by the science. If the science says it is possible for people to go back to work earlier, then of course NHS leaders will want that to be possible. West Midlands ambulance service (WMAS) has appealed for recently retired staff to return to work amid growing pressures due to rising Covid cases and a sharp increase in 999 calls. The service issued a similar appeal in March 2020 but said it is now in desperate need as the country grapples with the highest Covid infection rate since the start of the pandemic. The trust’s chief executive, Anthony Marsh, said they were looking for staff who had retired in the last two years, particularly people who worked on an ambulance or in a control room. He said: We would like those colleagues to consider returning to WMAS so that we can increase the quality and amount of care that we can provide the public in these challenging times. I wouldn’t ask you to re-join if I didn’t think it was the right thing for the public of the West Midlands and our patients. WMAS serves 5.6 million people covering a 5,000 sq mile area made up of Shropshire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire, Coventry, Birmingham and the Black Country conurbation. In October the service raised its risk rating to the highest level in its history, saying patients were being put at “catastrophic risk” of harm due to ambulance handover delays, and last year repeatedly broke records for its busiest days. It comes as multiple NHS trusts across England have declared “critical incidents” amid soaring staff absences caused by Covid-19. Keir Starmer has tested positive for coronavirus, a Labour spokesperson has said. Angela Rayner, the deputy leader, will deputise for him at PMQs. This is the second time Starmer has tested positive in less than three months. He also missed PMQs and the budget for the same reason at the end of October. This suggests he’s a good example of how up to 15% of Omicron cases are reinfections. Gillian Keegan, the health minister, said a record number of lateral flow tests - almost three-quarters of a million - were sent out to individuals yesterday. She told BBC Breakfast: What we’ve got is many, many more lateral flow tests. Yesterday was a record - we sent out 741,000 lateral flow tests to people’s homes. We’ve tripled capacity - that’s what we’ve been working on over Christmas - so for January and February, we have 350m lateral flow tests, so hopefully that should sort out some of the short-term supply issues that we’ve had where people have had to wait a little bit to get their packs. She also said she thought the number of people currently isolating was “about 1 million”. UPDATE: The Department of Health and Social Care later confirmed that Keegan was talking about 741,000 lateral flow test kits being sent out, not individual tests. There are seven tests in a kit. In her interviews this morning Gillian Keegan, the health minister, said it was not acceptable for patients waiting for an ambulance to take them to hospital to be asked to get a relative to give them a lift instead. As the Health Service Journal has reported, an internal note at North East ambulance service NHS foundation trust said that where there was likely to be a risk from the delay in an ambulance reaching a patient, call handlers should “consider asking the patient to be transported by friends or family”. My colleague Andrew Gregory has the story here. Asked about these reports, Keegan said this should not be happening. She told Sky News: I’ve actually asked NHS England to look at that particular case because that doesn’t sound to me like that’s an acceptable approach - people should be able to get an ambulance if they have a heart attack and that’s why we’ve put that extra funding in place, and why we’ve been building up our ambulance service over the last couple of years. She also claimed that more ambulance crews were in operation than ever before and that the service had received an extra £55m to help it cope over the winter. Nicola Sturgeon is expected to cut Scotland’s self-isolation period from 10 to seven days when she updates Holyrood on the Covid crisis later today, after sustained pressure from businesses and opposition parties to address soaring staff absences. The first minister has resisted demands to soften her government’s highly-cautious stance on the 10-day isolation period; ministers in England and in Wales cut it to a week last month, after judging Omicron was less medically severe than first feared. Scottish hospitals are warning their services are under significant strain due to staff absences; ScotRail, the main trains operator, has cut hundreds of trains this month and is operating a reduced timetable due to staff shortages; hospitality outlets and retailers have struggled to remain open. While Scotland has recorded its highest-ever Covid infections figure of 20,217 on Monday - a figure partly inflated by results delayed by the holiday weekend, critical illness rates have remained stable. There were 1,147 people in hospital on Tuesday, double the number seven days ago, but the number in intensive care has remained relatively stable, at around 52 or 53 people a day. Ministers have so far failed to state whether they were hospitalised because of Covid or were found to be Covid-positive after admission for another reason. No recent Covid-related deaths have been reported for Scotland due to public holidays; the last figure was 13 deaths on 31 December. No reliable data has been published yet on the fatalities or intensive care cases due to Omicron in Scotland. John Swinney, Sturgeon’s deputy and Scotland’s Covid recovery minister, told BBC Scotland on Tuesday they were “actively considering” cutting the isolation period. He said: We’re obviously looking at the clinical advice that is crucial in the hands of this because as I’ve indicated before in these discussions, we do not in any way shape or form serve anybody’s interests if we ignore the clinical dimension of this issue. Good morning. Gillian Keegan, the social care minister, has been giving interviews this morning and she has come close to confirming reports that the Covid testing rules in England are going to be changed. Under the new system, people without symptoms who test positive on a lateral flow test will no longer be asked to get a confirmatory PCR test. This will reduce pressure on the testing laboratories. Asked about these reports, Keegan did not deny them, and hinted that a formal announcement is coming soon. She told BBC Breakfast: As I say, I don’t have any official news on that but I know that the teams are looking at testing and testing regimes. We’ve introduced so many lateral flow tests now and they are very accurate - they are really accurate if people are infectious, so I guess they are looking at the regime all the time in terms of what makes sense. I don’t have any official news but the teams will announce it once they have come to their conclusions. Asked if the announcement would come today, she said: “You may be able to expect some news - I don’t know when.” Ministers are also reportedly planning to announce that people travelling to England will no longer need to take a pre-departure test. Boris Johnson is chairing cabinet this morning, and both measures may be discussed there. At his press conference yesterday Johnson said he would asking cabinet to agree that the government should carry on with plan B instead of introducing further restrictions. That’s not much of an ask, because most of the cabinet, and the Conservative parliamentary party, are strongly opposed to tightening restrictions (which arguably would be too late now anyway). But Johnson may face a tougher reception in the Commons, where the timing of today’s session means he is taking PMQs at 3pm, and where is is expected to deliver a Covid statement later. Here is the agenda for the day. Morning: Boris Johnson chairs cabinet. 2pm: Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, makes a statement to the Scottish parliament on Covid. 2pm: The ONS publishes more results from its Covid infection survey. 2.30pm: The Commons starts sitting again after the Christmas recess, with Welsh questions. 3pm: Johnson faces Keir Starmer at PMQs. 3.30pm: Johnson is expected to make a statement to MPs on Covid. I will largely be focusing on UK Covid developments in this blog today, but for wider coronavirus coverage, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comNew Hampshire police officers were engaged in a low-speed dog-chase on a highway along the state’s border with Vermont when they discovered that a real-life Lassie was leading them to rescue two men thrown from a truck and suffering from hypothermia. The driver, Cam Laundry, 31, and his passenger, Justin Connors, 40, were found injured but alive on Monday thanks to Tinsley, Laundry’s canine companion. Another dog, Connors’ bulldog, was hit by a car and found dead on the side of the road after the accident. Captain Tim Cohen of the Lebanon police department said Laundry’s truck appeared to have fallen from the embankment into the woods “in such a way that it would not normally have been seen by a passing motorist”. “It’s pretty incredible that we were able to help these men, not even knowing that they were there to begin with. It was a good stroke of luck,” Cohen said. “The dog definitely played a large part in this because it drew our attention to that area.” The two friends were heading back home from dinner before the car accident. Laundry was not wearing a seatbelt and was charged with driving under the influence. He called the incident “a wake-up call”. “I couldn’t believe the amount of intelligence she had to know that we were in distress and kind of do a Lassie-thing and go get help,” Laundry told the Guardian. “I’m still trying to recollect everything that happened. She’s a little guardian angel.” It was onlookers from the road that first alerted police to the loose German shepherd on a bridge. “Of course we care about the dog. We don’t want to see it get injured, but it can also pose traffic hazards to motorists or pedestrians,” Cohen said. “We wanted to make sure the dog didn’t cause an accident, especially on the interstate.” “[Tinsley] wouldn’t really get near anybody,” Cohen said. After chasing the dog for five to 10 minutes back and forth between New Hampshire and Vermont on the Veterans Memorial bridge, police followed Tinsley to a gap in the road’s guardrail near the intersection of interstate of 89 and 91, later revealed to be the scene of Laundry’s crash. Emergency services were immediately called. The Lebanon police chief, Phillip Roberts, said he had seen this behavior from police-trained dogs before, but never from a household pet. Laundry is back home now and Connors is recovering from leg and neck surgeries in hospital. “I want my friend Justin to get better as soon as possible. Things could’ve been a lot worse than they were,” Laundry said. “We’re very fortunate to be here today because of my dog, Tinsley.”BMW has unveiled a chameleon car that changes colour, in the latest attempt by automotive firms to combine their vehicles with cutting-edge technology. The German car firm said it was “bringing the car body to life” with the specially developed body wrap for its all-electric iX SUV model, which uses the same technology as Amazon’s Kindle e-reader. At the touch of a button, a driver can change the shade of the car’s exterior, allowing the colour to shift between black and white or even light and dark stripes by activating electronic ink in the wraparound shell. “You decide what you want to wear, what your social media status is – and you can decide what your car looks like,” said Stella Clarke, BMW’s project lead on the vehicle. Clarke added that the technology could be used to locate the car by making it flash when the driver is looking for it, or to display the vehicle’s battery capacity externally. According to BMW, the effect is created by applying an electrical charge to microcapsules – which contain particles of white and black pigments – suspended within a liquid encased in the wrap. The colour alternates depending on whether a negative or positive charge is applied, causing either the white or the black pigments to collect at the surface of the microcapsule. The concept car, which is not available for public sale, was unveiled at the annual Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas, where automotive firms increasingly advertise their products alongside mobile phone, gadget and TV screen makers. The agricultural machinery firm John Deere has unveiled a smartphone-controlled autonomous tractor at CES this week, while Sony revealed plans to start an electric car company, General Motors announced an electric version of its Chevy Silverado pick-up truck and Mercedes-Benz revealed a concept electric car with a range of 1,000km – almost double the distance of a Tesla Model S. Apple, which does not exhibit at CES, has been working on a self-driving electric car that, according to a recent report, could be launched in 2025. New products shown by consumer electronics firms at CES this week include a portable Smart TV projector by Samsung, an autonomous home on wheels from LG and the official name for Sony’s new virtual reality headset, which will be called PlayStationVR2. Many of the product announcements have been made virtually after regular attenders such as Google, Microsoft, Intel and the Facebook owner Meta pulled out of physical appearances due to Covid-19 fears.It’s choose your poison time for a government that must know allowing low-income households to suffer the full blast of the scheduled rise in energy bills in April is a political non starter. After six months of high gas prices in the wholesale market, the regulator Ofgem’s price-setting formula is likely to spit out a figure close to £2,000 on average for an annual dual-fuel bill, or a year-on-year increase of roughly £700. That is simply unaffordable for many. And the implied £20bn-ish hit to discretionary consumer spending will do little to encourage a whoosh of post-Omicron activity the Treasury is relying on in other areas of the economy. Some form of subsidy or smoothing mechanism for bills must be found. From where the chancellor sits, though, you can see why he may not fancy cutting VAT. It’s charged at 5% on energy bills, so even a temporary removal would only reduce a £2,000 bill by £100. Nor would it be targeted: all bill payers would benefit. On that score, Boris Johnson is correct to describe it as “a blunt instrument”. Rishi Sunak’s real worry, though, may be whether an intended temporary measure could become semi-permanent. The Treasury, remember, is trusting that VAT receipts from electricity will rise over time as fuel duties from petrol and diesel decline when we plug in our electric cars. It needs VAT to be seen as fixed. A windfall tax on North Sea gas producers? That will be tempting, but the design would be key. Some of the producers who are enjoying current conditions are also hooked into government-backed carbon capture projects, so a windfall tax risks complaints about jeopardising long-term incentives and investment. Should nuclear generators, or energy trading firms, also be included since they are also beneficiaries of high wholesale prices? Determining who should pay, and defining a “windfall” profit while wholesale prices are still volatile, can quickly become a messy business. Back in 1997, the beauty of the then chancellor Gordon Brown’s windfall tax on privatised utilities was its simplicity: it was levied on the grounds that the companies had been sold off too cheaply, which was almost unarguable. Definitions were clear and boardroom grumbling could be ignored. Boosting the size and availability of the warm homes discount available to vulnerable households is a far simpler idea. There is at least an established mechanism for payments and the benefits, unlike with a VAT removal, would be targeted. How much would it cost to make a meaningful difference? A case can be made for any number as high as £10bn, which would upset the Treasury’s spending arithmetic for the next financial year. And, again, Sunak may fret about an exit given that analysts expect next autumn’s price cap to be set even higher than April’s. Thus you can see the political temptation to grant a £20bn multi-year loan to energy supply companies to make them manage the headache. The government would avoid the appearance of setting energy bills and consumers would pay over time. It’s hardly a pain-free or risk-free option, however. It means telling consumers their bills won’t fall even when wholesale prices do. And underwriting loans to a sector where two dozen companies have gone bust in the last three months would be a brave move. The government has already nationalised Bulb and probably does not want to add to its collection of failed suppliers. It is hard to predict where ministers will land among this range of unattractive choices, but a massively expanded warm homes scheme gets the vote here. It would be targeted, which is an essential requirement, and would confront the problem head-on instead of putting the bill on the never-never. The hardest part would be expanding the definition of “vulnerable” consumers: the whole point about a £700 hike to the default tariff is that newly vulnerable households will be created, which is the penny that is dropping only belatedly among ministers. Meetings with supply companies, as on Wednesday, don’t change the basic fact that a political choice has to be made about how much money to throw at easing the price shock. Doing nothing is not plausible. Ofgem sets the price cap in early February and any support scheme for low-income households needs to be announced simultaneously. Ministers need to hurry up.Border Force officials could strike over Priti Patel’s “morally reprehensible” plans to turn back dinghies in the Channel, a union has said. The Public and Commercial Services Union (PCS), which represents the vast majority of Border Force staff who would implement the “pushbacks”, has joined forces with the refugee charity Care4Calais to seek a judicial review of the policy, a tactic campaigners warn could put lives at risk. Channel crossings have become one of the most politicised issues in British politics, with the home secretary, Priti Patel, staking her reputation on making the route “unviable”. A total of 28,300 people crossed the Dover Strait onboard small boats in 2021, triple the number for 2020, according to figures compiled by the PA Media news agency. Patel’s borders bill intends to reduce such numbers and contained, until recently, proposals that appeared to criminalise organisations such as the RNLI for rescuing asylum seekers in the Channel. The PCS and Care4Calais intend to challenge the lawfulness of redirecting boats out of UK waters and back to France. The union said the policy “contravenes international law and is morally reprehensible”, and could expose Border Force officials to risk of prosecution. Even if the court application is unsuccessful, the union has not ruled out industrial action and officials refusing to carry out the pushbacks. The PCS general secretary, Mark Serwotka, said: “The legality of the pushbacks policy is in serious question, and it is right that the court decides whether it is unlawful to turn back Channel boats. We cannot have a situation where our members could be open to potential civil and criminal action for implementing a policy that they do not agree with and know is not safe. “Although we are hoping for a positive outcome from the legal proceedings, people should be in no doubt PCS strongly opposes this policy, on moral and humanitarian grounds, and we will not rule out industrial action to prevent it being carried out.” Clare Moseley, the founder of Care4Calais, said: “The proposed policy deprioritises the UK’s duty under domestic and international law to save lives at sea. It is for good reason that this duty is a cornerstone of international maritime law. If eroded, I fear it will enable the UK to devalue lives at sea.” “It risks opening the gates to the horrific scenes we are seeing in the Mediterranean,” she added. A Home Office spokesperson said: “As part of our ongoing operational response and to prevent further loss of life at sea, we continue to test a range of safe and legal options to stop small boats making this dangerous and unnecessary journey. “These all comply and are delivered in accordance with both domestic and international law. Our New Plan for Immigration will also overhaul the broken asylum system and reduce many of the historic pull factors.” Despite the home secretary’s pledge to make crossings an “infrequent phenomenon” by spring 2020, more than 36,000 people have succeeded in reaching the UK in the last two years. The government continues to consider various options to tackle the issue and has invited businesses to a non-disclosure-agreement-bound meeting in the hope of hearing “innovative ideas”.The story of how Elizabeth Holmes came to defraud some of the richest and most powerful investors in the US, only to end up this week facing decades in prison, is so epic and outlandish that it is no wonder it has already flowered into a prize-winning book and a popular podcast, and is reportedly on its way to becoming a Hollywood film, with Ms Holmes to be played by Jennifer Lawrence, no less. But it is more than superb entertainment; it is a parable about how our financial system is badly broken. At only 19, Ms Holmes decided to reinvent a fundamental part of healthcare: blood testing. No more painful pinpricks, nor anxious waits for results. She dropped out of Stanford to start Theranos in 2003, and in short order pulled in some of the biggest investors in Silicon Valley, garnered adoring magazine profiles and turned her startup into a firm employing 800 staff and valued at £6.6bn. There was just one problem: the miracle technology was junk. It did not do what it said on the tin. The deception was first exposed in 2015, the company dissolved in 2018 and last August its founder began a four-month long trial. A jury found her guilty this week of four counts of fraud, each carrying a maximum term of 20 years. Ms Holmes is still only 37. When the going was good, she could count among her backers and board members powerbrokers such as Henry Kissinger and George Shultz. The trial revealed how far networking of contacts served to beguile the supposed smart money, who asked few questions but were satisfied instead with a great backstory and the lustre of the names. Investors gave Ms Holmes their millions and sent notes thanking her for taking them. Not far behind were the profile writers. Far from a few suckers getting duped, this was a political-financial-media elite disastrously short on self-doubt. As with Jeffrey Epstein, it required dogged journalism to do the serious investigation and expose the truth. Yet when the Wall Street Journal’s John Carreyrou did ask the necessary questions, Ms Holmes admitted in court that she retaliated by going straight to the newspaper’s owner, Rupert Murdoch – who just happened to be a serious investor in Theranos. The WSJ ran the stories anyway, but another organ under different ownership might not have done. Finally, America and other rich countries have spent years running record-low interest rates and quantitative easing programmes, which have pushed the cost of capital close to zero. This has not sparked a wave of innovation in socially vital technologies, but pumped more air into asset bubbles. And in the case of Theranos, all it has done is provide the kindling for a bonfire of wealth – money that could have been spent more wisely, invested more usefully and done some actual good.The threat to American democracy may be greater today than when the insurrectionist mob swept into the US Capitol one year ago, attempting to prevent the peaceful transfer of power following a free and fair election. Joe Biden is ensconced in the White House and with the passage of time, the shock of their lethal assault has faded. But if the danger appears less immediate, addressing it is no less urgent. We know more than we did a year ago about the full violence and menace of the riot, and about what preceded it – including the PowerPoint presentation turned over by Donald Trump’s chief of staff Mark Meadows, detailing ways to stage a coup. Rioters have been jailed, but so far no case has been brought against those who encouraged and incited them. Mr Trump himself has resurged, with a cult-like grip upon his party. He and his allies have longer to plan for this year’s midterms and 2024. State legislatures are constructing an election-stealing machine. In short: 6 January was not an end, but a beginning. Listen to the warnings from America’s political scientists. One says that the US is “closer to civil war than any of us would like to believe”. Another warns that the insurrectionists of 6 January are not part of a fringe: he sees a new mass political movement with violence at its core. Others foresee a slide to Hungarian-style competitive authoritarianism in which the trappings of elections remain, but so rigged that Democrats cannot win. Faced with an electorate that has rejected them, the Republicans have already entrenched their advantage in the electoral college, Senate and supreme court. Yet it is Republicans who claim that the system is cheating them. A vast swathe of the population is now detached from both political reality and political ideals – believing the 2020 election stolen, and believing that force is an acceptable response. “Alternative facts” have become mainstream belief: according to a recent poll, 68% of Americans think there is no evidence of widespread electoral fraud in 2020 – but 62% of Republicans disagree. While 60% of Americans think Mr Trump bears either a “great deal” or a “good amount” of responsibility for the storming of the Capitol, 72% of Republicans say he bears “just some” or “none at all”. Another survey found that 9% of Americans believed that “use of force is justified to restore Donald J Trump to the presidency”. It is hard to know where one might begin to tackle the sprawling rightwing disinformation ecosystem. The aspiration to a policy response to the political chasm – the Build Back Better Act – has been killed by Republican opposition, with the aid of conservative Democrat Joe Manchin. He and fellow Democratic senator Kyrsten Sinema will also tank the fresh push on voting rights if they remain opposed to amending the filibuster. Meanwhile, Republicans who attempted to rein Mr Trump in on 6 January, or publicly criticised him afterwards, have long since fallen back into line. In 12 short months they have rewritten history. Their hostility to the select committee investigation, rushing to report before November’s midterms lest it be closed down afterwards, is another attempt to silence the truth. Last year’s tidal wave of voting restrictions at state level continues, and election sabotage is gaining ground, with Republicans giving legislatures control over vote counts and replacing nonpartisan officials with Trumpists. Against these are ranged the steady, committed efforts of activists, politicians and ordinary voters to defend their rights and protect their democratic institutions. More political violence is likely in future, not least because the GOP elite have helped to legitimise it. Senior Republicans have not merely made their peace with Mr Trump and his tactics, but embraced them. Next time, such efforts might gain support from within the services. Yet the deeper threat may be that force will not be required. The dismantling of American democracy could be bloodless: quieter, more sophisticated, more cynical – and nonetheless devastating for it.Canadians will receive 140m rapid tests free throughout January, Justin Trudeau announced on Wednesday, as the country struggles to cope with record-breaking Covid case numbers. “With the speed at which Omicron is propagating through our communities and through our country, it makes sense to have rapid testing,” said the prime minister. The health minister Jean-Yves Duclos said that rapid tests are proving to be an important tool in the fight against Covid. But the decision to invest in rapid testing marks a dramatic change in a country where – until last month – rapid tests were not commonly available, despite successful implementation in the US, UK and Europe. The delay of rapid test adoption in Canada was caused by a couple of factors, David Juncker, department chair of biomedical engineering at McGill University, told the Guardian. He said a “false sense of perfection” on testing sensitivity and an unnecessarily complicated maze of rules prevented Canada from acquiring the rapid self-tests the country would have needed to slow the spread of Omicron. “They were focused on sensitivity that they haven’t come around to understand this test is a public health test,” Juncker said. The scientific community has known since the summer of 2020 that Covid-19 tests’ sensitivity is less important than the frequency and speed of testing, particularly when it comes to stopping asymptomatic people from spreading disease. Concerns over sensitivity led to an over-reliance on PCR testing, and slowed down approvals and procurement deals for rapid tests. The current Omicron surge has provincial and territorial PCR facilities completely overwhelmed, which has led some to limit the public’s access to such testing. Provincial governments have also played a key role in the slow adoption of rapid testing. Canada acquired several million rapid tests at the end of 2020. However, most provinces failed to distribute the tests they were given over sensitivity concerns. Juncker said provinces claimed they wanted to do more research before rolling the tests out. On Wednesday, Trudeau was asked whether he had any qualms with the way provinces have chosen to distribute their supplies of rapid tests. He said he hoped they would learn and share best practices, but that the federal government had no real say in the matter. “Our job is to procure as many [tests] as we possibly can,” said Trudeau. The first self-test in Canada was approved only on 23 April 2021, six months after the FDA approved the same test for use in the US. All previously approved tests – including rapid tests – required professional administration or lab processing. Most of the rapid self-tests now available in Canada were only approved in November and December of 2021, including Abbott’s Panbio rapid antigen test which was approved on 21 December. Currently, Canada has an agreement to procure up to 122.9m of those tests. Canada’s increased supply may be a case of better late than never, although 140m a month may not quite cut it. Juncker said with the highly transmissible Omicron, Canadians could need upwards of 600–700m tests a month. “Once the situation subsides, two tests a week [per person] should be fine,” he said.And here, as they used to say on TV game shows – as that tumble dryer, that golden fondue set, drifts off down the conveyor belt – is the Test cricket you might have had. Four distinct but interconnected things happened overnight as England and Australia played out the opening rain-addled day of the fourth Ashes Test in Sydney. First, England and Australia played out the opening rain‑addled day at the SCG, where Joe Root’s team produced their most sustained performance of the southern summer. This should come as no surprise. An Ashes series usually starts on the back of three forgettable warm-up games against motivated, high-calibre opponents. Well, we’ve had those now. History will remember them as the live elements of the 2021-21 Ashes series. In Sydney England finally got to work without the extra handicap – beyond cunning-plan selections and a seriously poor batting lineup – of culture shock and rustiness. It felt like something resembling a contest. Meanwhile, in the same timeline, the second thing was happening. The comically self‑serving words of Ashley Giles, the England and Wales Cricket Board’s managing director (no, me neither) of cricket, will continue to echo around the place once this tour is done. Giles has largely been a mute figure through England’s collapse on his watch as a Test team. He broke his silence on Tuesday to make a startling pronouncement. There is, according to Ashley Giles, no point in sacking Ashley Giles – because you’ll only end up with someone like Ashley Giles. It is almost tempting to leap up and applaud this fantastical piece of non-think, to assume Giles intended this statement as a devastating satire on the spin and blame-avoidance of the ECB. But it seems Giles, who has had three years of constant oversight as England’s MD, really does seem to believe he’s just another victim of this pesky system. This is the same pesky system that led to the disintegration of the England men’s pathway (overseer: Ashley Giles), too much power in the hands of an outgunned head coach (decided by: Ashley Giles), and the consequent disastrously planned and executed Ashes tour. This, according to Ashley Giles, believer in fate, wyrd, destiny, was all simply preordained. And yet before we become too depressed by the sound of lifeboat hunting, things three and four were also happening. At Mount Maunganui, overnight, Bangladesh produced one of the great moments in modern cricket history. Led by the wonderful Ebadot Hossain, a bolter from the wider sporting superstructure, and glued together by a fine captain and coach, Bangladesh beat the world Test champions New Zealand on their home turf, dishing up an exhilarating spectacle of team chemistry and expert planning. It seems nobody told Ebadot, or the millions cheered through lockdown in Bangladesh, about the death of red-ball cricket, systemic decline and all the rest. Maybe someone from the ECB could have a word. Meanwhile at the Wanderers, South Africa continued to sustain a gripping, well-matched Test series against India. This is the same South Africa that continue to struggle with culture-scale issues that make English cricket’s whinging about short attention spans and so on look a little deranged. And the same India that is, in English cricket’s playbook, Test cricket’s nemesis, the IPL vandals, but who continue to produce the standard of on-field excellence, and to commit to the format in its year‑round scheduling. The message from Sydney and related points is clear enough. The product is, even now, resilient. This thing has always stunk of death, has always been the object of dire predictions (it’s called the Ashes for a reason). But it is possible with competence and good intentions to preserve Test cricket. Even – imagine that – to promote it. England’s players also did their bit on day one. They bowled well, which they have throughout the series, and caught well, which they haven’t. Much attention will focus on Stuart Broad taking the wicket of David Warner, but the idea Broad’s misuse in this series is some kind of overlooked silver bullet is also misguided. England lost the Ashes because of their batting. To date, only two players have passed 50. Broad himself has already played in a 5-0 and a 4-0 defeat and has 13 wickets at 39 over the past year. He should have played in Brisbane and Melbourne. But this is one small strand in a wider bodge. In Sydney it was Anderson who provided the illumination on a blue-green day. He came back late on, pitched the ball up and got Marcus Harris to edge to slip. Aged 39, Anderson is taking his wickets at 15 and going at 1.6 runs per over in the series. He remains a sporting marvel, but also a one‑man reminder that so much in Test cricket turns on small virtues of craft and planning. Cricketing lore states that you should never judge a pitch until England have had a chance to collapse in a heap on it. But the next few days in Sydney could yet provide a belated show of resistance to that sense of managed decline.At least seven historically Black colleges and universities (HBCUs) across the United States received back-to-back bomb threats this week, forcing students to evacuate or shelter in place while authorities investigated. The threats come amid a dramatic rise in bombings in the US and follow bomb threats at other US colleges last November. The targeted HBCUs spanned six states and Washington DC, including Prairie View A&amp;M University in Texas, the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Howard University, Florida Memorial University, Norfolk State University in Virginia, North Carolina Central University, and Xavier University in New Orleans. Some students and university employees were put on lockdown, while others were forced to relocate off-campus. The schools have since given the all-clear, the Washington Post reported. Whether the barrage of violent threats targeting universities that have historically served Black students was a series of isolated events or part of a larger conspiracy was not immediately clear, the Post reported. While some of the threats were later deemed unfounded, police warned that at least one had been “very real”, according to local New Orleans news channel WDSU. None resulted in explosions. The incidents were not the first bomb threats on college campuses this academic year. Last semester, three Ivy League schools – Cornell University, Columbia University and Brown University – all reported similar warnings, none of which were found to be credible. This week’s events also come after an alarming uptick in bombings in the US. In a report on 2020, the United States Bomb Data Center recorded 25% fewer bomb threats than in 2019. Yet it tallied 428 actual bombings – a 71% increase from the year before. Officials from the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff asked everyone to remain vigilant, while police told anyone with relevant information to contact the crime stoppers tip hotline.This beautifully brooding slice of English pastoral places Cecil Sharp, the godfather of folk music who collected thousands of songs from rural communities, alongside two women he met in 1903. They were half-sisters, Louie Hooper and Lucy White, daughters of a renowned singer in south Somerset who, at the start of this drama, has just died, leaving them drenched in grief. It is clear why Nell Leyshon’s script was adapted into a BBC audio drama last year, starring Simon Russell Beale and Amanda Wilkin. It bursts with sound, from distant birdsong to folk tunes the sisters sing as they sew gloves to make ends meet. But the visual aspects of this production are just as enthralling with Matt Haskins’s dappled light throwing shadows across Rose Revitt’s simple, striking set, sometimes lighting up the sisters with the clarity of a Vermeer painting to capture the everyday drama of bucolic working life. Sharp’s meeting with Louie and his appropriation of her songs lie at the play’s heart, though the sisters’ relationship runs deftly alongside it. The production is paced to perfection by Roxana Silbert and full of delicate but deeply mined emotions, every actor shining in their part. Song is finely integrated into the script with spine-tingling moments when Louie (Mariam Haque, quiveringly expressive) sings her haunting solos. Lucy (Sasha Frost, just as brilliant as the more flirtatious, frustrated sister) intermittently joins in along with her sometimes lover, John (Ben Allen), to give the play a bustling community feel. Simon Robson’s Sharp is a slyly manipulative figure, quickly switching on the charm when he sees his opportunity with Louie. He goes from cajoling her into singing her mother’s songs for him, even when her grief is raw, to the full-circle betrayal of handing over a book of those songs now “tidied up” and appearing under his authorship. Like Jean Rhys’s 1962 short story, Let Them Call It Jazz, about a Caribbean woman whose song is taken and sung by a man at a west London party, Leyshon explores questions around the archiving and ownership of an oral tradition, capturing all the nuance in the debate, from whether it needs preserving in this formal way to if it can remain authentic in that process. Sharp, who has since been accused of racism and misogyny, not only flattens out Louie’s songs but projects his jingoism on to them. “I see England,” he says when he first hears her sing and speaks of the “purity” of Englishness in her sound, seeing her as a “primitive” force within the land, which sounds close to Rousseau’s Noble Savage. For her, songs are also connected to the land but without his toxic nationalism; as she points out, the songs were passed down to her mother by her “Gypsy” father, who collected his verses through his travels. Where Sharp wants to fix Englishness on to the page in his compositions, she tells him, wisely, that “none of it stays still” and this aspect of the play speaks to contemporary anxieties over nationhood and identity. The play’s intellectual explorations never overshadow its emotional drama; we feel Louie’s betrayal and also a strong sense of the sisters’ complicated bond. Louie’s dependency and Lucy’s desire to leave creates a tension resembling Tennessee Williams siblings. The tenderness between them develops slowly and powerfully, the story in the end as much about their songs, indelibly tied to love, grief, memory and Somerset itself, as it is about what Sharp takes from them. At Hampstead theatre, London, until 5 FebruaryResearchers studying the purple-crowned fairy wren in far northern Western Australia have discovered the birds romancing outside the normal breeding season for the second year running. The development is highly unusual in the 16-year program at the Australian Wildlife Conservancy’s (AWC) Mornington Wildlife Sanctuary, which closely monitors the birds and was identified in a three-week survey carried out during the dry season in October and November. Ordinarily breeding takes place during the wet season between December to April when insects are plentiful. It is indicated by “brood patches” – bare patches on the belly – of female birds and bent tail feathers caused when they nest their eggs in cramped nests. But Dr Niki Teunissen, a postdoctoral research fellow at Monash University who conducted the recent dry-season survey, said that when she caught female birds they showed all the telltale signs of a “busy season”. “Some of those females already had fledglings, so they’d already successfully bred,” Teunissen said. “Then I caught them and found that they had brood patches, which means they already had a nest again. So it’s a busy season. “We don’t really understand why it’s happening but we would love to find out.” As it is had occurred for the second year running the discovery upended much of what researchers thought they knew about the bird’s lifecycle. Teunissen said there may be several contributing factors for the birds changing up their schedule, though so far any theories were “speculative” without further research. She said the region had experienced good rainfall after a period of drought which may make it more attractive for the birds, especially as life can be difficult during the wet season. Not only is their habitat – wetlands along rivers – under threat from fire and cattle grazing, but it is also prone to flash flooding during the wet season that can see local waterways rise metres in a matter of minutes. Last wet season 40% – two in every five nests – were washed away. Another contributing factor may be pressure from cuckoos that lay their eggs in the wrens’ nests for the wrens to raise. As the cuckoos are not around in the dry season it is possible the wrens have adapted. “What I take away from it is that if anything these birds are clearly more flexible in terms of the time of breeding than we thought,” Teunissen said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The purple-crowned fairy wren has two sub-species – the eastern sub-species and the western sub-species. The population being studied by the AWC belongs to the western sub-species. The birds get their name for the purple crown the males wear during the breeding season. This colouring fades when not in season, but last season they were purple all year round. With only an estimated 7,000 birds in the wild they are considered an endangered population that is in decline. The birds only live for four years on average, however the oldest bird tracked by the program has lived to 15 years. Unlike the superb fairy wren, which has a reputation for promiscuity with the female birds regularly cheating on their partners, Teunissen says purple-crowned fairy wren’s are “quite faithful”. The birds do not always mate for life but they can form stable relationships with couples raising their young together and defending their territory together outside breeding season. While the longest breeding pairs last eight years, Teunissen says divorce is not unheard of. “And what we find is that usually when divorce happens the female leaves to join a male elsewhere who’s got better habitat, so it’s all about real estate really,” she said. “It really is a soap opera and we follow them in so much detail that we know exactly what each individual bird is up to sometimes.”It’s an ill wind and all that. With Keir Starmer testing positive for Covid for the second time in a matter of months, it was the deputy leader, Angela Rayner, who got to take on Boris Johnson at the first prime minister’s questions of the new year. Which was just the news that Johnson didn’t want to hear, because Rayner is his worst nightmare. First off, she’s a woman and Boris has a major problem relating to women without mansplaining. More importantly, though, she’s a working-class woman who is very comfortable speaking her mind. Where Starmer may back off and err on the side of caution and politesse, Rayner is never happier than when going toe to toe. Especially when she’s up against someone who is struggling in the polls and whom she doesn’t much respect. Rayner began with a flick at the ongoing investigation into parties at No 10 – it never hurts to remind your opponent of nasties coming down the road – before homing in on the here and now. In October he had said that fears of inflation were unfounded. Given that inflation was now running at 6%, how had he managed to get it all so wrong? “Um, er,” said Johnson. For a moment – the trademark hesitations and incoherence aside – it looked as though Johnson might actually try to answer the question directly. He even began a half-formed sentence to that end. Then half way through he gave up and decided to do what he always does. When under pressure or not. He started lying. How could he have forgotten to do something so natural to him? Maybe it was the Rayner effect. “I said no such thing,” he continued. It was a pure invention that just happened to have been captured in an interview he had given to Sky. From that point on, Johnson was pretty much lost, careering from one car crash to the next. In between wittering on about cold weather payments and the warm home discount – he claimed it was worth £140 a week: it isn’t, it’s £140 a year, though this was probably less a lie and more total ignorance – he just bounced from one lie to the next causing ever greater self-harm. First he tried to claim that the country would be in lockdown if Labour had got its way. Where he got this idea from is anyone’s guess. Most likely it was his own wish fulfilment; what he would have liked to do had he not been too weak to face down the rightwing libertarians in the Tory party. All Labour had ever done was back plan B and said it would be guided by the scientific data. Then he smashed into the next lie. Labour was committed to nationalising the gas industry. It isn’t: Starmer has specifically ruled that out. Then, when Rayner wondered why the government was so keen to rule out cutting VAT on fuel bills – something Johnson had promised as a Brexit dividend – Boris exploded into faux outrage. How dare people who had voted to stay in the EU demand that he keep his promises? He was fully entitled to break as many as he liked to remainers. And, in any case, Labour wanted to rejoin the EU. Pure fantasy. Even the Lib Dems have given up on that one. When Starmer is faced with so many lies in a matter of minutes, he tends to have a mini-meltdown himself. As if the idea of a prime minister being unable to tell the truth does not compute with his version of reality. And you can sort of see his point. It’s a sign of how low we’ve sunk into the shit that we’ve grown used to the idea of Johnson as a serial liar. We don’t expect anything else from him. But where Keir, frets, Rayner runs with it. Sensing Boris was badly losing the plot – if you can lose something you never really had – she paused to ask if he was feeling OK? And he really wasn’t. He was having one of his worst days. He knew that all of his lies would unravel long before the end of PMQs but was unable to prevent himself from telling them. He was so busted. So exposed. He knew it and his own benches knew it. Some Tories tried to offer some encouragement – their jobs are hanging by the same thread as Boris’s and, like it or not, they are symbiotically entwined with him – but it was all a bit half-hearted. Not least because all the red wall MPs care about their constituents’ cost of living. The session ended with Edward Leigh moaning about foreigners. Boris couldn’t bring himself to tell him Vote Leave had promised Indians they could come to the UK post Brexit. Things didn’t much improve for Johnson when he came to give the Covid statement right after PMQs. There again, it’s never the easiest lie to spin that you’ve made all the right calls for the right reasons, when everyone knows that you only did what your party would allow. Or more specifically what the Coronavirus Recovery Group would allow. Donkeys led by yet more donkeys. Rayner pointed out some of the more obvious dangers of hospitals being overwhelmed, operations cancelled and people with heart attacks expected to take a bus to A&amp;E but it was the SNP’s Ian Blackford who got to the heart of the matter. Riding out the pandemic had consequences. More people would die. Which probably wouldn’t affect Boris or many Tory MPs that much, but would certainly be one hell of a bummer for those who died. And for their friends and families. So maybe now was the time for a bit more caution. A bit of humility. Only Johnson doesn’t do caution or humility. He just ducks and dives, doing what he needs to do to get through to the end of the day more or less intact. The consequences left to pile up for tomorrow. Steve Baker and Mark Harper, two hardline members of the CRG, invited Boris to end all restrictions now. In their world, it is their bravery in standing up to Omicron that had forced it into being weaker than Delta. Had the government imposed another lockdown, Omicron would have been inspired to be a much stronger variant. Or something. Whatever drugs they are on, count me out. Boris hummed and hahed, before saying the plan B restrictions ended in three weeks anyway and he would see how things had panned out by then. Hopefully all those who were going die would hurry up and get their dying in during the next weeks so he would then be able to wing it again. It’s come to something that surviving this episode of the pandemic will come down to luck rather than scientific judgement. Then Boris will be Boris.In front of the old New Orleans train station where, in 1892, Homer Plessy engaged in a trailblazing act of civil disobedience that led to the landmark Plessy v Ferguson supreme court decision, Louisiana’s governor stood 130 years later and issued a posthumous pardon to the late civil rights pioneer. Beneath a grey sky and in a ceremony laced with symbolism and repentance, Governor John Bel Edwards signed the pardon for Plessy, a Creole man of color who purchased a ticket for a whites-only train cabin and was subsequently arrested for violating Louisiana’s Separate Car Act. Plessy’s case resulted in the infamous 1896 court decision, which legalized the “separate but equal” doctrine and ushered in the Jim Crow era of racist segregation. “The stroke of my pen on this pardon, while momentous, it doesn’t erase generations of pain and discrimination. It doesn’t eradicate all the wrongs wrought by the Plessy court, or fix all of our present challenges,” Edwards said. “But this pardon is a step in the right direction.” The ceremony, on the grounds of the old station that is now a campus for the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts, was attended by descendants of both Plessy and John Ferguson, the Louisiana judge who initially ruled against Plessy before the case made it to the supreme court. “This is truly a blessed day for ancestors and elders. For children and children yet to be born,” said Keith Plessy, Homer’s cousin three times removed. Holding back tears, he continued: “I feel like my feet are not touching the ground today, because the ancestors are carrying me.” The ceremony began with a rendition of the hymn Lift Every Voice and Sing, performed by a cellist, Kate Dillingham, descended from the lone dissenting supreme court justice in the Plessy case, John Marshall Harlan. In his dissent, Harlan wrote that the ruling “will, in time, prove to be quite as pernicious as the decision made by this tribunal in the Dred Scott case” – a reference to the 1857 decision that said no Black person who had been enslaved or was descended from a slave could ever become a US citizen. The Louisiana parole board voted unanimously in November to pardon Plessy, leaving the final act in the process with Governor Edwards. The pardon marked the first time Louisiana’s Avery C Alexander pardon law, passed in 2006 to allow victims of racist laws clemency, has been used in the state. The effort was driven by New Orleans’s recently elected district attorney, Jason Williams, a progressive reformer who came to office on a wave of grassroots support. On Wednesday, Williams addressed the ceremony, insisting that the district attorney’s office should never have prosecuted Plessy at all. “It was important that the office that prosecuted Homer Plessy be the office that asked for his name to be pardoned,” Williams said. “My predecessor should not have prosecuted Homer Plessy.” He continued: “I did not submit this pardon asking for Homer Plessy to be forgiven. I submitted it asking for us, the institution, to be forgiven.”A nurse who claimed she was victimised for wearing a necklace with a Christian cross at work has won a case for unfair dismissal. Mary Onuoha, a theatre practitioner at Croydon university hospital, Surrey, was discriminated against and harassed, an employment tribunal ruled on Wednesday. Onuoha, a Catholic, wore a necklace with a small cross pendant both in and out of work as a symbol of her religious devotion. However, Croydon Health Services NHS Trust’s uniform policy prohibited the wearing of necklaces in clinical areas on the basis that they could be a health and safety risk. Onuoha was asked to remove her necklace in 2014, 13 years after she began working at the hospital. She refused for religious reasons, and refused again when the issue was raised again in 2015 and 2016. Further efforts by the trust to get Onuoha to remove the necklace, or wear it inside her uniform, failed. She was suspended from clinical duties and demoted to working as a receptionist which she said left her feeling humiliated. She resigned in 2020 and claimed constructive and unfair dismissal. She argued that the trust had breached her right to religion under article 9 of the European convention on human rights, and that her treatment was religious discrimination, harassment and victimisation under the 2010 Equality Act. According to the tribunal’s ruling, the wearing of jewellery, including necklaces, was “rife” among the trust’s workforce and was “widely tolerated” by management. The trust allowed employees to wear other items of religious apparel such as headscarves, turbans and kalava bracelets. “There was no proper explanation as to why those items were permitted but a cross-necklace was not,” the ruling said. The trust had “directly discriminated against and harassed” Onuoha, and her “dismissal had been both discriminatory and unfair”. However, the suggestion that the trust had deliberately targeted the cross necklace as a symbol of the Christian faith or that the trust had acted out of “any kind of prejudice towards the Christian faith” was rejected by a majority of the tribunal. Onuoha said: “My cross has been with me for 40 years. It is part of me, and my faith, and it has never caused anyone any harm. “At this hospital there are members of staff who go to a mosque four times a day and no one says anything to them. Hindus wear red bracelets on their wrists and female Muslims wear hijabs in theatre. “Yet my small cross around my neck was deemed so dangerous that I was no longer allowed to do my job. I am a strong woman but I have been treated like a criminal.” Andrea Williams, chief executive of the Christian Legal Centre which supported Onuoha’s case, said: “From the beginning this case has been about the high-handed attack from the NHS bureaucracy on the right of a devoted and industrious nurse to wear a cross – the worldwide, recognised and cherished symbol of the Christian faith. “Any employer will now have to think very carefully before restricting wearing of crosses in the workplace.”Good morning. Novak Djokovic spends hours at Melbourne airport over visa mix-up, data confirms Donald Trump’s enduring hold over vast sections of America and Covid concerns in a Sydney nursing home. The world No 1 men’s tennis player Novak Djokovic has been held at passport control in Melbourne for several hours, throwing fresh doubt over his participation at the Australian Open. It comes after the reigning Australian Open champion was announced he had been granted a Covid-19-related “medical exemption” by tournament organisers. Scott Morrison has said there would be no “special rules” for the Serbian, and if he failed to provide sufficient evidence to support his medical exemption the 20-time Grand Slam champion will be “on the next plane home”. Djokovic has refused to reveal his Covid vaccine status and has been an outspoken opponent of vaccination for the coronavirus. A major Covid outbreak at a Sydney nursing home has left residents reportedly “petrified”, with families questioning how the disease spread to 38 residents and 25 care staff and the timing of booster shots. Meanwhile, importers of Covid rapid tests have blamed regulatory delays for preventing home use, further strangling supply at a time of peak demand. One company claims they’ve been waiting three months for the national regulator, the Therapeutic Goods Administration, to give the green light for its product to be used at home. More than 40% of Americans still do not believe that Joe Biden legitimately won the 2020 US presidential election, a new poll has found, despite no evidence of widespread voter fraud ever being proven. The data was released on the first anniversary of the 6 January attack on the Capitol, provoked by Donald Trump’s claim that the election was stolen. New research has also found that more than 1,000 Americans in positions of public trust acted as “accomplices” in attempting to overturn the 2020 result. The former president earlier cancelled a press conference scheduled to mark the day. Australia Small businesses across Australia are grappling with acute staff shortages, as skyrocketing Covid cases and complications surrounding testing keep thousands of workers away from their places of employment. More than one in 10 staff at one of northern NSW’s biggest hospitals have resigned, citing crippling workload, burnout and significantly better working conditions across the border in Queensland. Paramedics have experienced their busiest month in the 126-year history of the NSW Ambulance service, with the state’s health minister and premier calling on residents to stop making unnecessarily calls. In this column, a Sydney-based paramedic shares their concerns. Archibald prize-winning artist Craig Ruddy has died from Covid-related complications, aged 53. Ruddy was revered for his paintings of David Gulpilil, Cathy Freeman and Bruce Pascoe. In a statement, Pascoe paid tribute to the painter’s “decent and gentle soul … The world needs the goodness of his spirit replaced.” The world Kazakhstan’s president has vowed to crack down on ongoing protests across the nation that started nearly a week ago following a sudden spike in fuel prices. In Almaty, the mayor’s office was set alight following violent clashes between demonstrators and police. Pope Francis has suggested that “selfishness” is to blame for many people choosing to have pets rather than raise children. The pontiff said the practice “is a denial of fatherhood and motherhood and diminishes us, takes away our humanity”. A section of the Parthenon’s eastern frieze is being returned to Greece by Italy, adding pressure on the UK to repatriate the 2,500-year-old Elgin marbles. The fragment will initially return on loan, but the move is expected to become permanent. Recommended reads The pernicious effect of social media on youth mental health has been a repeated focus for Scott Morrison, with the prime minister campaigning prominently on reforming online safety. And while Australia’s children’s commissioner supports these efforts, as Anne Hollonds tells Paul Karp, there are many and multifaceted roots to youth self-harm or poor mental health that long precede the rise of social media. Standup paddleboarding – or sup-ing, to those in the know – is about the closest you can get to water without getting wet. As Cait Kelly writes: “You cruise along, admire the view, find a nice spot for lunch. You can dip in, dip out – hell, you can take a rod if you want, or do some downward dog on your board.” But how difficult is the sport, how much skill does it require and how much does it cost to get into it? They’re the duo behind 500 live comedy podcasts. And this week it’s the brains behind the Little Dum Dum Club’s turn to sift the online chaff of the internet for comedy wheat in this week’s 10 funniest things. Come for the Dave Chapelle, stay for vintage Seinfeld. An everyday dish across India, there are seemingly endless varieties of dal to try. And given its simplicity to make, as well as its protein, fibre and iron, dal is “the comfort food you can enjoy freely without feeling disgusting afterwards,” Rosemary Bolger writes. Listen Hyperpop: revisited. In this recap of one of our top-rating stories of 2021, on this episode of Full Story Laura Murphy-Oates speaks with music writer Shaad D’Souza about the emergence of the bold and vibrant genre known as hyperpop. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Broad v Warner. It was one of the chief “what could have beens” of England’s puzzling Ashes selections. And having finally got his man in Sydney, Geoff Lemon examines the case for the man responsible for Warner’s 2019 “Ashes immolation”. “Thin-skinned and indignant.” That’s Andy Bull’s assessment of England’s managing director Ashley Giles’s “scattergun broadsides” as the finger pointing and blame shifting within the visiting camp continues after their meek 3-0 Ashes capitulation. Media roundup Anthony Albanese has ruled out a minimum tax rate for Australia’s highest income-earners, effectively dropping a policy he previously championed inside the Labor party, the Australian reports. Western Australia’s Covid exposure has expanded with five new Delta cases linked to the so-called “backpacker cluster”, the ABC writes. And Indigenous advocates have criticised systemic failures in the Northern Territory’s “living with Covid” plan after a suspected Covid patient had to walk for three hours to access testing, only to be turned away, according to the NT News. And if you’ve read this far … It’s long been argued that Google Maps can help you find anything. But thanks to a fleeting street capture, it’s now unearthed an Italian mafia boss, on the run for over 20 years. Convicted murderer Gioacchino Gammino was snapped out the front of a fruit and vegetable shop he ran in rural Spain, under an assumed name. He reportedly asked police: “How did you find me? I haven’t even called my family for 10 years!” Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Some Democratic California lawmakers want to make it easier for people to sue gun companies for liability in shootings that cause injuries or deaths, a move advocates say is aimed at getting around a US law that prevents such lawsuits and allows the industry to act recklessly. In general, when someone is injured or killed by gunfire it’s very hard for the victim or their family to hold the gun manufacturer or dealer responsible by suing them and making them pay damages. A federal law prevents most of those types of lawsuits. But US law does permit some types of liability lawsuits, including when gunmakers break state or local laws regarding the sale and marketing of their products. Last year, New York approved a first-in-the-nation law declaring such violations a “public nuisance”, opening up gunmakers to lawsuits. On Tuesday, the California assembly member Phil Ting of San Francisco unveiled a bill modeled after the New York law. “Almost every industry in the US is held liable for what their products do … The gun industry is the one exception,” Ting said. “Financial repercussions may encourage the firearms industry and dealers to be more responsible.” The bill is co-authored by assembly members Chris Ward of San Diego and Mike Gipson of Carson. Gipson’s son, his son’s fiancee and another man were shot in Los Angeles in April 2020. Gipson’s son and fiancee survived. But the other man, Gary Patrick Moody, was killed. “This is absolutely personal to me,” said Gipson, a former police officer. The New York bill is already being challenged in court by gunmakers. And critics were swift to denounce the California proposal as well. Gun advocates denounced the bill, known as AB1594, as a smokescreen for another attempt by California progressives to ban guns. Sam Paredes, executive director of Gun Owners of California, compared it to suing the California governor, Gavin Newsom, because he owns a winery and people have misused his products by drinking and driving. “He can’t ban guns, but he’s going to try to bankrupt lawful firearms-related businesses,” Paredes said. California already has some of the toughest gun laws in the country, including a ban on most assault weapons that has been in place for decades. But last year, a federal judge overturned California’s assault weapons ban, prompting a lengthy appeals process. Angered by the move, Newsom last month asked the state legislature to pass a law allowing citizens to enforce the state’s assault weapons ban through lawsuits. The idea is similar to a Texas law that bans most abortions but leaves it up to private citizens to enforce the law by taking offenders to court. The bill announced on Tuesday would not do that. Instead, Ting said it would let people and governments sue gun manufacturers or dealers for liability in shooting deaths or injuries. That’s a key distinction from the Texas abortion law, which is only enforceable by private lawsuits. It’s unclear what these potential lawsuits against gunmakers could include. The bill filed in the state legislature is just one sentence long, declaring gun manufacturers have created a public nuisance if their failure to follow state and local gun laws result in injury or death. The bill will probably be changed several times as it moves through the legislative process. Tanya Schardt, senior counsel for gun control group the Brady Campaign, said lawsuits could include suing gun dealers who knowingly sell weapons to people who then sell them illegally to others who are not allowed to own them. Or it could mean suing a gun manufacturer that supplies dealers they know are selling guns used in crimes. The goal is to “create an environment where the gun industry is held accountable”, Schardt said. Chuck Michel, a civil rights attorney and president of the California Rifle and Pistol Association, said that goal will likely backfire by making it harder for law-abiding citizens to have guns for self-defense. “As a matter of policy, to try and shift the blame for the criminal misuse of a lawful product that is used far more often to save lives and protect lives than to take them is a terrible idea,” he said.This year’s Grammy awards has been postponed as a result of the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic. A statement confirms that the ceremony has been postponed indefinitely with no new date yet announced. The awards were set to take place on 31 January at the Crypto.com center in Los Angeles and while sporting events have still been taking place there, sources claim that artists and executives have expressed concern over attending this year’s Grammys ceremony. “The health and safety of those in our music community, the live audience and the hundreds of people who work tirelessly to produce our show remains our top priority,” the statement read. “Given the uncertainty surrounding the Omicron variant, holding the show on January 31st simply contains too many risks. We look forward to celebrating music’s biggest night on a future date, which will be announced soon.” Los Angeles has been seeing a surge in cases along with the rest of the country with a record-breaking number of cases. On 4 January, more than 22,000 people in Los Angeles county tested positive, almost double the previous peak at the start of 2021. This year’s ceremony was set to be hosted by Trevor Noah with nominations led by Jon Batiste, HER and Justin Bieber. Last year’s awards were also delayed until March. The postponement follows a string of other shifts within the entertainment industry including a hiatus for Broadway shows including The Music Man (after stars Hugh Jackman and Sutton Foster both tested positive for Covid-19) and Mrs Doubtfire and today, this year’s Sundance film festival also announced it was ditching its hybrid physical and digital plans to go fully online later this month, in line with last year. “Despite the most ambitious protocols, the Omicron variant with its unexpectedly high transmissibility rates is pushing the limits of health safety, travel and other infrastructures across the country,” organizers said in a statement. This weekend’s Critics Choice awards have also been postponed indefinitely.Anti-racism campaigners have hailed a jury’s decision to clear protesters responsible for toppling a statue of the slave trader Edward Colston as a huge step in getting the UK to face up to its colonial past. Jake Skuse 33, Rhian Graham, 30, Milo Ponsford, 26, and Sage Willoughby, 22, did not dispute the roles they had played in pulling down the statue and throwing it into Bristol harbour during a 2020 Black Lives Matter protest but all denied criminal damage. In closing statements following the nine-day trial, the defence had urged jurors to “be on the right side of history”, saying the statue, which stood over the city for 125 years, was so indecent and potentially abusive that it constituted a crime. After just under three hours’ deliberation, a jury of six men and six women found the so-called “Colston Four” not guilty by an 11 to one majority decision at Bristol crown court on Wednesday afternoon. “This verdict is a milestone in the journey that Bristol and Britain are on to come to terms with the totality of our history,” said David Olusoga, the broadcaster and historian of the slave trade, who gave evidence in the trial. Olusoga said: “For 300 years Edward Colston was remembered as a philanthropist, his role in the slave trade and his many thousands of victims were airbrushed out of the story. The toppling of the statue and the passionate defence made in court by the Colston Four makes that deliberate policy of historical myopia now an impossibility.” Clive Lewis, the Labour MP, said: “A British jury has confirmed the toppling of Edwards Colston’s statue was not a criminal act. The real crime was the fact the statue was still there when protesters pulled it down. “Today’s verdict makes a compelling case that a majority of the British public want to deal with our colonial and slave trading past, not run away from it. That’s important to understand and I hope it gives political leaders a little more confidence when it comes to challenging the ‘culture war’ our government is currently pursuing.” But some critics reacted with fury. Scott Benton, a Conservative MP, denounced the verdict as an “absolutely appalling decision”, tweeting: “Are we now a nation which ignores violent acts of criminal damage? This sends out completely the wrong message.” The former Sun editor Kelvin MacKenzie said he could not help “questioning the sanity of the jury”. He added: “The verdict was a shocking signal to every lefty protester in the country that they can damage with impunity as long as they chant the phrase hate crime.” After the statue was toppled, on 7 June 2020, the home secretary, Priti Patel had demanded that police pursue those responsible, saying their behaviour was “utterly disgraceful”. The Home Office did not comment following the verdicts. The four defendants laughed with relief as the verdicts were returned. They emerged from court wearing T-shirts designed by the Bristolian street artist Banksy to raise funds for their legal fight, and hugged the many supporters waiting outside. “This is a victory for Bristol,” Willoughby said. “This is a victory for racial equality and it’s a victory for anybody who wants to be on the right side of history.” In the trial, in which few facts were in question, the four defendants argued that their actions were justified because the statue was so offensive. Each defendant described being motivated by sincere antiracist conviction, frustration that previous attempts to persuade the council to remove the statue had failed, and a belief that the statue was so offensive it constituted an indecent display or a hate crime. Colston was a 17th-century shareholder in the Royal African Company when it shipped 84,000 Africans into slavery, including 12,000 children; he rose to become the equivalent of a modern chief executive, Olusoga had told the trial. Overall, he said, the company “transported more Africans into slavery than any other company in the whole history of the slave trade in the north Atlantic”. The judge, Peter Blair QC, the recorder of Bristol, allowed expert evidence from Olusoga despite past comments that he “desperately” wanted to join protesters that day, which were raised as a sign of potential bias by the prosecution. The prosecution argued that the fact Colston was a slave trader was “wholly irrelevant”. William Hughes QC, for the crown, said the case was about “cold hard facts” and the “rule of law”. Jurors were shown CCTV capturing each of the defendants playing roles in toppling Colston. Bristol council’s head of culture, Jon Finch, gave evidence of damage to the statue, which lost a cane and part of a coattail. He confirmed £350 damage to the harbour railings and £2,400 to the pavement. The Colston statue was approved in 1895 by the council, which had not given permission to anyone to alter, damage or remove the statue on 7 June, the trial heard. But Liam Walker QC, representing Willoughby, said: “Each of these defendants were on the right side of history, and I submit, they were also on the right side of the law. Colston’s deeds may be historical but the continued veneration of him in this city was not. The continued veneration of him in a vibrant multicultural city was an act of abuse.” Ponsford told jurors: “I thought that a statue that celebrates a figure such as Colston was disgraceful, and offensive to the people of Bristol.” Graham, who had also brought rope to the scene, said she had acted out of “allyship and solidarity” with people of colour. Skuse admitted helping roll the Colston statue to Pero’s bridge (named after an enslaved man who lived in Bristol), where it was thrown into the water, “sentencing [Colston] to death”. Skuse said: “I knew I was in the right, I knew everyone wanted it down. I knew Bristol wanted it, everyone wanted the same thing.” The court heard from black Bristolians including a former lord mayor of the city, Cleo Lake, who had removed a portrait of Colston from her office. “He was the person responsible for brutalising my ancestors, taking away their humanity, and for me and my community experiencing the harm they still experience today,” Lake said. Responding to the verdict, Liz Hughes, chief superintendent of Avon and Somerset police, said the toppling of the statue was an incident that “attracted worldwide attention and … polarised public opinion”, which the force had had a duty to investigate. “Having been presented with the evidence, a jury has now determined their actions were not criminal, and we respect its decision.” • This article was amended on 11 January 2022. The Colston statue was thrown into Bristol harbour, not the River Avon as an earlier version said.Uefa would welcome a bid for the 2028 European Championship from the UK and Republic of Ireland after hopes of bringing the 2030 World Cup there began to fade. The English Football Association is undertaking a feasibility study into a World Cup bid after receiving £2.8m of funding from the UK government. But while a final decision has not been taken, senior figures in the organisation believe any bid is unlikely to succeed. The Guardian understands the Scottish FA is also uncertain over making a commitment to the 2030 project after proposed funding for the refurbishment of Hampden Park as part of the deal was not forthcoming from Whitehall. The Conservative party made a 2030 bid part of its 2019 election manifesto and last summer Boris Johnson said it was “the right time” to “bring football home”. The pledge was made alongside a commitment to put £550m into the game in the UK, with £50m released last year. A World Cup bid is likely to face several challenges, however, not least the prospect of a strong rival European candidacy in the form of a joint bid from Spain and Portugal, and a shared South American offering on the centenary of the first World Cup in Uruguay. Uefa’s president, Aleksander Ceferin, has said he wants to back only one European bid. In a failed bid to secure the 2018 World Cup the English FA received only two votes in 2010 and although the process now gives a vote to each of the 211 members of the Fifa congress, a UK and Ireland vote is again likely to struggle to reach widespread support. An alternative European Championship bid has therefore been gaining traction inside the five associations and relations with Uefa are strong despite the unrest at the Euro 2020 final last year. Ceferin told the Times that the incident “could have happened anywhere,” calling London “a great hub” for hosting a major sporting event. Uefa recently announced that a one-off match between Italy, the European champions, and Argentina, the Copa América winners, would take place at Wembley in June. At the 2028 European Championship the number of competing teams could be expanded to 32, with the facilities offered by the five nations likely unrivalled by alternative bidders. Any proposal to host the 2030 World Cup must be submitted to the Fifa Council before a meeting of the Congress on 31 March. The English FA did not comment on the possibility of not proceeding but referred to a previous joint statement about the feasibility study which said: “Staging a Fifa World Cup would provide an incredible opportunity to deliver tangible benefits for our nations. If a decision is made to bid for the event, we look forward to presenting our hosting proposals to Fifa and the wider global football community.”• The S&amp;P 500 index rose by 26.9% last year, not a record 47.7%. The latter figure relates specifically to the S&amp;P 500 energy index (Tech giant Apple becomes world’s first $3tn company, 4 January, p27; European stocks reach record highs on first day of trading in 2022). • We misnamed the Costa poetry prize winner, Hannah Lowe, as Hannah Love (Writer’s ‘gamble’ on first novel pays off with Costa book prize, 5 January, p11). • Other recently amended articles include: Why has UK’s weather been so mild and is it linked to climate crisis? Remembering Liverpool’s role in slavery Slopes of hope: how Scotland’s ski resorts are speeding back to business – a photo essay Chinese officials face punishment over Covid lockdown in Xi’an Italy: proposal for statue of first woman to get PhD sparks debate ‘Seems like a scam’: Americans with diabetes criticize Biden’s insulin proposal ‘Energy costs could be the breaking point’: UK’s small businesses being pushed to brink The Lost Daughter review – Olivia Colman lights up Elena Ferrante psychodrama My house was a film set: ‘They were filming sex scenes on our kitchen bench’ UK weather: warmest start to new year on record Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.Millions of patients will suffer worsening quality of care unless ministers take immediate action to alleviate the staffing crisis engulfing the NHS, health chiefs have warned. The NHS Confederation, which represents the whole healthcare system, is calling for a range of new measures to be implemented in the NHS in England to help overstretched hospitals and struggling ambulance, mental health, community, GP and social care services cope with “widespread” shortages of medics and health workers. Tens of thousands of medical students should be deployed on to wards and other healthcare settings, NHS and social care staff must be granted priority access to lateral flow and PCR tests, and the self-isolation period should be reviewed to see if it could be slashed from 10 days to five, as had happened in the US and France, it said. MPs warned on Thursday that Omicron, NHS-wide understaffing and heavy demand for A&amp;E services were likely to derail efforts to tackle the backlog of 5.83 million people awaiting surgery. “Our report finds that the government’s recovery plans risk being thrown off course by an entirely predictable staffing crisis,” said Jeremy Hunt, the chair of the Commons health and social care select committee. “The current wave of Omicron is exacerbating the problem but we already had a serious staffing crisis, with a burnt-out workforce, 93,000 vacancies and no sign of any plan to address this.” Growing numbers of operations are being cancelled, with more than 20 NHS trusts declaring an “internal critical incident” in recent days as they struggle to cope with the intense Covid pressure. It emerged on Wednesday that at least four more NHS trusts have taken that step, the highest form of alert any hospital can issue, as had the entire NHS in Norfolk. NHS staff absences had spiralled to double what they normally would be at this time of year, and 17,276 people were in hospital in the UK with Covid – up 58% in a week – as Omicron continued to put “enormous strain” on every part of the health service, the NHS Confederation added. The absence of tens of thousands of staff was already having a “detrimental” impact on the ability of the NHS to provide healthcare, it said, and without further measures, the staffing crisis “threatens the quality of patient care”. Given the worsening situation, there should also be “explicit acknowledgment” from the national regulators that clinical tasks “might need to be allocated in ways which would not normally be recognised as best practice”, the NHS Confederation said. Matthew Taylor, its chief executive, told the Guardian that in the last 24 hours hospital bosses had become “extremely concerned” about the widening ratio of staff to patients. Boris Johnson said on Wednesday he was right not to take any further action. The prime minister told MPs the cabinet had agreed to keep the existing plan B restrictions and ease travel testing rules. He also confirmed plans being implemented across the UK to end the requirement for confirmatory PCR tests for asymptomatic people who test positive using a lateral flow device (LFD). An estimated 3.7 million people in the UK had Covid in the week ending 31 December, the highest number since comparable figures began in autumn 2020, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said. In England one in 15 people in private households had Covid-19, according to ONS estimates. The level is one in 10 in London. A further 194,747 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases were recorded in the UK as of 9am on Wednesday, while 334 more deaths were recorded – although this figure includes a backlog of hospital data from England since 1 January. “It’s clear that we are facing a staffing crisis in the NHS, with a number of hospitals telling us they have around 10% of their staff in self-isolation or on sick leave for other reasons,” Taylor said. “This is pushing up the ratio of staff to patients to levels hospitals are extremely concerned about. “The prime minister’s attempts to reassure the public that the NHS is not being overwhelmed will not chime with the experience of staff working in some parts of the NHS. The government now needs to do all it can to mobilise more staff and other resources for the NHS to get through this extremely challenging period.” While he welcomed Johnson’s announcement that 100,000 critical workers would get direct access to testing from next week, the move “does not go far enough”, Taylor said, and NHS, social care and other key workers should also have “priority access” to tests. He said there was “merit” in reviewing the self-isolation period “to see if the evidence supports a halving of the period to five days”. “We also need other short-term measures, including deploying medical students on wards and taking other steps to cover rota gaps,” he added. All of Greater Manchester’s 17 hospitals have postponed non-urgent surgery. Its healthcare system would not necessarily be able to “ride out” the wave of Omicron infections, the mayor, Andy Burnham, said, with the number of Covid patients in the region’s hospitals almost tripling in the past two weeks, from 346 people to 1,020. Cara Charles-Barks, the chief executive of the Royal United Hospitals Bath trust, one of those to declare an internal critical incident, said it had done so on New Year’s Eve “due to ongoing pressures caused by both Covid and non-Covid patients, sickness among our staff and availability of beds”. University Hospitals Dorset, which runs acute hospitals in Bournemouth and Poole, is preparing to cancel some routine operations after also declaring a critical incident. On Wednesday Poole hospital had only four free beds while Bournemouth had 25. The same level of sickness absence prompted West Suffolk hospital to join the lengthening list of trusts declaring an incident. Both the acute trusts which provide care to people in Bristol, North Somerset and South Gloucestershire also declared an internal critical incident over the bank holiday weekend. The chief executive of one trust in the north of England said it has had to scale back non-urgent surgery after the number of Covid inpatients it is treating soared by 80% since Christmas Eve. “We are doing priority one and priority two surgical cases, with others having to be cancelled,” the chief executive told the Guardian. The trust is also redeploying staff because 10% of frontline personnel are off sick. “The NHS runs hot all of the time so it doesn’t have the reserve for extraordinary events. Something has to give and, as in previous waves, it will be the care that can be delayed and it will be the goodwill and potentially the wellbeing of staff.” • This article was amended on 6 January 2022 to correct a misspelling of the surname of Cara Charles-Barks.“Hospitals in the north of England are incredibly busy now, in particular because of Omicron. At the hospital where I work we’ve gone from 26 Covid inpatients on Boxing Day to 104 now. Unlike previous waves of Covid, only four people are being cared for in ICU, whereas in previous waves we were maxed out at 20 people in ICU. That’s good from the patients’ point of view. But it does stress the rest of the system, including the bit of the system I work in – acute medicine. That’s because the system sort of sludges up because of the infection control procedures we have to operate to keep patients safe, and keep Covid and non-Covid patients separated. Those are particularly necessary just now, given how easily Omicron is spread. Covid patients need to be kept in single rooms as far as possible or isolated in areas for them, which can reduce the number of beds for other patients to go into. Do we have enough single rooms for them all? No, not at all. And if a non-Covid inpatient in a four-bedded bay tests positive for it then you can lose the other three beds, because segregation is so important. If there aren’t enough beds for other patients then you cannot get patients in to have an elective procedure, because urgent patients have filled up the elective beds. That means that we can’t get as many patients in for elective procedures as we would like. The numbers of patients we are treating now – both Covid and non-Covid – is quite incredible. Our acute medicine team is staffed to look after 45 patients but this morning we had 62. Ten of those 62 have got Covid and the others have a mixture of all the medical conditions that land people in hospital – pneumonias, strokes, heart attacks, liver disease. My colleagues on the respiratory wards are the same. They’re staffed for 45 and have got 58. Covid is affecting all the acute specialties. We’ve got more non-Covid patients than we’ve ever been looking at before in the first week of January, and we’ve got Covid on top of that. It’s not the worst year ever, but it’s on a par with that. This is my fourth wave of Covid. Staff are mentally tired from making so many decisions all the time without a break. But this time myself and colleagues aren’t thinking ‘here we go again’. It’s more ‘we have to do this, we will look after these people, it’s something we have to do’. No one’s happy. No one’s enjoying it. But it’s sort of heads down and do our utmost for these people. You do always feel a bit of anxiety, though, coming in every morning to see how many patients are waiting for you in A&amp;E, who haven’t got a bed. How long have they been there? Omicron-driven staff sickness is not affecting my hospital too badly. We’ve had some junior doctors off, but only a few consultants, and nursing-wise we are coping. But I know that parts of other hospitals in the north have been really ravaged, decimated, because of horrendous staff shortages. You know an NHS trust is in trouble when they’re sending out group texts saying ‘can anybody come in and do a few hours?’ Loads of NHS staff up and down the country will be getting those messages now from their workforce department. They are messages to doctors and nurses saying basically ‘please can anyone spare a few hours to come in and help?’ They’re seeking help in all the frontline departments – A&amp;E, medical admissions, surgical admission and respiratory medicine. They’re the ones that are really busy and need extra staff. Are people answering the call? Mostly people are now just too tired. Some answer and do come in. Maybe they’ve got a few days off and choose to come in, at whatever risk to themselves. But I talk to people who say: ‘Yeah, I got the text, but I’m just too tired. My choice is either doing the extra hours or doing my shift tomorrow. And I’ll stick with my shift tomorrow’.” * Dr Scriven is a former president of the Society for Acute Medicine, which represents doctors who specialise in acute medicine and look after patients who do not need surgery, including many who are Covid+It was not how Antonio Conte had envisaged his return to Chelsea, the club where he enjoyed such success for two seasons before everything went bang, his departure in 2018 marked by acrimony and a long-running legal case. Results had generally been impressive for Conte on the domestic front since his arrival at Tottenham in early November but this was quite the unravelling, the only consolation being that his team are still just about alive ahead of the second leg of this Carabao Cup semi-final. Spurs’s defending in the first half was almost impossibly bad. If Kai Havertz’s early opener owed much to their looseness, the second was entirely down to it, Japhet Tanganga’s attempted clearing header from a Hakim Ziyech free-kick smacking into Ben Davies and flying in for a darkly comic own goal. There was no Chelsea player in the vicinity. It was not the only time that Spurs were a danger to themselves, players getting in the way of each other, coherence sorely lacking. Almost implausibly, they came close to burgling a late goal when the substitute, Bryan Gil, showed off his quick feet and cut back for another replacement, Giovani Lo Celso, whose shot was pushed out by Kepa Arrizabalaga. Tanguy Ndombele, who also came off the bench, could not force home the rebound. It was difficult to remember Spurs doing much else as an attacking force. Harry Kane and Son Heung-min were entirely peripheral. The story was one of Chelsea profligacy, with Romelu Lukaku among the guilty. Thomas Tuchel had restored the striker to the starting XI after the fallout from his controversial interview and he struggled to make an impression; his finishing was rushed, his moves a little predictable. It was almost as if he was trying too hard at times. Lukaku, who was given a muted reception by the home support, was not the only Chelsea player to fluff his lines in front of goal. Havertz, the otherwise excellent Ziyech and the substitute, Timo Werner, all missed gilt-edged chances. Conte, who was without Eric Dier because of a positive Covid test, would pour out his heart afterwards, talking about how far Spurs have come to lag behind teams like Chelsea. They were a long way off them after the first whistle blew, the drive belonging to the hosts, and Havertz’s goal came after Tanganga had played Emerson Royal into trouble. Marcos Alonso stepped up to win the ball, played Havertz in behind Tanganga and the finish went in off Davinson Sánchez. Havertz dislocated his finger in the act of scoring – in gruesome fashion – and, although he made it to half-time, he did not reappear thereafter. Tuchel had been able to call upon only four defenders – Thiago Silva was the latest absentee with Covid (the virus also ruled out a midfielder, N’Golo Kanté) – which is a bit of a problem when his preferred system involves playing a five. He switched with the minimum of fuss to 4-2-2-2. It was Spurs in their regular 3-4-2-1 formation who looked like strangers during the first half, which was summed up for them by the own goal. Conte stood motionless on the touchline, silently stewing, because it had not been a lone moment of slapstick defending from his team. Havertz had earlier blown a clear chance for 2-0 after Pierre-Emile Højbjerg hit Oliver Skipp with a clearance and the ball broke for the Chelsea attacker. It was no exaggeration to say that the tie could have been over at half-time. Chelsea had pot shots from around the area, with Mason Mount seeing two charged down but it should have been 3-0 in the 41st minute when Ziyech drifted over a cross for Lukaku, who had got in front of Sánchez. The Belgian rose and glanced a header just past the post. Conte was spoilt for choice in terms of who to remove at the interval but limited himself to only one change – hooking Matt Doherty, who had laboured out of position at left wing-back, and introducing Ndombele. The eye-catching move was the switch to 4-2-3-1. Tuchel was not the only manager to break his religion of three centre-halves. Spurs were a bit better. They took up higher starting positions, which they had failed to do in the first half when Højbjerg and Skipp were worried about Ziyech and Mount getting in between the lines and the team sunk back. They pieced together a few passing moves and Kane extended Arrizabalaga from a free-kick after Ndombele had been fouled by Malang Sarr. But it was Chelsea who continued to look the more threatening. Ziyech sidefooted straight at Lloris after a nice Lukaku pass while he would later volley high; Werner curled past the far post and also watched Lloris save his lob after Ziyech’s defence-splitting pass. And, at the very last, Lukaku shot weakly at Lloris.Former US talkshow host Jon Stewart says comments he made about the Harry Potter films were meant to be “lighthearted” and he was not accusing author JK Rowling of antisemitism. The comedian said news outlets had “piled into this ridiculously out of context nonsense”, and he did not want the franchise censored “in any way”. It comes after a clip emerged of Stewart discussing scenes from the film set in the magical bank Gringotts, run by goblins, on the podcast The Problem with Jon Stewart. In it, Stewart made comparisons between caricatures from antisemitic literature and the “folks that run the bank”. Speaking in a video posted on Twitter, he said: “There is no reasonable person that could have watched it and not seen it as a lighthearted conversation amongst colleagues and chums. “Having a laugh, enjoying ourselves about Harry Potter and my experience watching for the first time in the theatre as a Jewish guy and how some tropes are so embedded in society that they’re basically invisible even in a considered process like movie-making. “This morning I wake up, it’s trending on Twitter, and here’s the headline … ‘Jon Stewart accuses JK Rowling of antisemitism.’” He added: “So let me just say this super clearly, as clearly as I can. “Hello, my name is Jon Stewart. I do not think JK Rowling is antisemitic. “I do not think the Harry Potter movies are antisemitic. “I really love the Harry Potter movies, probably too much for a gentleman of my considerable age. “I cannot stress this enough – I am not accusing JK Rowling of being antisemitic. She need not answer to any of it. “I don’t want the Harry Potter movies censored in any way. It was a lighthearted conversation.” Representatives for Rowling said the author would not be commenting on Stewart’s remarks. In her world-famous books, the goblins that run Gringott’s Bank are depicted as ill-tempered, diminutive creatures who are the guardians of the gold. The first book describes one as “about a head shorter than Harry. He had a swarthy, clever face, a pointed beard, and Harry noticed, very long fingers and feet”. This article was published after Jon Stewart clarified that his comments about the Harry Potter films were light-hearted and he was not accusing J K Rowling of anti-semitism. It replaces an earlier version, also published on 5 January 2021, that reported on the comments in his podcast.Novak Djokovic’s attempts to compete at the Australian Open this month have collapsed after the No 1-ranked male tennis player was told his visa has been rejected. He is due to be flown out of Melbourne on Thursday amid a spiralling outcry over a controversial “medical exemption” agreed by the tournament’s organisers. The reigning Australian Open champion was held up for several hours at passport control on Wednesday night at Tullamarine airport in Melbourne, the host city of the tournament, as he was questioned. The Australian Border Force confirmed on Thursday morning he would not be allowed to remain in the country. “The ABF will continue to ensure that those who arrive at our border comply with our laws and entry requirements,” a statement read. “The ABF can confirm that Mr Djokovic failed to provide appropriate evidence to meet the entry requirements to Australia, and his visa has been subsequently cancelled. “Non-citizens who do not hold a valid visa on entry or who have had their visa cancelled will be detained and removed from Australia. The ABF can confirm Mr Djokovic had access to his phone.” There are reports Djokovic’s lawyers will challenge the decision. Djokovic’s father Srdjan said the player was moved to a room alone, separated from his team. More than five hours after they arrived in Melbourne, Goran Ivanisevic, Djokovic’s coach, posted a selfie on Instagram from the airport at 5am captioned “not the most usual trip Down Under”. The Victoria state government said it had refused to formally support Djokovic’s visa application and it was reported that the visa with which he attempted to enter Australia does not allow for exemptions for unvaccinated applicants. The exact grounds for Djokovic’s initial exemption were unclear, although his opposition to vaccination is well known, fuelling the criticism inside Melbourne, Victoria and across Australia. Djokovic is seeking to win his 21st grand slam singles title, overtaking Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, at the tournament beginning on 17 January. On Wednesday Scott Morrison, the Australian prime minister, added his voice to the furore, saying Djokovic would be “on the next plane home” if he was unable to provide proof of his medical exemption. “If that evidence is insufficient, then he won’t be treated any different to anyone else and he’ll be on the next plane home. There should be no special rules for Novak Djokovic at all. None whatsoever.” Victorian officials were asked by the federal authorities to formally support Djokovic’s visa application, which led Jaala Pulford, the state’s acting sports minister, to announce on Twitter that the state would not be doing so. “The federal government has asked if we will support Novak Djokovic’s visa application to enter Australia,” Pulford said. “We will not be providing Novak Djokovic with individual visa application support to participate in the 2022 Australian Open grand slam [tournament]. We’ve always been clear on two points: visa approvals are a matter for the federal government, and medical exemptions are a matter for doctors.” Djokovic announced on Tuesday that he would be flying to Australia after receiving an “exemption permission”, rather than vaccinating himself against Covid, immediately prompting backlash from the Australian public and politicians. As the nine-times Australian Open champion embarked on his journey to Melbourne, criticism of him hardened. Karen Andrews, the federal home affairs minister, released a statement suggesting the federal government could revoke Djokovic’s exemption unless he provided “acceptable proof” of the reasons for his medical exemption at the border. “Any individual seeking to enter Australia must comply with our strict border requirements,” Andrews wrote. “While the Victorian government and Tennis Australia may permit a non-vaccinated player to compete in the Australian Open, it is the Commonwealth government that will enforce our requirements at the Australian border.” Victorians have endured lengthy lockdowns and there is significant anxiety about rising Covid cases as Australia struggles with the Omicron surge. On Wednesday Victoria recorded a record 17,636 new cases and a rise in hospitalisations, prompting non-urgent elective surgeries to be reduced. Additionally, Morrison’s government is under fire for its handling of Covid and his refusal to make basic provisions free or affordable. Simple lateral flow tests are sold out at supermarkets and pharmacies across the city, most available are sold for around A$30 (£16) and others have been subject to price gouging from some companies. The Australian tennis legend Rod Laver said in an interview with the Herald Sun that Djokovic should reveal the reason he was granted a medical exemption. “If he’s got a reason for [the exemption] then … we should know it,” Laver said. “Yes, you’re a great player and you’ve performed and won so many tournaments, so, it can’t be physical. So what is the problem?” Djokovic’s fellow world No 1, Ashleigh Barty, was asked about Djokovic after her opening match of the season in Adelaide. Barty noted the difficulties faced in Victoria but she declined to wade into the debate around Djokovic. “I know how hard it has been for Australians all around our nation, but in particular Victorians have had a real rough trot over the last 18 months and two years,” Barty said. “I understand why they may be frustrated with the decision. Ultimately I have no interest in speaking about Novak’s medical history. It’s not my decision. Those decisions are made. They’re completely out of my control.” Shortly after Djokovic announced his “exemption permission”, Tennis Australia clarified that Djokovic had been granted a medical exemption and that his application was reviewed by two separate independent medical panels, firstly from Tennis Australia and then provided by the Victorian government. The personal information of each applicant was redacted. Craig Tiley, the Tennis Australia chief executive, revealed 26 tennis players and support staff had applied for exemptions with only a handful receiving them. On Wednesday Tiley continued to emphasise the robustness of the process that led to Djokovic receiving an exception but he acknowledged the public’s frustrations. “Some of you will be upset about the fact that Novak has come in because of his statements of the past couple of years around vaccination,” Tiley said. “However, it’s ultimately up to him to discuss with the public his condition if you choose to do that, and the reason why he received an exemption. We as an event, also as a state, as a country, will do everything we possibly can to give everyone an equal opportunity to come into the country.” Last year Djokovic said he was “opposed to vaccination” and added: “I wouldn’t want to be forced by someone to take a vaccine in order to be able to travel … But if it becomes compulsory, what will happen? I will have to make a decision.”“Peacekeeping forces” from a Russia-led military alliance will be sent to Kazakhstan to help the country’s president regain control, it was announced on Wednesday night, as violent clashes continued after fuel price rises triggered widespread protests. Armenia’s prime minister, Nikol Pashinyan, said the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) – an alliance of Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan – would dispatch forces to “stabilise” the Central Asian country. The announcement came after Kazakhstan’s president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, appealed to the bloc for help, decrying the actions of “terrorists” and alleging the country had been the victim of “attacks” by foreign-trained gangs. On Wednesday, demonstrators took over government buildings and reportedly stormed the airport in Almaty, the country’s commercial capital and largest city. “Almaty was attacked, destroyed, vandalised, the residents of Almaty became victims of attacks by terrorists, bandits, therefore it is our duty … to take all possible actions to protect our state,” said Tokayev, in his second televised address in a matter of hours. The Kazakh events come at a time when all eyes have been on a possible Russian intervention in Ukraine. Images of police being overpowered by protesters are likely to cause alarm in Moscow, as another country neighbouring Russia succumbs to political unrest. Kazakhstan is part of an economic union with Russia and the two countries share a long border. It was not clear how many troops the CSTO would send and how long they would stay in the country. There was no immediate comment from the Kremlin, but Russian MP Leonid Kalashnikov told Interfax that the troops would stay “for as long as the president of Kazakhstan believes it necessary”. He said they would mainly be engaged in protecting “infrastructure” in the country. The announcement came just hours after Dmitry Peskov, Putin’s spokesperson, said it was important no foreign countries interfered in Kazakhstan. Earlier in the evening, Tokayev spoke to the Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko, who crushed a huge uprising with brutal force in 2019. Before calling Tokayev, Lukashenko spoke to Putin, the Belarusian news agency Belta reported. The protests began in the west of the country at the weekend, after a sharp rise in fuel prices, but have spread quickly and taken Kazakhstan’s authorities and international observers by surprise. On Wednesday, there were further reports of violent clashes and shooting in Almaty and other cities, as well as unverified videos suggesting casualties among protesters. Kazakh media outlets cited the interior ministry as saying 317 police and national guard servicemen were injured and eight killed “by the hands of a raging crowd”. There have been no reliable estimates of civilian casualties. Earlier in the day, the Almaty mayor’s office was set on fire, with smoke and flames visible from several floors of the imposing building. Many flights were diverted or cancelled after the apparent storming of the airport. Kazakh media outlets reported authorities took the airport back under control after a firefight. In other cities, including Aktobe in the west of the country, crowds tried to storm government buildings. There were reports and videos of police cars set on fire and security vehicles seized by the crowd. Tokayev accepted the resignation of the government on Wednesday morning and introduced a state of emergency in several provinces in an attempt to gain control of the situation. Later, the state of emergency was extended to the entire country. Tokayev also announced that his predecessor and benefactor, 81-year-old Nursultan Nazarbayev, would step down as head of the security council. Much of the anger has been directed at Nazarbayev, a former Soviet-era communist boss who became Kazakhstan’s first president and ruled until 2019 and who wielded immense power behind the scenes. “The authorities are trying everything to calm things down, with a mix of promises and threats, but so far it’s not working,” said Dosym Satpayev, an Almaty-based political analyst. “There will be imitations of dialogue but essentially the regime will respond with force, because they have no other tools.” At times, authorities have shut down mobile internet and blocked access to messaging apps, and on Wednesday the internet went down across much of Kazakhstan. Authorities said army units had been brought into Almaty to restore order. The trigger for protests in Kazakhstan was a sharp rise in the price of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), used by many to power their cars, particularly in the west of the country. Protests began at the weekend in the oil city of Zhanaozen, where in December 2011 police fired on protesters, killing at least 16 people. It soon became clear that the anger was not focused only on LPG prices, and a government announcement that the price would be fixed at a lower level has done nothing to quell the protest. Instead, there is broader discontent with Tokayev, president since 2019, and Nazarbayev. “Nazarbayev and his family have monopolised all sectors, from banking to roads to gas. These protests are about corruption,” said 55-year-old Zauresh Shekenova, who has been protesting in Zhanaozen since Sunday. “It all started with the increase in gas prices but the real cause of the protests is poor living conditions of people, high prices, joblessness, corruption.” Darkhan Sharipov, an activist from the civil society movement Wake Up, Kazakhstan, said: “People are sick of corruption and nepotism, and the authorities don’t listen to people … We want President Tokayev to carry out real political reforms, or to go away and hold fair elections.” The five former Soviet Central Asian republics have been largely without protest in their three decades of independence, with the exception of Kyrgyzstan, which has had several revolutions. Kazakhstan has never held an election judged as free and fair by international observers. While it is clear there is widespread discontent, the cleansing of the political playing field over many years means there are no high-profile opposition figures around which a protest movement could unite, and the protests appear largely directionless. “There are some local figures, but nobody who could unify forces across the country, though with time they could appear,” said Satpayev.David Hytner was our man at Stamford Bridge tonight. His report has landed. You know the drill: clickity click! Thanks for reading this MBM. Stay safe and warm. Nighty night. Antonio Conte talks to Sky. “It was a difficult game. From the start Chelsea showed to be much better than us. The first half we struggled a lot, but we know we are talking about one of the best teams in the world, and if you compare it to our team, there is no comparison. Today we have seen the difference between the two teams. It is not easy to play at Stamford Bridge and Chelsea won the ball every time. We also conceded unlucky goals and the game became very difficult. I know the situation, it is very clear, there is an important gap. We have to try to fight to stay in the league in a good position, but if we think we are close, we are not in the right way. There is a lot of job to do, there is a lot of situation to improve. We need time and patience. Everyone has to have patience. Tottenham in the last years, the level has dropped a lot, so now we have to fight to win every game. We have to be humble, and continue to work. It is not as simple as going to the transfer market. In the second leg, we will see what will happen. We have to try to change the situation slowly, slowly. It’s impossible to change it in one transfer market.” Thomas Tuchel talks. “It seems like a deserved win, an excellent result. We could have scored even more but it is hard to score against a team like Tottenham. It is going to be a tough match, it’s not decided yet. We had a strong start and never lost focus. It was good.” Man of the match Hakim Ziyech speaks to Sky. “It was a good performance from the team. A really strong first half. Second was more up and down, but overall a good performance and we got the job done. We can be happy with 2-0 but there is still a game next week. We put pressure on them and didn’t give them space or time. The second half we could have killed the game more. We didn’t, but that’s still 2-0. Hopefully we can keep performing like this.” Advantage Chelsea ahead of next week’s second leg in north London. A thoroughly deserved win against opponents who were, in the main, awful. 90 min +4: So nearly the dream goal for Chelsea, as Werner flicks to Lukaku, just inside the Spurs box. Lukaku sends his shot straight at Lloris. That could have been the tie, plus redemption for the big man. 90 min +3: Loftus-Cheek rolls Pulisic into acres down the right. Pulisic, under no pressure whatsoever, skies a cross over the box and away from danger. He had options in the middle, too. 90 min +2: Hakim Ziyech is named as Sky’s man of the match. 90 min +1: Chelsea knock it around to pantomime cheers. 90 min: There will be four added minutes. 89 min: Azpilicueta is down, having tweaked his hamstring by the looks of things. He’s not going to be able to continue. Off he hobbles. He’s replaced by 18-year-old Harvey Vale, making his Chelsea debut. 88 min: Gil skins Pulisic down the left and reaches the byline. He cuts back for Lo Celso, whose shot is blocked. Ndombele can’t force the rebound home from six yards. So close to a barely deserved lifeline for Spurs! 86 min: Alonso artlessly clumps the free kick straight into the Spurs wall. 85 min: Davies clumsily clatters Pulisic, just to the right of the Spurs D. A daft foul to make in a dangerous position. 83 min: A little bit of space for Ndombele down the right. He reaches the byline and juggles the ball around, eventually losing control and allowing it to roll to Kepa. This is as good as Tottenham have been all evening, though Kepa still hasn’t had a serious save to make. 81 min: A free kick for Spurs out on the right. Lo Celso curls it towards the near post. Tanganga sends a header over the bar. A decent chance goes begging. 80 min: Spurs make a double change. Off go Son and Moura, on come Lo Celso and Gil. 79 min: Pulisic comes on for Ziyech, who was rubbing his back gingerly a couple of minutes ago. 77 min: Suddenly they come to life, stepping it up, Alonso crossing long from the left, Ziyech hoicking a volley well over the bar. What a picture that would have been had he caught it right. 76 min: Chelsea stroke it around in the imperious style. 74 min: Ziyech sends Loftus-Cheek into the Spurs box on the right. Loftus-Cheek reaches the byline but can’t find anyone with his cutback. An immediate assist would have been some way to begin his 100th appearance for the club, but it wasn’t to be. 73 min: Kovacic, the hero against Liverpool on Sunday, replaces Mount, while Saul makes way for Loftus-Cheek. Spurs respond by swapping out Skipp for Winks. 72 min: ... nothing. The ball’s all the way back at Kepa’s feet within seconds. 71 min: Lukaku wins a corner down the right off Davies. And from that ... 70 min: Spurs enjoy a period of sustained possession. They’ve improved since the break, though admittedly the bar wasn’t set particularly high. 68 min: Royal crosses from the right. Moura attempts the spectacular, hooking a first-time volley from the edge of the box. It’s not a million miles away, despite the ball coming off his shin. Just over. 66 min: Ziyech, quarterbacking from a deep position on the right, plays a glorious diagonal pass to find Werner, clear in acres in the middle! Werner opts to chip Lloris, but doesn’t get enough on the ball to beat the well-positioned keeper, who plucks from the sky at the edge of the box. That could have pretty much wrapped up this semi-final with one-and-a-quarter legs still to go. 65 min: Alonso gifts the ball to Moura, who sends Royal loping down the right. There are options in the middle, but Royal can’t beat the first man. That first man? Alonso, getting back to clear up his own mess. 63 min: Kane is good to continue. 62 min: Sarr is booked for swinging an arm into Kane’s jaw. It didn’t look intentional. The Spurs captain stays face down on the turf. “Re: the last couple of reader posts. Is this what they mean by the Guardian’s anti-Royal bias?” Peter Oh, ladies and gentleman. He’s here all week. Try the quarter-pounder with cheese. 61 min: Werner cuts in from the left and curls powerfully towards the top right. Inches wide. Had that been on target, it was in, because Lloris was rooted to the spot. 60 min: Moura crosses deep from the right. Ndombele has a couple of goes at chesting down, with a view to blootering goalwards, but can’t quite get the ball under control. He’s been lively since coming on, especially in the context of this otherwise flat Spurs performance. 58 min: Unfortunately for Spurs, that next goal looks much more likely to be scored by Chelsea. Werner has a whack from the edge of the box. Blocked. Then Ziyech curls in low from the right; Saul flicks wide right from a tight angle, six yards out. 56 min: Chelsea continue to stroke it around. Tottenham’s early second-half flourish, such as it was, appears over already. Here’s Yash Gupta again: “If Royal is hopeless, then what is Matt Doherty?” Let’s be kind and end this riff now - and remember, folks, the next goal could change everything. 54 min: Ndombele picks up possession just to the right of the Chelsea D. He sends a shot deep into the Shed. Not great, but still better than most of what’s gone before for Tottenham. “Emerson Royal is another of the second-rate signings a la Bergwijn,” writes Foderoy, letting it all out in the latest edition of Instant Spurs Catharsis. “All of the crossing skills of Wan Bissaka with none of the defensive prowess” 53 min: Lukaku slips Ziyech into all sorts of space down the inside-right channel. Ziyech opens his body with a view to steering a curler into the bottom left. He gets it all wrong and it’s an easy claim for Lloris. 52 min: Lukaku hooks a lame shot goalwards from 20 yards. Easy for Lloris. Meanwhile, anyone for more Spurs unhappiness? Here’s Paul Durdin! “So far you and the readers have blamed Tanganga, Hojbjerg, Davies, Sanchez. Are you all blind? Emerson Royal is completely hopeless! Surely is a hoax? There is no way he is a footballer.” 51 min: Son drives towards the Chelsea box but is unceremoniously upended by a good old-fashioned slide tackle from Saul. No quarter given there. 49 min: Kane fizzes the free kick towards the bottom left. Kepa is behind it all the way and solidly parries clear. 48 min: Ndombele dribbles down the inside-right channel and is dragged back by Sarr. Free kick, just to the right of the D. Spurs have notably upped their pace of play, having presumably been given the what-for by Conte, and no wonder. “That’s one of the worst halves by a Spurs team for years,” writes Arthur Tee. “They did absolutely nothing right except stand in the way once or twice.” 47 min: Havertz clearly hadn’t recovered from that whack upside the head, then. On that subject, here’s JR in Illinois: “The reason Havertz was groggy in the 41st minute was that just before the Lukaku miss Kane ran up to Havertz from behind just as Havertz completed a long crossfield pass to Ziyech and purposely brained him with a shoulder/elbow to the head. It was really dirty. Like red card dirty. If you get a chance check it out again. The announcers completely missed it.” Chelsea get the second half underway. They’ve replaced Havertz with Werner, while Spurs have changed to four at the back, replacing Doherty with Ndombele. HALF-TIME ADVERTISEMENT. Sign up now! Sign up now! Sign up now? Sign up now! HALF-TIME POSTBAG: Spurs misery special. “Why can no one see that Hojberg is part of the problem? He is clearly implicated in both goals. For the first rather than play a simple quick ball forward to Doherty, he plays it back. For the second, his error undid the great work by Dav covering Lukaku. His attempted clearance off Skipp almost caused another in between those two. Get him off and bring in Ndombele or Lo Celso” - Niall Sheerin. “We fans always like to big up a player, especially when the player is from academy. But apart from his performance against Manchester City, where another ref would surely have booked him early, Tanganga has been pretty average. For a player who made his debut two years ago, he doesn’t have any defensive awareness and is way more physical in tackles. He badly needs a loan otherwise we have another KWP scenario” - Yash Gupta. Spurs have only won once in their last 35 visits to Stamford Bridge. They’ve got a job on if they’re to make it two in 36. Chelsea are in complete control. 45 min: Just the one extra minute. 44 min: Azpilicueta has a whack from distance. Nope. 43 min: Mount turns Skipp and is dragged back by the shirt. Skipp should go in the book, but for some reason doesn’t. He’s already had a lecture from the referee for clipping Jorginho, so he’s surely one foul away from a yellow now. 42 min: Havertz has taken a whack upside the head, but is able to continue for now. 41 min: Ziyech floats in from the right wing and curls a cross towards Lukaku, who rises majestically above Sanchez, ten yards out. His header is weak, though, brushing his forehead and sailing harmlessly wide left. He should have at least hit the target; it could have easily been three. 39 min: Son feeds Royal down the right. Royal crosses deep. Doherty heads back across goal. Kepa gathers but fumbles the ball, Moura clanking into him. The ball hits Moura’s arm, and that’s the end of that. Better from Spurs, though. Small acorns. 37 min: Stamford Bridge is bouncing as a result of that farce. Spurs are being thoroughly outplayed here. They could do with hearing the half-time whistle. 35 min: Not entirely sure why Tanganga elected to head sideways rather than back upfield, but there we have it. He’s had a complete shocker so far, his mistakes leading to both goals. Ziyech swings it in. Tanganga, on the six yard line, sends a header across the face of goal. The ball pings off the unwitting Davies and into the top right. What a fiasco. 34 min: Lukaku twists and turns down the right, earning a free kick off Sanchez, who taps his heel. A free kick just outside the Spurs box in a very dangerous position. Everyone lines up just inside the area, and ... 33 min: Spurs half-clear the corner. Mount curls in low and hard from the right. Lloris smothers bravely. Spurs are hanging on. 32 min: Havertz runs at Tanganga down the left and wins a corner. Ziyech hits it long, finding Rudiger free on the right-hand corner of the six-yard box. Tanganga does extremely well to get his body in the way of the resulting shot. Corner. 30 min: Ziyech curls in from the left. Havertz prepares to head home at the far stick, but Doherty does enough to eyebrow away from danger, just in time. 28 min: Jorginho swings in from the right. Lukaku hopes to head goalwards, but Lloris comes out and punches clear. Not the most convincing clearance, but it does the job. 27 min: Chelsea stroke it around for a bit. They’re in complete control. 25 min: A free kick for Spurs out on the right touchline. Everyone lines up on the edge of the box. Royal and Son combine down the wing and win Tottenham’s first corner of the evening. Son takes. Chelsea clear and break upfield. With Spurs light at the back, Lukaku runs clumsily out of play on the right, and the danger is over. 24 min: Kane nearly releases Doherty down the left with a raking diagonal pass. Ziyech, momentarily caught out of position, picks up his legs and intercepts just in time. For a second, Spurs had a sniff. 23 min: Alonso creams a long pass down the left in the hope of releasing Mount into the area. Too strong. Goal kick. Chelsea’s possession stat in the last five minutes: 81 percent. 21 min: Royal tries to find Kane in the Chelsea box with a sliderule pass down the inside-right channel, but clanks the ball straight through to Kepa. It’s the best they’ve managed up to this point. 20 min: A slight lull. Spurs will take it. They’ve been run ragged so far. 18 min: Ziyech has a speculative dig from 25 yards. He aims towards the top left but it’s always sailing high and wide. 16 min: From the corner, there’s a half-chance for Jorginho to take aim, but the window of opportunity quickly slams shut. Chelsea have enjoyed 63 percent of possession so far. It feels like 83. 15 min: Ziyech buzzes down the right, cuts inside, then rolls a pass to tee up Mount, whose long-range effort is deflected out for a corner. Ziyech to swing it in from the left. 14 min: Chelsea’s press is too much for Spurs right now. They’re first to everything, and forcing errors. At the moment, the visitors need to hang on in there. Right now, a second goal for Chelsea looks very much on the cards. 12 min: Hojbjerg’s attempted hoof upfield slams into the back of Skipp, and breaks to Havertz, just inside the box. Havertz has more time than he realises, and should probably score, but takes a first-time swipe, sending a weak shot towards the bottom left, Lloris able to parry then claim. 10 min: Moura piles down the right, drifts infield, and attempts to slip Son clear down the middle. It’s not the worst idea, but it’s well anticipated by Azpilicueta, who nips in to nix the attack. 8 min: Kane tries to get something going for Spurs, but is quickly surrounded by blue shirts and stripped of possession. Nothing going right for the visitors in these early exchanges. 7 min: Havertz hurt his hand while slotting that one away, but after the doc gives him the once-over, he’s good to continue. 6 min: Havertz has been credited with the goal, so that’s some good news for Sanchez at least. Tanganga’s weak pass wide right is intercepted by Alonso, who slips Havertz into the box. Havertz takes a touch and looks to shoot across Lloris and into the bottom right. It’s on target (I think) but helped in anyway by Sanchez. It had been coming, but what a defensive error by Tanganga. 4 min: Kane is this close to closing down Kepa, who dallies with the ball at his feet. The keeper clears his lines just in time. 3 min: Chelsea probe down both flanks. Pass, pass, pass. Eventually Mount is teed up, 25 yards out, though his shot is blocked. Spurs have hardly taken a touch yet. 2 min: Free kick for Chelsea out on the right. Mount takes, but whips it over the head of every single player in the box. A fast start by the hosts, though. 1 min: A mere 20 seconds in, Lukaku bombs down the right and reaches the area. He should have a dig, but unselfishly lays off to Havertz. The pass rolls behind his team-mate and away. What a story of redemption that could have been! Spurs get the match underway ... but only after the knee is taken. A gesture met by warm applause. There’s no room for racism. No pre-match patter from Antonio Conte, but never mind that, because here come the teams! Chelsea in royal blue, Spurs in lily white. An atmosphere dripping with rich derby goodness. More than 12,000 of the crowd are in the brand-spanking-new safe-standing places, making a rare old row. Conte slips into the away dugout almost completely unnoticed. We’ll be off in a couple of minutes! This semi-final is a rematch of the 2008 and 2015 finals. Click below for inconsistently headlined retro MBM bliss. Thomas Tuchel talks to Sky Sports. “I am happy Romelu Lukaku is on the pitch today. We can listen to the interview 100 times, but it will not make it better. But we can shift our focus, we accept it happened, he accepts it happened, and we can move on. We will protect him now and push him, because he is our player, he wants to be and we want him to be a key player. Now we move on.” He also reports that N’Golo Kante and Thiago Silva have tested positive for Covid. Chelsea make six changes to their starting XI in the wake of the 2-2 draw with Liverpool, Romelu Lukaku now back in favour after that interview. Kepa, Malang Sarr, Jorginho, Saul Niguez and Hakim Ziyech also step up; Edouard Mendy, Thiago Silva, Trevoh Chalobah, N’Golo Kante, Mateo Kovacic and Christian Pulisic make way. Spurs make two swaps after the one-goal win at Watford. Japhet Tanganga and Matt Doherty replace Sergio Reguilon and Eric Dier. Chelsea: Arrizabalaga, Azpilicueta, Sarr, Rudiger, Alonso, Saul, Jorginho, Ziyech, Havertz, Mount, Lukaku. Subs: Kovacic, Pulisic, Werner, Loftus-Cheek, Bettinelli, Barkley, Hudson-Odoi, Vale, Hall. Tottenham Hotspur: Lloris, Tanganga, Sanchez, Davies, Emerson, Hojbjerg, Skipp, Doherty, Lucas Moura, Kane, Son. Subs: Reguilon, Winks, Gil Salvatierra, Rodon, Lo Celso, Alli, Gollini, Ndombele, Austin. Referee: Craig Pawson (South Yorkshire). Pick a narrative, folks! Antonio Conte returns to his old stomping ground. Romelu Lukaku returns after apologising for Interviewgate. Spurs continue their search for a first trophy in 14 years. Chelsea continue their search for a first trophy in seven months. Chelsea and Spurs are London rivals who don’t like each other very much. All fit the bill, so perm as many as you like. Kick off of this League Cup semi-final first leg is at 7.45pm GMT; unlike tomorrow night’s game between Arsenal and Liverpool, this one is very much ON. It’s on!You have to hand it to Tottenham defenders. Whatever their faults, at least nobody can doubt their entertainment value. After all they even managed to pull off the impossible during the first leg of this Carabao Cup semi-final, somehow dragging the spotlight away from Chelsea’s extremely apologetic record signing with a performance of spectacular slapstick at the back. This must have been a form of rare torture for Antonio Conte. Even with Romelu Lukaku straining for touch and composure, Chelsea were dominant after welcoming their former manager back to Stamford Bridge for the first time. Thomas Tuchel had come up trumps after being forced to tweak his system and Conte cut a glum figure as half-time approached, his mood hardly helped by the farcical own goal that eased Chelsea into a 2-0 lead after 34 minutes of one‑way traffic. It had been wretched from Spurs, who were dismal without Eric Dier and Cristian Romero at the back. Pierre-Emile Højbjerg and Oliver Skipp were being pulled all over the place in central midfield, the movement of Mason Mount and Hakim Ziyech a constant problem, and the vulnerabilities at the back were evident even before Kai Havertz fired Chelsea ahead in the fifth minute. The gaps had appeared from Chelsea’s first attack. Lukaku, back in the side after annoying Tuchel by accidentally pledging his undying love to Internazionale, had something to prove. The time for talking was over and the £97.5m forward was involved in the first minute, tearing down the right flank before letting Spurs off the hook with a poor cross. Still, it was a moment of promise for Chelsea. Always creative, Tuchel had a solution after the absence of Reece James, Ben Chilwell, Andreas Christensen and Trevoh Chalobah was compounded by Thiago Silva and N’Golo Kanté testing positive for Covid-19. The German had not veered away from a back three all season but he adjusted here, paying homage to Ralf Rangnick by switching to a 4‑2‑2‑2, a change that gave Lukaku more support and left Spurs all at sea. Conte, who got the best out of Lukaku when he managed him at Inter, had not seen it coming. With Jorginho and Saúl Ñíguez assured in midfield for Chelsea, Spurs had no way out and they looked nervy with Havertz under instructions to play near Lukaku during the early stages. The curiosity of that move from Tuchel is that Lukaku – who describes himself as a “multidimensional” forward – has often looked isolated this season. The Belgian has pined for his partnership with Lautaro Martínez, his former Inter teammate, and has struggled to live up to expectations since returning to Stamford Bridge. Tuchel, however, has repeatedly rejected suggestions that he has changed his system since signing Lukaku; as the German has pointed out, sharp-eyed observers will have noticed Chelsea used a 3‑4‑2‑1 when they won the Champions League last season. Nonetheless this was no time to be rigid. Tuchel had only four fit senior defenders – in came the lesser spotted Malang Sarr to partner Antonio Rüdiger in central defence – so it made sense to bolster his attack by using Ziyech and Mount as roving No 10s. Spurs, arranged in a staid 3-4-3, were confused. After five minutes Japhet Tanganga tried to play out from the back. The pass was too short and Marcos Alonso quickly stole in front of Emerson Royal before slipping in Havertz, who beat Hugo Lloris with the aid of a deflection off Davinson Sánchez. At that point it was worth remembering Lukaku is not the only expensive Chelsea forward who has struggled to fire under Tuchel. After all, what is Havertz’s best position? Is he a target man? A No 10? A false nine? And just when will the £62m German build on his winner in the Champions League final to produce a consistent run of form? Perhaps this, a goal against Chelsea’s fiercest rivals, will be a moment of ignition for Havertz. He was excellent before going off at half-time, troubling Spurs by drifting to the left to combine with Mount and Alonso, and he could have scored again after another wretched mix-up from Conte’s side. Spurs could barely put a foot right. Harry Kane was barely allowed a sniff by Rüdiger and although Lukaku toiled at times, his difficulties encapsulated by the moment when he ran the ball out for a throw and tripped over his own feet, Chelsea were always on top. A second goal felt inevitable and it arrived when Ziyech’s inswinging free-kick led to more comedy, Tanganga’s attempted headed clearance bouncing off Ben Davies and flying past Lloris. There was no way back for Spurs from there. Lukaku could have increased their pain when he headed wide and, although Spurs improved after the break, Chelsea are in control before the second leg next week. It is up to Conte to find the answers.Lawyers for Ghislaine Maxwell have called for a retrial after a juror said in recent post-trial media interviews that he was a victim of sexual abuse. Maxwell was found guilty on 29 December of five counts for facilitating the late financier Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of girls, some as young as 14. Prosecutors have also asked judge Alison Nathan to investigate the juror’s remarks. “While the court instructed jurors that they were free to discuss their jury service with anyone of their choosing, some of the statements, as related in the media, merit attention by the court. In particular, the juror has described being a victim of sexual abuse,” prosecutors wrote. “Assuming the accuracy of the reporting, the juror asserted that he ‘flew through’ the prospective juror questionnaire and does not recall being asked whether he had been a victim of sexual abuse, but stated that ‘he would have answered honestly’. “Based on the foregoing, the government believes the court should conduct an inquiry,” they wrote to Nathan. The juror’s claim that he did not recall being asked about sexual abuse has spurred questions, given that prospective jurors were given a questionnaire which directly asked them this topic. One inquiry on the questionnaire stated: “Have you or a friend or family member ever been the victim of sexual harassment, sexual abuse, or sexual assault?” Another asked: “Witnesses in this case may testify claiming sexual abuse or sexual assault. Would you have any difficulty assessing the credibility of a witness claiming sexual assault or abuse just like you would any other witness?” In their letter, prosecutors proposed Judge Nathan schedule a hearing in about a month, as well as a schedule for filing paperwork relating to this inquiry. “Government respectfully submits that any juror investigation should be conducted exclusively under the supervision of the court,” they wrote. “If the court decides to schedule such a hearing, the government respectfully requests that the court’s staff promptly contact the juror to notify him of the hearing and inquire whether he would like counsel to be appointed in connection with it.” One of Maxwell’s lawyers, Christian Everdell, filed a letter about the juror’s comments several hours after prosecutors’ submission, describing it as “an issue of pressing importance”. While this filing had some redactions, one visible phrase said “presents incontrovertible grounds for a new trial under rule 33”. Everdell asked Nathan to set a schedule for both sides to submit filings on the issue. “Should the defense prevail on this motion – and we believe the law and facts are clearly on our side – it would render all other post-trial motions moot. Ms Maxwell should not have to expend precious time and resources briefing other motions when this motion can and should be dispositive,” Everdell said. “Accordingly, the defense respectfully requests that the court set a briefing schedule for this motion alone and defer setting a briefing schedule for any other post-trial motions.” Jeffrey Pagliuca, another one of Maxwell’s lawyers, said in a filing shortly thereafter that “the government’s request for a hearing is premature because based on undisputed, publicly available information, the Court can and should order a new trial without any evidentiary hearing. “It is clear to Ms Maxwell that based on this record alone a new trial is required,” Pagliuca also wrote. David S Weinstein, a former federal prosecutor who is now a partner at Jones Walker LLP, said: “Based on the letter motion that was filed today by the government, it’s clear that they want to ensure that it’s the court who conducts any questioning of this juror.” He said: “They want to put the court on notice that this information is out there and they want to prevent any other third party from speaking to this juror before the court does” – including Maxwell’s defense team. At issue will be what the juror said on his questionnaire. If he answered no, the motivation behind that answer could influence the outcome of any inquiry. For example, if he answered no because he was not paying attention, that might present less of a problem than if he knowingly answered in the negative to avoid being disqualified. “If it turned out he checked the box yes, and both the defense and prosecution never bothered to follow up on it, that’s on them,” Weinstein said. Weinstein said that the process would involve Nathan questioning the juror. Then, Nathan will provide the information from this questioning to both sides. “If the answers are ‘I misled you because I wanted to serve’, then that’s going to provide the defense a basis to push their side forward,” he explained. “It’s certainly going to prolong things. It’s going to provide more motion practice, it’s going to potentially delay the sentencing.” The outcome will rest on Nathan, Weinstein said. “She can decide whether or not it’s going to be a new trial, or she could deny [any] motion for a new trial, and then it will become an issue for the court of appeals whether or not that was an error.” “This could be a huge blow to the prosecution if this juror did in fact fail to provide such information,” New York criminal defense attorney Julie Rendelman told the Guardian. “Keep in mind that this juror suggests that his own experience as a victim of sexual abuse not only impacted his decision making but others in the jury who he relayed his story to.” Late Wednesday afternoon, the New York Times revealed that another juror had told their fellow panelists that they had been sexually abused. This juror told The Times that their disclosure seemed to aid in shaping deliberations. With additional reporting from Edward Helmore Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlItaly has made it obligatory for people aged 50 or more to be vaccinated against Covid-19 as the country scrambles to ease pressure on hospitals and reduce deaths amid a dramatic surge in infections. The measure is among the toughest vaccine mandates in Europe and takes effect immediately. The move was unanimously supported by ministers despite divisions between the parties that make up prime minister Mario Draghi’s broad coalition before the cabinet meeting on Wednesday. Italy also tightened its workplace vaccine rules and from 15 February, people aged over 50 who are in jobs, either in the public or private sector, will have to present a health pass proving immunisation or recovery from Covid-19. Hospitals are under increasing pressure because of the Omicron variant. Italy registered 189,109 new infections on Wednesday and 231 fatalities, bringing the death toll to 138,276, the highest in Europe after the UK. Health minister Roberto Speranza said that two-thirds of Covid-19 patients in intensive care units were unvaccinated, as were 50% of the patients being treated in ordinary wards. “We are making these choices in order to restrict the unvaccinated as much as possible, as this is what is causing the burden on our hospital system,” Speranza told the Italian media after the cabinet meeting. Business leaders had urged the government to make the vaccine mandatory for all workers over fears that the latest wave of the pandemic could slow down the economy. Draghi had sought to toughen up the vaccine mandate last week, but the cabinet failed to agree on a measure and so the talks were postponed. “We want to slow the growth of the infection curve and push Italians who are not yet vaccinated to get vaccinated,” Draghi said at the start of the cabinet meeting, according to the news agency Ansa. “We are targeting the age groups which are most at risk of hospitalisation in order to reduce pressure on hospitals and save lives. At the same time, we want to keep schools and businesses open.” Obligatory vaccines were already in place for health workers, teachers and the police. Austria is making vaccines obligatory for the over-14s from February, while Germany is planning to introduce a vaccine mandate for adults. Italy’s latest move follows the tightening of measures regarding the so-called super green pass last week. From Monday, people will no longer be able to dine in or outside a restaurant, go to the gym or use public transport unless they can prove immunisation or recovery from Covid.Britain’s economic recovery stalled before the arrival of the Omicron variant of Covid and the dampening effect of the government’s plan B restrictions on consumer spending in the Christmas shopping period, a wide-ranging company survey has found. Businesses blamed spiralling inflation and shortages of imported goods for a decline in sales in the fourth quarter, which meant that an expansion during the spring and summer ground to a halt. In a message that will concern the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, the British Chambers of Commerce added that many respondents to its quarterly survey of almost 5,500 firms revealed that they were running low on cash and had ditched investment plans to stay afloat into the new year. Suren Thiru, the BCC’s head of economics, said sales growth stalled as firms struggled with the “mounting headwinds” of inflation, a scarcity of skilled workers, and problems sourcing products from overseas. “The persistent weakness in cash flow is troubling because it leaves businesses more exposed to the economic impact of Omicron, rising inflation and potential further restrictions,” he said. The survey also found that the prospect of Bank of England officials raising interest rates was another concern for firms that had taken on extra debt over the last 20 months to cope with the pandemic. The bank raised rates to 0.25% in December. A series of reports have shown the UK economy heading into a challenging spring, with a strong rise in consumer prices hitting household disposable incomes and denting consumer confidence. Official figures showed the consumer prices index (CPI) jumped to 5.1% in November following persistent increases in oil and gas prices and other commodities, including wheat and copper. Consumer spending has underpinned the recovery, accounting for more than 80% of the UK’s growth, while spending on government services such as the NHS has made up much of the difference. Only a minority of businesses have pushed ahead with spending on new equipment, buildings and machinery, despite the offer of tax subsidies on investment, made in the budget last March. In the second quarter of 2021 GDP growth hit 5.5%, but fell back to 1.3% in the third quarter. The BCC survey, which was conducted in the last week of November, indicated that the economy was on course to flatline in the fourth quarter. It was likely the economy would contract in the first months of this year as the message to work from home and avoid large gatherings affected sales, Thiru said. Thiru added: “The UK economy is starting 2022 facing some key challenges. The renewed reluctance among consumers to spend and staff shortages triggered by Omicron and plan B may mean that the UK economy contracts in the near term, particularly if more restrictions are needed. “Rising inflation is likely to limit UK’s growth prospects this year by eroding consumers’ spending power and squeezing firms’ profit margins and their ability to invest. The notable uptick in concerns over higher interest rates underscores the need for the Bank of England to proceed with caution on further rate rises to avoid undermining confidence and an already fragile recovery.” A separate survey by the Chartered Institute of Procurement &amp; Supply (Cips) found that 85% of the 228 firms questioned experienced supply chain disruption last year. A quarter of the firms said suppliers shutting down due to Covid restrictions caused them the most acute supply shortages. The majority (71%) of those experiencing disruption and shortages expected it to last for six months or more, while more than a third said shortages would persist into 2023. The Institute of Directors said its economic confidence index had tumbled from -6 in November to -17 this month, a sign of nervousness among business owners about the UK’s economic prospects. It said three-quarters of company directors expected costs to rise in the next 12 months, and most said they would raise prices to either fully or partially offset the rise in costs. A snapshot of the UK’s manufacturing sector in December showed supply chain disruption and staff shortages continued to hold back growth. The IHS Markit/Cips survey showed growth in UK factory output was limited last month by Covid restrictions and Brexit weighing on orders and pushing up costs. Inflows of new work from overseas dropped for the fourth month in a row. The BCC director general, Shevaun Haviland, said: “Supply chain disruption is continuing to persist, inflation is soaring, and rising energy costs are presenting firms with a huge headache. “With companies now having to grapple with the impact of Omicron and further changes to the rules on imports and exports of goods to the EU, there are significant hurdles for businesses in the months ahead.”There is an intern inside Diane Morgan’s beehive. The person, after being shrunk to fit, operates a tiny control panel to create Morgan’s facial expressions. The only problem is that they are not very good at it. Perhaps the hairspray Morgan wears for her role in Mandy (BBC Two) has clouded the intern’s brain. They keep pulling on the lever that twitches her pursed lips into a lop-sided smirk, or using the rotator ball to make her Marty Feldman-like eyes swivel in a parody of human sarcasm. Or at least, this is my explanation for why Morgan’s performance as the titular mardy, functionally unemployable Lancastrian tends towards the two-dimensional. It not only accounts for why Mandy is obsessively focused on keeping her hairdo in place. It also explains why there is not the remotest hint that Mandy’s character will develop. She looks like a homage to Coronation Street’s Bet Lynch, with her heels and hatchet glares, but has none of Bet’s rounded humanity or narrative arc. She more closely resembles other Lancastrian comic ciphers such as Twinkle in Dinnerladies (played by Morgan’s friend and fellow Boltonian Maxine Peake), who was forever subverting her boss’s patriarchal mind games with lines including: “All right, keep your scrotum on.” Or Caroline Aherne’s checkout girl in The Fast Show, deriding shoppers’ purchases: “Parmesan cheese? Smells like a tramp’s crotch.” The twist here is that Mandy is neither an ancillary character nor delivering a gag in a weekly sketch, but rather intended to carry the series. You might think that Morgan’s character should seem to involve more than being manipulated from within her hair by a tiny, undertrained intern. But that is to miss the magnificence of Mandy. In a sense, this is a revolutionary sitcom, dedicated to the philosophy that people don’t really change and that richly developed narratives aren’t all that. There is an episode of Seinfeld in which Kramer test-drives a car to see how far he can go without putting in more gas. Mandy is like that: how far can she go with zero character development and only the most threadbare storylines? Not as far as season three, I would guess, but I have been wrong before. In this episode, the season two premiere, Mandy is sent by jobcentre lackeys to work at a stately home. Her previous jobs all ended in disaster: there were fatalities after she ineptly processed fruit at a banana plant, and she saw an alien in the aisles while working in Co-op, where she racked up a £79 bill for edam after wilfully misinterpreting the staff discount. At Brampton Hall, Mandy dresses as a scullery maid and takes visitors on tours exploring the house’s past. “This is the room where John the Baptist died,” she explains to sceptical couples in jumpers. It is as if Lucy Worsley turned up for a TV documentary gig in period costume but knew nothing about history and decided brazenly to invent nonsensical claims on the fly, staring dead-eyed at anyone who doubted her. Offered folding money by some dimwit tourist, she reveals more of the house’s history: “Ronnie and Reggie used to live here, but were killed because they stole Michael Heseltine’s ashtray.” Mandy, then, is the soul sister of Philomena Cunk, the gormless know-nothing pundit created by Charlie Brooker and performed by Morgan. She is also closely related to Liz – whom Morgan plays in Motherland – a woman heroically scathing about the middle-class pieties of child rearing. Later, Mandy is tasked with serving nibbles at a book reading in the hall, but she takes the vol-au-vent tray to the wrong room and finds herself among satanists conducting a black mass. That furious clattering noise you can hear is National Trust and English Heritage press officers typing statements distancing themselves from Brampton Hall’s employment practices and room-hire policies. Long story short, Mandy is strapped to an altar by masked yet unacceptably naked satanists and rescued only when Lola, her designated-driver mate, shows up. “What the devil is going on here?” Lola exclaims. “My badminton got cancelled,” says one devil worshipper. Then Lola smacks the men’s bare buttocks (the biggest laugh of the episode, in my book) and chases them off. Why satanic ritual requires nudity is beyond me. The episode ends with two revelations. The first I won’t disclose, but if you can’t guess the identity of at least one satanist, you are too dim to be watching Mandy. The second is more astounding. According to the credits, the show was written and directed by Morgan – not by a homunculus inside a hairdo. I would never have guessed.The acquittal of the Colston Four will prompt close scrutiny of the actions of the home secretary, Priti Patel, who became personally involved in ensuring that they were pursued through the criminal justice system. Hours after the statue of the slave trader was toppled on 7 June 2020, Patel appeared on Sky News to demand that police pursue those responsible, saying their behaviour was “utterly disgraceful”. “It is right that the police follow up on that and make sure that justice is taken, undertaken, with those individuals that are responsible for such disorderly and lawless behaviour,” she said. Two days later, it emerged that she had also called Andy Marsh, the chief constable of Avon and Somerset police, to demand an explanation. Her comments and subsequent actions have been queried by close observers. Nazir Afzal, the former chief prosecutor for northwest England, questioned why she appeared to have become so heavily involved in pursuing those involved instead of leaving decisions to police and prosecutors. “We have a tripartite regime for a reason and that is so that politicians do not get involved in the operational decisions taken by the police,” he told the Guardian. “It may be that she has overstepped the boundaries of that arrangement that we have had for nearly 200 years. It is not something that I think she would want to repeat.” Stuart C McDonald, the SNP’s home affairs spokesperson, said the prosecution always appeared uncalled for, ill-considered and a waste of resources. “The home secretary’s meddling was inappropriate, ill-judged and shows how totally out of touch she is,” he said. This is not the first time Patel has faced criticism for involvement in police operations, particularly when it comes to confronting demonstrators. Police sources told the Guardian last year that heavy-handed tactics used at the Sarah Everard vigil followed a meeting at the Home Office where it was made clear the government wanted a pandemic ban on large gatherings to be enforced. Senior officers were told Patel would make a statement saying so – but the statement never came, it was claimed. Whitehall sources said Patel repeatedly criticised local police for not protecting the Colston statue in 2020 or making arrests on the day. The dilemma they faced was explained and justified by the Avon and Somerset force’s Supt Andy Bennett, who was acutely aware of the campaign against the statue and why officers could not be seen to defend it. “[Colston was] a historical figure that’s caused the black community quite a lot of angst over the last couple of years. So while I am disappointed that people … damaged one of our statues, I do understand why it’s happened, it’s very symbolic,” he told the BBC. “We made a very tactical decision that to stop people doing that act may have caused further disorder.” Labour MPs suspect that ministers have become obsessed with the issue of statues and whether they may be toppled because they are pursuing a “war on woke”. Kerry McCarthy, the MP for Bristol East, said in March: “We know what it is about. It is about stoking up social and cultural anxieties to win votes, seeking out not what we have in common, but what divides us, fanning the flames.” But Labour are facing their own dilemma following the verdict. Keir Starmer sparked unease across the left of his party the day after the Colston statue was toppled by condemning the actions of the protesters. In a clear shift in tone from Jeremy Corbyn’s attitude to civil disobedience, Starmer told LBC radio: “It shouldn’t have been done in that way, [it was] completely wrong to pull a statue down like that. “[But] stepping back, that statue should have been taken down a long, long time ago. We can’t, in 21st century Britain, have a slaver on a statue.” As of Wednesday night, neither Patel nor Starmer had released a statement commenting on the verdict.