The average age for joining the property ladder in Britain has risen to above 30 in every region of the country, as surging house prices mean first-time buyers must save for longer before they can afford their own home. Halifax, the UK’s biggest mortgage lender, said the national average for a first home purchase had risen to 32 in 2021 from 29 a decade earlier, and was above 30 for every region. Despite a record year for growth in first-time buyers, with an increase of more than a third compared with 2020, it said rising average house prices meant waiting longer to become a homeowner than in previous generations. The average age remains highest in London, at 33, although it has only risen by a year in the past decade. Other regions have recorded a sharper increase, including a three-year jump in Wales to 31, and a rise of two years to 30 and 31 in the north-east and north-west of England. Esther Dijkstra, the mortgage director at Halifax, said the difficulty of raising a deposit, rising property prices and changing lifestyle factors were pushing back the date at which people bought their first home. “Over time more people have chosen to go on to higher education, go travelling, or move around for work, which are all factors in the increase in first-time buyer age,” she said. “However, undoubtedly, the biggest drivers are the cost of homes and the need to save a significant deposit to get on the housing ladder. In 2021, the increase in average house price to £264,140, combined with difficulties in raising a deposit, meant that the gap between purchase price and deposit widened in every region in the UK.” Halifax said the number of people buying their first home rose at a record rate in 2021, soaring by 35% to 409,370 – the biggest jump on records dating back to 2006 – despite surging property prices. Dijkstra said it was clear the government’s stamp duty holiday (which applies in England and Northern Ireland) had increased the availability of first-rung homes as others moved up the property ladder. First-time buyers already benefited from full relief when purchasing a home worth up to £300,000 and a reduced rate up to £500,000. The figures come as ministers push to support first-time buyers, including through the government’s help-to-buy scheme. The Bank of England is also considering watering down mortgage affordability rules in a development that could help more people on to the property ladder. Rates of homeownership among young adults have fallen dramatically in recent decades, plunging from a peak of 51% in 1989 to just 25% in 2016, according to the Resolution Foundation. Rates have risen slightly in recent years to 28% in 2019. Halifax said the price of an average first-time buyer home was less than four times the average income – considered the limit for affordability under rules set by UK financial regulators – in just 15 local authorities.One of Britain’s most wanted fugitives has been arrested by Spanish police just 24 hours after an appeal to track him down was launched. Joshua Hendry, 30, was arrested in the town of San Pedro de Alcántara in Marbella, southern Spain, on Thursday after police spotted him out walking a dog. Hendry has an international arrest warrant against him for his extradition to the UK on charges of drug trafficking and belonging to a criminal gang in Liverpool. He was named as one of 12 most wanted British criminal suspects thought to be hiding in Spain in an appeal by the National Crime Agency (NCA) and the charity Crimestoppers, in partnership with the Spanish police, on Wednesday. Hendry’s arrest came just 24 hours after photographs of the wanted men were published, with others sought in connection with crimes including murder, drug trafficking and arms smuggling. The NCA’s director general of operations, Steve Rodhouse, who attended the launch of the appeal alongside the Spanish security minister, Rafael Pérez Ruiz, said that Spain was not a “safe haven” for criminals. “The last thing the fugitives’ associates will want is the combined determination and capabilities of the UK and Spanish law enforcement focusing on them,” he said. According to Rodhouse, many of the wanted men on the list are likely to have attempted to blend in with British communities in Spain. He added: “Loyalties change over time and we urge anyone with information about these men to help us find them.” Pérez Ruiz said: “The campaign allows us to reinforce and strengthen police collaboration between Spain and the United Kingdom with the aim of creating a hostile environment which impedes criminal organisations from setting up in Spain and criminals from settling in our cities.”That’s all from me on the west coast, here are some of the notable moments from throughout the day: Kamala Harris visited southern California to spotlight a bevy of investments at the federal and state levels in wildfire preparedness, response, and recovery. Mississippi’s Black senators walked out of legislature and withheld their vote in protest of a bill that would would ban schools from teaching critical race theory. People are bracing for an anti-vaccine rally in Washington DC that has been largely organized on Facebook and is expected to draw tens of thousands of people. Biden emphasized the need to pass Build Back Better, arguing it will help create a fairer tax system in the US. Speaking at the US Conference of Mayors’ meeting in Washington today, Biden said it was vital that the wealthiest Americans pay their “fair share” in taxes. Democrats are attempting to revive their Build Back Better Act, a month after Senator Joe Manchin announced he would oppose the legislation. Joe Biden said on Wednesday, “I’m confident we can get pieces, big chunks of the Build Back Better law signed into law.” Manchin has indicated Democrats will be “starting from scratch” in their negotiations. Have a great weekend. Thousands of protesters, including prolific anti-vaccine figures are expected to flood the streets of DC to protest vaccine mandates. The event was primarily organized on the “Defeat the Mandates DC” Facebook group and on smaller far-right internet platforms. According to NBC News, hotels in Virginia are already fully booked and organizers have crowdfunded at least $200,000 ahead of the planned demonstration. The permit for the rally was filed by the Children’s Health Defense an anti-vaccine nonprofit founded by Robert F Kennedy Jr. Dr Robert Malone, a virologist who has become a leading anti-vaccine voice is also slated to speak. Read more ahead of the planned demonstration here. A Texas man has been arrested and federally charged for allegedly threatening to kill Georgia election workers and other state officials. This is the first case brought by the Department of Justice’s election threats task force. According to the indictment, Chad Christopher Stark, 54, posted a message on Craigslist on 5 January, 2021, with the title “Georgia Patriots it’s time to kill [Official A] the Chinese agent - $10,000,” according to an NPR report on the arrest. These types of threats have been happening across the US since Donald Trump lost the the 2020 election and began pushing false claims that he was cheated out of a second term due to widespread election fraud. Read the rest of NPR’s writeup of Stark’s case here. Mississippi’s Black senators walked out of legislature and withheld their vote in protest of a bill that would would ban schools from teaching critical race theory. The bill’s chief sponsor, Michael McLendon, a Republican senator says that constituents have heard about the theory in the news and don’t want it taught in schools, according to a Washington Post write-up of the Black senators’ walkout. But, the state superintendent has said that critical race theory is not being taught in public schools and no one has presented evidence indicating that it has been previously. Still, Senate bill 2113 passed by a vote of 32-2. Watch footage of the senators’ walk out below. Kamala Harris has just wrapped up her remarks on the federal government’s investment in wildfire preparedness and recovery in California and throughout the west. In addition to highlighting the promise of satellites to understand and respond to blazes, and increasing pay for federal firefighters, the vice-president underscored the following: $600m of a $1.3bn federal grant for disaster relief will go to California $1bn in wildfire prevention grants that were recently approved by state lawmakers $5bn in wildfire preparation and response earmarked in Biden’s infrastructure bill Harris also emphasized the need for federal, state and local collaboration to deal with fires that are increasing in frequency and intensity each season. “We cannot respond only in reaction to a moment of harm or danger ... we are our best when local, state and federal work together, hand in hand, unencumbered by partisanship or politics,” Harris said. Ahead of Kamala Harris’ statements, Governor Gavin Newsom expressed his gratitude for the current administration’s willingness to support California’s wildfire mitigation and recovery efforts. This is a profound, existential moment ... but it’s also a moment of optimism ... These efforts means nothing without the support – not just financial – from the Biden-Harris administration,” Newsom said at San Bernardino county’s Del Rosa fire station. He also acknowledged Greenville and Paradise, two California cities that were all but obliterated by wildfires in 2021 and 2018 respectively. My colleague Dani Anguiano recently wrote about where things stand in Greenville. Read her coverage here. As we await Kamala Harris’ remarks here is some background on the setting she is in: San Bernardino County in California’s Inland Empire is notoriously fire-prone and has been especially hard hit by blazes including the 2020 El Dorado fire that was sparked by a pyrotechnic device used during a gender-reveal party and burned for more than three weeks. Read my west coast colleague Gabrielle Cannon’s coverage of that incident here: The vice-president came to southern California to give remarks on a $600m federal investment meant to help the state recover from unprecedentedly devastating wildfires over recent years. Harris joined California governor Gavin Newsom, Senator Alex Padilla and secretary of agriculture Tom Vilsack. Watch the livestream here: Good afternoon, this is Abené Clayton blogging from sunny Los Angeles. Kamala Harris is in Southern California today with Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack to promote the Biden administration’s $3 billion investment in wildfire preparedness and response. I’ll have more on the vice president’s remarks later in the day. A live stream of the event can be found here. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Abené Clayton, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Democrats are attempting to revive their Build Back Better Act, a month after Senator Joe Manchin announced he would oppose the legislation. Joe Biden said on Wednesday, “I’m confident we can get pieces, big chunks of the Build Back Better law signed into law.” Manchin has indicated Democrats will be “starting from scratch” in their negotiations. Biden emphasized the need to pass Build Back Better, arguing it will help create a fairer tax system in the US. Speaking at the US Conference of Mayors’ meeting in Washington today, Biden said it was vital that the wealthiest Americans pay their “fair share” in taxes. Politico published a draft executive order from the Trump administration that outlines a plan to seize voting machines in battleground states. The order, which was never sent, was part of a collection of documents turned over to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection after the supreme court rejected Trump’s efforts to block the documents’ release. The US said Biden is “fully prepared” to hold a summit with Vladimir Putin, as fears intensify over a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. US secretary of state Antony Blinken met with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva today to continue the two countries’ discussions over Ukraine. Biden delivered remarks on the need to boost US production of semiconductors, which power everything from cell phones to electrical grids. During the event, the CEO of Intel announced his company would invest more than $20bn to build a semiconductor production facility in Ohio. Abené will have more coming up, so stay tuned. And the Manhattan US attorney’s office, which is investigating Rudy Giuliani’s dealings in Ukraine, has now received thousands of documents from the Trump lawyer’s devices, which were seized by investigators last April. The Washington Post reports: The retired federal judge assigned to review the contents of 18 electronic devices seized from Rudolph W. Giuliani’s home and offices in Manhattan last spring has withheld about half of what former president Donald Trump’s personal lawyer argued should be kept out of the hands of investigators because it was privileged. More than 3,000 communications were released to prosecutors on Wednesday, an action reflected in a four-page report submitted to a judge overseeing litigation on the FBI’s April 28 seizure of Giuliani’s phones and computers. The contents of the devices were not disclosed. The Manhattan U.S. attorney’s office has been investigating Giuliani’s dealings in Ukraine while he was representing Trump. Prosecutors have said Giuliani might have acted as an unregistered foreign agent, which was the basis for the agents’ search. Giuliani, a former mayor of New York who also once headed the prosecutor’s office that now has him under a microscope, has denied any wrongdoing. Giuliani has also attracted the attention of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, which issued a subpoena to the Trump ally this week. In his statement announcing the subpoena of Giuliani and three other Trump lawyers, committee chairman Bennie Thompson said each person had “advanced unsupported theories about election fraud, pushed efforts to overturn the election results, or were in direct contact with the former President about attempts to stop the counting of electoral votes”. Meanwhile, the National Archives has turned over hundreds of pages of documents from the Trump administration to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, per Guardian contributor Hugo Lowell. The news comes two days after the US supreme court rejected Donald Trump’s request to block the release of the documents based off claims of executive privilege. The newly released documents are expected to include call logs, daily presidential diaries, handwritten notes and memos from Trump’s top aides. In the heady days between Donald Trump’s defeat in November 2020 and the 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol, an executive order was prepared. It commanded the defense secretary to seize voting machines in battleground states, as part of Trump’s “big lie” that the vote was rigged. The draft executive order, obtained and published by Politico, was never sent and its author is unknown. It was part of a cache of documents handed over to the House committee investigating the 6 January violence, after the supreme court ruled this week that Trump could not shield himself from oversight on grounds of executive privilege. The disclosure of the draft order adds to evidence of the lengths to which Trump and his close advisers were prepared to go to keep him in the White House, against the will of the American people. Under the draft order, the defense secretary would have been required to carry out an assessment of the voting machines “no later than 60 days from commencement of operations”. Read the Guardian’s full report: In case you missed it yesterday: the US supreme court declined to expedite the case over Texas’ abortion law, which bans the procedure as early as six weeks into pregnancy. The AP reports: Over dissents from the three liberal justices, the court declined to order a federal appeals court to return the case to a federal judge who had temporarily blocked the law’s enforcement. The court offered no explanation for its action. The Texas ban is thus likely to remain in effect for the foreseeable future, following a decision by the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans to send the case to the Texas Supreme Court, which is entirely controlled by Republican justices and does not have to act immediately. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, also marked the 49th anniversary of Roe v Wade during her daily briefing this afternoon. “Reproductive health care has been under extreme and relentless assault ever since [Roe was decided], especially in recent months,” Psaki said. The press secretary noted it had been nearly 150 days since the Texas abortion law, which bans the procedure as early as six weeks into pregnancy, went into effect. “We’re deeply committed to making sure everyone has access to care and we will defend it with every tool we have,” Psaki said. Psaki added that the Biden administration is continuing its efforts with Congress to codify Roe v Wade into law, but that goal will be extremely difficult (if not impossible) to achieve with Democrats’ current narrow majorities in the House and Senate. The theme of this year’s March for Life was “equality begins in the womb.” Organizers wrapped their speeches in the rhetoric of the social justice movement, arguing that abortion was anathema to racial and gender equality. Jeanne Mancini, president of the March for Life Education and Defense Fund, decried Roe v Wade decision handed down by an all-male majority on the supreme court in 1973. “Murder is not a women’s right,” read one sign carried by a young man in a Donald Trump beanie. Another popular sign read “BLM = Babies Lives Matter.” A memo by reproductive rights organization Naral accused the anti-abortion movement of “co-opting social justice rhetoric in order to make its extreme agenda appear more palatable.” “In this critical moment for the future of reproductive freedom, we must call out the anti-choice movement’s fake ‘feminism’ for what it is: a tactic for maintaining white, patriarchal control,” it read. It’s Roe’s 49th anniversary this weekend. Abortion opponents are hopeful it’ll be the last. At the annual March for Life demonstration in D.C., anti-abortion activists were optimistic the Supreme Court will soon overturn Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 decision that established a woman’s right to abortion access. “We are hoping and praying that this year, 2022, will bring a historic change for life,” Jeanne Mancini, president of the March for Life Education and Defense Fund, said. The crowd for the march was tens of thousands strong, and attendees waved signs that read: “I am the post-Roe generation” and “the future is anti-abortion.” Speaking at the rally, Congressman Chris Smith, a Republican from New Jersey, said there was “fresh hope and heightened expectations” that a new conservative-supermajority on the Supreme Court would reverse Roe, overturning nearly half a century of precedent on abortion rights. In his speech at the US Conference of Mayors’ meeting, Joe Biden also announced a new partnership with state and local governments aimed at lowering greenhouse gas emissions from buildings. The Hill has more details on the initiative: According to a White House fact sheet first shared with The Hill, the partnership will include 33 state and local governments that encompass 20 percent of the country’s building footprint and 22 percent of its population. The fact sheet said that the initiative will ‘unlock energy efficiency and electrification across the buildings sector as an engine for job creation all while lowering energy bills for consumers.’ The goal of the coalition is to advance legislation or regulation in each local or state jurisdiction by Earth Day 2024. Joe Biden once again emphasized the need to pass the Build Back Better Act, Democrats $1.75tn spending package that includes significant investments in childcare, healthcare and climate initiatives. The president said the bill would also establish a more just tax system in the US, arguing it was time for the wealthiest Americans to pay their “fair share” in taxes. “Raise your hand if you think the present tax structure is fair. And we’ll take a picture of you and send it home,” Biden joked, prompting laughs from the crowd at the US Conference of Mayors’ meeting. The Build Back Better Act has stalled in the Senate due to opposition from Democrat Joe Manchin, but there were signs of renewed energy to restart negotiations this week. The president closed his remarks with his standard pitch about American resilience, and he applauded the mayors’ work for their cities and towns. “Keep it going, folks. We need you badly,” Biden told the mayors. Joe Biden is now speaking at the US Conference of Mayors’ 90th annual winter meeting in Washington, touting the accomplishments of his first year in office. The president specifically celebrated the passage of the bipartisan infrastructure bill, which he signed into law in November. Biden also addressed reiterated his position on the need to increase funding for police departments, a stance that is at odds with many progressives in his party. “We shouldn’t be cutting funding for police departments,” Biden said. “I proposed increasing funding.” New DOJ elections threat taskforce makes first arrest after Texas man makes alleged death threats A special Justice Department unit created to combat threats against election officials made its first arrest on Friday after a man allegedly posted threats online against Georgia election workers. Chad Stark, a 54 year-old resident of Texas, was arrested by law enforcement after officials allege he posted a message on Craigslist on 5 January 2021 saying that he wanted “Georgia Patriots” to kill several election officials. Stark was charged with one count of communicating interstate threats, which has a maximum sentence of five years in prison. He is expected to make his first appearance in an Austin, Texas court on Friday afternoon. Stark’s arrest marks the first criminal case brought by this interagency election threats taskforce. The unit was created in June 2021 under the Biden administration to help address a rise in threats to election workers following the 2020 presidential election. “The Justice Department has a responsibility not only to protect the right to vote, but also to protect those who administer our voting systems from violence and illegal threats of violence,” said Attorney General Merrick Garland. Michael Flynn allies allegedly plotted to lean on Republicans to back vote audits Peter Stone reports for the Guardian: FBI agents and the House panel investigating the January 6 attack on the Capitol have both learned of an alleged plan by allies of retired army Lt Gen Michael Flynn to gather “intelligence” on top Republicans to “move” them to back election audits in key states Trump lost, said ex-whistleblower Everett Stern who talked to the panel and the FBI. Stern, who runs the intelligence firm Tactical Rabbit and is a Republican vying for a Senate seat in Pennsylvania, in multiple interviews with the Guardian said two Flynn associates with the rightwing Patriot Caucus group enlisted his help in April in a scheme to seek potentially damaging information on two Republican members of Congress to prod them to back an audit of the 2020 vote that Joe Biden won. Stern told the Guardian he spent several hours in November telling House panel investigators about the alleged drive by Flynn associates who sought campaign finance and other dirt on Pennsylvania’s Senator Pat Toomey and Congressman Brian Fitzpatrick to win their support for an audit to bolster Trump’s debunked charges that Biden’s win was fraudulent.’ See the full story below ... Here’s where the day stands so far: Democrats are attempting to revive their Build Back Better Act, a month after Senator Joe Manchin announced he would oppose the legislation. Joe Biden said on Wednesday, “I’m confident we can get pieces, big chunks of the Build Back Better law signed into law.” Manchin has said Democrats will be “starting from scratch” in their negotiations. The US said Biden is “fully prepared” to hold a summit with Vladimir Putin, as fears intensify over a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine. US secretary of state Antony Blinken met with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva today to continue the two countries’ discussions over Ukraine. Biden delivered remarks on the need to boost US production of semiconductors, which power everything from cell phones to electrical grids. During the event, the CEO of Intel announced his company would invest more than $20bn in a semiconductor production facility in Ohio. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. A reporter asked Jen Psaki whether the White House believes certain provisions of the Build Back Better Act could attract the support of 10 Senate Republicans to overcome a potential filibuster. “You tell me,” Psaki replied. “Is there a proposal where there are 10 Republicans? I’m not aware of one.” The question comes two days after Joe Biden expressed confidence that “big chunks” of the Build Back Better Act could still get enacted. That sparked questions about whether the bill would be split into several components, but that would likely mean those proposals would not be eligible for passage via reconciliation, which allows Democrats to circumvent the Senate filibuster. Psaki seemed to indicate Democrats were still focused on passing a package via reconciliation, saying, “What the president was talking about is, we have 50 votes in the Senate. We’re going to get as much -- a big, mountain-sized chunk, whatever you want to call it -- as much as we can of the Build Back Better agenda that we can get 50 votes for.” The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, is now holding her daily briefing with reporters, and she is answering questions about the Biden administration’s talks with Russia amid concerns of a potential invasion of Ukraine. Secretary of state Antony Blinken met with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, in Geneva today to continue the discussions over Ukraine. Psaki said that Blinken communicated Russia would suffer “swift and severe consequences” if President Vladimir Putin launches an invasion. The press secretary added that, while there were no major breakthroughs in the talks today, the US is still urging Russia to pursue a path of “dialogue and diplomacy”. “It is up to them to decide which path they are going to choose,” Psaki said. “We are on a clearer path to understanding each other’s concerns.” Joe Biden and Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida discussed the importance of the US-Japanese alliance and potential responses to Russian aggression during their virtual meeting this morning, the White House said. “The President commended Prime Minister Kishida’s strong commitment to the U.S.-Japan Alliance, and his determination to fundamentally strengthen Japan’s defense capabilities to reinforce deterrence against common threats,” the White House said in its readout of the meeting. “The leaders committed to work closely together to deter Russian aggression against Ukraine, and Prime Minister Kishida pledged to continue close coordination with the United States, other Allies and partners, and the international community on taking strong action in response to any attack.” The White House also noted that Biden “welcomed Prime Minister Kishida’s invitation to visit Japan for the next Quad Leaders Meeting in the first half of 2022”. Joe Biden initially indicated he would not take any questions from reporters, out of concern that it would shift focus away from Intel’s announcement about its new semiconductor facility in Ohio. “You guys will ask me all about Russia and not about anything having to do with chips,” Biden said. But one reporter was able to ask the president a question regarding today’s announcement, specifically about how the US will source raw materials to produce semiconductor chips when much of those materials come from countries like Afghanistan. “There’s a lot not in Afghanistan,” Biden said. He added that the US is pursuing research to identify new sources of raw materials, including some potential locations within the country. With that, Biden walked away from the podium without taking any additional questions. Joe Biden celebrated Intel’s announcement that it will invest more than $20bn to build a semiconductor production facility in Ohio. “To be able to say ‘made in Ohio,’ ‘made in America,’ what we used to always be able to say 25, 30 years ago -- that’s what this is about,” Biden said. The president noted that semiconductors power “virtually everything in our lives,” including cell phones, cars and electrical grids. Biden argued investments like Intel’s will allow the US to pursue a “stiff economic and technological competition” with China, which has dedicated significant resources to building up its domestic semiconductor industry. “I think we’re better positioned than any nation -- any nation -- to seize these opportunities,” Biden said. “And I think our best days are ahead of us.” Joe Biden is now hosting an event on the need to boost US production of semiconductors, and he is joined by Intel CEO Pat Gelsinger and commerce secretary Gina Raimondo. Gelsinger announced that Intel will invest more than $20bn to build a “megasite” in Ohio dedicated to producing semiconductor chips. Ohio’s two senators, Democrat Sherrod Brown and Republican Rob Portman, are present for the event as well, and Gelsinger thanked them for their support. Gelsinger said a semiconductor factory is really more like a “small city” that will serve as a “magnet for the entire tech industry”. “And all of this is creating new jobs,” Gelsinger said. Meanwhile, Joe Biden met with Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida this morning to “advance our shared vision for a free and open Indo-Pacific,” per the president’s official schedule. Biden shared a picture of the meeting on Twitter, saying, “It was an honor to meet with Prime Minister Kishida to further strengthen the U.S.-Japan Alliance — the cornerstone of peace and security in the Indo-Pacific and around the world.” During the talks in Geneva, US secretary of state Antony Blinken told Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, that the White House still hopes to deescalate tensions along Ukraine’s border before an invasion occurs. “In my meeting with Foreign Minister Lavrov today, I stressed that Russia has two choices: Diplomacy and de-escalation or massive costs to Russia. Our strong preference is to pursue the path of diplomacy,” Blinken said on Twitter. Joe Biden sent a similar message yesterday, saying he has warned Putin that his country will suffer massive economic consequences if he approves an invasion. “I’ve been absolutely clear with President Putin. He has no misunderstanding. If any -- any -- assembled Russian units move across the Ukrainian border, that is an invasion,” Biden said. “Let there be no doubt at all that if Putin makes this choice, Russia will pay a heavy price.” The Guardian’s Julian Borger and Patrick Wintour report: The US has said that Joe Biden is “fully prepared” to hold a summit with Vladimir Putin if it would be useful in lessening the threat to Ukraine posed by a continuing Russian build up of troops. The US secretary of state, Tony Blinken, also said Washington and its allies were ready to respond in writing next week to Russian demands on the future of Nato and European security, which Moscow has said must be addressed to avoid it taking “military measures”. But Blinken repeated the US and Nato position there could still be no compromise on the central issue of the right of Ukraine and other countries to join Nato in the future. The offer of a summit came after talks between Blinken and his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov in Geneva, as a weeks-long standoff over Ukraine teeters on the cusp of a pivotal and potentially violent phase, with rising concerns that Europe may again be beset by war. In his remarks to the press afterwards, Blinken stressed it had not been a negotiation but a “candid exchange of concerns and ideas”, which had been “frank and substantive” and should lead to further talks. Read the Guardian’s full report: Despite the hurdles that a revamped Build Back Better Act would face, there seems to be some growing consensus among Democrats that the bill should focus on addressing climate change, extending Obamacare subsidies and establishing free prekindergarten. “I remain very optimistic that we can get big pieces of the plan over the finish line, including reducing the price of prescription drugs, expanding opportunity with early education, making child care more affordable [and] addressing the climate crisis,” Democratic Senator Chris Van Hollen told the Washington Post. At this point, it seems unlikely that Democrats will be able to resurrect the expanded Child Tax Credit program, which expired at the end of 2021. Joe Manchin has expressed concern about the price tag of the Build Back Better Act, and the expanded Child Tax Credit program would cost about $1.6tn for the next ten years if it were made permanent. (The House-passed version of the Build Back Better Act only calls for extending the program for one year.) Joe Biden marked one year in office yesterday, and the president is struggling to enact his legislative agenda with narrow majorities in the House and Senate. On Wednesday, Senate Republicans were able to block Democrats’ voting rights bill by using the filibuster, which requires 60 votes for most proposals to advance. Senate Democrats then tried to amend the filibuster to create a carveout for voting rights bills, but that effort failed because two of their own members, Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, joined Republicans in opposing the suggested change. The failures have sparked questions over whether Biden should revamp his White House staff as he enters his second year in office. NBC News reports: From inside the administration, some officials express concern that [White House chief of staff Ron Klain] ‘micromanages’ the West Wing and gives outsize credence to cable news and social media. Some former colleagues and longtime Biden allies fret that advice they used to offer Biden directly isn’t getting through. And on Capitol Hill, Klain has been a favorite target for Democrats, and especially Republicans, who say Biden has drifted too far to the left. ... The main criticisms of Klain, whether from current or former Biden staff members or those who consider themselves allies of the president, flow from a single idea: that Biden has strayed from his core brand as a pragmatic, empathetic politician who won the Democratic nomination as a moderate willing to compromise. They see Klain as the person responsible for that. His ubiquitous presence on Twitter has solidified that view, particularly for those who see it as being out of step with a 2020 campaign that deliberately tuned out cable news pundits and ‘blue checks’ on social media. At her press conference yesterday, a reporter asked House speaker Nancy Pelosi about Joe Biden’s comment that Democrats will be able to pass “big chunks” of the Build Back Better Act. “Well, let me just say, ‘chunks’ is an interesting word,” Pelosi replied. She added, “I’m sure that we can agree upon something significant. Call it a chunk if you want. But, whatever you call it, we want it to be able to make a difference in transforming the workplace by honoring work, by respecting the fact that there are families that have to make decisions between home and work, and, again, protecting the planet.” However, Pelosi emphasized that the bill will still need to be passed via reconciliation in order to avoid a filibuster in the Senate, which may make it more difficult to split it up into multiple components. “There are big chunks of the bill that have to be contained in the bill,” Pelosi said. “But remember this. This is a reconciliation bill. So when people say let’s divide it up – nah. No, they don’t understand the process.” Greetings, live blog readers. Democrats are attempting to revive components of their Build Back Better Act, the $1.75tn spending package that includes massive investments in childcare, healthcare and climate initiatives. A version of the bill passed the House, but the legislation stalled in the Senate after Joe Manchin announced his opposition last month. Now, Manchin seems open to the idea of restarting the negotiations over the bill, telling reporters yesterday, “We’ll just be starting from scratch.” Manchin’s comments came after Joe Biden voiced confidence that Democrats will be able to get some of the bill’s most significant provisions signed into law. “I’m confident we can get pieces, big chunks of the Build Back Better law signed into law,” the president said at his press conference on Wednesday. However, the changes that Manchin will likely demand may spark criticism among progressives in Congress, and Democrats can afford very few defections if they want to get a bill across the finish line. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.William Blake said “Great things are done when Men and Mountains meet”, and the capitalisation seems telling; while there are female mountaineers, there is something hyper-masculine about the idea of conquering mountains. In his classic memoir, Touching the Void, Joe Simpson talks candidly of his addiction to the thrill of mountain climbing, and the strange pull towards danger that comes from “too much testosterone and too little imagination”. The book became famous when it was published in 1988, and then the docudrama that came in 2003 made Simpson and his fellow climber Simon Yates even more famous. Certainly, it was an extraordinary tale of grit and survival; two climbers in impossible danger, a shattered leg, a drop, a body hanging from a rope. That rope became a kind of talismanic representation of human connection, and the decision to cut it – ostensibly sending a fellow climber to his death – chillingly underlined its limits. A stage adaptation of a story that takes place entirely on the top of a mountain in the Andes begs the question of how, but more important is the question of why. What attracted playwright David Greig to this story, and what did he think a stage version could tell us that hadn’t been told before? It would be informative to ask him, because the play doesn’t provide satisfactory answers. The central alteration Greig makes is the introduction of Joe’s sister Sarah (Lucy Durack), who opens the play with a speech she gives at the pub hosting Joe’s wake. Attending are Joe’s climbing partner Simon (Kevin Hofbauer) and the man who looked after their tents back at base camp, Richard (Karl Richmond). As the three drink and mourn, as Sarah punctures the men’s grandiloquence and reaches for details of her brother’s fate, Joe (Joe Klocek) himself appears like an apparition. The story of the climb and the fall slowly reveals itself, as an adventure story in its own right and as a means of exorcising ghosts. But Greig has a trick up his sleeve. What becomes clear is that Sarah isn’t conjuring Joe; rather Joe, trapped and alone on the mountain, is conjuring Sarah. The wake is a mere hallucination, Joe’s imagined end to a life still hanging literally in the balance, and his sister becomes a phantom guide to get him through. This may have struck the playwright as an ingenious device, a way of taking the book’s relentless interiority and making it external and therefore the stuff of stage drama. But the effect is strangely inert, and intellectually thin. In Simpson’s own version, a voice from within keeps him alive and moving; here it’s his good old sister Sarah, cheering him along like an overzealous life coach. If the playwright thought the introduction of Sarah would help balance the gender disparity at the heart of the story, he needed to give her some inner life. As it stands, and despite Durack’s earthy charm and welcome cynicism, Sarah is merely an adjunct to the men and, as the play progresses, dangerously close to the manic pixie girl trope. Worse, because she accompanies Joe throughout his ordeal, that existential terror of being alone – the void at the centre of the story – fails to register. Director Petra Kalive seems more at home with the play’s lighter moments, its casual humour and breezy banter, than she is with the tilt into awe; she struggles to wrestle the tonal shifts into something cogent and affecting. Andrew Bailey’s monumental set, with its mountain made of strips of metal, is clever and suggestive, and Katie Sfetkidis’s lighting is brilliantly effective. The mountain seems to shift from snow-capped peaks to rocky moraines simply with a change in the light. The cast are admirably physical and committed, even if they never seem particularly stretched (mountain climbing aside). Klocek is a winning Joe, avuncular even when most tortured, and Hofbauer is suitably pained as the climber who carries the guilt. Best of all is Richmond, who brings enormous amounts of charm and depth to a character who could easily become irritating. Why people feel compelled to climb impossible summits for fun is anyone’s guess, but at least Simpson’s own telling grappled meaningfully with the grand questions of life and death. Greig’s version feels depressingly lightweight, glib and avoidant. Perhaps adaptation isn’t for him; he wrote the appalling stage adaptation of Stanislaw Lem’s Solaris for Malthouse Theatre a few years ago. Blake may have been right about great things happening when men and mountain meet, but not in this iteration.Three Canadian visitors have been shot by a lone gunman in their hotel in the Mexican resort town of Playa del Carmen – in an attack security officials are calling targeted and alleging involved individuals with criminal records. One of the tourists died of their injuries while being transported to hospital following the incident on Friday, according to the Quintana Roo state public security secretary, Lucio Hernández Gutiérrez, who confirmed the nationality of the victims. The state prosecutor’s office later tweeted that a second Canadian had died of their injuries. The first person who died – identified as ATCH – “had a criminal record: drug trafficking, use of a false identity, among other things”, the office said. ATCH “was considered a very dangerous person in Canada”, state prosecutor Óscar Montes de Oca Rosales told Radio Fórmula. The second deceased victim, RJD, “also had a criminal history”, according to the prosecutor’s office. Information shared on social media showed a lone attacker dressed in a grey tracksuit and brandishing a pistol on the grounds of the Xcaret hotel. A video posted on Twitter showed people shrieking as a victim received first aid. The video later panned to show two more victims lying wounded by the pool – one heavily bleeding. “He’s still breathing,” one person could be heard saying amid the chaos. The attacker escaped into the thick tropical vegetation surrounding Xcaret – which is famed for its theme parks on the Riviera Maya – and remains at large. Hernández Gutiérrez said the shooting “stemmed from an argument between hotel guests”. Global Affairs Canada said in a short statement it is “aware of reports that Canadian citizens have been affected by an incident in Mexico”. The attack at a luxury hotel compound comes amid a string of shootouts on the Yucatan peninsula’s Mayan Riviera, which have killed or injured tourists who were caught in the crossfire. A team of at least 10 gunmen stormed a beach at a luxury hotel near Cancún in November, killing a person linked to a rival faction and dragging away another person trying to hide. A Californian travel blogger and a German tourist were killed in October at a restaurant in Tulum, south of Playa del Carmen, during a shootout between suspected gang members. The region draws in millions of tourists annually – including during the coronavirus pandemic as Mexico has imposed no Covid tests or vaccination requirements for travellers. But many of Mexico’s major drug cartels are disputing the region, where they run extortion rackets and deal drugs to tourists. State officials have blamed the rising violence on disputes over drug dealing – with foreign tourists being the biggest buyers.Shaun White was one of four defending gold medalists named to the US snowboarding team Friday, along with Chloe Kim, Jamie Anderson and Red Gerard. Only White had to sweat out his spot on the team after a difficult month of qualifying that included a bout with Covid-19 and an injured ankle. He finished third last week at a World Cup halfpipe contest in Switzerland to eliminate any doubt about his spot, and the US Ski and Snowboard team made it official when they announced the 26-person team. Kim won the gold in women’s halfpipe in 2018, while Anderson and Gerard won in slopestyle. Lindsey Jacobellis, the 2006 silver medalist, made her fifth Olympics in snowboardcross and Alex Diebold, the wax technician-turned-2014 bronze medalist, is back at the games. The rest of the team: Maddie Mastro, Zoe Kalapos, Tessa Maud (women’s halfpipe). Taylor Gold, Chase Josey, Lucas Foster (men’s halfpipe). Hailey Langland, Julia Marino, Courtney Rummel (women’s slopestyle/big air). Dusty Henricksen, Chris Corning, Arvada, Colorado Sean FitzSimons (men’s slopestyle/big air). Faye Gulini, Stacy Gaskill, Meghan Tierney (women’s snowboardcross). Nick Baumgartner, Hagen Kearney, Alex Deibold, Mick Dierdorff (men’s snowboardcross). Robby Burns, Cody Winters (men’s parallel giant slalom)It is impossible, at least for me, to watch a documentary on Sinéad O’Connor and not be impacted knowing that her 17-year-old son has just died by apparent suicide, and she herself, as I write this, is hospitalized after sending suicidal tweets. Naturally, this was not the case when this project was being produced, and, logically speaking, these outside factors should have no bearing on my critical appraisal of this film. But Sinéad O’Connor didn’t become an international sensation by following the roads of logic. A very in-your-face emotionalism has always been her stock in trade. One can trace her early years, at least as I encountered her in the United States, with three distinct acts. Her first hit music video was initially shocking, debuting O’Connor’s revelatory genderfluid look, but the song, I Want Your (Hands On Me), is far from fiery and abrasive, indeed nothing but catchy and sensual, as a lover’s call should be. Her eternal smash Nothing Compares 2 U remains one of pop music’s rawest, empathetic, most heartbreaking tracks. (Crying in the video didn’t hurt either.) Then there was the moment of righteous rage, ripping up a photo of Pope John Paul II on Saturday Night Live. Director Kathryn Ferguson has decided to cover, in vivid and exciting detail, O’Connor’s miserable upbringing, her overnight success, and her head-on collision with the sensationalist press and a fickle public. And that’s it. While the documentary does thread a recent interview in voiceover, and there is a closing credits tag of a modern performance, Nothing Compares is simply more about the Sinéad you already know. But a critic’s original sin is to review the movie you want to see, not the movie that exists. To that end, with expectations managed, Nothing Compares is a quite engaging document. In it, one will find remarkable footage of Sinéad, new to London in 1985, in rehearsals with her early band. She appears like a stick of dynamite in these washed-out videos, recorded in a small room with brick walls, her voice cartwheeling in pitch and volume, smiling to her bandmates, finding her footing, and unable to keep still. It’s incredible. Counterbalancing these moments of joy is the deep dive into her abusive childhood. The cruelty she felt at her mother’s hands, for which Sinéad mostly blames the cycle of violence perpetuated by an Irish society in the grips of the Catholic Church, is represented in artfully re-enacted glimpses, though discussed in vivid detail. A sequence describing the origin of the song Troy explains how young Sinéad was forced to live, day-and-night for an entire summer, in the garden behind her house, with her mother ignoring her cries from a lit window. To this day, she is triggered by the onset of dusk, as it reminds her of another oncoming night where she may not be let back in the house. One comes away from Nothing Compares fully understanding that this was an artist that really did have nothing to lose. When she acted indelicately in the United States, she wasn’t looking for trouble, this was just a person already so troubled that there was no point in her playing a publicity game. Some may have forgotten that before her Saturday Night Live moment in 1992, there was a huge scandal after refusing to let the state-funded Garden State Arts Center in New Jersey play a tape of the American national anthem before her show, as was customary. (That facility is now the PNC Bank Arts Center, this is no longer an issue.) It is appalling to see the frothing, reactionary news clips to O’Connor’s simple request that the song not be played. It’s a reminder that pig-headed, posturing tough guys weren’t an invention of the Trump administration. Old interviews with Ireland’s Gay Byrne of the Late, Late Show have much more tact, but are no less condescending. O’Connor’s call to “fight the real enemy” on SNL is shown in full, and another thing I did not know is that the photo she used was one that once belonged to her mother. Sinéad didn’t do anything that wasn’t rich with meaning. The incident was soon followed up with an appearance at Bobfest, a concert at Madison Square Garden for Bob Dylan’s 30th anniversary as a recording artist, in which she was scheduled to sing I Believe in You. She was met with a barrage of boos and applause, and since I Believe in You is a quiet song she knew she had to pivot. She belted out Bob Marley’s War (as she did on SNL) a cappella, then sobbed in Kris Kristofferson’s arms. Nothing Compares is essentially bookended by this moment, and presents it as both a triumph and tragic climax. She looked at the abyss and fought back. She didn’t let the bastards get her down (as Kristofferson said quietly on stage) but she did, ultimately, retreat from the public sphere. It remains unclear if this was her choice, or because the press and mainstream society was just done with her. This is something for the next Sinéad O’Connor documentary to investigate. Nothing Compares is showing at the Sundance film festival and will be released later this year In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.In 1974, on the first anniversary of the Roe v Wade supreme court decision, abortion opponents gathered on the National Mall in Washington to “march for life”. They vowed to return each year until the ruling, which established the right to abortion, was no longer the law of the land. On Friday, anti-abortion activists from across the country braved sub-zero temperatures and the coronavirus pandemic to assemble in Washington, more hopeful than ever that this would be their last march to a court where the fate of Roe will soon be decided. “We are hoping and praying that this year, 2022, will bring a historic change for life,” Jeanne Mancini, president of the March for Life Education and Defense Fund, told a crowd tens of thousands strong and waving signs that read “I am the post-Roe generation” and “The future is anti-abortion”. Praising followers for standing against what she called the “single-most critical rights abuse of our time”, Mancini said they sent a clear message to the supreme court: “Roe is not settled law.” Chris Smith, a Republican congressman from New Jersey, described the mood as one of “fresh hope and heightened expectations”. The court’s conservative supermajority appears open to reversing Roe, thereby overturning nearly 50 years of precedent since the 1973 decision. “There’s optimism in the air, there is a sense that a significant hurdle to protect the unborn is about to move,” he said. The rally took place a day before the 49th anniversary of the Roe decision. The theme of the march, also in its 49th year, was “equality begins in the womb.” Speakers told rally-goers that their cause was bound up with the struggles for racial justice and gender equality and described abortion as “the ultimate form of discrimination”. The march typically draws about 100,000 abortion opponents by the busload to Washington. But this year’s march took place amid a wave of Omicron infections in the nation’s capital that limited turnout. Some activists said on social media they would not attend because of a new mandate in Washington requiring anyone over the age of 12 to show vaccination proof before entering restaurants, conference centers and other public places. Still, the event attracted a large and enthusiastic crowd, priests, pastors and busloads of high school students, among them. Together after the rally they marched to the supreme court singing hymns and chanting “Hey hey, ho ho, Roe v Wade has got to go!” The jubilant demonstration comes as the supreme court reviews a case involving a Mississippi law which bans abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy, a direct challenge to Roe. At oral arguments, several members of the court’s conservative bloc appeared open to not only upholding the ban, but to overruling Roe entirely. A decision is expected by the end of June, months before the midterm elections. “We’ve been building to this moment,” said Victoria Cobb, president of the Family Foundation of Virginia who spoke on a virtual panel organized by the March. Her group was active in helping confirm Amy Coney Barrett to the supreme court, part of a decades-long legal strategy by abortion opponents to remake the nation’s federal court system. “We heard justices say that precedent shouldn’t be upheld if it was incorrectly decided in the first place,” Cobb said. “That’s a big deal.” Several Republican lawmakers appeared on stage and virtually to voice their unwavering support for the anti-abortion cause, declaring that the movement was “winning this battle”. Last year, states enacted more than 100 new abortion restrictions, a record, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a research organization that supports reproductive rights and tracks state-level legislation. The group has called 2021 “the worst year for abortion rights in almost half a century”, and estimates that 26 US states are “certain or likely” to immediately ban abortion if Roe is overturned. And conservative states are already laying the groundwork for new restrictions as fights over issues like telemedicine and abortion pills gain momentum. Though the anti-abortion movement has made significant legal and policy gains in recent decades, public opinion polls have consistently found that a majority of Americans believe abortion should be legal in all or some circumstances. “If Roe falls, the battle lines will change,” Mancini said. “But make no mistake, the fight for life will need to continue in the states.” Kelly and Greg King, a married couple from Los Angeles, who were attending the event for a third time, said the supreme court decision would likely push their state to expand abortion access. They worry about plans to make California a “sanctuary” for out-of-state patients seeking reproductive care in a post-Roe legal landscape. Clear-eyed about the state’s progressive politics, Kelly King said she would focus her efforts on “changing hearts” rather than changing policy. “Abortion has become … ” Kelly King said, searching for the word. “Normalized,” her husband chimed in. “Yes, normalized,” she said. “That’s the problem.” Hours before marchers arrived on the National Mall, the supreme court declined to accelerate a legal challenge to a Texas law that has effectively banned abortions in the second-largest state. Yet among the speakers, there were few references to that victory or to the Texas law, which is deeply unpopular, including among Republicans. Pro-choice supporters also marked the anniversary, using the occasion to “sound the alarm” on the threat posed to reproductive rights. Mini Timmaraju, the president of NARAL Pro-Choice America, warned that a “small but vocal minority” was “determined to undermine the will of the majority of people in this country who support reproductive freedom”. “They falsely claim to be supporters of ‘equality’ all while working ardently to block abortion access and end the legal right to abortion,” she said in a statement. “Make no mistake – this movement’s end goals would only criminalize and endanger people based on pregnancy outcomes, furthering inequality.” At the White House, press secretary Jen Psaki noted the anniversary of Roe v Wade during her press briefing, saying that “reproductive healthcare has been under extreme and relentless assault ever since, especially in recent months”. She said the Biden administration was committed to working with Congress to pass federal legislation essentially enshrining into law a woman’s right to an abortion. The Democratic-controlled House passed the bill last year, but it remains stalled in the Senate, where it faces a Republican filibuster. “We’re deeply committed to making sure everyone has access to care and we will defend it with every tool we have,” Psaki said. At the rally, the presence of Make America Great Again hats was a reminder of the mutually beneficial relationship forged between Christian conservatives and Donald Trump, who became the first sitting president to attend the event in 2020. As they gathered, Trump voiced his allegiance: “As you gather together today for the March for Life, I am with you in spirit!” While many of the speakers anticipated the end of Roe, several demonstrators said they would continue to attend future marches until its mission “to make abortion unthinkable” was achieved. “I just pray every year that this is the last year we’re here,” said Janice LePage, who works for the youth ministry in the Archdiocese of St Louis. “I’m praying that the following year will be a march of celebration.”Late last year, Pablo Ortez quit his job, sold his belongings and prepared to join his wife in Japan, where she is studying for a doctorate. But 72 hours before he was due to leave Argentina, he checked the Japanese foreign ministry website to find that the government had imposed a near-blanket travel ban to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus. “I called the Japanese embassy and they said I couldn’t fly,” said Ortez, who has moved in with his mother and does not know when he will be able to join his wife, whom he has not seen since she visited Argentina last April. The 33-year-old is one of tens of thousands of people with plans to study, work or join relatives in Japan who now find themselves “locked out” of a country that has maintained some of the world’s strictest travel restrictions throughout the pandemic. The latest measures, imposed at the end of November, apply to all arrivals except Japanese citizens and returning foreign residents – new students, guest workers, technical interns and, in some cases, the foreign spouses and children of Japanese nationals. Lewis Hussey had set his heart on studying in Japan before he graduates from university this summer. But the travel ban means the Missouri-based student has had to drastically rethink his plans. “It’s incredibly disappointing,” Hussey, 26, said. “There have been times when it looked like Japan was about to open up, and then it didn’t. It’s frustrating because I could have considered other places. I feel like I’ve been cheated out of the opportunity to study abroad because of the inconsistent and nonsensical approach of the Japanese government.” The World Health Organization has urged countries not to impose blanket travel bans, warning that they were ineffective in preventing the spread of the virus and created economic and social misery. Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, is unlikely to make significant changes to the border policy, however, after a recent poll showed 88% of the public believed the measure was “appropriate”. But it has not prevented Omicron from taking hold in Japan, which reported a record 46,000 new cases of Covid-19 on Thursday. This weekend, large parts of the country, including Tokyo, will enter a quasi-state of emergency to relieve pressure on health services. Japan has imposed tight travel restrictions throughout the pandemic, with moves to relax them quickly undone by waves of infections driven by new variants. The only exception came last summer, when tens of thousands of athletes, officials and journalists arrived for the Tokyo Olympics. Aware of how mismanagement of the pandemic helped topple his predecessor, Yoshihide Suga, Kishida is hoping that travel restrictions will play well among voters during upper house elections in July. Kishida recently said the ban would be extended until the end of February, but Jade Barry is bracing herself for more delays. The 29-year-old was poised to fulfil her professional ambition of expanding her hairpiece business when the latest ban went into effect, forcing her to drop plans to scout locations in Tokyo for her new outlet. “I was devastated,” Barry said from her home near Chicago. “I cried all day and my kids were wondering what was wrong with mom. “I have been in love with Japan since I was little. Expanding my business there was a way of realising my ultimate goal of starting a life there. I still believe it’s a beautiful country, but to be banned for so long means I feel resentment towards the government.” Stranded students have found little sympathy among Japanese politicians but have received support from some business leaders, who say the ban will stifle innovation and threaten Japan’s long-term interests as more students look to other countries, including economic rivals such as South Korea. Hiroshi Mikitani, chief executive of the e-commerce group Rakuten, has likened the ban to the isolation brought by the sakoku “locked country” policy during the Edo period (1603-1868). On the day Kishida extended the restrictions, Mikitani tweeted: “What is the point of not letting in new foreigners now? Do you want to shut Japan off from the rest of the world?” A letter to Kishida signed this week by hundreds of academics and experts in Japan-US studies, urged his government to relax border controls to allow educators, students and scholars to enter Japan. “They become the bridges between Japan and other societies. They are future policymakers, business leaders and teachers,” the letter said. “They are the foundation of the US-Japan alliance and other international relationships that support Japan’s core national interests. The closure is harming Japan’s national interests and international relationships.” “It’s frustrating,” said Imane, a 20-year-old Canadian student who has waited two years to begin her Japanese-language studies in Tokyo. “It’s been two years of wasting time, waiting for Japan to open its borders. “I love Japan so this is heartbreaking, but I can’t spend my whole life waiting,” added Imane, who preferred to use only her first name. “If Japan doesn’t open its borders this year I’m going to have to look elsewhere.” Her frustrations are shared by Vilhelm, a student from Lithuania, who gets up at 4.30am for online classes in international business studies at a university in Tokyo. “The most frustrating part is that I can see no end to this,” said Vilhelm, who asked that his surname not be used. “I’ve invested in studying in Japan and I feel like it is treating me very unfairly. I still love Japan, but sometimes I forget why.” Barry took to social media to rally students and other stranded people behind a campaign to end the restrictions, with protests outside Japanese embassies planned for later this month. “To have the opportunity to come to Japan ripped away is devastating. And I can’t imagine what it’s like not to be able to see your child because of border restrictions. The uncertainty is no longer acceptable. This is literally ruining people’s lives.” The government responded to mounting criticism by opening the door, if only by a fraction. It will allow 87 students on government scholarships to enter in February, the chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, said last week. But that leaves almost 150,000 others, mostly privately funded, who have been waiting up to two years to begin their studies. They will continue to live in limbo, unsure of when they will be able to begin their new lives in a country that has effectively become a Covid hermit kingdom. “Japan is damaging its soft power and its economy because it is punishing people who have a genuine interest in the country,” Ortez said. “It’s ruining its reputation. This will have long-term consequences for Japan.”Finally, a winter’s day that actually feels like one! Crisp air, blue sky, frost – just what the doctor ordered. For months, it has felt as if the Earth itself has been suffering from a low-grade fever – it was a depressingly record-breaking 16C on New Year’s Day and has been grumbling along in low double figures ever since. Today, though, the icy air quickens the blood, tautens everything with its astringent sting. I want to feel it against my skin, as you might test a knife’s sharpness with your thumb. At Staple Hill, the footpath skirts the edge of conifer plantations: mostly Scots pine, Norway spruce and the occasional magnificent cedar. There are also oaks, beech and silver birch, and under the trees a tussocky jumble of bracken, moss and brambles. The whole area is a delightful patchwork of evergreen and deciduous, straight rows and rambling woodland, tarmacked pathways and animal tracks, open glades and spooky fairytale forests where a gruffalo would feel right at home. The tree trunks look painted in colours squeezed fresh from the tube. A trick of the eye? Surely this much iridescent green belongs in the summer and in the leaves of the canopy, not on the trunks and branches of the naked trees? Lichen reigns supreme at this time of year, in every shade of jade, emerald, pistachio and chartreuse. Each variety is the result of a particular blend of fungus, bacteria and algae. The sun has been out all day, but in the dips and shadows, frost still lingers. Tiny white globules adorn each blade of grass. I pick one up expecting it to crumble, deliquesce or pop, but it stays on the tip of my finger: a pearl of solid water, supercooled dew. I put it in my mouth and it melts deliciously on my tongue. I cross a glade of plantation trees, their tall shadows spreading on the grass as precise as a barcode, and enter the forest. Fallen pine needles cushion the ground, putting a spring in my step. The air is drenched with phytoncides. I can almost feel my immune system bucking up. My walk back is a slow strobe – two steps dark, two steps dazzle – as though the sun has decided this perfect crystal day deserves nothing less than to end in a blaze of glory. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiarySo that’s that then. Unfortunately the weather has put paid to the second game of this Ashes series and the teams will share the spoils - 1 point each. It would of course BE GOOD FOR THE SERIES if England can chalk up a victory in the final T20I tomorrow so that both sides head into the Test match level pegging on 3 points apiece. Otherwise it will be 5-1 Australia and all a bit gloomier than the current skies over Adelaide. Not that Meg Lanning and co will care a jot. It was brief but enjoyable, thanks for you emails and tweets. I for one am all caffeine-d up with nowhere to go. As the ‘old folks’ and B*Witched both said - C’est la vie. We’ll be back tomorrow, fingers crossed for clearer skies. In the meantime, here’s a match report of sorts: I was thinking this: Maybe the forecast was so bad that an early call was best, it’d be nice to think there was a bit of leeway factored in though. The captains are going to say a few words shortly, not sure how much they can offer after that but I’ll keep my ear to the ground for any interesting quote-oids. That’s it. It’s official. Cursed skies. Useful dates and times for the rest of the series A reminder if it is needed that it is 2 points up for grabs in the white ball games and 4 for the solitary Test match. Australia of course are up by 2 after their win in Adelaide a couple of days ago. If they don’t get back on here then the spoils will be shared. 23 Jan 3rd Twenty20 international, Adelaide (03:10 GMT) 27-30 Jan Only Test, Canberra (23:00 GMT, 26-29 Jan) 3 Feb 1st ODI, Canberra (d/n) (03:10 GMT) 6 Feb 2nd ODI, Melbourne (Junction Oval) (23:05 GMT, 5 Feb) 8 Feb 3rd ODI, Melbourne (Junction Oval) The rain falls and the remorseless hands of time keep a’tickin. This is a nice thing though: Tick followed tock followed tick followed tock... Peter Gibbs is on the batphone: “Here in Selsey, (dahn sarf) it is too cold to get out from under the dog and duvet to contemplate any drink. What I WOULD like to know is: What supposed witticisms has anyone out there had to put up with because of their name (and welcome Jim, I’m assuming you get the odd Star Trek clonker).” Cheers and forgive me Peter, the Trek aint my thing so I’m a bit clueless with this one? I can offer up my brother though, who is William Wallace. He was born pre Braveheart. Still. He’s had years of “freeeedom” being bellowed at him from all quarters. It’s been one of those days so far. Hearing that the latest start time is now 3.53pm local time. Which isn’t a long way off. Rain, rain go away. 4th Over: England 25-0 (Beaumont 6, Wyatt 14 ) The players scamper off after 4.1 overs. So we’ve not quite had enough overs to constitute a match, yet. England were trying to force things but the ball was hooping about and Lanning rotated her bowlers, giving them just the one each so that England’s batters couldn’t settle or get into a groove. Hopefully back on soon. 4th Over: England 24-0 (Beaumont 5, Wyatt 7) It is chucking it down. Powerplay over and for now they are staying out there... It’s spitting as Schutt comes into the attack... 3rd Over: England 16-0 (Beaumont 5, Wyatt 7) McGrath into the attack. It gives me chills just to write that. But she serves up a full bunger on leg stump and Tammy Beaumont is not going to miss out on that, dispatched for her first boundary. Beaumont then tries an audacious ramp but fails to connect. There’s six off the over. 2nd Over: England 10-0 (Beaumont 2, Wyatt 7) A nervous start from Darcie Brown, she oversteps slightly and it is a FREE HIT. She’s getting some late swing though and escapes with a dot from it. Wyatt then plops her down the ground and they scamper 3. There’s swing. 1st Over: England 6-0 (Beaumont 1, Wyatt 5) The first four overs are going to be powerplay overs and it only takes Danni Wyatt one ball to get her eye in before she dances down and lifts Gardner over cover for the first four. Luvvly. A couple of singles and it is six off the first. England are away. Here’s those teams confirmed: Australia: Alyssa Healy (wk), Meg Lanning (c), Tahlia McGrath, Rachael Haynes, Ashleigh Gardner, Grace Harris, Nicola Carey, Jessica Jonassen, Alana King, Darcie Brown, Megan Schutt England: Tammy Beaumont, Danni Wyatt, Nat Sciver, Heather Knight (c), Amy Jones (wk), Sophia Dunkley, Katherine Brunt, Charlie Dean, Sophie Ecclestone, Sarah Glenn, Freya Davies We are going to be underway in around ten mins. The 21 year old spinner is set to make her debut in this format. It is 50 caps up for Sophie Ecclestone. Things are getting more exciting eh. Snack chat. Damian Clarke emails in and he’s not messing about: “Morning. Soreen malt loaf, blue Stilton, and Branston. With strong, sweet, black, fresh coffee. Here endeth the lesson.” There’s a lot of cheese being bandied about here for quite an early hour. The overs are reduced. 14 per side as it stands... But hovering nearby - squint and you can see a patch of lighter cloud. My intel is telling me that if there is no further rain the coin toss is scheduled for 2:15pm local time with play beginning at 2:30pm. Play has been reduced to 14 overs a side. The countdown is on. Hopefully the rain does one and we can get a game in... otherwise an hour and 40 minutes of biscuit based chat it could be. Now, this is what I’m here for. You can always trust the good folk of the OBO to rally around in times of need. An email whooshes in from Adrian Armstrong, who is just up the road from me in east London: “Morning Jim, hope this is the first of many. Shame about the rain - nobody wants to be twiddling thumbs at ungodly hours like these. So here’s what I hope might be a decent conversation-starter: what do viewers/readers have with their tea/coffee at times like these, and why? Sweet or savoury? Substantial or morselesque? I have an embarrassment of choice here in east London, and am tossing up between Tunnocks teacakes (did anyone else, other than my wife, call them “preacher’s pumps” as a child?) and mature cheddar.” Sublime Adrian. And could be a lifesaver with this weather knocking about. Preacher’s pumps? mature cheddar?! Fire away! Well this is not good: You might be the first caller dananananananananananadey but you do not bring good news... Apologies - Here’s the link to that piece with Thalia and her ma. READ THIS: A powerful piece with Thalia McGrath and her mum. I’m going to try and fathom what sort of a delay we might be looking at because of the wet stuff / pad through to kitchen to fuel up for some fill time. Here’s quite a bleak picture of a radar: The covers are on and the toss is delayed. Apparently the radar isn’t looking too clever either. Oh. Anyone out there got any local weather knowledge? Is it mizzle or drizzle? Or cats and dogs? I’ll try and get my Michael Fish on. Hello, good afternoon/very early morning and welcome to the second Australia v England T20. The first match in this Ashes series turned into a bit of a cakewalk for Australia, largely thanks to a formidable all-round performance by Tahlia McGrath. With ball in hand McGrath turned the game by prising out both Nat Sciver and Danii Wyatt with a couple of toe-endangering yorkers. She then set about England’s total of 169 with the bat, arriving at first drop to join captain Meg Lanning, the all-rounder went on to produce a quite scintillating innings. A couple of brutally dismissive pull shots have been on a loop in my mind ever since. In notching up 91 runs off 49 balls and snaring 3-26, McGrath became the first player in women’s T20Is to score more than 75 and take three wickets in the same match. Now that’s a STAT. All this whilst shouldering the pressure of coming into the side ostensibly in place of one of the all-time greats… Ellyse Perry could be seen watching on during McGrath’s knock, smiling generously but perhaps a little nervously beneath her sunhat. “I think that’s one of the best innings I’ve ever seen”, Tammi Beaumont - one time teammate of McGrath’s at Adelaide Strikers said afterwards. Much as she admired it, Beaumont and her England teammates won’t want to witness a repeat any time soon. What of England? Well, they looked a little ring rusty in the field, perhaps understandably given the topsy-turvy run up to the series, they’ll be keen as Dijon to get some points on the board from the remaining brace of T20 games ahead of the four-point Test match ding-dong in Canberra next week. Jim here with the call on my maiden voyage aboard the good ship OBO, it’s the wee small hours here in south London so any company, thoughts or theories are very welcome - you can email, tweet or fax* me and let’s see what the next few hours bring. I’ll be back shortly with team and toss news, in the meantime I’m off to grind up some Colombian beans** and try not to wake my nine-month-old in the room next door. Or the 3oo+ month old for that matter… *Kidding of course, I’m still not sure I entirely understand how a fax works? **Alright, alright - it’s instant Kenco.Soya is one of the four main crops that feed the world 60% of its calories, and organic- and biodynamic-certified soya products are just one good way to help encourage better farming practices to build back soil health and plant diversity. Tofu often comes in large blocks that can be hard to get through in one sitting. Firm tofu freezes well – some say it even improves the texture, turning it more meat-like. Silken tofu, however, tends to get coarser when frozen, though it’s still fine to eat. If you have an excess of tofu, use it up in a quick stir-fry, add it to smoothies, whizz it up with olive oil and lemon juice to make vegan mayo, or make this quick and tasty brunch. Tofu rancheros When I lived in Honduras, my go-to-breakfast was huevos rancheros, a spicy and satisfying brunch of eggs served on corn tortillas with salsa fresca, refried beans and guacamole. Here, I’ve made it with silken tofu, which scrambles perfectly and goes wonderfully well with the spicy rancheros sauce. It’s quick to make and a great use of excess tofu. If you like, use fresh jalapeños instead of the dried chillies here – how many depends on your taste and capacity for heat. That said, there are an estimated 4,000 different varieties of chilli now grown in the world, and exploring that diversity helps to promote biodiversity. Although seed diversity is dwindling overall, the agrodiversity of some plant species is increasing as horticulturalists explore new varieties of ingredients. In chillies’ case, these range from the very mild, pop-them-in-your-mouth varieties such as the Spanish poblano or smoky ancho, to the hottest, touch even just the tip of your tongue and blow-your-head-off varieties such as the Carolina reaper, which registers a scorching 2,200,000 on the Scoville heat scale. Keep an eye out for locally grown varieties at farmers’ markets and in box schemes, or check out the likes of theSouth Devon Chilli Farm for mail order. Dried chillies such as guajillo and chipotle can be bought from large supermarkets, delis and online. Serves 2 1 dried guajillo chilli, soaked in water for five minutes, or fresh jalapeño or red chilli to taste 1 dried chipotle chilli, soaked in water for five minutes, or fresh jalapeño or red chilli to taste 1 large tomato, finely chopped ¼ red onion, finely diced 1 small garlic clove, peeled and finely chopped Sea salt and black pepper 120g cooked black beans, cooking liquid saved Virgin or light olive oil 200g organic silken tofu, drained ¼ tsp turmeric 4 sprigs coriander, stalks finely chopped, leaves left whole 4 corn tortillas, to serve Guacamole, to serve First make therancheros sauce. Remove and discard the tops and seeds from the drained soaked chillies, then finely chop the flesh. In a bowl, mix the chillies with the tomato, onion and garlic, then season with sea salt to taste. Reheat the black beans in a little of their cooking liquid, season, mash slightly with a fork, then keep warm until ready to serve. Drain and pat dry the silken tofu, then crumble it into rough pieces so it looks a bit like scrambled eggs. Put a glug of oil in a thick-based frying pan over a medium heat, then gently fry the tofu and turmeric for five minutes. Add half the rancheros sauce and cook, stirring, until heated through. Spoon the tofu and black beans on to the warmed tortillas and serve with the remaining sauce and some guacamole on the side and topped with the coriander.Peering through binoculars, Mykola Chekman pointed to the bridge connecting Ukraine to Russian-controlled Crimea. “It’s not the first time the peninsula has been occupied,” he observed. He added: “Crimea has seen a lot of war.” Chekman – a Ukrainian army photographer – was standing on the castellated tower of what was once a tourist cafe. It is now a base for Ukrainian forces, facing off against their invisible Russian counterparts across a shimmering expanse of water and duck-filled lagoons. The abandoned building is situated in the village of Chonhar in Ukraine’s southern Kherson province. A Ukrainian checkpoint with a blue and yellow flag marks the de facto border with what Moscow considers to be Russia, a ragged group of houses over the bridge. In the east of the country, Russian-backed separatists regularly lob grenades and shoot at their Ukrainian adversaries. The Chonhar frontline, by contrast, is tranquil. A handful of civilians arrive in a white minivan and cross the last section on foot, rolling small cases. Despite this apparent normality Kyiv is taking no chances. Soldiers stand guard in a network of trenches reinforced with wooden pallets. They peer at the enemy through letterbox-style positions, guns at the ready. For now, the only intruder is a ball of tumbleweed. A cold wind blows. The cafe’s tower, reached via a perilous staircase, serves as an observation platform. It is topped with a decorative black finial featuring a Crimea map. On a ground floor wall someone has scrawled: “Putin is a prick”. Nearby, a BTR armoured personnel carrier sat hidden behind a fir tree. “Vladimir Putin dreams of making a land corridor between Russian-occupied territories in the Donbas and Crimea. We won’t let him,” Ivan Arefiev – a military officer – said. He added: “We are ready for whatever happens, including an attack.” There are few obvious signs of a Russian military presence. At night the soldiers say they can hear the roar of enemy tanks as they manoeuvre, concealed behind a small wood. But the stark fact is the Kremlin could advance from here at any time: from land, sea or air. With 100,000 Russian troops now encamped on its borders, Ukraine is surrounded. In the south, Moscow’s armed forces may break out from Crimea and move north and then east along the coast, a flat 250km strip encompassing the Ukrainian ports of Berdyansk and Mariupol. The strategic goal would be to link Crimea to the separatist mini-fiefdoms of Donetsk and Luhansk. Moscow effectively seized these territories in spring 2014, installing and arming local proxies and starting a conflict that has gone on ever since. In the east, Russian tanks may advance across the border towards the Ukrainian city of Kharkiv and smash through the “line of contact” between the separatists and the Ukrainian army. In the west, Russian forces are stationed near to Odessa in Transnistria, a breakaway republic in the east of Moldova. The most ominous developments, meanwhile, are playing out in the north. The Kremlin has moved troops, fighter jets and heavy weapons to Belarus, ahead of what it says are large-scale military exercises next month. Tactical battalions from Russia’s far east have arrived, bringing with them Uragan self-propelled multiple rocket launchers and S-400 air missile defence systems. This formidable attack force is within striking distance of Kyiv and its pro-western government, 200km away. So far talks between Russia and the west including a meeting on Friday between US secretary of state Antony Blinken and Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov have gone nowhere. Russia is demanding a cold war-style zone of influence in eastern Europe and the withdrawal from former Warsaw pact powers of Nato forces. All of which has led the US and its allies to conclude an invasion is imminent – something Joe Biden this week acknowledged to be “likely”. Experts in Kyiv say any Russian incursion would meet massive Ukrainian resistance. “There are currently enough Russian forces on the borders to launch a swift attack and inflict significant losses. But there are not enough forces to win,” Serhii Kuzan, chair of the Ukrainian Security and Cooperation Center, said. Ukraine had 261,000 troops and 400,000 military veterans, as well as surface to air missiles and new antitank weapons delivered this week by the UK, he pointed out. It has mined the coast along the sea of Azov and installed anti-ship missiles. A Russian amphibious landing would incur huge losses, he said. Amid this grim martial backdrop, Chonhar is for the moment a peaceful wildlife haven. No hunting is allowed. Its wetlands are home to growing numbers of ducks, hares, rabbits and pheasants, seen clattering amid reeds and tall yellow feather grass. “When I got here 5am I saw a fox,” Chekman said. For locals, Russia’s 2014 Crimea takeover has been a disaster. Chonhar was once a stop on the railway line to Sevastopol, with thousands of holidaymakers crossing by car in high season every day. Next to the cafe is a crumbling Soviet gateway. One pillar remains, adorned with grapes. “This place is now a tupik, a dead end,” Vyacheslav said, standing at what was once the village’s thriving roadside fish market. With no tourists, and little vehicle traffic of any kind, business was slack, he said. Vyacheslav was selling silvery roach, large smoked white-fish and mullet, which he had caught himself. His neighbour Valery, a coffee seller, said times were better in the Soviet Union – an entity Putin seems determined to bring back. “You could buy kolbasa [sausage] for eight roubles,” Valery said. A Russian land-grab of Kherson province would solve Crimea’s most pressing problem: a lack of water. A Soviet-built 400km long canal network used to connect the Dnipro river with the peninsula, supplying residents and irrigating fields. In 2014 Ukraine built a dam to stop its flow. In 2021 Crimea suffered severe drought. Defending the canal is now a strategic priority for Ukraine. A single Ukrainian soldier was visible last week where the canal begins, outside the city of Khakova. He had a Kalashnikov and an alsatian dog. Snow had blanketed the frozen waterway and its picturesque willows. At the Chonar crossing point soldiers sleep in a cosy barracks warmed by a log stove. They rejected Putin’s recent assertion that Ukraine and Russian are “one people”. “We are moving to Europe and Nato. Russia is stuck in the Soviet past,” Lt Petro Yanchenko said. Why was he fighting? “So my family can live in a free country,” he replied. Yanchenko said Crimea and the part-Russian occupied Donbas region belonged to Ukraine. He added that Kyiv had unresolved territorial claims of its own. Russia’s southern Kuban area – just across from Crimea’s Kerch strait – was once home to Ukrainian Cossacks, he said. “It’s our territory,” he asserted. The prospect of Crimea ever returning to Ukraine seems remote. But Chekman noted that the peninsula had changed hands on numerous occasions. Its bloody history is never far away. Chonhar has a needle-like memorial to Soviet dead from the second world war. On the Russia side is a monument to anti-aircraft gunners. Nazi Germany swept through the village in the summer of 1941, killing some of its Jewish residents and occupying Crimea for two years. The Red army drove the Wehrmacht out and restored Ukraine as a USSR republic. Putin appears to regard Ukraine’s independence and statehood in 1991, and its western aspirations today, as a historic error. But he may find bringing the country back under Moscow’s imperial grip is not as easy as it seems. “Russia can’t do any more than threaten us,” Alex Lunyov – a sergeant in the marine corps – said. “This is our house, our home. Our grandfathers and ancestors are buried here. If the Russians come we will fight. We will kill them like cattle.” Lunyov said the Ukrainian army was tougher, more professional and better trained than in 2014, when superior Russian forces inflicted heavy defeats in the east, including a massacre in the city of Ilovaisk. “Since then we have learned how to fight,” he pointed out, saying Ukraine had right on its side. He grinned. And added with a twinkle: “A warrior’s armour is heavier than a collar of a slave.”I am on my hands and knees on the kitchen floor, trying to install a new cat flap while the cat watches. “The central ring section is adjustable,” I tell the cat. “You know, depending on the thickness of your door.” The cat looks at me, then at the flap. “For the same reason it comes with three sets of screws – short, medium and long,” I say. “I don’t have to measure because I have the screws from the old flap, which are clearly medium.” The cat yawns, ostentatiously. The old cat flap was wrecked when the dog crashed through it in the middle of the night and ended up wearing it like a skirt. The cat never really mastered the old flap anyway – he sat in front of it for hours, delicately prying it open with one claw and watching it fall back into place. “You don’t pull, you push it, you idiot,” I would say. The cat didn’t listen. The new flap won’t be any easier to work out, because it is as near to exactly like the old one as possible: same make, same size. The actual model is out of production, but this, I’m assured by wife, is the closest match. I want the replacement process to be seamless – like for like. I don’t want to have to saw a bigger hole, or buy a new door. When I take the new flap out of the box I am gratified to see how much it resembles its predecessor. It appears to be put together the same way the old one came apart, so the instructions are superfluous. But nothing is that simple. The tolerances between hole and housing are tight: all the components need to be precisely aligned to meet in the middle, and this is difficult to manage when they are on either side of a door. It doesn’t help that my assistant is a cat. I move outside, with the cat following, and drop to my knees on the wet brick. It’s dark already, and a light rain is falling. I push a medium length screw into its intended hole, but it doesn’t find the corresponding threaded slot in the component on the inside of the door. Plastic creaks alarmingly when I try to tighten it. “Arse,” I say. As I speak a second medium screw falls from my mouth, bounces once on the brick patio and lands in front of the cat. He bats it away into the darkness, and looks up at me. “If you’re not part of the solution,” I say, “you’re part of the problem.” Finally, with the open door pinched between my knees and my arms stretched at full length, I manage to finesse the pieces into an arrangement that allows two medium screws to span the distance between them. With everything tightened, the new cat flap is firmly secured in place. “Allow me to demonstrate,” I say to the cat, pushing a finger against the flap from the outside in. The flap does not move. I find my wife at her computer. “Have you put it in already?” she says. “Well done.” “It has a magnetic lock,” I say. “You have to be wearing a special collar to go through it.” “Yeah,” my wife says. “It’s to stop other people’s cats getting in.” “Our cat is too stupid to use a regular cat flap,” I say. “I know,” she says. “And it only comes with one collar,” I say. “What about the dog?” “It was the only kind they make that matched the measurements you gave me,” she says. “How did you imagine this working out?” I say. “I figured you could just dismantle the mechanism,” she says. “Did you,” I say. “I did,” she says. There are few things more dispiriting than one of my wife’s sudden demonstrations of faith in my abilities – they are infrequent, but they are wholly random and largely misplaced. With the new cat flap now uninstalled, I sit down at the kitchen table with the parts. The magnetic lock is, as you might imagine, not designed to be got at. A lot of ugly prying and cracking must take place to gain access. Once I’m in, though, I find myself fascinated by the simple beauty of the mechanism, by the little weighted seesaw that holds the lock in position, and the magnet that counteracts it when a suitably collared pet approaches. I look up to find the cat sitting on the table watching me. “Miaow,” it says. “Believe me,” I say. “You wouldn’t get it.”Going Out : Cinema Nightmare Alley Out now If you had to pick the best person to remake a cult 1947 noir about a sleazy carnival and the grifters, hustlers and femmes fatales who inhabit it, Guillermo del Toro (Pan’s Labyrinth) would be top of many people’s lists, and with this electrifying new version of Nightmare Alley, starring Bradley Cooper, Cate Blanchett and Willem Dafoe, he proves exactly why. A Journal for Jordan Out now A true story based on a journal kept by First Sergeant Charles Monroe King (Michael B Jordan) while deployed in Iraq and intended for his infant son, this weighty drama is directed by Denzel Washington from a script by writer-on-the-rise Virgil Williams. Belfast Out now Writer-director Kenneth Branagh’s family lived in Belfast in the 1960s, but moved away when he was nine to escape the Troubles. An intensely personal film shot in black and white, Belfast is based on Branagh’s memories of that early childhood in Northern Ireland and how. throughout all the difficulty and danger, cinema provided with a semblance of solace. Memory Box Out now The idea of the past as a type of Pandora’s box sits at the heart of this inter-generational drama that skilfully blends experimental storytelling and real-life artefacts. Set in contemporary Montreal, but with its roots in war-torn Beirut, where protagonist Alex’s mother spent her adolescence, Memory Box asks if we can ever really know our parents. Catherine Bray * * * Going out: Gigs Let’s Eat Grandma 26 &amp; 27 January; tour starts Norwich Ahead of April’s Two Ribbons, the follow-up to 2018’s breakthrough I’m All Ears, childhood friends Rosa Walton and Jenny Hollingworth test the waters with two warm-up shows. Revelatory recent single Happy New Year, all cascading synths and euphoric lyrics, should go down a treat in a live scenario. Soak 27 January to 6 February; tour starts Southampton While work continues on the follow-up to 2019’s second album Grim Town, Irish singer-songwriter Soak heads out on a tour supported by the Independent Venue Week initiative, which shines a spotlight on smaller venues. Keep an ear out for songs from their unflinching 2015 debut Before We Forgot How to Dream. Michael Cragg Total Immersion: Music for the End of Time Barbican Hall, London, 23 January The BBC SO devotes its latest Total Immersion day to the remarkable works that came out of the prison camps and ghettos of the second world war. There’s music from Terezín by Schulhoff, Klein, Krása and Haas, before a concert staging of Viktor Ullmann’s opera Der Kaiser von Atlantis, and Messiaen’s Quartet for the End of Time, composed in a Silesian POW camp. Andrew Clements Zoe Rahman Trio Vortex Jazz Club, London, 28 January, 7pm &amp; 9pm British pianist-composer Zoe Rahman’s mergers of the American, Bengali, and Celtic music she learned from her US hard-bop piano teacher Joanne Brackeen and her own cross-cultural family connections, always make for vivacious live shows. Classy bass and drums partners Alec Dankworth and Gene Calderazzo are in close attendance. * * * Going Out: Stage Fern Brady 25 January to 18 March; tour starts Salford In her recent BBC standup special, the straight-shooting Scot spoke about receiving an autism diagnosis in her early 30s. Autistic Bikini Queen, her new show, looks set to dig deeper into the subject without skimping on the delightfully scathing observations about sex and class that have become her trademark. Rachel Aroesti Compagnie 111: Ash Barbican theatre, London, 26 January to 29 January Indian kuchipudi dancer Shantala Shivalingappa has been a muse for some big names in western theatre and dance, including Maurice Béjart, Peter Brook and Pina Bausch. Her latest collaboration is with the French director Aurélien Bory, who has created a solo paying homage to Shiva, god of creation and destruction. Lyndsey Winship A Number The Old Vic, 24 January to 19 March Lyndsey Turner directs Caryl Churchill’s head-spinning play about a father and son and a cloning conundrum. Paapa Essiedu and Lennie James star, with designs by the great Es Devlin. The Play What I Wrote 22 January to 5 March; tour starts Theatre Royal, Bath Sean Foley revives this blissfully silly comedy. It’s about a comic double act at a crossroads in their career, is jam-packed with Morecambe and Wise sketches and features an exquisitely hammy celebrity guest appearance every night. Miriam Gillinson * * * Going Out: Art Betsy Bradley Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, to 13 February It’s been a tough time and we all deserve a break. This young British painter and sculptor offers a sweet pastoral escape into free floating colour. Some of her objects even look like garden swings. Her canvases have hints of a modern Gainsborough in their soft and sensual colours. Enjoy. Gainsborough’s Blue Boy National Gallery, London, 25 January to 15 May One of the masterpieces of British art returns. Gainsborough is a painter of exquisite nuance, a portraitist of acute empathy – and one of the first Romantics. This bold, self-possessed kid, painted in about 1770, is both a homage to Van Dyck and a premonition of the French Revolution’s youthquake. America in Crisis Saatchi Gallery, London, to 3 April But not for the first time. Today’s crisis has people predicting civil war but the US felt similarly riven in the Vietnam era. This show revisits a 1969 photographic exhibit called America in Crisis – and compares its images with those of today, featuring Bruce Davidson, Sheila Pree Bright, Stacy Kranitz and more. Emily Speed Tate Liverpool, to 5 June What is it like to live in a flat world? Speed’s video takes its title from the novel Flatland by Edwin Abbott, a Victorian masterpiece not so much of science fiction as mathematical fiction that imagines a two-dimensional society. Speed uses this idea to investigate how we are shaped by cities. Jonathan Jones * * * Staying In: Streaming The Responder 24 January, 9pm, BBC One and iPlayer Another week, another police drama, but this new series starring a convincingly scouse Martin Freeman as a misanthropic copper blends the job’s wearing mundanity with casual corruption, mental health struggles and blood-curdling career criminals in novel – if unremittingly grim – style. The Afterparty Out 28 January, Apple TV+ This murder-mystery comedy from Christopher Miller (21 Jump Street) stars Broad City’s Ilana Glazer, Sam Richardson of I Think You Should Leave fame, and Stath Lets Flats’s Jamie Demetriou among the suspects. Tiffany Haddish and cult funnyman John Early investigate. The Gilded Age 25 January, 9pm, Sky Atlantic In Downton Abbey creator Julian Fellowes’s ever‑so‑slightly camp period drama, Cynthia Nixon and Christine Baranski are old-money sisters under siege from the new breed of social climbers that proliferated during New York’s late 19th-century boom. The Woman in the House Across the Street from the Girl in the Window Out 28 January, Netflix Twisty thrillers led by unstable female protagonists have become a category of their own in recent years; this supremely silly parody stars Kristen Bell (The Good Place) as a wine-glugging woman who believes she has witnessed a murder. Is she perceptive, paranoid or just drunk? RA * * * Staying In: Games Serious Sam: Siberian Mayhem Out 25 January, Windows You might remember this unapologetically silly shooter from the 00s: spray bullets at relentless hordes of enemies with entertainingly OTT weapons. Uncharted: Legacy of Thieves collection Out 28 January, PS5 A remaster of the superb Uncharted 4 and its expansion Lost Legacy, two of the greatest Indiana-Jones-style globetrotting adventures in video games. * * * Staying In: Albums Years &amp; Years – Night Call Out now No ballads, all bangers is the order of the day on this third Years &amp; Years album, the first as a solo vehicle for Olly Alexander. While the likes of Crave and 20 Minutes exalt the thrill of sweat-soaked hedonism, sugary current single Sweet Talker hides relationship disappointment under lashings of DayGlo dance-pop. Aurora – The Gods We Can Touch Out now Parents might recognise Norwegian singer-songwriter Aurora’s bewitching vocals from the Frozen II soundtrack, while art-pop connoisseurs might be familiar with 2019’s A Different Kind of Human (Step 2), a multi-layered concept album about the climate crisis. This follow-up finds her flitting between rumbling electropop and delicate folktronica. Bad Boy Chiller Crew – Disrespectful Out now The UK’s hardest-working bassline crew return with a 16-track mixtape to follow last year’s Charva Anthems EP and 2020’s debut album, Full Wack No Brakes. Disrespectful is led by the alcopop-infused single Messages, all rave pianos and “jump around for no reason” lyrics. FKA twigs – Caprisongs Out now A playful stop-gap mixtape after a period of personal upheaval, Caprisongs has been billed by its creator as a celebration of togetherness. Its 17 songs feature a plethora of friends, from Jorja Smith to Pa Salieu, while production comes from the likes of Arca, Mike Dean and Rosalía collaborator, El Guincho. MC * * * Staying In : Brain food Everything Under the Sun Podcast Guardian kids’ quiz writer Molly Oldfield hosts this lighthearted weekly podcast, answering questions from children with celebrity help. Recent queries include investigating why there are always problems in stories, and whether we can make paper from poo. WhoSampled.com Online This database explores the DNA of hit songs and the samples that make them. Discover how Nas’s The World Is Yours flips Ahmad Jamal’s I Love Music, or how the Winstons’ Amen Brother drum break has been repurposed. The Alpinist Sky Documentaries, Saturday Man vs mountain: director Peter Mortimer tracks down the camera-shy solo climber Marc-André Leclerc, who has made a name for himself tackling some of the most nerve-shredding ascents in history, without a rope or companions. Ammar KaliaDolly Parton at the BBC 8.30pm, BBC Two Beyond being the Queen of Country, the pandemic proved Dolly Parton to be a total hero – with her $1m donation to the Moderna vaccine. So, what better time to settle in for an evening of her performances? From Here You Come Again to I Will Always Love You and 9 to 5, Parton’s “at the BBC” treatment is an hour of telly impossible not to sing along to. Sadly, it won’t feature her recent “vacciiine” take on “Joleeene”. Hollie Richardson The Masked Singer 7pm, ITV “Take it off! Take it off!” The highly enjoyable (and downright bizarre) singing contest/guessing game is back and we’re down to eight contestants in their elaborate costumes. Who will be the fifth to leave? Joel Dommett is on presenting duties, while Davina McCall and co do the judging. HR Michael McIntyre’s The Wheel 8.30pm, BBC One The wacky gameshow that sees celebrities teaming up with contestants to answer questions on specialist topics (perfectly suited to McIntyre’s Marmite mannerisms) continues. Tonight, Dermot O’Leary, Penny Lancaster, Krishnan Guru-Murthy, Judi Love, Craig Revel Horwood and Nikki Fox join the spinning stage. Henry Wong Secrets of the Royal Palaces 8.30pm, Channel 5 Another compendium of royal gossip majors on Versailles, with its hall of mirrors – a tricky build, since mirror-making in 1634 was a viciously guarded Venetian trade secret. The most memorable insider info, however, concerns the immediate aftermath of the death of Princess Diana. Jack Seale Hidden Assets 9pm, BBC Four Following its full-throttle start, the Irish crime thriller starring Angeline Ball continues with another double bill. Rough diamonds are found in Fionn Brannigan’s offices and Emer links this evidence to the bombings – this leads her on a trip to Antwerp in the second episode. The series concludes next week. HR The Alpinist 9pm, Sky Documentaries How do you make a film about a gifted young climber when he regularly vanishes to do far-flung solo ascents? That is just one thread in this moving portrait of Marc-André Leclerc, a fearless Canadian compelled to scale precarious ice walls. The heart-in-mouth result is a fitting monument to his skill. Graeme Virtue Film choice Supernova, 10.25am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere Harry Macqueen’s chamber piece has a more muted take on memory loss than recent films The Father or Relic, but is no less heart-tugging. Longstanding couple Sam (Colin Firth) and Tusker (Stanley Tucci), who has early onset dementia, take a road trip to the Lake District. Amid family gatherings and cosy nights in their campervan, the pair struggle to deal with loss – in more ways than one. It may sidestep some of the realities of the condition, but this is a superbly acted drama about living life on your own terms. Simon Wardell Live sport Premier League Football: Everton v Aston Villa 11.30am, BT Sport 1. From Goodison Park. Champions Cup Rugby Union: Bath v Leinster 12.30pm, Channel 4. Pool A encounter at the Recreation Ground. Bowls: World Indoor Championships 1.30pm, BBC Two. The open singles semi-finals from Hopton-on-Sea, Norfolk.Judy Baca still recalls the day in the 1970s when the curator of an exhibit showcasing the work of emerging Los Angeles artists told her she couldn’t possibly include Baca in the show. “These are only people touched by an angel,” Baca remembers the woman saying about the the all-male group of artists she had selected. The message was clear: Baca was not worthy of a museum. Fifty years later, Baca’s an internationally celebrated artist, whose large-scale works of public art have left an unmatched imprint on the artistic landscape of LA. And the Chicana muralist, scholar and activist is now receiving long overdue mainstream recognition. The Museum of Latin American Art (Molaa) in Long Beach, California, is running the first major retrospective on her work, and a major show at the Museum of Contemporary Art (Moca) in Los Angeles is planned for September. “I never expected to be part of the 1% that would live on my art,” Baca, 75, said in a recent interview. “This is the first time in my career in which people are seeking to buy my work, to own pieces of the Judy Baca collection.” For years, Baca said, the white, male-dominated art industry was uninterested in her. “My work has been ignored a lot in LA … and the men here have been pretty profoundly unable to see women as their peers. That’s been the struggle of my whole life as a Chicana and activist and feminist. It’s created a devil-may-care attitude for me. I had to just perceive what I was doing as significant for myself and my community and move ahead with willfulness and belief, buoyed by the community people I worked with – not by the arts.” Baca was born in Watts, an LA neighborhood known for the 1965 uprisings, and grew up in Pacoima, near the LA river. Her grandparents came from Mexico to La Junta, Colorado during the Mexican Revolution, a story told in her Denver airport mural, La Memoria de Nuestra Tierra, and at the entrance of her Molaa retrospective. “This was the first massive migration of Mexican people into the United States … although in some ways, we didn’t cross the border, the border crossed us,” she said. While her mother worked at a factory in her early childhood, her grandmother raised her and had a huge influence on her creativity: “My grandmother had a special relationship with the spirit world. She would begin my day by saying, ‘What did you dream?’ … I realized there was more to living than simply what was visible, tangibly.” Her grandma’s indigenous identity also shaped her: “People were not able to own their indigeneity, because it was not considered attractive or good. But my grandmother was indigenous and she looked Apache.” Baca’s grandmother practiced a kind of “curanderismo”, meaning people came to her for counsel and healing. Baca’s mother worried she would not earn a living as an artist and encouraged her to get a degree in education – a path that led her to muralism. Baca created her first mural while working at a Catholic high school, as a way to channel the students’ interest in graffiti. (She was later fired from the school after marching against the Vietnam war.) In 1974, she launched the city of LA’s first mural program, which produced over 400 murals and soon after, co-founded the Social and Public Art Resource Center (Sparc), a public art community organization, housed in an old jailhouse. Baca began building the Great Wall of Los Angeles, in 1976 along the Tujunga wash in the San Fernando Valley, with the idea of painting a “tattoo on the scar where the river once ran”. Originally named The History of California, the mural is one of the longest in the world and depicts forgotten histories of people of color in California. Over five years, she worked with hundreds of youth – some of whom were diverted from the criminal justice system – to paint a visual history of stories that disappeared along with the river, from prehistoric times to the 1950s. The narratives within the 2,754-ft mural include a little-known massacre of Chinese people in LA in 1871; the mass deportations of Mexican Americans in the 1930s; and a portrait of Luisa Moreno, a farm-workers labor organizer in the 1940s. “What I learned from the young people who participated is that it changed forever the way that they saw each other,” Baca said. “We were in segregated communities … but they were all sort of ‘rejects’, thought to be young people who will never succeed. But that mixing with each other, which has continued for a lifetime, was a remarkable change.” In 1980, Baca became a professor in studio art at the University of California, the only Chicana to have a tenured position in visual arts and one of a handful of senior Chicana professors across the public university system. The Molaa exhibit includes more than 110 of Baca’s works, spotlighting the history of the Great Wall, and featuring paintings, sculptures and early drawings. There are portraits of her dressed as a “pachuca” in the 1970s for LA’s first all-Chicana show; her striking Josefina: Ofrenda to the Domestic Worker print; a vendor cart painted with histories of the criminalization of undocumented people; and study drawings of the World Wall, her mural that has traveled around the globe. Gabriela Urtiaga, Molaa’s chief curator, said in an email that Baca “has always [been] and continues to be a pivotal figure looking for new alternatives to speak about silenced voices, and the figure of women as an essential part of her creative work”, adding, “Judy rethinks a collective memory and identity as a fundamental link in the construction of women’s power – Chicana, Latina, women of color.” Some of the most fascinating displays capture obstacles she overcame. On a draft drawing of a mural commissioned for the University of Southern California in the 1990s, she wrote down critiques from administrators who tried to censor the painting, which depicted conflicts, violence and resistance movements involving Latinos in LA: “Judy, we believe that this mural is not understandable to an Anglo audience and is too negative. The history you represent is depressing.” “I do not make the history, I just paint about it,” she responded on the mural draft. The exhibit also chronicles the reaction to Danzas Indigenas, a monument she created in 1994 at an LA rail station, meant to honor indigenous history in the region. In 2005, an anti-immigrant group, Save Our State, protested the monument; the footage on display closely resembles the white supremacist rallies of recent years and the growing push to erase teachings of racism in America. “I hope the show reminds people that we’re dealing with the same thing over and over again, and if we don’t fix it, we have to keep reliving it,” Baca said, adding that seeing decades of her work curated in a museum format has been validating. “I always thought I’d make a work and it’d go out into the ether, never to be seen again or spoken about,” she said. “But I realized that when I was making it, that I was processing through my hands, and through my art. I was finding a way to live with truth that was hard and difficult. It was a way of keeping me sane, and keeping me in the process of healing, and healing those around me … and I’ve learned that my instincts were good.” Why does she believe she is finally getting proper recognition? “Maybe they think I’m gonna die,” she said with a laugh, adding that the recent social justice uprisings have forced a reckoning in the arts. For so long, she said, “It was the gatekeepers, and the remarkable failure to deal with the Latino community in any real way. I think it’s a lot about the referencing and metaphors that define a people as ‘aliens’.” Last year, the Lucas Museum of Narrative Art acquired the archives related to the Great Wall, and the Andrew W Mellon Foundation awarded Sparc $5m to expand the wall to include stories from the 1960s to 2020. The 1960s section will feature a “generation on fire” fighting Jim Crow and Alabama firemen hosing protesters. The 70s will start with the Alcatraz occupation, with a quote from Oglala Lakota leader Red Cloud: “They made us many promises … but they kept but one; they promised to take our land, and they did.” While Baca is hopeful about her future projects, she is disheartened about the state of the art form: “Muralism as a whole has been diminished in LA. It’s totally commercial. The only things that can get made are those paid by corporations that want to decorate buildings.” She lamented that the city lacked the kind of public program that she launched in the 70s, noting how murals can shape our understanding of history and “create sites of public memory” when done with communities: “Murals can do some amazing work in the world, because they live in the places where people live and work, because they can be made in relationship to the people who see them, because the people themselves can have input, if it’s done in a profound way. And that’s what I intend to keep doing as long as I’m standing here on earth.” Judy Baca: Memorias de Nuestra Tierra, a Retrospective is at the Museum of Latin American Art through March. Baca’s Museum of Contemporary Art show opens 10 September.A friend, Barry Horne, who kept meticulous weather records in his home village of Edlesborough in Buckinghamshire from 1969 until 1999, was not convinced about climate change. He contended that the weather varied too much even over a 30-year period. Just in case he was wrong, however, he printed off his entire records and presented them to me so that if either of us lived long enough, the statistics might help with the answer. He did concede that one set of figures, the number of days snow fell in a year, had shown a general downward trend over the period, despite sharp annual variations. By the 1990s it was down to 10 days of snowfall a year on average. With this winter halfway through, we have had one snowfall this year – 10 would be exceptional. Perhaps his record of air frosts is more remarkable. In the 1970s it was not unusual for the winter months to have more than 20 air frosts recorded, and in January and February 1979 there were only three nights without one. That year March had 22. Sadly Barry died before we could settle the argument but air frosts would have been the clincher. In his log they were often recorded in April, most years in May, twice in June.Tom on Claire What were you hoping for? A fun chance to meet someone new. First impressions? Friendly, polite, warm. What did you talk about? Political engagement and why people should vote. Bake Off and MasterChef. Christmas music. The tribulations of flat-sharing. Any awkward moments? The police did walk past our photo shoot – I found that pretty awkward! Good table manners? Impeccable. Best thing about Claire? How multitalented she is – good at baking, music, photography, cooking, flowers and more. She is a very accomplished person. Would you introduce her to your friends? Yes, they would think she’s great. Describe Claire in three words? Talented, interesting, knowledgeable. What do you think she made of you? I genuinely don’t know – perhaps that I talked too much. Did you go on somewhere? Alas, no. And … did you kiss? See above. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? I might have pretended to like sport a little bit more. Marks out of 10? 9. Would you meet again? As friends, absolutely! Claire on Tom What were you hoping for? Good food and good conversation. And the hopeless romantic in me was secretly hoping for a knight in shining armour. First impressions? Tall, friendly, keen to order an aperitif. What did you talk about? Food. MasterChef, Bake Off. Devon. The trials and tribulations of a London flatshare. Voter apathy. Any awkward moments? There was a slight mix-up between Drake and Francis Drake … Good table manners? Great until we got to dessert … Fingers shouldn’t be used in the absence of a fork. Best thing about Tom? Easy to talk to. Would you introduce him to your friends? Yes, I think so. He’d be a great guest at a Sunday pub lunch. Describe Tom in three words? A true gent – he walked me to the bus stop. What do you think he made of you? That I’m massively into food and a big fan of an evening class. And perhaps also that I’m rather a quick drinker?! Did you go on somewhere? It was a chilly Monday evening and time to head home. And … did you kiss? Sadly no smooching. There wasn’t a spark. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? That I’d made a note of the white wine – Italian, crisp and delish. Marks out of 10? 7. Would you meet again? Unlikely. Claire and Tom ate at Lina Stores, Greek Street, London W1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comA Jewish couple from Tennessee has filed a lawsuit against the state’s Department of Children’s Services after a state-funded Christian program denied them foster care services for religious reasons. According to the lawsuit filed on Wednesday, Elizabeth and Gabriel Rutan-Ram signed up for the foster-parent training class and home-study certification process last January at the Holston United Methodist Home for Children. On 21 January 2021, the same day the Rutan-Rams were scheduled to begin the foster-parent-training class at Holston, an employee “emailed Ms Rutan-Ram to inform her that Holston would not serve the Rutan-Rams because of the couple’s Jewish faith”. The employee wrote, “As a Christian organization, our executive team made the decision several years ago to only provide adoption services to prospective adoptive families that share our belief system in order to avoid conflicts or delays with future service delivery.” In a statement released earlier this week, Gabriel Rutan-Ram criticized the organization, saying, “It’s infuriating to learn our tax dollars are funding discrimination against us. If an agency is getting tax money to provide a service, then everyone should be served – it shouldn’t matter whether you’re Jewish, Catholic or an atheist. We’re all citizens of Tennessee, regardless of our religion.” In response to the lawsuit, Brad Williams, president and CEO of Holston said that the organization seeks to place children with families that “agree with our statement of faith”. “Vulnerable children should not lose access to Christian families who choose to become foster or adoptive parents. Holston Home places children with families that agree with our statement of faith, and forcing Holston Home to violate our beliefs and place children in homes that do not share our faith is wrong and contrary to a free society,” Williams said in a statement to NBC News. In early 2020, the state’s Republican governor, Bill Lee, signed a controversial adoption bill that allows faith-based foster care and adoption programs to use taxpayer money, even if the programs exclude families of various religious backgrounds and sexual orientations. Lee, who is Christian, called defending religious beliefs “very important”. Other states with similar legislation include South Dakota, Texas, Alabama, Virginia, Michigan, Oklahoma and Mississippi. The Anti-Defamation League’s Southern Division criticized Lee at the time in a statement that said: “Allowing a taxpayer-funded child placement agency to discriminate is outrageous. No child should be denied a loving foster or adoptive home simply because of a prospective parent’s religion, sexual orientation or identity.”Authorities in Western Australia are attempting to contain a growing Perth Covid cluster, amid handwringing about the state’s decision to indefinitely delay the reopening of its borders. WA recorded seven new Covid cases on Saturday. There were 20,148 new cases in New South Wales, 16,016 in Victoria and 15,050 in Queensland. While the WA numbers remain extremely low compared with states where the Omicron variant has spread, concerns are mounting that a more serious outbreak could still take hold despite the decision to keep the state border shut. Two of the new cases were acquired in the community without a known source; the state’s health department has urged anyone in the Perth and Peel region experiencing symptoms to come forward for testing. “[It’s] the elephant in the room. We already have Covid Omicron in WA. We already have community spread,” said the president of the Australian Medical Association’s WA branch, Mark Duncan-Smith. “In the other states, it all started with one case. WA already has that one case. Even as we speak, the number of Omicron cases in the community is doubling every three days.” In a strongly worded statement, Duncan-Smith called on the WA government to introduce modest restrictions, and to properly prepare the health system and schools for the pandemic. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said on Saturday that he sympathised with families kept apart by the extended WA state border closure, but stopped short of the sort of outright criticism previously levelled at states over hardline border policies. Federal ministers, including Hunt, have previously been outspoken about Western Australia and Queensland’s closed-border policies. In September he said Queensland’s policies that had separated families and denied entry to certain people were “a profound moral failure”. “We understand many families will be disappointed, their ability to meet loved ones, their ability to see beautiful young babies or to be present for weddings. That’s all been deferred,” Hunt said on Saturday. “It is a matter for Western Australia and so we recognise that that’s a decision for the WA government.” Australia recorded 64 total Covid deaths on Saturday – 30 in New South Wales, 20 in Victoria, 10 in Queensland, three in South Australia and one in Tasmania. A day after Western Australia’s border announcement, Queensland effectively opened its international borders to travellers, who arrived for the first time without having to quarantine. Queensland has delayed the return of its school year by two weeks; though New South Wales and Victoria are both planning to welcome students back in the coming weeks. In NSW, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, said the state’s healthcare system was equipped to cope with an expected spike in transmission that would result from a return to the classroom. “We are doing it in a way that is safe for parents, safe for teachers and safe for children, and we’ll be announcing those plans alongside the Victorian government shortly,” he said. The Northern Territory recorded 314 cases of Covid-19 overnight, with the lockout in Alice Springs, the Amoonguna community, Yuendumu, Yuelamu and Galiwin’ku being extended for a week. There are 63 people with Covid-19 in hospital in the territory, including six on ventilators and one in intensive care. The Australian Capital Territory recorded 666 new cases of Covid-19, two-thirds of which were from rapid tests. There are currently 63 people with Covid in hospital, one person in intensive care, and one ventilated. Meanwhile, an estimated 1,000 people took part in a “Freedom Rally” in Melbourne’s central business district to protest against Covid vaccination mandates. The crowd, which was followed by police, assembled at Parliament House around noon and moved along Bourke Street and Flinders Street before stopping at the Victoria Police Centre. The crowd chanted “you serve us” at police along with slogans such as “save out children” and “sack Dan Andrews”. Also in Melbourne, the organisers of the city’s Invasion Day rally announced they had cancelled the march this year, saying the risk of spreading Covid through the Aboriginal community was too high. They have recommended supporters attend the online dawn service instead. The Invasion Day rally is the biggest protest held in Melbourne each year. A total of 93.3% of Victorians aged 12 and over have had at least two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. The national vaccine rate for children aged five to 11 receiving their first dose has climbed to 26.5%. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, who was in Launceston pledging $15m for the Royal Flying Doctors Association, described the vaccine rate of children five to 11 as being in “chaos” and a “shambles”. He said the rate indicated that “children just won’t be able to be fully vaccinated by the time that school goes back”. Albanese did not directly answer when asked if he believed the start date for primary schools should be pushed back until there was greater vaccination coverage, saying instead that the Australian government should have moved faster.We’re going to bring this blog to a close now, thanks for your company today. A quick recap of today’s events for you: Handwringing continues about the ongoing closure of the Western Australian border. The AMA, business groups and others have lined up to criticise the state, which has indefinitely pushed back the date for its planned reopening. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said he sympathised with separated families but that the border was “a matter for WA”. He’s previously said the way the closed Queensland border kept people from their loved ones was “a profound moral failure”. There are seven Covid cases in the Perth area; despite the closed border, there is some concern that Omicron may have already taken hold in the west. New South Wales recorded 20,148 new cases and 30 deaths. The premier, Dominic Perrottet, says the state is working on a school reopening plan. There were 16,016 new cases recorded in Victoria; 15,050 in Queensland; 2,193 in South Australia; 726 in Tasmania; 666 in the ACT; and 314 in the Northern Territory. 30 people died in NSW; 20 in Victoria; 10 in Queensland, three in South Australia and one in Tasmania. Anti-vaccination rallies were held in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane. The organisers of Melbourne’s Invasion Day rally announced they had cancelled the march this year, saying the risk of spreading Covid through the Aboriginal community was too high. Read our Covid full report here: The Greens leader, Adam Bandt, is in Queensland this weekend and talking up the party’s chances in two Brisbane lower house seats. Wait, what? In Queensland? Isn’t that the place where all the far-rightwingers come from? Well, yes, but it’s not as far-fetched as it might seem. In fact, the party itself believes it’s a very good chance of an upset in Griffith, once the seat of the former PM Kevin Rudd and now held by the very well-regarded Labor frontbencher Terri Butler. They are throwing serious resources at the seat and claim to be on track to doorknock 35,000 homes by election day. The Greens also have an eye on Ryan, in Brisbane’s west, which is held by the LNP’s Julian Simmonds. Parts of both electorates have elected Greens MPs at state level. “Queensland is set to be a three-cornered contest in the next election, and we’re feeling a massive swell of support on the ground for action on climate change and economic inequality,” Bandt said. “The lower house pushes in Griffith and Ryan are huge, ambitious and energetic people-powered campaigns, and they’re seeing results.” Speaking of the Hottest 100, the excellent Twitter account, @OzKitsch, held its Coldest 100 earlier today. The winner was the Wiggles’s 2014 song, Pappadum, which landed them in some controversy a couple of years back. It is frankly awful by any standard (let alone today’s) and a deserving winner/loser. I am, however, disappointed at the relatively low placing of this classic: You Can Make It In Tasmania. Triple J’s Hottest 100 has just passed the halfway mark, with Kanye West coming in at No 50 with Jail. The US rapper and one-time presidential aspirant was in the news elsewhere today, demanding that Netflix allow him to approve the edit of its forthcoming documentary about him, Jeen-Yuhs, which is due to premiere at the Sundance film festival on Sunday. We’re expecting a result in the Hottest 100 sometime after 8pm. Australia’s medicines regulator approved the Novavax Covid-19 vaccine for use in adults on Thursday, making it the fourth vaccine to be included in Australia’s rollout and the country’s first approved protein-based Covid vaccine. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said on Thursday he hoped Novavax’s approval would encourage vaccine-hesitant people – around 1 million adults that comprise less than 5% of the over-16 population – to get the jab. “We have a first-dose national vaccination rate of 95.2%,” Hunt said. “Some people have waited for Novavax and although we’ve encouraged everyone to proceed, we recognise that that’s a fact.” So how does the Novavax jab differ from other Covid-19 vaccines and will it make a difference to vaccination rates? Read more from Donna Lu here: The world No 1 doubles player Mate Pavic has expressed unhappiness over some raucous crowd behaviour at the Australian Open after his defeat to Australian duo Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis: World No 1 doubles player Mate Pavic called on crowds at the Australian Open to be more respectful after he and partner Nikola Mektic were knocked out in the second round by home duo Nick Kyrgios and Thanasi Kokkinakis. The Australians prevailed in straight sets against the top ranked duo on Friday evening amid a raucous and at times heated atmosphere at Melbourne Park. Pavic’s comments come after Daniil Medvedev criticised sections of the Australian Open crowd following his singles win over Kyrgios on Thursday. “They are pretty loud,” Pavic said of the home fans. “Obviously they cheer for Aussies. It wouldn’t hurt them to show some respect to all opponents, to other players. “We saw yesterday also with Medvedev how it was. That’s how they are here. We’re used to that. But like I said, it wouldn’t hurt them to show some respect.” The Northern Territory has recorded 314 cases of Covid-19 overnight. There are 63 people with Covid-19 in hospital in the territory, including six on ventilators and one in intensive care. The lockout in Alice Springs, the Amoonguna community, Yuendumu, Yuelamu and Galiwin’ku has also been extended for a week. There is another “Freedom Rally” protest going on in Melbourne today. According to the ABC, more than 1,000 protesters were in the CBD opposing vaccine mandates. This seems like a good time to state that 93.3% of Victorians aged 12 and over have had at least two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. You could argue the moment has passed. Here’s more from the ABC: A highly visible police presence followed the crowd as it travelled through the CBD before stopping at the Victoria Police Centre. Drums, airhorns and chants of “save our children”, “sack Dan Andrews” and “free Victoria” were heard throughout the city as a further 20 deaths were recorded across the state. The national vaccine rate for children aged five to 11 receiving their first dose has climbed to 26.5%. This is good – vaccinations for kids in this age range have only been available since 10 January. But school goes back in a week. At this rate, a number of primary school aged kids will not have had their first dose before returning to classrooms. Western Australia has reported seven new locally-acquired cases of Covid-19, and four in hotel quarantine. Five of the seven new cases are known contacts of a previously reported case, but two others – in people who live in different households – are under investigation. Authorities have urged anyone in the Perth, Peel and the South West regions experiencing Covid-19 symptoms to get tested immediately and isolate until they receive a negative result. A dog that was on a boat which flipped in Sydney’s North Harbour swam to shore and was found alive, but one of the people on board remains missing. From AAP: A 25-year-old man was spotted by a local fisherman in the water near Dobroyd Head at Balgowlah Heights shortly before 4.50am on Saturday. He was rescued by surf life savers on jet skis and taken to Little Manly Beach where he told police his boat flipped during a test drive, throwing him, his 49-year-old friend and a dog into the water. The pair launched the 12-foot runabout from Tunks Park boat ramp at Northbridge about 9pm the previous evening, before running into rough seas and capsizing around 3am. The dog was washed away but both men clung to the boat for hours before the 49-year-old man drifted away. Inspector Andrew Veale said the dog was found alive at nearby Cave Beach about 10.30am after the boat’s fuel tank and rubber mats were earlier recovered two nautical miles off the coast. The 49-year-old man, who has no fixed address, is still missing as a major air, sea and land search continues. Police have checked the north shore area where he is currently living in a camper van and he hasn’t returned. Veale said the two men had known each other for about two years, and the 49-year-old was interested in buying the boat from his younger friend. There were no life jackets, lights or safety gear on board when the pair set off, but search and rescue teams are not giving up hope of finding the missing fisherman alive. “We’re hoping for the best,” Veale said. His friend is recovering at home after being treated for hypothermia and injuries to his wrist. The Australian Capital Territory recorded 666 new cases of Covid-19 yesterday, two-thirds of which were from rapid tests. There are currently 63 people with Covid in hospital, one person in intensive care, and one ventilated. The ACT is continuing to lead the country in the vaccine rollout. In just 12 days, 41.7% of children aged 5-11 have been vaccinated. Some 98.6% of those aged 12 and up have been double vaccinated, and 36.4% of people aged 18 and over have had a booster. Let’s check in with the Hottest 100. I still don’t know any of these songs. What a blow to my cool girl image. In the Northern Territory, activists have rallied outside the Darwin headquarters of major gas producer Santos. AAP reports the activists want more oversight of the company’s onshore gas exploration in the Beetaloo Basin, 500km south-east of Darwin, and the Barossa offshore gas production project. The Environment Centre NT said the nation’s second-largest independent gas producer was attempting to greenwash the Barossa project and called on the territory’s environment protection authority to fully assess its impact. “Santos is trying to develop the dirtiest gas field in Australia at Barossa,” spokesman Jason Fowler said on Saturday. “They are literally scraping the bottom of the barrel.” About 40 protesters gathered at Santos’s East Arm premises chanting “protect country, land and water” while holding placards saying “frack off” and “stop Barossa and Beetaloo gas”. The Environment Centre said documents submitted to the EPA show that two-thirds of the carbon dioxide from the gas field will be vented directly into the atmosphere before the gas is piped to Darwin. “The gas field has a reservoir CO2 content of 18%, double that of any other Australian gas project,” Fowler said. Tiwi traditional owners are also understood to oppose the Barossa project and the proposed pipeline extension, which could cross 100km of open ocean if approved by the environmental protection authority. Santos was contacted by AAP for comment, but has yet to respond. The organisers of the Melbourne Invasion Day rally have cancelled the march this year, saying the risk of spreading Covid through the Aboriginal community is too high. They have recommended supporters attend the online dawn service instead. In a Facebook post yesterday, rally organisers Warriors of the Aboriginal Resistance said: After lots of consideration WAR has decided to cancel the Invasion Day March in Melbourne. It would be careless to hold an event in the height of a pandemic and a virus that has taken ahold of so many in our community. This is the first time since 2015 WAR hadn’t organised this rally and we want to be on the street fighting for our people but the time isn’t now. The Invasion Day rally is the biggest protest held in Melbourne each year. There are a few organisations you can donate to instead of attending this year. The Dhadjowa Foundation is a grassroots organisation to support the families of those who die in custody. There is also family violence support service Djirra, VALS, and Pay The Rent. You can also donate to your local land council or traditional owner organisation. I am not sure this counts as forward sizzle, but Victoria’s Covid response commander, Jeroen Weimar, told reporters in Melbourne that the state will announce its back to school plans “in the next few days”. Victoria and NSW have been working together on this and are expected to announce the same or very similar settings for monitoring Covid in schools. Weimar also told reporters the rollout of 51,000 air filters into Victorian schools before the start of term one – which is one week away – was “on track” despite fewer than half of those air filters being delivered by mid-January. On coronavirus numbers in Victoria, which have dropped to a seven-day average of 20,954, Weimar said: We’re in a far better place than we were three weeks ago. We’ve got rapid antigen tests really starting to flow through. We’ve got cases under more control. The test positivity rate has dropped to around 20% after hovering in the mid-30s, AAP reports. The first quarantine-free flights from Papua New Guinea and Singapore arrived in Brisbane today. Families separated for up to two years were reunited at Brisbane international airport. AAP photographer Russell Freeman was there to capture it. Unions are bracing for a flood of employers to follow the lead set by airline Qantas and stevedore Patrick Terminals by trying to rip up enterprise agreements with staff before the federal election. Labor, which has been performing strongly in recent polling, has promised to stop employers from unilaterally terminating agreements if it wins the election, which is due to be held on or before 21 May. Enterprise agreements, struck between employers and their staff, provide conditions that leave workers better off overall than the underlying award conditions governing their industry. The employment conditions they set down continue in force until a new agreement is struck or they are terminated by the Fair Work Commission. Applications to terminate enterprise agreements were relatively rare until a landmark decision in 2015 in which rail company Aurizon convinced the FWC to tear up a dozen agreements it had previously struck with unions. Following Aurizon’s victory, terminations skyrocketed, according to FWC reports and research by the Australia Institute. Terminations reached a peak of 508 in 2017-18 and have since fallen back but remain above pre-Aurizon levels of around 200 a year or less, with 330 applications to terminate lodged with the FWC in the 2020-21 year. Read more: Just an update on me being out of touch, we’re now seven songs in to the Triple J Hottest 100 and I recognise absolutely none of them. The federal government has again denied claims it requisitioned rapid antigen tests from Queensland, despite reaching a $26m deal with a known supplier, AAP reports: The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, has doubled down on denials that rapid antigen tests have been requisitioned by the commonwealth, as supplies remain scarce. The Queensland transport minister, Mark Bailey, this week published a letter from a supplier claiming the federal government “commandeered” 34,000 rapid antigen tests originally destined for the state’s rail staff. In a further post on Saturday, a screenshot appears to show a known supplier reached an agreement to provide rapid tests to the federal health department as part of a $26.29m contract. “Either the Morrison govt has commandeered the stock using emergency powers, or they’ve swooped in late with a big money procurement offer of $26.29m that a supplier couldn’t refuse given the massive profit margin offered,” Bailey tweeted. But Hunt slapped down allegations federal authorities had diverted the tests from the Queensland government. “The claims that were made about the commonwealth are false. They had been referred to the ACCC (Australian Competition and Consumer Commission) because they are false,” he told reporters. “I have confirmed with the Department of Health, the commonwealth has not received and is not expecting to receive any supply from that supplier until at least February 7.” He said the federal government is providing 200,000 rapid antigen tests to Queensland on Saturday, and rejected suggestions it did not plan well enough to meet surging demand amid the Omicron wave. Sixty-four people have died with Covid in Australia in the past 24 hours. New South Wales has recorded 30 deaths and 2,762 people in hospital, with 20,148 new cases. Victoria recorded 20 deaths and 1,029 people in hospital with 16,016 new cases. Queensland recorded 10 deaths, 884 people in hospital and 15,050 new cases. South Australia recorded three deaths with 2,193 new cases. Tasmania recorded one death and 31 people in hospital, with 726 new cases. The ACT has reported no deaths in people with Covid-19 overnight and 63 people in hospital, with 666 new cases. Western Australia has reported seven new locally-acquired cases of Covid-19, five of which are linked and two are under investigation. The Northern Territory has recorded 314 cases of Covid-19 overnight and there are 63 people with covid in hospital. The Triple J Hottest 100 has started. Ten people with Covid have died in Queensland. The state recorded 15,050 new cases, about a third of which were from self-reported rapid tests. Some 884 people are in hospital and 52 are in ICU. Parents, teachers and students in NSW are still waiting for details of the government’s Covid plan for returning to school. Students go back to NSW government schools on 1 February, and many schools have a staff development day scheduled for this coming Friday, 28 January. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, told reporters that vaccinations – including for the 5-12 age group – and booster shots were a key part of the plan. On the return to school, he said: We are doing it in a way that is safe for parents, safe for teachers and safe for children, and we’ll be announcing those plans alongside the Victorian government shortly. The state opposition leader, Chris Minns, said on Friday that parents and teachers urgently needed clarity: We really need the NSW premier to front up and explain to the parents and teachers and students of this state when that plan will be released. AAP reports that Labor has suggested the government use public schools as vaccination hubs in a bid to boost the number of children who have received at least one dose of a vaccination before schools returns, which 24.1% of them had on Saturday. Three people with Covid have died in South Australia in the past 24 hours, the ABC has reported. The state also recorded a significant drop in cases, with 2,193 reported on Saturday compared to 3,023 on Friday. The premier, Steven Marshall, told reporters in Adelaide this morning: [This is] a very significant fall and certainly our lowest number for a very long period of time. But he said that the reduction in cases could be due to hot weather yesterday which caused delays to PCR testing. Marshall: The numbers do jump around a little bit and of course we had hot conditions yesterday and so there was a delay in PCR testing. Government MP George Christensen has amped up his conspiracy theory and anti-vaccination commentary, described by the PM as “dangerous”, while signs suggest he may be quietly planning to launch his own media brand when he retires from parliament. Christensen’s commentary has become increasingly controversial in recent months since he announced he would not recontest the north Queensland seat of Dawson at the upcoming federal election. His public commentary has included pushing anti-vaccination messages, climate change denial and apparent conspiracy theories, and comments that have undermined his own government’s public health messaging. In the process he has built a significant Facebook following of more than 111,000 people. Guardian Australia has obtained records showing Christensen has registered a business name with the Australian Securities and Investments Commission. A website domain for the MP’s company was also registered by Christensen in December. The site features the Eureka flag, which has previously been adopted by the far right, and language calling on people to “fight for our sovereignty”, and says it is “coming soon”. Speaking at the online event Prayer and Pushback on Friday, Christensen appeared to confirm a move into the media landscape. “I’m not leaving politics – I’m leaving parliament – we’re all involved in politics as citizens. I’m going to be in the fray. I was a journalist before I was in politics … I’ll probably step back into that in the future, in some way, shape or form,” he said. Read more here: Albanese has been asked by Tasmanian reporters if he thinks the Tasmanian government opened its borders too early. It follows the death of a second person with Covid-19 in Tasmania this morning. He says he respects the right of state governments to make their own decisions on state borders. I respect the decisions that state governments have done, and I think one of the things we need from the national government is to bring state governments together. I would like to see more commonality in the response, but that has been something that has happened that the prime minister and the national cabinet has presided over with state governments essentially making their own decisions based upon their own advice. I respect the decision, and I am not here to criticise the Tasmanian state government, I wish them well, there are facing major challenges ahead for the health system. I know that is the case, there are major challenges for the aged care system as well. That is causing major concern. He then pivoted back to federal issues, saying a major concern is the rollout of vaccines in the five to 12 age group. About one in four kids in this age group have had their first shot, with school resuming in a week. It’s rapid uptake but not quite fast enough. But Albanese did not directly answer when asked if he thinks the start date for primary schools should be pushed back until there is greater vaccination coverage, saying instead that the Australian government should have moved faster. I think the federal government should have been anticipating the issues that have been warned about for a long time. Labor leader Anthony Albanese has been campaigning (pre-campaigning?) in Tasmania today. He is at the Royal Flying Doctor Service in Launceston, and committed $15m to rebuilding their Launceston airport base. That’s a commitment that will be included in our very first budget and it’s a commitment that will get done. Usual caveats about polls apply, but you may be interested to know a Roy Morgan poll this week put Labor ahead nationally on 56-44. In Tasmania it put Labor at 60.5-39.5, a swing of 4.5%. A person has died with Covid-19 in Tasmania, the second death with Covid in the state since borders reopened in December. Tasmania recorded 726 new cases in the past 24 hours, with 31 people in hospital and two in ICU. Jones said the Country Fire Service, and all volunteer fire agencies, were grieving the loss. While no words can ease the raw pain we currently endure, [we appreciate] the love, respect and support of fellow emergency responders political leaders and all Australians. Help us remember the special place that country fire service holds in the public esteem. I also hope that the tributes and outpours of love and respect to those hurt and killed yesterday help with the healing process as we recover from these terrible events. Please spare a thought for the families. Louise paid the ultimate price, that all emergency responders risk when they respond and put themselves in harm’s way to protect others. We have lost a dedicated volunteer. South Australia has lost a valuable community member and her family have lost a devoted wife and mother. Louise was a much loved member of CFS and will remain forever in our hearts. SA premier Steven Marshall said firefighting was “inherently dangerous” and all firefighters faced up to those risks every time they donned the uniform. I on behalf of all South Australians want to express my sincere condolences to her family and to her friends... she is a hero. South Australian fire chief Mark Jones has been speaking in Adelaide about the death of a firefighter who was hit by a falling tree at the Coles fire yesterday. Senior firefighter Louise Hinks, 44, had been a volunteer Country Fire Service volunteer since 1994. Jones said: Yesterday we received an awful reminder of just how dangerous firefighting can be. The Country Fire Service is often described as a family, yesterday morning we lost one of those family members... Firefighters were struck by a falling tree whilst firefighting in a forestry plantation in Coles, near Lucindale in the south-east of our state. Senior firefighter Louise Hinks aged 44 was killed. And another experienced firefighter in his early 60s was seriously injured in the incident. Both are very experienced CFS firefighters. Jones said Hinks was “a much loved volunteer of the Happy Valley brigade and held positions as brigade finance officer, and as a senior firefighter. She’s remembered by colleagues as a passionate volunteer who would do anything to help any of them”. Hunt rejected suggestions that the federal government did not plan well enough for demand for rapid antigen tests, despite saying it had been buying them since August when supply constraints peaked in December. He said that testing had always been the responsibility of state and territory governments, with the federal government funding half of the PCR program. And we provide direct tests to aged care and then the private market is supplying the community through pharmacies and that’s very much the case around the world. I think it’s important to understand the United States, the United Kingdom, Europe, other countries, this is a global challenge which is followed from the Omicron wave. Not only have we had the 66 test approved, not only were we in the market and providing that supply, but the commonwealth was a very strong supporter of the role of rapid antigen tests and understandably the medical community had emphasised the role of PCR which has kept Australia safe. And I think this is a very important thing. That the strong emphasis on PCR testing, because it is more accurate, has meant we are able to maintain a tracing system which allowed during the Wuhan outbreak, during the new case strain or the alpha strain, the alpha variant, and through the Delta variant very strong contact tracing ... but that was appropriate at that stage. And as we had moved to opening up and as we have Omicron we recognise and the medical community recognised there is a much broader role where it’s not a case of trying to trace every case for the rapid antigen tests. So we are in the market early, we have been providing continuous supply and that has helped keep people safe. But equally we recognise that there has been a global spike in demand and states and territories and the Commonwealth and the private sector are all bringing additional testing to the country. A few things on that. Firstly, the United Kingdom provides free rapid antigen or lateral flow tests through the NHS and the United States has promised to distribute 500m free rapid tests. In fact a number of countries are providing free RATs – you can read about some of them here. Secondly, the preference for PCR tests as the most accurate test does not really explain why the federal government did not ensure adequate supply of rapid antigen tests in preparation for opening up. Hunt was also asked about the supply of rapid antigen tests. He says that the Australian government has provided more than 6.6m RAT tests since August. He said they had provided 200,000 tests to Queensland today, and that the federal government was focusing on providing tests to aged care and Indigenous health providers. The unspoken bit is that tests in other sectors are a matter for the states or individuals, apart from some limited federal government support. So we are doing our bit to support aged care and others. We, as I say, planned early, we made sure that these tests were approved and I think 66 tests [are] approved in Australia across point of care and self-tests. And we have been encouraging states and territories to place their own orders and now we know that there are more than 200 million orders that are in place. I do have to say that one of the reasons that we have moved apart from aligning with the domestic circumstances for international arrivals is this is a global challenge. We know from the United Kingdom, the United States, significant articles outlining the challenges they faced both with their PCR and with their rapid antigen tests or lateral flow as they are called in the UK, and in other countries. So it’s a global challenge ... in our case we were in the field early, in our case we were ordering early and we have been pleased to supply and support aged care, Indigenous care and also states to this point in time. Health minister Greg Hunt has been talking to reporters in Canberra. He was asked about the decision of the Western Australian government to vacate the 5 February border opening date. He said WA’s border opening was “very much a matter for the WA government”, but then says several things which sound like criticising the WA government. We understand many families will be disappointed, their ability to meet loved ones, their ability to see beautiful young babies or to be present for weddings. That’s all been deferred. It is a matter for Western Australia and so we recognise that that’s a decision for the one government. The Triple J Hottest 100 will kick off at 12pm today. I am very old, so the peak of the Hottest 100 for me was 1997-2004 and I do not know any of the songs. But, for the youth or those who like to fein youthfulness, Shaad D’Souza has written a helpful primer. This year one of the favourites for the No 1 spot is the Wiggles covering Tame Impala’s Elephant. Other favourites are Kamilaroi rapper the Kid Laroi with Justin Bieber, for Stay, and Olivia Rodrigo’s Good For You. You can read Shaad’s whole piece here. Staying in Tonga, Pacific editor Kate Lyons has written a timeline of how the disaster unfolded. Save the Children is setting up temporary classrooms in Tonga following the destruction of the volcanic erruption. From AAP: Save the Children will provide school bags, hygiene kits and cash assistance to affected families as it’s anticipated the scheduled start to the school year will be pushed back while the full extent of the damage is being assessed. The CEO of Save the Children Fiji said the organisation is incredibility concerned for the mental wellbeing of children in the Pacific nation, with the natural disaster causing alot of distress and anxiety. “There is absolutely a need for psychosocial support and counselling for children,” Shairana Ali said. “We still don’t have a lot of information about how families have fared on those low-lying islands, so we are very concerned for the safety and the wellbeing of children.” Power has been restored to 90 per cent of the country and some international phone calls are now available but communication networks largely remain affected after a major underwater cable was damaged. Telstra is waiving charges for calls and texts from home phones, post-paid services and mobiles for customers reaching out to family who have been impacted by recent events from Saturday. Twenty people have died with Covid in Victoria in the past 24 hours and 1,029 are in hospital, with 120 people in ICU and 39 on ventilators. Victoria recorded 16,016 new cases, 7,584 of which were self-reported rapid test results. Thirty people have died with Covid in New South Wales in the past 24 hours, and 2,762 people are in hospital – that’s up slightly from yesterday. There were 20,148 new cases recorded, 8,566 of which were from rapid antigen tests. In good news for those who already own property and bad news for those who are trying to afford their first home, the Australian real estate market has just reported the highest returns for property sales in a decade. From AAP: The rate of profit-making resales across Australia rose to 92.4 per cent in the September quarter, up 50 basis points from the previous three months and the highest returns in a decade. CoreLogic head of research Eliza Owen says considering the period was marked by lockdowns across Sydney, Melbourne and the ACT it was a remarkable result. It was also the fifth consecutive quarter of increases. Total transactions amounted to 99,000, down from 106,000 resale events in the June quarter, something blamed on distancing restrictions limiting physical inspections. The national median nominal gain was $270,000 with total resale profits at $27.3 billion. Median losses were $37,000 or $368 million in total. Owen says CoreLogic’s Pain and Gain report showed both the combined value of profit and loss fell through the quarter but the decline in total losses was more rapid. “Resales had a typical hold period of 8.8 years, which was consistent on the previous quarter,” she said. “However as the market finds a peak over the next couple of years, this may incentivise more resales and we may see the average hold period shift higher as more owners look to cash in their long-term gains.” Properties held for more than 30 years had the highest median gain of just over $745,000. Yet the highest nominal gains per year were achieved at the other end of the spectrum on properties held for two years or less, with the median figure $120,000. Regional Australia had a higher rate of resale profit, at 93.1 per cent in the quarter but the combined capitals also had a fairly high rate at 91.1 per cent. The regions have seen a more rapid increase in the rate of profit-making sales, with expectations that the trend is likely to continue. The highest portion of these was in Bendigo (99.8 per cent) followed by Hume (99.5 per cent) and the Sunshine Coast and Ballarat (99.3 per cent). With dwelling values showing further increases nationally through the December quarter, profitable sales are likely to keep on rising. However it can’t last forever. “There are accumulating headwinds for property market performance in the coming months, in the form of higher supply of advertised stock, normalising interest rates, affordability constraints and the possibility of tighter lending restrictions,” Owen said. “A downswing in Australian housing market values would ultimately impact the profitability of resales, particularly for recent purchasers.” The Victorian government is calling on retired teachers to join a pool of casual relief teachers to backfill vacancies left by teachers catching Omicron. Schools in Victoria are scheduled to return next week. On Saturday, the education minister, James Merlino called on inactive teachers, retired teachers, education support staff, retired principals and people with education administrative experience to join a “job opportunity pool”. Those staff will be deployed to schools on a fixed-term basis to fill any short-term gaps caused by people contracting cCvid-19 and needing to isolate, he said. Everyone in the pool must have a valid working with children check or Victorian Institute of Teaching registration, and must all be fully vaccinated. Merlino said: Every sector is under pressure from the Omicron variant, and education will be no exception – but we’re taking action early to make sure staff absences don’t mean huge disruptions for students’ learning. If you’re a retired or inactive teacher, school support staff member, allied health professional or administration worker – we want you to support our schools in 2022, so please get online and apply now. Tens of thousands of Australians will have had long Covid by the end of 2022, Guardian Australia health editor Melissa Davey has reported. She spoke to health economist Prof Martin Hensher, who said: I think we can be very confident that we will see many tens of thousands of people who will have long Covid, and possibly over 10,000 people who will still have long Covid by the end of the year. He said that Australia urgently needs to roll out a regular national survey to ask people about their experience with Covid, including their ongoing symptoms. We are flying blind about the actual scale of long Covid in this country. Most people with Covid-19 recover within four weeks, but 5% of those infected still have symptoms three months later. The WHO describes long covid as symptoms which last at least two months past infection and which cannot be explained by any other diagnosis. Common symptoms of long Covid include fatigue, shortness of breath, cognitive dysfunction and “others which generally have an impact on everyday functioning”. You can read Melissa’s full article here: Good morning, Australia is scrapping the requirement for international arrivals to show a negative PCR test and will accept a rapid antigen result instead. Current regulations require overseas travellers to return a negative PCR test taken up to three days before their flight, but from 1am on Sunday arrivals can instead provide a negative RAT from within 24 hours of boarding. The time a person is banned from entering the country after testing positive to Covid-19 has also been cut in half, from 14 days to seven, bringing it in line with domestic isolation requirements. But quarantine requirements upon entry remain subject to state and territory restrictions. On Thursday Western Australia announced that its border would stay closed after the premier, Mark McGowan, went back on his promise to reopen the border on 5 February. More than 20,000 people were scheduled to fly to Perth on Qantas and Jetstar flights alone in the first week the West Australian borders were set to reopen. Qantas CEO Alan Joyce said the situation was “deeply concerning”. [West Australians] would be asking, ‘If not now, when?’” treasurer Josh Frydenberg told the Seven Network on Friday, while the president of the Australian Medical Association, Dr Omar Khorshid, and the Business Council of Australia also criticised the delay. Friday was Australia’s deadliest day of the pandemic so far, with 88 virus-related fatalities reported across the country. More than half of the deaths announced on Friday were recorded in NSW, which had 46 fatalities, a one-day record in the state. Yesterday Queensland reduced its booster interval from four to three months, following NSW, Victoria, ACT and South Australia, while health experts warned that delaying elective surgeries in Victoria will see blown-out waiting lists spiral into a “massive healthcare crisis”. Today the ABC will also be broadcasting Triple J’s Hottest 100. Who will win? Justin Bieber and Kid Laroi? Olivia Rodrigo? Billie Eilish? The Wiggles’ cover of Tame Impala’s Elephant? We’ll bring you all the news throughout the day. If you see something, you can contact me at @callapilla on Twitter or via email at calla.wahlquist@theguardian.comQuestions 1 What “died at the Oval on 29 August 1882”? 2 What defines a Weird society? 3 Which TV show took its title from a Whiskas advert? 4 Which wonder of the ancient world may not have existed? 5 On what does Nikkie de Jager offer online advice? 6 Which medieval dynasty was named after the broom plant? 7 Which political document sold for $43m last year? 8 What was traditionally stored in a fiasco? What links: 9 Indian cobra; red fox; common buzzard; Eurasian lynx? 10 Cheviot; Donegal; Harris; Saxony; Yorkshire? 11 James Webb; Cheops; Hubble; Astrosat? 12 Dapple; Modestine; Benjamin; Puzzle? 13 Snooker players; race walkers; flamingos? 14 Îles Sorlingues; Îles Anglo-Normandes; Orcades? 15 Woolworth; Singer; Metropolitan Life; Chrysler? Answers 1 English cricket (mock Ashes obituary). 2 Western, Educated, Industrialised, Rich and Democratic. 3 8 Out of 10 Cats. 4 Hanging gardens of Babylon. 5 Makeup/beauty (NikkieTutorials on YouTube). 6 Plantagenet (from Latin name planta genista). 7 US constitution (original copy). 8 Chianti wine. 9 Zoological triple tautonyms: naja naja naja; vulpes vulpes vulpes; buteo buteo buteo; lynx lynx lynx. 10 Types of tweed. 11 Space telescopes. 12 Literary donkeys: Don Quixote; Travels With a Donkey in the Cévennes; Animal Farm; Chronicles of Narnia. 13 One foot on the ground (in the rules, in the case of snooker and race walking). 14 French names for British archipelagos: Isles of Scilly; Channel Islands; Orkney. 15 Early-20th-century New York skyscrapers.It’s a set-piece, sarge. Through the tunnels of London. Scottish bloke on the walkie-talkie. Code words. ETAs. Vicky McClure. You know where you are with Vicky McClure. Short back and sides, no messing around. Classic haircut for a reason. Yeah she’ll have a topknot with it, why not. You wanna say something? Me and all the boys can’t hear you. You wanna say something? About Vicky McClure’s topknot? Thought not. Council block, sarge. Road block. I’ll give you the rundown on Trigger Point (starting Sunday): ITV has overspent on getting the two main actors in, so everyone around them just isn’t quite as good. Adrian Lester’s here, look. Good bloke. Family bloke. Complicated handshake. All right, enough fannying around, yeah? Suit up. We’ve got a bomb to dispose of. The thing with Line of Duty is that it’s Line of Duty, and we’re not here to make Line of Duty. But the lads out here like gritty police procedurals with a bit of Enigma machine-style codebreaking, don’t they? They’ve got the taste for it, and Jed Mercurio’s got the secret sauce. All right, fine, he didn’t write this one. Someone else did, jog on. But it’s his production company, so he’s the one who’ll go on Twitter if you don’t like it. Write that down. Upstairs, third on the left, copy. We’re on the cusp of a new era here, sarge. You know what I mean when I say “Scandi drama”: a police officer in an elegant overcoat is going to drive out beyond some fjords and say nowt. And you know what I mean when the murder is a “legacy drama” set in “the USA”, an all: one girl’s dead, nothing’s as it seems, everyone in town seems to have had some sort of interaction with her or her suspiciously grumpy dad. Back in the day, British detective shows were all twee little villages or that magician bloke. Not any more, yeah? We’re the best in the world at driving a 4x4 out to an abandoned factory building and telling everyone to GET OUT! THIS IS YOUR LAST WARNING! I AM A POLICE OFFICER AND I WILL FIRE! Twists? Yeah, we’ve got twists, sarge. And we’ve got turns. We’ve got some pretty bananas set pieces, too. Entire first episode is set in the same block of flats, as Vicky McClure and Adrian Lester alternate between disarming bombs and doing banter. Is it your turn to buy chips or not? Private joke. You wouldn’t get it. But we get it. This job is everything to us. It’s not a career, yeah? It’s a calling. You’ve got my back and I’ve got yours. Now chill and take five, I’ve got a car door to open in a really high-tension way. Sort of show that teaches you lingo, boss. IED. Hard cover. Forty-five minutes of this and you’ll be fairly confident you can disarm a nail bomb using a steady hand and some snips. Sorry, slipped into force-chat: civs call them “wire cutters”, I think. Wouldn’t know. It’s been a long time since I did anything civilian. I don’t eat lunch, for instance; I just have a big energy drink while leaning on the back of my car. I use lockers as a storage device more than any other adult alive. And don’t even ask me about grit. Can’t move for grit. They’ve got Kevin Eldon doing a northern accent, that’s how gritty it is. Gotta go, boss: I’ve accidentally toppled the series of dominos that will aim a rightwing pro-England political party at the real and dreadful threat of Isis, and in setting an ITV show in the middle of that geopolitical discourse I’ve started off a whole big round of blogging. One last thing before I go: these lurching police dramas might lean on cliffhangers too heavily, yeah, but they do make you sit up and gasp. Nothing wrong with that. And here’s the thing, right: you can’t gasp at drama if you don’t think the stakes are real. Vicky McClure’s sweating her topknot off here in front of a wired-up boiler and due to the density of the world around her – you feel the hard lessons these people have gone through; you feel the roughness of certain working relationships and the smoothness of others; there’s guile, and a certain British griminess, and all of it is laid thick like a fog – and if all that wasn’t there, I wouldn’t give a shit if she blew up or not, sarge. But it is, so I’m enraptured, and I’m taking notes, and I’m pretty sure if you turn one of these codes sideways the whole thing reveals itself. Keep it under your hat, yeah. See ya, sarge. I’m just off to disarm a vest-bomb with maverick elan.“What is the best thing about Norway?” asks the leading character in this intriguing film from Norwegian writer-director Anders Emblem. Her friend answers: “Mountains? A-ha?” To which the original speaker replies that she was actually thinking more of things like the welfare state. It’s a quibbling, playful, thoughtful exchange, which appears also to coincide with tentative sexual advances, and it’s very characteristic of this elegant, seriocomic, beautifully shot, slow-cinema piece with some great cat acting and quirky touches of Murakami. Asta (Amalie Ibsen Jensen) is a young woman who lives with Live (Maria Agwumaro) in an airy apartment in the Norwegian port town of Ålesund, opposite a derelict building at which Asta is often seen gazing thoughtfully. Live is a carpenter who specialises in repairing chairs. She also likes to play the electric organ that the landlord has left in the attic. In what appears to be a lull in her personal and professional life, Asta applies to the local newspaper, Sunnmørsposten, for temporary shift work. After working on some stories about fan discontent with the local football team, and greedy developers threatening to destroy the art nouveau architecture for which the town is famous, Asta hits on a story that means something to her: an asylum seeker called Aslan who has been forcibly repatriated. She sets out to discover more about him and appears reasonably content with the resulting sombre article about Norwegians’ troubled conscience – though the question of where Aslan is now is another matter. In fact, Asta (and Live) may both be more distracted by the issue of Asta’s depression and possible self-harm. Everything that we see on screen: all the slow establishing shots, the angular visual compositions, all the bright, palate-cleansing tableaux of the town and its steep picturesque lanes, the sweet shots of the cat, the newspaper investigating and the chairs … It may all just be displacement activity. It may all simply be about Asta’s healing – or about her reluctance to heal. And this healing also plays a part in the fact that Live appears to be in love with Asta. And the emptiness of the town is itself arresting. The pandemic isn’t mentioned and no-one is wearing masks. But I wonder if Emblem hasn’t adopted a kind of lockdown aesthetic for his movie, a deliberate dream-like emptiness. A Human Position is a question mark of a film with its elusive, happy-sad tone. It lingered in my mind. • A Human Position screened at the Tromsø film festival in January 2021.A little over a decade ago my daughter Aggie asked me a question that changed the path of my working life. She asked: “Can we ride to the park?” It wasn’t her question that altered everything, it was my answer – which was: “No.” We live in a typical northern seaside town, and the park in question was – I know because I measured it later – 549 metres away, a distance that takes a little over one minute to ride. I, an ex-Olympic cyclist, didn’t feel I could keep my daughter safe on our roads for one minute. And that felt very wrong. It wasn’t what I wanted for her, and it wasn’t the place I wanted to live. So I decided to do something about it. It quickly became clear that advocating for cycling wasn’t hard. I could pick almost any topic in the news and more cycling made it better: health, climate, cost of transport, levelling up – the list goes on. Cycling was an easy cause to love. It was a terrible irony then, that in 2016, while I was campaigning for safer cycling, my mother, Carol, was killed by a driver while out on a ride. The devastating experience galvanised my desire to ensure that anyone getting around on foot or by bike could be confident of doing so safely. In 2017 a phone call from the mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham, gave me the opportunity to do just that and I became his cycling and walking commissioner. He and the region’s leaders had seen that active travel was the logical foundation for a sustainable, healthy transport system – as it is in towns and cities across the world. Over the course of the next four years, we planned a 1,800-mile network for the city region, not for “cyclists” but to enable people, doing everyday things in normal clothes, to do so without cars if they chose. Mark from Stretford’s story is exactly what this is all about. As it does for millions of people, his day began by bundling his two boys into the back of the car and driving them less than a mile to the school, a stressful round trip at rush hour that could easily take half an hour even without having to find a parking space. Two round trips every day. A total of 190 hours – more than a week – of his and his sons’ lives spent in a car every year. Then, as part of a local active neighbourhood, his council put in some planters and he realised he could now get to the kids’ school on quiet streets via a local park and avoid the morning melee. Mark now walks to school with his kids, who ride or scoot, every day. The trip takes just 10 minutes and it’s better than stress-free; it’s actually enjoyable with a bit of daily exercise thrown in for good measure. Seeing what making safe space could do was incredible, so I was delighted when the national government produced its “Gear Change” strategy for England, setting out a clear roadmap to give everyone in the country the same choice as Mark. New national standards to make sure all cycling infrastructure is safe, an inspectorate to ensure councils adhere to the guidelines and training provision so local authorities could start doing this as a matter of course, were all part of the plan. When the transport secretary asked me to help set up Active Travel England, the new executive agency that will be charged with delivering this vision, it was the most natural choice in the world to accept. The body is exactly what is needed to give people the option to travel actively, to feel able to leave the car at home more often and help children get to school under their own steam. And to make sure this becomes an embedded part of our transport futures, it will act as a statutory consultee for all major developments, meaning developers will have to make high-quality provision for those who want to walk, wheel or ride. We will give people the choice to enjoy rather than endure journeys and to kick off their day fresh and invigorated, not frustrated and irritated. That’s the future Mark has now for himself and his two boys and it’s the one I want to help make for Aggie. I intend to make sure that when she has a family, she’ll be able to say “Yes” when they ask if they can ride to the park. Chris Boardman is the interim commissioner of Active Travel EnglandIt has always been a great strength that there are so many international influences in the hospitality sector in this country: they enrich it, they make it interesting, they make it fun. But now, the perfect storm of the pandemic and Brexit is severely affecting that diversity. In my restaurants, we have seen a substantial number of people leave and go back to Europe over the past year and a half, and not enough people are coming to fill the places of those who have left; it’s really crippling the industry. It makes hiring and keeping talent, from the commis chefs and the kitchen porters to experienced head chefs and managers, very competitive. We even had a guy we had hired in the morning walk out halfway through his shift because he said he’d had a better job offer. There is one positive: I do see more Britons coming to work in the sector, which is great, but there are nowhere near enough, leaving us at risk of no longer being a global leader in food. When I first came to the UK from Israel in 1997, many years before Brexit, Europeans were everywhere. There were French and Germans and Italians and Greeks and Scandinavians at all levels of the hospitality industry – I’ve worked with people from all of those countries over the years. I’d say that at least 60% of the jobs were taken by immigrants, most of them from Europe. My own story is one of immigration: when I set up the Ottolenghi deli in London in 2002, all bar two of the people starting it up with me were immigrants. My partners were Sami Tamimi, a Palestinian, and Noam Bar, an Israeli. Everything we brought was from another part of the world. There was obviously a strong Middle Eastern feel to the ingredients, the techniques, the dishes – and it was a wonderful and very satisfying feeling to bring the food that I grew up with here – alongside north African, southern European and antipodean influences. The UK was very open in its acceptance of food from the rest of the world and I am grateful for that. In other parts of Europe – Italy and France being the most typical examples – there is a strong patriotic tradition of cooking. Twenty years ago, there was a kind of an apologetic tone when it came to British food. There’s much less of that today. Watching the mood in some quarters of the UK turn against immigration has been hard. I always felt it was a terrible shame that the inequalities people experience in British societies are attributed to immigration. Over the years I’ve felt sorry, angry, misunderstood, because people have made that confusion between immigrants and social issues; they have the wrong target. Like other cultural phenomena, food is enriched by interaction between different cultures – we wouldn’t have all the incredible cuisines without having absorbed people from all over the world. You can get some of the best Sri Lankan, Persian, Malaysian, Lebanese, Vietnamese, Chinese, even Mexican restaurants here, thanks to people who have immigrated. The diversity, the plurality, the pure deliciousness of food in this country today would not have been the same had it not been for those who have come, cooked their food and made their cultures thrive in a hospitable environment. People really take it for granted. In the 60s and 70s, you could only get olive oil from a pharmacy. You could only get pomegranates in speciality shops in London owned by Iranians and Arabs; herb and spice selections were a lot smaller; even aubergines were hard to find. People think that hummus, which is now a staple spread in the UK, has always been here. But that was not the case 25 years ago. In a restaurant kitchen, cultural differences make for interesting interactions. Years ago, I worked with a totally inexperienced but hard-working young guy from Malaysia. I will never forget the time I asked him to make fruit salad. He went and picked out the ingredients – and returned with a bowl full of fruit with a pile of tomatoes on top. One dish we cooked at my restaurant Nopi was the product of having a Catalan chef in the kitchen. Scully, the head chef, was working on a take on a Moroccan pastilla, which is a sweetmeat pie. He wanted to make this incredibly rich, beautiful dish even more special. The Catalan chef suggested adding a layer of spinach cooked the Catalan way – sweet and sour with pine nuts – and it just worked so well with the Moroccan flavours, the cinnamon and shredded meat. People bring their heritage in this way and enrich menus in restaurants across the country. Many of our staff are still from the EU, and I would love to find a way for them to keep on being allowed to come. It would be the most incredible thing if the government could understand the predicament of the sector, but also the benefits that immigrants bring. I don’t want to turn back time, and we need to accept that we’re in a different world post-Brexit. But I would love recognition of how incredible this industry has been for our culture. It has meant that tourists come from all over the world to try our food. We have exported celebrity chefs internationally, and it brings so much not only in terms of our wellbeing, but also our economy. When immigrants are allowed to work in our kitchens and on restaurant floors, and to start their own ventures, everybody gains. There would be only winners, no losers. As told to Ellie Violet BramleyWhen FC Barcelona took to the pitch for the 2021 Spanish Super Cup final, the trophy wasn’t the only prize at stake. Thousands of blaugrana fans were also keeping an eye on the market for FCB’s “fan token”, the club’s very own cryptocurrency. Socios, the web-based platform that pioneered fan tokens, had promised to “burn” 20,000 tokens for every goal Barcelona scored – and 40,000 if they lifted the cup. In theory, success on the pitch would increase the scarcity of the currency, boosting its value. In practice, Barcelona lost the game and, footballing passions aside, it didn’t make much difference anyway. With 3.5m of the tokens in circulation, not to mention millions more retained by the club for future issuance, a few thousand here or there wouldn’t have moved the needle. But the stunt symbolised something more, the burgeoning love affair between football and cryptocurrency, an alliance that holds the promise of new revenue streams for a game that is already awash with cash but always wants more. Football finance expert Kieran Maguire thinks clubs have latched on to crypto because revenues from other sources are starting to level off, having risen reliably for decades. “Football clubs have realised that we’re now at max broadcast revenues, with modest growth at most to look forward to,” he said. “As far as commercial sponsors are concerned, we’re seeing deals being renewed but not with increased money. The only way to increase matchday sales is to increase prices and fans are reluctant.” Manchester United – whether one believes the club or not – claims to have 1.1 billion fans on the planet. With revenue of £488m in 2019-20, that’s just 45p per year, per fan. “Clubs are thinking: ‘Can we ‘find another way of extracting money out of that huge fanbase?’ That’s where tokens come in.” When AC Milan launched a token in early 2021, it raised $6m (£4.4m) in under an hour, or about 12% of the value of the club’s record signing, Leonardo Bonucci. Paris Saint-Germain’s token, the most valuable, has a market value of $45m. In the murky and unregulated world of crypto though, it’s hard to know how much clubs are actually making. Socios said last year it had sold $300m worth of fan tokens but would not say how much of that went to the clubs with which it partnered. Other platforms, such as Binance, are also moving into the fan token market, indicating there is room for growth, particularly given that only a few dozen clubs have entered the market in any meaningful way. Pedro Herrera, senior blockchain analyst at DappRadar, a marketplace for blockchain-related apps, said that most fans buy tokens for the associated perks, such as votes on small decisions about which song to play over the stadium tannoy after a goal, or entry into a draw to win a signed shirt. “It’s a win for the fan because they feel more involved; it’s a win for the team because it’s adding a layer of monetisation; and it’s a win for the [crypto] industry because you attract the masses and it’s one step closer to mass adoption.” Maguire isn’t against crypto but adds a more sceptical tone: “Lots of fans love crypto and in its purest form it’s great. Banks have been overcharging people for years in terms of transaction fees and if crypto can reduce those fees that’s fantastic.” “The problem is when unscrupulous traders, particularly via social media, seek to exploit fans who think a token is a serious investment product, rather than a glorified collectible. “It’s magic beans. So long as it’s sold as a digital Panini card, it’s OK. But when it’s being seen as a form of investment, it’s moving into uncomfortable territory.” “It’s unregulated, it’s volatile and it’s subject to manipulation by people who own large amounts of the asset.” Fan tokens, though, are a mere paragraph in football’s rapidly unfolding crypto saga. In 2021, crypto sponsors piled into football and were welcomed with open arms by cash-hungry clubs, leagues and players. Exchange app Crypto.com sponsors Italy’s Serie A, one of the world’s most glamorous leagues, while Socios is Internazionale’s shirt sponsor. EToro, a trading platform that facilitates investment in multiple cryptocurrencies, has deals with more than half of the clubs in the Premier League. Southampton players are understood to have been offered the option to be paid bonuses in bitcoin, as part of a £7.5m-a-year deal with Coingaming Group. And in January 2021, striker David Barral made history when he became the first player in a major league to be signed with bitcoin, albeit in Spain’s third tier with Internacional de Madrid. Much better-known players and ex-pros, such as Paul Pogba and John Terry, are promoting cryptocurrencies, trading platforms and non-fungible tokens (NFTs) – the controversial digital art form – too. This should come as no surprise given the reach that big-name stars have via social media and the money they can make from promotions. Other partnerships are perhaps more unexpected. Visitors to the Twitter profile of former Republic of Ireland international Tony Cascarino might have been wrongfooted by the former striker’s sudden change of pace midway through 2021. One moment he was musing on the latest developments in the Premier League, the next he was evangelising about blockchain bank Babb (no relation to former Ireland teammate Phil) and musing that the “crypto market is on fire”. Even in its infancy, the reputational risks of this new commercial pact between crypto and football have become all too clear. Last year, Manchester City’s deal with a mysterious firm called 3Key Technologies fell apart in a matter of days as it emerged that nobody seemed to know anything about the company or its executives. In December, Arsenal were rapped on the knuckles by the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), which banned a club promotion that it said was exploiting fans’ “inexperience or credulity, trivialising investment in crypto assets, misleading consumers over the risk of investment and not making it clear the ‘token’ was a crypto asset”. “For those in sport looking for sponsorship, it’s a whole new market of opportunity but it’s a bit of a landmine you’re dealing with,” said Bill Esdaile, managing director of sports marketing agency Square in the Air. “My gut feeling is that such a small percentage of people understand how [crypto] works that too many decisions are made on trust, thinking that if [crypto firms] say they’ve got the money, they do.” The amounts on offer appear to be going up. Premier League strugglers Watford have perhaps the country’s biggest crypto deal, a front-of-shirt sponsorship from Stake.com. The site offers crypto gambling, which isn’t legal in the UK but may appeal to the league’s hundreds of millions of viewers around the world. The arrangement even means that Watford players’ shirt sleeves bear the logo of Dogecoin, a “joke” currency whose value swings around wildly, often in response to tweets by Tesla multibillionaire Elon Musk. Kieran Maguire estimates that the shirt deal could be worth up to £8m, based on the typical value of such partnerships, while an insider at Watford told MSN in August that the Dogecoin sleeve display added £700,000 into the mix. Sums like these will become increasingly difficult for clubs to ignore, he thinks, particularly if the government goes ahead with a root-and-branch overhaul of gambling regulation that could see football lose the cash cow of shirt deals with betting firms. “They [clubs] see the token market as slightly to one side, it won’t get picked up by the gambling review and it will help fill the gap,” says Maguire. “Those deals of £5m to £8m could be replaced by NFT advertising and by crypto.” In a recent paper, psychology researcher and gambling expert Dr Phil Newall warned that football sponsorship may be about to swap one risky product for another. “Research has found that cryptocurrency traders are likely to have problem gambling symptoms, and has identified psychological similarities between cryptocurrency trading and online sports betting,” wrote Newall. He believes removing gambling advertising may create more space in which to legitimise equally dangerous products. As they burn through cash in the pursuit of glory, it seems unlikely that clubs will worry about that.Households on green energy tariffs who assumed they would be unaffected by soaring gas prices have been shocked to be told their electricity bills are rising, despite them being signed up to a renewable supply. Suzanne Taylor has been told that her fixed daytime tariff with the renewable energy supplier So will double from 16p to 32p a unit if she renews it this month. “So is blaming the current energy crisis,” she says. “Its website says that 100% of its electricity is supplied from renewable sources so why would it be affected by gas prices?” More than half of new energy tariffs are now marketed as “green” and 9 million customers have switched to deals that promise supplies from renewable sources. However, many are unaware that because providers rely on the National Grid to distribute electricity, they can’t control its source. Energy is pooled in the grid, and when demand outstrips the availability of renewables, the grid tops up the supply with gas. On average only about a third of the electricity from the grid is from renewable sources, while more than a third is powered by natural gas. The rest comes from other sources, such as nuclear. Companies offering green tariffs typically invest the revenue in renewable energy sources, covering the equivalent of the kilowatt hours consumed by their customers. However, these prices are also affected by the cost of gas because providers of renewables raise or lower their charges in line with the wider energy market in which the fossil fuel remains a key driver. So Energy, which specialises in offering renewable tariffs, tells Guardian Money that its electricity prices are dictated by the cost of gas, but that it has advance purchase agreements with a range of renewable power plants to increase green energy generation. It also pays the plants a sum that reflects each megawatt hour of energy consumed by its customers. “In this way, we are using the existing grid and slowly replacing its input from non-renewable to renewable sources, which is the best we can do without building a rival National Grid,” it says. Another specialist provider, Good Energy, says that although it backed all of the power it supplied with electricity bought from a community of more than 1,900 generators, directly investing in the growth of renewables, it was still affected by wholesale prices. “The prices we pay generators are influenced by the wider market but also … we still have to trade wholesale power. We match customer demand with renewable power as much of the time as possible, and of course 100% across a year, but when there are shortfalls our trading team have to look to the wholesale market,” it says. Campaigners have warned that people could be misled by sales talk that fails to reflect the complexity of the green energy market. “Essentially, you should consider your electricity to have the same carbon footprint as everyone else’s no matter what tariff you are on,” says Josie Wexler, a researcher at Ethical Consumer. “Ofgem [the energy regulator] should be forcing companies to be much more honest about what ‘100% renewable’ really means.” Wexler says that the specialist providers have the strongest case for saying that their tariffs are fully renewable, because they are investing in their own plants or have purchase agreements with clean energy producers. These agreements guarantee the purchase of energy to match all or most of their customers’ consumption. Ecotricity and So Energy parent ESB are constructing their own sources. Good Energy and Green Energy UK (GEUK) have power purchase agreements covering 100% of their customers’ electricity use. Wexler adds that Ecotricity also avoids the fossil fuel market. As customers are finding to their cost, some of the specialists are not covered by Ofgem’s price cap on variable tariffs. Ecotricity, Good Energy and GEUK have a permanent exemption because their variable deals are ones that customers have chosen to be on, and because they support the generation of renewable energy. While the price cap means a typical unit price for electricity of 21p a kWh, Good Energy and Ecotricity’s are set are about 34p (see box). Taylor’s company, So, is price capped, so its variable tariff will be cheaper than the new fixed rate price it has quoted her. Ofgem says that while gas remains a staple of the electricity market it will affect green tariffs, and suppliers must not make unfounded or confusing claims about their energy sources. “As we transition to net zero, it is vital consumers can trust the renewable energy claims made by suppliers and that these are backed up by the appropriate evidence in order for them to make informed choices about their supply,” it says. “We expect all suppliers to comply with the rules on disclosing where they source their electricity from and will continue to monitor compliance, taking appropriate action where this isn’t the case.” Taylor feels misled. “So Energy says very clearly that all its power is green,” she says. “The fact that suppliers have to use the National Grid may be true but it’s not clear to the consumer if you are not in the energy business.” So Energy says it has links from its homepage to places where you can find this information, and has “always been transparent and clear” on how energy is supplied. ‘I’m so worried about price rises I’m considering moving out’ Kirsten Downer is a furious Ecotricity customer who feels very let down. In November the supplier increased the unit price of her economy 7 electricity by 29% and said her projected bill for the two-bed flat in south-east London that she shares with a lodger would be rising by £480 to an “unaffordable” £2,362 a year. She is currently paying more than 35p for a daytime unit of electricity compared with the capped average of 24p/kWh. Her night-time rate is more than 16p against the 12.5p paid by neighbours on standard tariffs. “I am so worried about these price hikes that I’m considering moving out of my home, where I’ve lived for 20 years,” she says. “My unit costs went up by 40% last autumn and my latest monthly usage was £311, compared to £90 a couple of years ago. All I read about is what will happen to those families currently protected by the Ofgem price cap when that is increased in April. “But what about the consumers like me who did the right thing by taking out a green tariff but are now paying eye-watering sums as a result? No coverage has yet been given to the fact that we’re already suffering fuel poverty. I have tried to switch to a cheaper supplier but was told they were not taking on new customers – meaning I am stuck with these unaffordable bills.” After the Guardian’s intervention, Octopus Energy has agreed to take over Downer’s supply from Ecotricity, which should bring her bills down significantly when she moves to its standard variable tariff, which is covered by the price cap. An Ecotricity spokesperson says: “The price cap is expected to rise by about £700 in April – and this increase will close the gap on our tariffs to rival suppliers. Derogation enabled us to react to wholesale price movements before the rest of the market. We do not expect our prices to rise in April – but we can’t predict exactly what happens next due to the volatility in the wholesale energy market – and the fact the government has yet to reveal how much of the cost of supplier failures will be added back on to energy bills.”Her name was Peanut. I was drawn to her because she looked like the Jack Russell terrier from the TV show Frasier (the only likable member of the cast) and maybe also because of some bottomless loneliness. The pandemic seemed to nudge so many people into getting pets so maybe I should also become a mother to this oversized rat? A lot of people in the US got a dog in the pandemic. Almost 9 million dogs have been acquired by households since the start of the pandemic (a number equivalent to the population of New York City) bringing the total number of dogs in the US to 108 million (that’s roughly one dog to every three humans in the US). And cats crept up too – an additional 5 million in the space of just a few years bringing the total US feline count to 79 million. It’s hard to say how many of these pets have gone to first-time owners. In fact, all of these numbers are pretty rough estimates because counting animals is a lot less rigorous than counting humans. But several organizations are interested in getting this data – whether it’s veterinary groups or pet food manufacturers – pet ownership has big consequences for household spending and the US economy in general. The numbers I’m using here come from the American Pet Products Association. There were concerns among animal rights groups that many of these animals went to first-time owners who weren’t necessarily well-equipped to take good care of them. People who kept jobs might need to return to their place of work and abandon their pets. And those who had lost their jobs (a lot of people in the US have) might not be able to afford their new animals either. Some sources, like this study in the journal Frontiers in Veterinary Science, have even disputed these numbers and found a small decline in pet ownership, which was attributed to pet owners decreasing financial security. The authors of the study were especially interested in retention – in other words, how many of the households that got new pets during the pandemic have kept them? But it turns out that most of the dogs and cats who found new homes during the pandemic are still there. Reassuringly, national databases of animal shelters didn’t see a big spike in animals being “surrendered”. Overall, 90% of the dogs and 85% of the cats that were acquired during Covid, are still in their new homes. I feared I would be part of the 10% so I never took Peanut home from the shelter after I met her last year. But if I had, I think I would have changed her name – anything but Bella or Max, since it turns out those are the canine equivalent of calling a child John Smith.The National Crime Agency has said that end-to-end encryption risks “turning the lights out” for law enforcers trying to prevent child abuse, after the UK data watchdog said failure to introduce strongly encrypted messaging poses a risk to children. The NCA said referrals from social media companies led to 500 arrests and safeguarded 650 children every month in the UK, but that will become “much more challenging” to achieve under widespread use of end-to-end encryption. The NCA was responding to an intervention by the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) in the debate over end-to-end encryption, which is taking place against a backdrop of plans by Mark Zuckerberg’s Facebook Messenger and Instagram apps to incorporate end-to-end encryption on messages next year. The ICO said on Friday that delaying the introduction of end-to-end encryption in communications put everyone at risk, including children, saying that it played an important role in safeguarding privacy and online safety. Nevertheless, Rob Jones, a director general at the NCA, said: “Strong encryption protects users’ privacy and can provide many benefits, but any move to E2EE [end-to-end encryption] also needs to include measures which maintain the ability to protect children and identify images of abuse. A jump to E2EE without this capability risks turning the lights out for law enforcement worldwide.” Last year the NCA, which fights serious and organised crime, said serial sex offender David Wilson had used Facebook Messenger and claimed he might have escaped justice if his messages had been end-to-end encrypted. Jones said tipoffs from tech companies on illegal content played a significant role in combatting abuse. “The nub of the cyber tip regime, used by industry to report child sexual abuse, is content and that allows a very fast dynamic law enforcement response because it enables us to develop suspicion, belief or in other jurisdictions, probable cause. That content will go if the current privacy model lands in the way it’s been described. So all those tips are at risk – all of those tips.” Stephen Bonner, the ICO’s executive director for innovation and technology, said on Friday that accessing encrypted content was not the only way to catch abusers. He pointed to other methods used by law enforcement including infiltrating abuse rings, listening to reports from children targeted by abusers and using evidence from convicted abusers. Child safety campaigners have said the encryption plans would prevent law enforcement and tech platforms from seeing messages by ensuring that only the sender and recipient can view their content – a process known as end-to-end encryption. This week a new government-backed campaign was launched saying strong encryption risked “blindfolding” social media companies to abuse. People’s data in the UK is covered by the General Data Protection Regulation, which states that encryption is one of the security measures that processors and controllers of data – like social media companies – should consider in relation to keeping data secure.When Donald Trump announced plans in 2006 to build a golf complex on ancient sand dunes on the Aberdeenshire coast in Scotland he told reporters it was love at first sight. “As soon as I saw it there was no question about it,” he said. It would be the world’s “greatest golf course”. This week Trump International Scotland became a central element of a case that looks poised to dominate his post-presidential life, and could even put him behind bars. Local fishermen denounced Trump as a “loudmouth bully” during construction of the course. Environmentalists warned the development would destroy the natural habitat, and sure enough it did inflict such damage that the site was stripped of its protected status. But none of this deflected Trump from his goal. Today, the Scottish complex stands as a “premier luxury golf” experience replete with five-star hotel and helicopter landing pad, at a bargain membership of £2,595 ($3,518) a year. Fifteen years on, the property has done wonders for its owner. That is, if you measure success according to the idiosyncratic accounting style of Donald Trump. He bought the 2,000 acres (809 hectares) site at Menie in 2006 for $12.6m. Within five short years it was valued by the Trump Organization in its financial statements at $161m, an increase of almost 13 times. By 2014, the windswept Scottish holding was put at $436m. The hike caught the attention of Letitia James, New York state’s progressive attorney general known for her relentless pursuit of the rich and powerful. How the Scottish property came to rise meteorically in value is one of the matters she is exploring in her continuing investigation into Trump Organization finances. In a new filing released this week designed to pressure Trump and two of his children – Ivanka and Donald Jr – into facing questioning, James forensically dissects how such strikingly large valuations came about. The 2011 estimate for the Scottish property, her investigators discovered, included an estimated £75m ($121m at 2011 exchange rates) for undeveloped land at the site. Investigating deeper, they found that the figure had been created for an article in Forbes magazine. The revelation prompted a line in this week’s filing that must be among the tartest in US financial history. “It thus appears,” James writes, “that the valuation of Trump Aberdeen used for Mr Trump’s financial statement was prepared for purposes of providing information to Forbes magazine in a quote.” James’s legal document is packed with similarly juicy titbits. The 2014 value of the Scottish golf club was based in part on the projected sale price of 2,500 houses on the land, even though none of the houses actually existed and the company had planning permission for only half that number. In 1995 the Trump Organization bought a parcel of land in Westchester, New York, known as the Seven Springs Estate, for $7.5m. By 2004 it was valued at $80m and by 2014 at $291m. That 2014 figure, James notes in another exquisitely tart reference, included a valuation of $161m for “seven non-existent mansions”. The juiciest titbit of all concerns Trump’s former home, the gilded Fifth Avenue temple to his own ego dubbed “Versailles in the sky”, in which he lived before moving into the White House. James’s investigators were puzzled to find the Trump Tower triplex in Manhattan was listed at $327m in 2015, based on the apartment’s size, allegedly 30,000 sq feet. In fact the property is 11,000 sq feet, which produces a value of $117m. That’s an overstatement in Trump’s official financial statements of more than $200m. Such startling disparities matter, James insists in her 114-page filing. The financial statements that contained them were used to secure loans from banks as well as insurance, and in other instances to reduce Trump’s tax burden. “We have uncovered significant evidence that suggests Donald J Trump and the Trump Organization falsely and fraudulently valued multiple assets and misrepresented those values to financial institutions for economic benefit,” James said after the filing was lodged in a New York court. The new material disclosed by James was so compelling that some close observers of Trumpland are now convinced that he is in serious legal trouble. Michael Cohen, Trump’s former personal attorney and an ex-vice president of the Trump Organization, told the Guardian: “The House of Trump is crumbling.” Cohen, who was released in November from house arrest having had his own legal difficulties, has skin in this game. It was his testimony to the House oversight committee in February 2019 that sounded the alarm over allegedly inflated evaluations in Trump’s financial statements, which in turn prompted James to open her investigation the following month. “My testimony before the committee as well as my subsequent cooperation with the New York attorney general has led to this day,” Cohen said. “We are seeing individuals who have continuously escaped responsibility for their actions finally being held accountable.” James is pursuing her investigation as a civil case, which means that were Trump to be found liable it could cost him heavily in fines and penalties. More seriously, James is working in coordination with the Manhattan district attorney, Alvin Bragg, a similarly tenacious and relentless prosecutor equipped with a large and highly experienced team of investigators. Bragg is asking exactly the same questions as James: did the Trump Organization commit accounting, bank, tax or insurance fraud? The critical difference is that Bragg’s investigation is criminal, threatening Trump not with fines but prison time. “Trump could end up in an orange jumpsuit at the end of that one,” said Timothy O’Brien, a senior columnist for Bloomberg Opinion. O’Brien also has a personal stake in this story. His book TrumpNation, a 2005 biography that raised doubts about Trump’s actual wealth in eerily similar terms to the James and Bragg investigations today, so irked the real estate developer that he sued O’Brien for billions of dollars. O’Brien’s lawyers deposed Trump as part of his defense. Over two days they managed to do something that has rarely been done before or since – they got the celebrity to acknowledge, no fewer than 30 times, that he had lied. “My lawyers were so well prepared that when he sat down for the deposition we had documentary evidence at hand that showed the reality of what he had lied about or exaggerated. We simply pushed those over the table at him,” O’Brien recalled. Many of the misleading elements – the value of his golf clubs, real estate assets in New York – were virtually identical to the details contained in this week’s filing. Which is why O’Brien feels confident in saying that the patterns that James outlines in her court document extend far back. “This is behaviour that Trump has been engaging with since he was a toddler, frankly,” O’Brien said. The libel suit was dismissed in 2009. The author was surprised that despite the mass of detail he had exposed in TrumpNation of potential malfeasance, no prosecutor showed interest. “There was ample fodder in my book for prosecutors to pursue, but nobody picked it up. Law enforcement simply didn’t take Donald Trump seriously until it was too late.” Times have changed. Trump is no longer a real estate magnate-turned-reality TV star, he is a former US president. The stakes have increased significantly and with them the scrutiny. Never before has Trump been confronted by two coordinated teams of sophisticated investigators raking through his financial affairs, with both civil and criminal charges possibly pending. Just how serious the prosecutors are about nailing their man is revealed in a single sentence of James’s new filing. She writes that the investigative team is determined to find out “Mr Trump’s actual knowledge of – and intention to make – the numerous misstatements and omissions made by him or on his behalf.” “Intention to make” indicates that James is not only thinking along civil lines. She is also anticipating possible criminal charges in which proof of the intent of the accused is required. Trump continues to resist giving testimony, as do his two children, on grounds that the investigations are politically motivated witch hunts (both James and Bragg are Democrats). A third child, Eric, who runs the day-to-day work of the Trump Organization, was deposed but pleaded the fifth more than 500 times. The family’s best hope is that the prosecutors will struggle to meet the high bar that is set for criminal cases. That is especially so when it comes to the critical issue of intent, said Robert Mintz, a former federal prosecutor. “The criminal case is more dangerous since it involves potential incarceration. But it requires criminal intent and that is difficult to prove, particularly in complex financial frauds involving organizations,” Mintz, now a partner at McCarter &amp; English, LLP told the Guardian. Prosecutors will have to prove that Trump knowingly and willfully violated the law. That can be tough – showing discrepancies in financial statements, juicy though they may be, is not enough. “Large investigations take time and are exceedingly difficult to prove without the help of cooperating witnesses and documentation,” Mintz said. “These parallel investigations are clearly moving ahead, but how they will end is difficult to predict.” • This article was amended on 23 January 2022 because an earlier version referred to a 2011 estimate for the Scottish property discovered by James’s investigators and gave a figure of £75,000 ($120,000 at 2011 exchange rates). That should have said £75m and $121m.Kyle Rittenhouse, the Illinois man acquitted last year of fatally shooting two men and wounding a third during racial justice protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin in 2020, is requesting the return of the gun. Rittenhouse killed Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, 27, when he shot them with an assault rifle as he roamed the streets of Kenosha with other armed men acting as self-described militia during protests over the shooting of a Black man, Jacob Blake, by a white officer. Rittenhouse’s highly contentious trial – and acquittal – was widely seen as a test case for US justice. The trial revealed contrasting attitudes of law enforcement when confronted with white men or teens who claimed to be acting as vigilante-style informal security personnel, armed with assault rifles, and Black members of the public or those protesting in support of the Black Lives Matter movement. Now 19, Rittenhouse has been fêted on the political right. On Wednesday his attorney, Mark Richards, filed court documents in Kenosha county seeking the return of the AR-15-style rifle Rittenhouse used on the evening of 25 August 2020, along with other items. “Mr Rittenhouse further wishes to ensure that the firearm in question is properly destroyed,” Richards wrote. Although the rifle Rittenhouse used belonged to a friend who helped the then 17 year-old purchase it as he was too young to buy and possess his own, Rittenhouse’s attorneys now maintain he is the gun’s lawful owner “per the verbal contract enacted” with the friend, Dominick Black. “As established through the trial testimony of Dominick Black and Mr Rittenhouse, the Smith &amp; Wesson M&amp;P 15 rifle … was purchased by Dominick Black but was to become the legal property of Kyle Rittenhouse upon his 18th birthday,” Richards’ filing said. In an interview with the Journal Times, David Hancock, the Rittenhouse family spokesman said: “Kyle has requested that the firearm be destroyed … there’s nothing to celebrate about that weapon. There isn’t. Kyle has no interest and no want to recover that weapon, and absolutely no interest to sell it or anything.” Rittenhouse is also attempting to retrieve ammunition, a sling and magazines, his iPhone, a cloth mask, and a $1 bill. He is also looking to retrieve the clothing he wore the night of the shooting, including boots, a baseball cap, jeans, socks, a belt and a T-shirt. The gun may not be handed back immediately. Under Wisconsin law, firearms seized by police as part of an investigation are kept as evidence until the investigation is over. Although Rittenhouse’s trial is over, Dominick Black is still on trial. “Though the case involving Mr Rittenhouse has been concluded, the firearm is still being held in evidence as Mr Black’s property until the time his case is resolved,” said Sgt Leo Viola of the Kenosha police department.Former Olympic champion Chris Boardman has promised to take England’s streets back from motor traffic after being given a powerful new official role which will see councils rated, Ofsted-style, for how well they make space for cycling and walking. Boardman, who won gold in the velodrome at the 1992 Games and raced in the Tour de France, has been named as the first head of Active Travel England (ATE), which will hand out funding for cycling and walking schemes and oversee designs. One particularly significant change will make ATE a statutory consultee on any big planning application, making sure big developments consider how people will access them on foot and by bike, and not just by car. Councils could lose funding if they try to install substandard schemes such as paint-only bike lanes, or delay work. The new organisation will inspect what is built and publish annual reports ranking councils on their performance, intended to mimic the role of Ofsted with schools. “We’ll have the engineering capacity to say, ‘Let’s have a look at the design and we’ll help you,’” Boardman told the Guardian. “But we’ll also have the power to say: ‘It’s not good enough.’” Boardman, who has given up his role with the Greater Manchester mayor, Andy Burnham, in which from 2017 he was the region’s cycling and walking commissioner and then transport commissioner, said his aim was to create “a quiet revolution” in how people get around. “Walking and cycling is the foundation of any sustainable transport system. You can encourage people to change all you like, but when it still takes bravery to cross a street, then people are going to drive,” he said. “This is about enabling, and encouraging once you have the safe space. The message is: this is for people doing normal things in normal clothes, just having the choice of not having to do it in a car. And it’s in all our interests to face up to that.” As well as bike paths on main roads, Active Travel England will set out standards for schemes intended to reverse the increasing dominance of motor traffic on smaller roads, where navigation apps have led to an increase in rat-running. “We have a finite amount of space, and there’s over 20bn more miles being driven around homes than there were a decade ago,” Boardman said. “We’ve co-opted local streets to soak up traffic that roads were never designed for. It’s not going to be easy to unpick, but it’s really worth it.” About a quarter of households in cities have no car, Boardman noted: “These are their roads and streets, too. Kids don’t have a choice to drive – they have to be driven. And these are their roads and streets, too, and they have the right to use them.” Based in York with a staff of just under 100, ATE will also offer councils advice on dealing with any backlash over new cycle routes, or motor traffic reduction measures such as low-traffic neighbourhoods. Some schemes have seen negative media coverage, as well as local opposition which, while generally involving a small number of people, has spooked some councils into reversing changes. Boardman said: “We always lose sight of the fact that the vast majority of people want this. Every survey you see says, yes, I want my kids to be able to cycle and walk to school, but at the moment I don’t feel able to do anything else but drive them. “Change isn’t going to be easy, but it’s essential. And it’s inevitable.”They have been hailed as the conscience of the Republican party, heroes of the resistance to former US president Donald Trump’s hostile takeover. But Senator Mitt Romney, Congresswoman Liz Cheney and others this month helped kill off a voting rights bill that Democrats say is essential to protecting democracy from a Trump-driven onslaught. The blanket opposition from these Republicans is provoking criticism that their professed rejection of the ex-president rings hollow and, despite their lofty words, they are ultimately helping further his authoritarian agenda. “They might not like Trump but they have the character of Trump,” said LaTosha Brown, co-founder of Black Voters Matter. “The reason why Trump was able to lead their party is because he is a good representation. He’s a liar; they lie. They’ve decided to use any means necessary to maintain power. If that means political corruption, they decide that they’re going to go that route.” Black Voters Matter and other groups warn that Republican-led states across the country are passing laws making it more difficult for African Americans and others to vote by consolidating polling locations, requiring certain types of identification and ordering other changes. In response Democrats in the House of Representatives last week passed the Freedom to Vote: John R Lewis Act, which would make election day a national holiday, ensure access to early voting and mail-in ballots and enable the justice department to intervene in states with a history of voter interference. The legislation was also supported by all 50 Democrats in the Senate but collapsed this week when Republicans used a procedural rule known as the filibuster to block it in the evenly divided chamber. Chuck Schumer, the majority leader, then called on a vote on changing Senate rules to allow the chamber to pass the bill by a simple majority vote. Again all Republicans were opposed, and now they were joined by Democrats Joe Manchin of West Virginian and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, ensuring a 52-48 defeat. It was a bitter defeat for Joe Biden just hours after he held a marathon press conference on Wednesday marking the end of his first year in office. “I am profoundly disappointed,” the president said in a statement. Much liberal fury was focused on the Democratic holdouts Manchin and Sinema. But their intransigence only mattered because all the Republicans – including so-called moderates – stood firm against legislation that aims to combat voter suppression, which largely affects communities of color. Even those who claim to be fiercely anti-Trump. Romney, a former presidential nominee, is a prime example. He was the only senator to break with his party by voting to convict Trump for abuse of power in his first impeachment trial in 2020. He was then one of seven Republicans to find Trump guilty of incitement of insurrection at his second impeachment trial last year. “Well, I like Mitt,” Biden told reporters at the press conference lasting nearly two hours. “Look, Mitt Romney is a straight guy.” Yet by then Romney, senator for Utah, had already spelled out his opposition to the voting rights legislation, dismissing it as a partisan takeover of federal elections and even comparing it to Trump’s false claim of election rigging in 2020. Romney was not alone. Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska, who also voted to convict Trump at last year’s impeachment trial, described the push to defend voting rights as a “charade” to satisfy a minority “addicted to rage on Twitter”, adding: “It’s bad for America. It’s just as undermining of public trust in elections as what Donald Trump did last year.” Senators Susan Collins, Lisa Murkowski, Rob Portman and Tim Scott, all of whom have spoke out against Trump at various times, opposed the bill. In the earlier House vote, NeverTrumpers Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger also toed the party line. Cheney, vice-chair of the House select committee investigating the January 6 insurrection at the US Capitol, has earned bipartisan admiration from some unlikely quarters. The New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman even floated the idea of her becoming Biden’s running mate in the 2024 election. But the daughter of former vice-president Dick Cheney made clear last year she did not see a connection between Trump’s “big lie” about 2020 and the blitz of voter restrictions imposed by Republican state legislatures. “I will never understand the resistance, for example, to voter ID,” Cheney told Axios on HBO. Some commentators agree that there is nothing inconsistent about decrying Trump’s assault on democracy and rejecting Democrats’ sweeping proposals. Michael Steele, the first African American to serve as chairman of the Republican National Committee, said: “You can be against Donald Trump and have a policy view on voting rights – I would personally maybe disagree with it – that would not lead them to support the proposed legislation in the House or the Senate.” But some conservative critics of Trump admit that the reforms, which they regard as an example of government overreach at the expense of states’ autonomy (even though article I of the constitution explicitly authorises Congress to set federal election rules), put them in a quandary. Joe Walsh, a former Republican congressman from Illinois, said: “I am vehemently anti-Trump, but anti- what the Democrats are trying to do at the federal level, so I’d be in the same grouping. Republicans are doing a bunch of shit but the answer to that in my mind is not bad, unconstitutional federal legislation.” But Walsh objects to Romney’s attempt to equate Trump’s lies with Biden’s policy. “I disagree with Mitt and any other Republican that’s making any sort of comparisons between what Trump did to our elections and what Democrats are doing.” This week’s vote was also the latest marker of the Republican party’s transformation in the Trump era. Sixteen of its current senators voted to re-authorise the Voting Rights Act in 2006 but opposed the latest bill, which would update the most powerful part of the law. Republican presidents Ronald Reagan, George HW Bush and George W Bush all supported its renewal. Antjuan Seawright, a senior adviser to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, took issue with Romney and colleagues’ claim that Republicans are not making it harder for minorities to vote. “It’s intellectually dishonest for anyone to say that there’s not an effort to suppress, suffocate and silence the votes of Black people in particular around this country. All you have to do is look at the bills that have been filed and where they have been filed,” he said. With the voting rights measures aimed at safeguarding democracy now apparently dead in the water, it may be harder for independents, liberals and others to heap praise on anti-Trump Republicans in quite the same way as before. Kurt Bardella, an adviser to the Democratic National Committee, argues that doing the right thing once does not make them heroes. “Just because you’re anti-Trump doesn’t mean you’re still not part of the anti-democratic effort that’s being spearheaded by the Republican party in America.” Bardella, a former senior adviser to Republicans on the House oversight committee, added: “For Republicans like Mitt Romney and Liz Cheney, it says everything that they’re still willing to be called Republicans, and it is the Republican party’s position to make it harder for minorities in America to vote. You look at the closing of voting locations in states like Georgia, where locations that have the highest density of minority voters are now having less options to go vote. “That’s pretty straightforward. That’s pretty racist. It demonstrates the white privilege in play for people like Mitt Romney and Liz Cheney to not see that. The reality is, if they’re not willing to move forward and assist in the effort to enact voter protections in America, then they’re Donald Trump’s biggest ally.”As Louise Erdrich’s new novel begins, her heroine, Tookie, has been sentenced to 60 years in prison for an offence both horrible and ridiculous. It’s 2005, and though Tookie is in her 30s, “I still clung to a teenager’s pursuits and mental habits” – drinking and drugging as though she is still an impulsive young adult. Her friend Danae’s lover Budgie has died in the arms of his ex, Mara; Danae persuades Tookie to steal a delivery truck in order to snatch Budgie’s body back. The judge who sends her away to a Minnesota jail is shocked by her crime; Tookie, however, is not surprised by his harshness. “I was on the wrong side of the statistics. Native Americans are the most oversentenced people currently imprisoned,” she says. But while in prison, books are her salvation. Even when she is not permitted to have them, she calls up a library in her head: “everything from the Redwall books to Huck Finn to Lilith’s Brood”. So when she is unexpectedly released in 2015 – her sentence commuted thanks to the tireless efforts of her tribe’s defence lawyer – it is perhaps unsurprising that she finds a job in a Minneapolis bookshop. And here this powerful, endearing novel takes a swerve from its Orange Is the New Black-style opening. It is not Tookie’s term in the savage American carceral system that is the true focus of the book, but her life after her release – a life as ordinary and extraordinary as any, delineated with the care and political acumen that have always distinguished Erdrich’s work, and which won her the Pulitzer prize for her last novel, The Night Watchman. That book was inspired by the life of her own grandfather, tribal chairman of the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa, who in the 1950s campaigned tirelessly against the US government’s policy of “termination”, through which Native American tribes would be moved off their land, and the land sold. Over the course of her long and distinguished writing career, beginning with the acclaimed Love Medicine in 1984, Erdrich has charted Indigenous lives in the US in a manner that recalls William Faulkner’s Yoknapatawpha County: the creation of a fictional universe centred in lived reality and experience. Her books always run right up against the politics of the present, and The Sentence has an almost shocking immediacy, set as it is against the background of the Covid-19 pandemic and the murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis, where Erdrich lives. And Erdrich not only lives there, but also owns a bookstore very similar to the shop in The Sentence. Birchbark Books describes itself as “a locus for Indigirati – literate Indigenous people who have survived over half a millennium on this continent”. And so it is with its fictional counterpart. Tookie looks over shelves filled with Indigenous history, fiction, memoir and poetry and “realised we are more brilliant than I knew”. One of their customers is Flora, a white woman who claims Native heritage. Tookie calls her “a very persistent wannabe”: a stalker of all things Indigenous. But when Flora dies suddenly, on 2 November, All Souls’ Day, “when the fabric between the worlds is thin as tissue and easily torn”, her ghost refuses to leave the bookshop. Her spirit haunts Tookie and her co-workers – and the mystery of her spirit presence is one of the motors that drives the book, as Tookie seeks to discover what keeps her drifting among the shelves. It’s not the only one. The joy of Erdrich’s novels lies in the way her characters live so richly, and are as present to the reader as our own friends and relatives are. Having had her life unexpectedly returned to her, Tookie savours the quotidian: the comforting presence of her husband, Pollux; her prickly relationship with her stepdaughter, Hetta. But as the novel’s chronology moves forward, catastrophe intrudes into Tookie’s happy if haunted life. An airborne virus closes the world down, though it makes the shop busier than ever, thank goodness. Erdrich captures the fear and the queasy pleasure of a suddenly deserted metropolis and a suddenly closed-down life. Tookie is content during the early months of the pandemic: safe. But Floyd’s death blasts apart any sense of safety, and in a sense takes the reader back to the novel’s beginning: to a legal system built on injustice and oppression, on the often brutal repression of Black and brown people. If the second half of the novel feels more chaotic than the first, why wouldn’t it? Erdrich is displaying the chaos of the moment as it occurs, and does so with astonishing grace. “I passed people going about their normal business, planting their gardens, flower beds, watering their lawns. I passed a popcorn store that was open and I stopped to buy popcorn. The popcorn smell modified the smell of old tear gas – sour, musky chalk.” The novel resolves in small moments of personal redemption and familial love, allowing for hope amid tragedy. Tookie’s courage and passion carry us; she is, throughout, a stalwart companion, facing hardship and aware of her own good fortune. “I live the way a person does who has ceased to dread each day’s ration of time,” she says – a motto to go by, surely, if we can. The Sentence is published by Corsair (£20). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Taiwan has reported a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases with a cluster among workers at a factory threatening authorities’ tenuous control of an Omicron outbreak on the eve of Lunar New Year. On Saturday, Taiwan’s centre for disease control reported 82 domestic cases, including 63 found at the Taoyuan factory in a first round of testing on Friday. Most of those sick are migrant workers, health and welfare minister Chen Shih-chung said. Taiwan maintains strict controls on its borders, with the few eligible entrants sent into 14 days of quarantine, seven days of self-managed semi-isolation, and multiple tests. With Omicron sweeping around the world, larger numbers of positive cases have been reported among new arrivals, despite requirements for a negative test before boarding departure flights. In recent weeks authorities have responded to clusters in Taoyuan connected to the international airport, and another in the southern city of Kaohsiung. Among Saturday’s figures were 14 new cases in the latter cluster, but the CDC said the airport cluster appears to have stabilised after tracing and isolation efforts. Saturday’s figures followed 23 cases reported on Friday, in Taoyuan and Kaohsiung. Taiwan has adopted a zero-Covid strategy in practice, if not formal policy, which has kept the island relatively Covid free for most of the pandemic. Its largest outbreak in the second half of 2021 saw more than 800 died after the Alpha variant infected thousands and a small rural outbreak of Delta infected 17, but it was eventually brought back to zero. In the months since, vaccination rates have increased and booster shots have begun to be rolled out. The capital city Taipei on Friday launched a mandatory vaccine passport for entry into some venues, like bars and clubs. On Saturday the CDC said 73% of migrant workers were vaccinated with two doses. Governments and companies in Taiwan were criticised last year for poor treatment of migrant workers during the outbreak. Thousands were ordered to remain in crowded dorms, which many feared put them at higher risk of contracting Covid-19, and they were subjected to harsher restrictions than local employees who worked along side them. On Saturday, the ministry of labor recommended migrant workers in Taoyuan not go out into the city or Greater Taipei, and said companies which employ 50 or more migrant workers to conduct mass testing. With Lunar New Year holidays beginning next week, authorities urged people to be cautious in mixing with others and travel, but did not impose restrictions. The increased transmissibility of the Omicron variant has challenged the remaining jurisdictions with zero Covid strategies. In nearby Hong Kong authorities found at least 75 community cases at a residential block on Friday, the South China Morning Post reported. Another residential block was placed into a five-day lockdown on Friday after 34 cases were detected. Hong Kong has reintroduced social restrictions and imposed other controversial measures, including ordering the surrender and destruction of more than 2,000 hamsters across the city after 11 were found to be infected at a pet shop where an employee fell ill with Covid. In China, Omicron has been detected in at least seven of the country’s 31 provinces, including several cases in the capital, Beijing. A range of restrictions have been imposed by local authorities, causing some confusion and fear around the possibility of travel during the Lunar New Year period. Authorities in the north-eastern city of Harbin said on Saturday that they will conduct a city-wide exercise to test its roughly 10 million people for Covid from Monday, although it has had no recent cases, calling it an pre-emptive move ahead of the holiday.In the 112 years since it began, the Electric cinema in Birmingham has lived through the history of film-making. When it first opened its doors in 1909 it showed silent movies with a piano backing, rolling newsreels and cartoons in the 30s, adult films in the 60s, and blockbusters in the 80s. But the Covid pandemic nearly marked the end of what is believed to be the UK’s oldest working cinema when its owners decided to sell up after more than a year of continuous closure. “It was the biggest existential crisis the industry has faced ever. The only time cinemas were forced by law to close was the first two weeks of world war two. So to be closed for 10 months was horrific,” said Kevin Markwick, the cinema’s new owner, who has brought the venue back to life, opening its doors on Friday for the first time since the start of the pandemic. Markwick, who also owns an independent cinema in East Sussex, was approached last year by the previous owners to see if he would consider saving the venue. It was the first time he had visited Birmingham, but he took one look at the traditional movie theatre with its art deco frontage and decided to buy it. “There is so much potential here. We can build something really special,” he said. When he announced the news on social media, he was overwhelmed by the response from people who feared the cinema had disappeared for ever, and the first screenings on Friday quickly sold out. A lot of work has gone on behind the scenes to get the cinema back in working order, including replacing all the digital cinema equipment – “It does not like being turned off,” Markwick said – and bringing the vintage 35mm projector back to life. He has plans to improve the venue further and enhance its classic aesthetic, including installing curtains in front of the screen. “I want it to be an old-school cinema experience,” he said. “It’s important to maintain that heritage, that through-line all the way from Charlie Chaplin through Errol Flynn to Marilyn Monroe, to Rex Harrison, to Arnold Schwarzenegger, to now.” The first film on the schedule is Kenneth Branagh’s Belfast, followed by an eclectic lineup including Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story and one of Markwick’s personal favourites, Billy Wilder’s 1960 romantic comedy The Apartment. “I want to programme it with a mixture of mainstream, art house, old films. Basically, I want to make it a go-to place for film lovers in Birmingham,” he said. When the Electric first opened on 27 December 1909, it was Birmingham’s first cinema and showed mostly American silent movies before adding sound in 1930. Much of the original building was rebuilt in 1937, and it reopened as a rolling news theatre, the Tatler. The cinema was rebranded again in the 1960s as the Jacey, mostly showing cartoons, and began showing adult films at the end of the decade to combat declining audiences. It went through various owners throughout the 1980s, before reverting to the Electric in 1993. While the pandemic has been tough for the cinema industry, Markwick is confident the success of blockbusters such as No Time to Die and the latest Spider-Man offering shows the appetite for cinema is as strong as ever. “We were hit hard during the pandemic by being forced to close and the studios going off with indecent haste to streaming, leaving us feeling like jilted lovers,” he said. “There was always this slight worry that we’d been abandoned by the film distributors, but obviously they’ve realised what side their bread is buttered on.” After a hectic few months preparing the cinema for the return of audiences, Markwick said he can’t wait to see a packed house for the first showing. “I’m as comfortable in a cinema as I am in my own front room. I’ve grown up around cinema and so have my children,” said Markwick, whose daughter Katie will be running the venue full-time. “Like me, she started working as an usher from about 16 years old. We love cinema and know all about it and, hopefully, we know what we’re doing.”As has often been the case in the past, England’s biggest selection conundrum for the Six Nations comes in midfield. The absence of Owen Farrell and Manu Tuilagi gives Eddie Jones the opportunity to try something different. He has the chance to develop his ‘New England’ a step further and perhaps even implement a different style that will remain in place until the World Cup next year. Eddie won’t address the fact Farrell and Tuilagi are missing with the squad in great detail on Monday when they assemble in Brighton. It can be disheartening to feel like you are just standing in for someone or keeping the jersey warm and I do wonder if, in Tuilagi’s case, that has been a problem in the past. He is such a valuable asset when fit and firing – and so popular with his teammates – that it has felt as if anyone who has worn the No 13 jersey has struggled to make it their own as a result. For this Six Nations, I would like to see Jack Nowell deployed there. He has only done it once before for England – the ill-fated match against Japan in the autumn of 2018 that effectively ended the Test careers of Danny Care, Alex Lozowski and Zach Mercer – but I believe it is time to take another look. It is incredible to think that Nowell has only made five appearances and three starts for England since then but that is indicative of the problems he has had with injuries and getting back to his best form amid so many interruptions. It has been well documented how he has decided to stop drinking alcohol, how he looks and feels in his best shape for ages, and it is showing on the pitch. On top of that, Eddie is putting great emphasis on versatility at the moment. He has talked in the past – perhaps ever so slightly tongue in cheek – about Nowell playing as a flanker but the point he was getting at was how unique a skillset he possesses. As Eddie alluded to in the autumn, we can get hung up on numbers on jerseys a bit too much but playing Nowell at 13 gives him the platform to bring the best out of himself. He is such a rare talent because he has all the fundamentals that a top all-round rugby player needs. He has an incredible appetite for work, gets through so many involvements and has an excellent rugby brain. He’s not just a great rugby athlete, he’s a great rugby player as well. He’s strong, consistent, there are very few mistakes in his game but also that bit of sparkle, an X factor, which gets me excited about what he may be able to do. While Ollie Lawrence and Dan Kelly have fulfilled the role of direct-running outside-centre in the absence of Tuilagi in recent times, I would love to see Nowell given the chance this tournament. That in turn allows Henry Slade to be the ball-playing No 12 outside Marcus Smith that Eddie clearly wants. He feels the need to have a second pair of eyes and ears but Slade did that superbly well against South Africa and he and Nowell would not need introduction in midfield. To go back to Eddie’s point on versatility. It’s an interesting one because as well as Nowell, he has picked Luke Northmore, Joe Marchant, Max Malins, Freddie Steward and even Orlando Bailey, who can all fill in at different positions. In the past such versatility has counted against players in Six Nations and autumn campaigns, but helps when it comes to World Cup selection because whereas England were able to select 36 players this week, it will be 33 at France 2023. Eddie seems to be trying to get ahead of the curve in that respect. Looking at the squad on the whole, what excites me the most is not so much the personnel, but more the style of players Eddie has picked. I understand the disappointment that some supporters have when George Ford is not included, or Sam Underhill, who has been so important defensively in the past, but look at the players chosen ahead of them in those positions. Ford’s absence allows Smith to develop at fly-half and without Underhill, it looks as if Alex Dombrandt, Sam Simmonds or Alfie Barbeary may get a shot at No 8 and that again points to a more adventurous outlook. I do have some frustrations. I can’t understand why Adam Radwan played against Tonga but not Australia and South Africa and now finds himself on the outside looking in after two caps. Granted the talent pool in England is huge and Eddie will want to look at as many players as possible but that suggests to me that there is either something wrong with the talent identification or something about the environment that did not enable Radwan to flourish. Of course, it can also be down to the player, maybe Eddie has decided that he is not at the required international standard yet but if there is similar turnover in the summer and autumn it will be a concern considering there will be just 12 matches before World Cup preparations begin after this Six Nations. Much of it is ultimately down to the players to maintain their form but equally the coaches need to implement a consistency of selection and style to ensure England hit the ground running at France 2023.North African: Los Moros, York Tarik Abdeladim, 51 “When I started out, getting harisssa in York wasn’t easy,” says Tarik Abdeladim. “There was one stockist.” Chefs have been frantic since reopening after lockdown, he says. “The combination of Brexit and the pandemic has been like a tsunami hitting our industry. We’re a tourist city. European staff, especially those without families here, have gone home.” He employs 20 mostly local workers. “People used to drop their CVs in all the time. I recently advertised for chefs and didn’t have one response. That’s a huge geographical and emotional shift; people no longer want to work long kitchen hours away from home.” Abdeladim moved to London from Algiers in 1990, aged 20: “We’d visit Paris when I was young and I worked in kitchens on the Côte d’Azur, so Europe was always on my radar. I visited a friend in London and fell in love with British culture, history, music, football. I never went home.” Having worked first as a pot washer, then later as a waiter and front of house, he moved to York in 1997, after visiting the city. “As an immigrant, language is a barrier to jobs,” he says, “but being in restaurants was what I knew. The pot wash suited me till I knew enough to speak to customers and take orders.” His falafel wraps and fiery merguez sausage, served with harissa on hot baguettes, quickly became the city’s top-rated food on Tripadvisor, after he opened a stall on Shambles Market in 2015. When a regular offered to sell him their restaurant three years later, he established Los Moros – a Spanish nod to his Berber heritage – serving modern north African cuisine. Its picturesque British exterior belies the colours and aromas of an Algerian souk you’ll find within. Abdeladim’s food is steeped in the legacies of Algeria’s invaders. He says: “My indigenous Berber family cooked tagines. My grandmother sat for hours at our kitchen table making kilos of couscous from semolina. The Romans brought olives and citrus; the Arabs brought spices; the Turks came to defend us, bringing coffee and baklava; and, finally, the French, with the croissants I ate for breakfast back home. All the cultures that shaped my taste buds exist on my menu.” They include the merguez he first cooked for his stall, now served in a butter bean dish his mother used to make:. “My father would go to the best butcher in Algiers.” Abdeladim says. “It’s the food of my childhood. When I came here at 20, I was young and adventurous, I wanted to discover and learn. My own business was never part of the plan. A guy from the Michelin guide tweeted about my food last year. I never envisaged that.” Algerian cassoulet (merguez and beans) Serves 4 2 tbsp olive oil 1 large white Spanish onion, peeled and finely chopped 2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced 1 tsp sea salt 1 tsp freshly ground cumin 1 tsp paprika ½ tsp ground coriander ½ tsp ground ginger ½ tsp turmeric ½ tsp ground chilli (or more, if you like it hot) 1 x 400g tin chopped tomatoes 1 tbsp tomato puree 500g merguez sausages, each cut into 3 equal pieces 500g drained, cooked butter beans (ie from 2 x 400g cans – we use Navarrico large butter beans) 1 handful each flat-leaf parsley and coriander, roughly chopped Crusty baguette to serve Heat the oil in a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan. add the onion, garlic and salt, and fry until translucent. Add the spices, cook for a further minute or two, then stir in the tomatoes, tomato puree and half a pint of water, and cook on a medium heat for 10-15 minutes. Throw in the chopped merguez and cook for another 15 minutes until the sausages are cooked, then add the beans and cook on a low heat until the sauce turns nice and thick. Adjust the seasoning to taste, stir in the chopped herbs and serve with a crusty baguette to mop up the sauce, Algerian style. Cambodian: Kambuja, Marple, Greater Manchester Y Sok, 45 “Hunger pain never leaves you,” says Y Sok, who was raised in a refugee camp in Cambodia during the Khmer Rouge civil war, where Red Cross food parcels sustained her family before they moved to America. “Every day there was a lottery system for a new life in France, the US or Australia. My father chose America.” She moved to the UK in 2014, aged 37: “I remember hanging up our sign and someone saying, ‘We’ll see how long that lasts.’ I wanted to change the perception of Asian food, the racism around it. People grew up eating £5 Chinese meals from the chippy but wouldn’t blink at paying triple for pasta. I wanted the suburbs to discover what ethnic food really is.” Sok’s 20 staff, who also run a market outpost, are mostly South Asian or Cambodian. She wants to sponsor skilled-worker visas for another two. “It is hard to find a Cambodian chef from our tiny UK population,” she says. “I have found loyalty in immigrant staff, who come looking for better opportunities. If you treat them well, give full benefits and respect, most tend to stay.” The restaurant, where walls are adorned with framed vinyls – it was formerly called Angkor Soul because of her husband’s record store downstairs – served takeaways during the pandemic. Sok says: “The supply chain has been horrible. I spent days driving round, looking for products.” Dishes include cha kroeung, a curry with lemongrass, galangal and turmeric, and loc lac, a French colonised dish. Growing up among Cambodian refugees, in Boston, then Los Angeles, where she would cater dinner parties and small weddings, food provided comfort for Sok’s community. Kambuja returned her to her roots. “As an immigrant kid, I wanted to eat American mac’n’cheese to assimilate,” she says. “I took the Cambodian food my mother cooked for granted. My restaurant brought me back to a place I had been away from for so long.” Cha kroeung chicken (spicy lemongrass stir-fry) Serves 4-5 2 tbsp vegetable oil 400g boneless chicken breast or thighs, thinly sliced 1 onion, in 1cm-wide slices 1 red pepper, stem, seeds and pith discarded, flesh cut into 1cm-thick slices 150g green beans, topped, cut in half 100g roasted peanuts, roughly chopped 1 large handful sweet holy or Thai basil Sliced spring onions For the lemongrass paste 3 lemongrass stalks, outer leaves removed, roughly chopped 6 garlic cloves, peeled 3 shallots, peeled 6 Thai red or green bird’s eyes chillies (or fewer) 2½ cm piece (about 15g) galangal, peeled and sliced, or ginger 5 fresh or frozen makrut lime leaves, sliced 2 tsp turmeric powder For the seasoning 3 tbsp oyster sauce 2 tbsp fish sauce 2 tbsp palm sugar (or any other sugar or honey) 1 tbsp tamarind paste or lime juice Blitz paste ingredients in a blender, adding enough cold water to make a smooth paste. Heat the oil in a wide pan until smoking hot, add the paste and cook, stirring, for eight to 10 minutes, until dry. Add chicken, veg and seasoning ingredients, and stir-fry until chicken is cooked. Add peanuts and, off the heat, basil. Garnish with spring onions; serve with steamed jasmine rice. Caribbean: Buzzrocks, Manchester Buzzrock, 72, and Farida Anderson, 60 Two decades after his parents arrived in the UK with the Windrush generation, Buzzrock came to Britain from Jamaica, in 1976, age 27, holding only a photograph of his mother. Raised by an aunt, Buzzrock (known as Buzz) was the last of his family to emigrate, following his three sisters, once his father – a second world war veteran – had made enough money. Buzz established his name in the shebeens and all-night Caribbean clubs of Manchester’s Moss Side where he met his wife Farida – the daughter of a Somali immigrant, now an MBE – and cooked up a taste of home for the city’s Jamaican community, including the tightly packed dumplings he is named after. Now his cafe, where meat marinates from 6am and punters queue before noon, dishes up 300 plates of island food a day. “Our customers are British, Irish, Asian, Caribbean – 80% are white. It gives me a buzz to see all of them with ‘dem belly full’.” (They sell T-shirts carrying Buzz’s slogan in their online shop.) “Buzz and I have put in a lot of hours to get here,” Farida says. “When they called the area ‘Gunchester’ we’d dodge bullets, serving food from our trailer. We fought for eight years to get our premises, experiencing racism as black shop owners.” The pandemic has had an impact, too. “Meat is 30% more expensive. I spent last summer policing the door, getting people to wear masks and sanitise.” In the shebeen days, Buzz’s cooking fuelled illicit gambling dens and a sideline supplying cannabis. He started the business following a two-year prison sentence for drugs offences and the (now expired) threat of deportation. Farida – later a campaigner for prisoners’ families – fought for him to remain. Now, they employ ex-offenders and prisoners on day release. “We believe in second chances,” Farida says. Thirty years after he started feeding crowds from a gazebo at Manchester’s Caribbean carnival, Buzz is still serving the same jerk recipe, salt fish patties, flavoursome gravy and curried goat (actually lamb, because British palates “don’t like the bones in goat”) in the shop the couple opened in 2007. “Consistency is the thing,” Buzz says. “People say they’ve been to many places but never tried jerk like I make it.” Barbecue jerk chicken with rice and peas Serves 5-6 For the jerk chicken 4-6 full chicken legs 3-4 tbsp lemon juice or vinegar 100g Buzzrocks all-purpose seasoning (Buzzrocks products all available from buzzrockcaribbean.co.uk) Buzzrocks jerk marinade or mild jerk marinade For the rice and peas 180g dried kidney beans – rinsed, soaked overnight and drained (you can use tinned beans, but it will affect the flavour) 1 small onion, peeled and finely chopped 2 spring onions, trimmed and finely chopped 1 tbsp garlic paste 2 tbsp Buzzrocks all-purpose seasoning 4 sprigs thyme 1 scotch bonnet chilli 2 tsp salt 1 tsp pepper 400g long-grain rice Rub lemon juice or vinegar all over the chicken, to add flavour, then season lightly with our all-purpose dry rub. Pour the jerk marinade into a large bowl, add the chicken and turn to coat. Cover and refrigerate overnight, or for at least 30 minutes, and bring back to room temperature before grilling. Light your barbecue. Grill the chicken over a medium fire, turning occasionally, for 30-40 minutes, until well browned all over. Put the beans in a large pot, cover with 750ml water and bring to a boil. Stir in the onion, spring onions, garlic paste, all-purpose seasoning, thyme, scotch bonnet (pierce a hole in the chilli – this will stop it splitting and adding too much spice), salt and pepper, then cover and cook gently for about an hour, until the beans are tender. Stir in the rice, cover and simmer over a low heat for another 30 minutes, until cooked. French: L’Escargot Bleu, Edinburgh Frederic Berkmiller, 51 “I have seen staffing problems in restaurants for years,” says Frederic Berkmiller, who established a French-Scottish training exchange for young chefs in 2011, long before Brexit and the pandemic triggered an exodus of foreign and casual workers. “Chefs say all the time that they can’t get waiting staff now foreigners have left. We have to build our own ecosystem. Young people brought up on chips, curry sauce and supermarket food will not aspire to cook and work with fresh fish or vegetables they’ve never seen before.” Since lockdown, he has slimmed his staff from 30, across two sites, to six, including chefs who have been with him for years. “The work is hard, so I look after my chefs,” he says. “We’ve been working four days on, three off, for 15 years.” Born in the Loire valley, Berkmiller moved to London in 1988, then to Edinburgh in 2004. He works to a sustainable, “producer to pass” ethos, farming himself and using nearby growers and suppliers for the dishes plated up at his chef’s pass. He serves classic French cuisine from a locally sourced Scottish larder and four-acre garden, employing skills he learned as a teenager. “School didn’t like me and I didn’t like school. At 14, I was sent to live in as an apprentice in a restaurant where food was hunted, picked and cooked on site.” L’Escargot Bleu is an authentic, charming bistro, with a blue frontage and a wood-panelled bar, tablecloths, a blackboard with the day’s menu and large, classic French advertisements on its walls. “I like to cook by my mood,” Berkmiller says. “My dream restaurant would have no menu. Time-intensive beef bourguignon and veal blanquettes are disappearing, but I’m a great defender of classic French cooking – it’s my origin.” Bourguignon of beef cheeks with garniture grand-mère Serves 4-6 4-6 beef cheeks Olive oil, for frying 2 tbsp plain flour 1 litre demi-glace or good beef stock For the marinade 2-3 bottles red wine 2 onions, peeled and cut into large dice 2 large carrots, peeled and cut into large dice 2 celery stalks 1 large bouquet garni 10 black peppercorns 2 generous soup spoons cognac For the garniture grand-mère 2 knobs butter (approx 25g each) 200g button mushrooms 200g lardons, or diced smoked bacon 200g silverskin onions 20g caster sugar Plan ahead – marinading can take up to five days. Pour 80% of the wine into a large container, then add the onions, carrots, celery, bouquet garni, peppercorns and cognac. Cover with clingfilm or a lid, and refrigerate for two days. Add the beef cheeks to the marinade and return to the fridge for a further two or three days, turning the meat every day. When the beef has marinated, lift it out of the marinade, keeping the wine and vegetables, put on a tray between two cloths and pat until it is very dry. Heat the oven to 130C (110 fan). Put a splash of olive oil in a large, cast-iron casserole pan on a very high heat, then brown the meat all over, until golden. Lower the heat and sweat the drained vegetables (but not the bouquet garni) from the marinade, until the onions are softened. Return the beef to the pot, sprinkle over the flour, then pour over the marinade juices. Bring to a boil, season, then add the bouquet garni and the demi-glace or stock. Cook in the heated oven for two to three hours. (If you want to add even more flavour, spread the cooking time over two days: cook for one hour on day one, leave to cool, then refrigerate, and cook at the same temperature for another hour the following day. This is how my grandmother always cooked this dish.) When the beef is cooked, it should be almost falling apart. When it gets to this stage, lift it out of the pan and place on a tray. Pass the sauce through a strainer into another pan. Place the pot on the heat, bring the sauce to a boil and reduce until it has a good consistency, thick enough to cover the back of a spoon. Season to taste, then return the meat to the sauce and serve the same day, or cool and refrigerate for a day or two, before reheating. To make the grand-mère garnish, heat the butter and a splash of olive oil in a frying pan, saute the mushrooms until well coloured, then lift out into a bowl. Do the same with the lardons, then put with the mushrooms. Add the silverskin onions and sugar to the hot butter and toss until glazed and golden. Drain, then saute all the garnish ingredients together to heat through. When you are ready to eat, pour the reserved wine into the beef pot and gently bring up to a simmer. Stir in the grand-mère garnish and serve with boiled potatoes such as ratte or pink fir, or an earthy, creamy mashed potato. Scandinavian: Hjem, Hexham, Northumberland Alex Nietosvuori, 29 “It can be hard to find a passion for working kitchen hours among local boys and girls,” says Alex Nietosvuori, the Swede behind newly Michelin-starred Hjem, which he established in 2019 with his Northumbrian fiance Ally Thompson, 37; they also run the Hadrian hotel and a gastro pub in the north-east market town. While their fine-dining staff have expanded to a team of eight, lockdown triggered departures elsewhere in the business. “A lot of people are in our industry for convenience or to pay their way through uni,” Thompson says. “They realised there’s probably an easier way to live than working till midnight everyday.” Nietosvuori, who emigrated from Sweden in 2015, is matter of fact. “At the end of the day, if people leave, we don’t need them here,” he says. “We want all of our business to reflect the standards of our restaurant.” It compounded a problem started by Brexit, Thompson adds: “There are no applications from Europeans now. Our last stage [intern], an Italian, left before lockdown. Our two Polish chefs have said the vote made them feel unwelcome. I fear we will see fewer European chefs wanting to open here.” Hjem – both a Norwegian translation and Northumbrian dialect for “home” – sits on the same latitude as Nietosvuori’s native Skåne, in the south of Sweden. The same berries, mushrooms and plants go into the recipes on his tasting menus, including crisp croustades; pearly, white river cod; and the restaurant’s signature horseradish sorbet with spelt crumble and warm apple caramel served inside a wooden apple crafted by Thompson’s father. “In Sweden you can forage on anyone’s land,” Thompson says. “Alex will often be walking the dog and pull containers out from his backpack.” Nietosvuori, whose career began 12 years ago, making pies in Malmö, says: “Our ambition is very simple: to be the best in the country, then the world. Last time we opened bookings, they were gone in two minutes. I couldn’t care less about food when I was young. Now, food is everything.” Baked cod and Northumbrian ’nduja sauce Serves 4 1 cod fillet, around 40cm 100g salt, for the brine 2 heads of broccoli, washed 500g spinach, washed 350g butter 50g ’nduja (we use Rachel Hammond’s Northumbrian ’nduja) 300ml good chicken stock 150ml double cream Plan ahead, as the cod needs to go in the fridge for 24 hours. Cut out the thickest part of the fillet and take off the skin; the rest of the fillet – the thinner part – is perfect for fish and chips later in the week. Measure out 2 litres of water, add 100g salt and whisk to dissolve. Put the cod in the brine and soak in the fridge for 24 hours. Next day, lift out and pat dry the fish, then place on clingfilm and roll into a sausage shape, twisting the ends to keep it as tight as possible. Wrap in foil to make a cylindrical shape. Bake at 110C, then remove and put it straight into ice water – still wrapped – to cool it down and stop any further cooking, then refrigerate overnight. The next day, slice the cod into 2cm-thick portions. Cook the broccoli in boiling water for about 10 minutes, adding the spinach for the last 30 seconds, then strain, put in a blender with 100g of the butter and blitz to a smooth puree (you might need to add a little water), then refrigerate. In a frying pan, sweat off the ’nduja without colouring it, to release some of the aromas, then add the chicken stock and reduce by half. Stir in the remaining 250g butter and blitz it all together. Put the slices of cod on a baking try and heat gently in a 150C oven for about three minutes, until just warm. In a pan, warm up the broccoli puree. In a separate pan, warm up your ’nduja sauce. Put a slice of cod in the base of four shallow bowls, top with a tablespoon of broccoli puree, pour over 2 tbsp of the warm sauce and serve. Chinese: The Welcome, Belfast San Wong, 69, and his sons Charlie, 44, and Michael, 42 Charlie’s father, San, was 16 when he left Tai Po, Hong Kong, with his parents. “We couldn’t make a living in the New Territories,” San says. “My father left first; I followed six months later.” His 70-cover Chinese restaurant, situated on Stranmillis Road in Belfast, bills itself as the longest established in Northern Ireland (the first Welcome opened in Portadown in 1973; it switched location to the Belfast site in 1982) and passed to his sons, Charlie and Michael, five years ago. “We still use sauces from Tai Po, but the pandemic has hit the supply chain hard,” Charlie says. “People are stockpiling imported ingredients. You have to buy up what you can from Chinese supermarkets. Consistency is important.” During the Troubles, San stayed, while other families left. “Many Indian and Italian restaurants closed. Those were dark days, but they presented an opportunity to make our name. As an Asian family, we would be waved through road blocks while both sides of the city fought. “Today we have families who’ve been coming for three generations. I’ve turned away rock stars and politicians to honour bookings from my regulars.” Steamed mussels in black bean sauce Serves 1-2 1 spring onion, trimmed 1 chilli (red or green) 300g dry black beans 50ml cooking oil (vegetable is fine but not olive), plus 10-20ml extra to finish 100g sugar 30g salt 20ml light soy sauce 10ml dark soy sauce 50g garlic, peeled and minced (or garlic paste) 7-10 frozen New Zealand mussels, in the half shell Cut the spring onion into thin strips, and slice the chillies into thin rounds, then set aside. Use a spoon to mash the black beans in a bowl. Put the oil into a pan on a low heat, then add the beans, sugar, salt, both soy sauces and garlic, stir to combine and cook slowly until they form a smooth paste. Take off the heat and set aside to cool. Put a steamer pan on to boil. Put the mussels on a plate and put a teaspoon of the black bean paste on each one. As soon as steam comes out from the steamer, put in the mussel plate, cover the steamer and leave to cook for seven to eight minutes, just until the flesh is bouncy, not squishy. To finish, heat 10-20ml cooking oil in a pan. Scatter the chopped spring onion and chilli on top of the mussels and, once the oil is hot, pour it all over the top so everything sizzles (this will add a sheen to the dish, too). Sprinkle over a drizzle of dark soy sauce, to add colour, and serve hot. Indian: Dastaan, Epsom, Surrey Nand Kishor, 47 The pandemic dealt the worst possible blow to staff at Dastaan who lost their senior chef, Balam Singh, to Covid last January. “He was my right-hand man, my friend, we miss him terribly,” says chef-owner Nand Kishor Semwal, born in Dehradun, in the Himalayan foothills. Half of his 22 employees were taken ill over Christmas 2020. The 52-cover restaurant, born of a friendship between Semwal and co-owner Sanjay Gour, both former head chefs at the Michelin-starred Gymkhana in London (where Singh also worked), is operating at 30 covers with a delivery driver, post-pandemic. “We’re lucky – our staff have been here for years, but I’m paying £2-3 more per kilo of lamb, and a box of chillis is up 50%.” The name Dastaan is taken from the Urdu for fable or tale. The unassuming shopfront on a Surrey high street belies a vibrant, talked-about and beautifully plated menu served in simple surrounds. Semwal moved to England, for work, in 2003, having cooked in Mumbai’s best kitchens. His lamb chops with mustard relish remind him of the meat his mother and grandmother prepared. “I cook the food I ate at home in north India and cooked in kitchens in the south. I was always fascinated by food. My dream came true.” Lamb chops Serves 2 4 thick lamb chops 50g melted butter, to serve For the first marinade 2-3 x 4cm pieces ginger, unpeeled and bashed to bruise 45g ginger and garlic paste 5g ground kasuri methi 7½g salt 40g Kashmiri chilli powder 25ml lemon juice 45ml mustard oil For the second marinade 200g Greek yoghurt, strained 20g ginger and garlic paste 5g ground kasuri methi 40g Kashmiri chilli powder 15g garam masala Plan ahead as the marinades take two days. Put the lamb in a container in which it will sit in one layer and add all the ingredients for the first marinade. Toss to coat, rub the marinade into the meat with your hands, then refrigerate for at least 12-18 hours. Next day, combine all the ingredients for the second marinade and again rub into the lamb, then refrigerate for six to 12 hours. Heat the oven to 170/180C (150/160 fan). Thread the chops on to skewers, passing them through each one two or three times, to secure. Roast for nine or 10 minutes, then turn and cook for four minutes. Remove, drizzle with melted butter and serve. Tibetan: Taste Tibet, Oxford Yeshi Jampa, 42 “We need more staff but we know it’s not a good time,” says Yeshi Jampa, who started up his canteen-style restaurant in November 2020, after six years serving up east Tibetan soul food at fairs and festivals, including Glastonbury. “There aren’t enough skilled workers around, or the time to train them.” Jampa and his wife, Julie, opened Taste Tibet’s distinctive blue front door, on a residential street, mid-pandemic. “It’s been really hard,” he says. “Suppliers didn’t want to come for our relatively small orders. I was going round shops buying chicken.” Their kitchen is open Wednesday to Saturday, with five employees, including staff from Tibet and Timor-Leste. “With more people, we’d be able to be open more often,” says Julie, who met her husband while working in India. Jampa had a semi-nomadic upbringing, followed by an accidental immigration. At 19, he crossed the Himalayas to help his brother join an Indian monastery. “I walked for 24 days. The journey was so hard, it was 17 years before I returned home.” He met Julie and moved to Oxford, where she worked, in 2011. “I’d never seen food covered in plastic or sold in such small quantities,” he says. Photographs of the mountainsides where he grew up, rearing yaks and cattle in summer and storing produce for winter, decorate the brick walls of his restaurant. The queue for his steamed momo dumplings hasn’t dissipated since he first pitched up on Gloucester Green market, in Oxford, in 2014. During lockdown, they used their premises, and customer donations, to send food to frontline workers and vulnerable people. A cookbook, Taste Tibet, follows on 17 March. Jampa says: “My driving force is to educate people about Tibet; food is a big part of that. Our canteen is a place where a rich man can eat the same food as a poor man. Being a refugee influences that. Where I grew up, the signs in schools said ‘Others before self’. That ethos, karma, is important in Tibet.” Heavenly vegan momos Makes 40 For the dough 500g self-raising flour, plus extra for dusting (or buy ready-made dumpling wrappers at a good Chinese supermarket) For the filling 1 small sweetheart cabbage, about 500g, finely chopped 200g spinach, finely chopped 2 tsp salt 2 tbsp cooking oil 200g Chinese chives, finely chopped For the dough, put the flour in a large bowl and slowly pour in about 250ml of warm water, while mixing it in with your other hand, to make a not-too-sticky dough. Knead until it forms a ball, cover and set aside for 15-20 minutes. Meanwhile, make the filling. Put the cabbage and spinach in a bowl, add the salt and oil, squish it through the vegetables (to draw out excess moisture), then set aside for five minutes. Tip the vegetables into a colander and press down firmly to drain off as much liquid as possible. Return the vegetable mixture to the bowl and stir in the chives. Knead the dough again for a minute to ensure it’s soft and smooth, then divide it into four, and cover to stop it drying out. Sprinkle a little flour on a work surface, but don’t overdo it – too much can stiffen the dough. Roll one piece of dough into a 25cm-long sausage shape, then cut into 10 equal slices, lightly flattening each one with your hand. Using a rolling pin, and making one wrapper at a time, push and pull the flattened piece of dough up and down quickly and firmly, holding it with your spare hand and turning it as you go, until it’s the size of your palm with the centre a bit thicker than the outer edges; it doesn’t need to be a perfect circle. Repeat with the rest of the dough. Lay a wrapper on a chopping board, spoon a tablespoon of filling into the centre, gently fold one side of the circle over the filling to meet the other side and, starting in the middle, use your fingertips to press the edges together. (If you’re using shop-bought wrappers, you’ll need to wet the edges before sealing.) If the momo is not completely sealed, the juices will escape during steaming, so ensure there are no gaps. Place the filled momo on a lined baking tray, cover with a tea towel, then repeat with the remaining wrappers and filling; keep the filled momos at least 1cm apart, covered with the tea towel to stop them drying out. If you’re using a metal steamer, lightly brush each basket with oil or line with greaseproof paper; if you’re using a bamboo one, line with greaseproof paper. The water in the base of the steamer, or in a wok, should be boiling when the baskets go in. Steam the momos in batches (and depending on the size of your steamer) over a high heat for 13-16 minutes. To test whether they’re ready, press gently: if the dough doesn’t stick to your finger, they’re done. Serve with chilli dips. Māori/Malay: Kota and Kota Kai, Porthleven, Cornwall Jude Kereama, 48 The last two years have given hospitality workers time to take stock, according to Jude Kereama: “I think a lot have really enjoyed being at home with their families. That’s had a big impact on attitudes towards working in this industry. I’m lucky to have had loyalty from mine.” He employs 10 people across his two restaurants on Porthleven’s Harbour Head. “Brexit and the pandemic have also taught us we must change the way we cook. Fish prices are four times what they should be. It’s no longer sustainable to demand overfishing and huge pieces of cheap meat on meals.” Born in New Zealand to a Māori father and Chinese-Malay mother, Kereama has seen a lot of changes in the Cornish food scene. “When we moved here, everything around us was pubs. My menu was a culture shock.” After rising through the ranks of New Zealand hospitality, he came to England on a two-year working visa, aged 24, and fell in love with his restaurant manager wife, Jane. They converted a west Cornwall boat shed into Kota in 2006, and opened family-friendly Kota Kai in 2011. Jane died of cancer in 2019. His Kota menu pays homage to his childhood. Soft-shell crab in a bao bun, with Asian slaw and seaweed mayo, is a bestseller. “My siblings and I would catch blue swimmer crabs on Waikanae beach,” he says. “Mum would throw them in chilli paste and we’d dip in white bread and butter.” Tempura oyster, served at the restaurant, is inspired by the taste of his dad’s battered oyster, enjoyed with fish and chips every Friday, on the beach back home. “In New Zealand, everyone had an abundance of garden veg and fruit trees. We’d harvest everything. Dad taught us bushcraft and foraging. Mum brought Malaysia’s fusion flavours and had an open-door policy. Friends would walk past at 6pm, knowing they’d get an invite to dinner,” says Kereama, a finalist on the BBC show Great British Menu, whose dream is to cook for the Queen. “Immigration is about following a dream. I try to give people my soul food, something that comes from my upbringing, my journey, and no one else’s.” Singapore crab bao bun Seves 4 as a starter For the soft-shell crab 4 soft-shell crabs 200ml buttermilk 1 tbsp Sichuan pepper 1 tbsp Cornish sea salt 250g plain flour For the bao buns (makes 24, which can be frozen once cooked) 3g dried yeast 170ml warm water 25g sugar 1/2 tsp vegetable oil 1/4 tsp baking powder 1/4 tsp baking soda 1/2 tsp salt 300g strong flour Vegetable oil for brushing For the Singapore chilli sauce 10 large dried red chillies, rehydrated, deseeded and diced (I like Sichuan long-dried chilli) 5 serrano chillies, diced 1 tbsp shrimp paste, roasted for 5 minutes 1 thumb of galangal, diced 1 stick lemongrass, diced 1 banana shallot, peeled and diced 3 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed 1 tbsp finely chopped ginger 25ml vegetable oil 3 tbsp tomato ketchup 1 tbsp black bean sauce 1 tbsp sugar ¼ tsp salt 3 spring onions, trimmed and chopped 2 tbsp chopped fresh coriander For the Asian slaw 100g chopped Chinese cabbage 100g carrot, julienned or grated into matchsticks 3 spring onions, trimmed and chopped 6-7 tbsp (25g) chopped fresh coriander 4 tbsp mirin 1 tbsp brown muscovado sugar 60ml rice-wine vinegar 1 tsp golden sesame oil 1 tsp light soy sauce 1 lime, juiced For the seaweed mayo 2 sheets nori 200g mayonnaise Juice of ½ lemon To garnish 12 slices cucumber Coriander micro-cress (or large picked coriander leaves) 1 lime, cut into wedges For the deep-fried soft-shell crab, soak the crabs in the buttermilk. Toast the Sichuan pepper in a frying pan for about a minute, then let it cool down. Grind the pepper with the salt, then season the flour. When needed, take each crab and let the excess buttermilk drip off, then dredge in the flour to coat. Deep-fry (at 180C if you can measure temperature) until crispy. For the bao buns, mix the yeast, water, sugar and vegetable oil in a mixing bowl and leave to react. Mix all the other dry ingredients together. When the yeast is activated, add everything together to make a dough. Knead for a good 10 minutes, then cover with a damp cloth and leave in a warm place to prove for about 1 1/2 hours. Knock the dough back and divide into about 24 even balls. Leave to prove for another 30 minutes. In the meantime, cut out 24 greaseproof paper squares (approx 10x10cm). When the dough balls are ready, roll them out into ovals. Take an oiled chopstick and place in the middle of the ovals, fold over the ovals to make a bao shape, then withdraw the chopstick. Place on the greaseproof paper and let them rise for another 30 minutes. When ready, steam the buns in batches for 10 minutes. For the Singapore chilli sauce, mix the chillies, shrimp paste, galangal and lemongrass, then blend to a paste. Saute the shallot, garlic and ginger in the vegetable oil until golden. add the chilli paste, ketchup, black bean sauce, sugar and salt, then take off the heat and stir in the spring onions and coriander. For the Asian slaw, put the cabbage, carrot, spring onions and coriander in a bowl. Combine the remaining slaw ingredients to make the dressing, whisk, then toss through the chopped vegetables. For the seaweed mayo, dry the nori in a cool oven until very crisp, then blitz to a powder. Season the mayonnaise with the lemon juice, then mix in ½ tsp of the nori powder. To assemble, open up the bao buns, smear chilli sauce to taste on the base, followed by slices of cucumber and a heap of coleslaw. Lay some crab meat on next, followed by a small dollop of mayo and, if you like it hotter, another smear of chilli sauce on top. Garnish and don’t forget to squeeze the lime over before eating. Ethiopian: Beza, London Beza Berhanu, 44 “My staff are students or mums who need some hours,” says Beza Berhanu, who was 16 when she followed her cousin to the UK. Her vegan restaurant in Elephant &amp; Castle opened six months before the pandemic. During lockdown, locals and her landlord funded cooking for NHS staff, the homeless and those out of work. “When I came here I wanted to do something that helped people. I came for opportunity. Look at me now,” she says. Berhanu grew up in Addis Ababa. Weekends and the winter were spent away from the city, at her grandmother’s, where the table was full of colour – spinach, tomatoes, green beans. “She grew everything you can think of on her land. My grandmother was an Orthodox Christian who knew all the health benefits of vegan food, or what we knew as ‘fasting food’. She was over 100 when she died.” Berhanu studied as a nutritionist in London, and started making juices, then batches of red lentil and spinach, to sell at Camden market. “When I started cooking, all that my grandma taught me came back to me. Ethiopian food was new to my customers – they were full of wonder.” Long queues led to the offer of a 25-seat premises in another part of London, which has all the colour and flavours of her grandmother’s table. In fact a round, Ethiopian-made replica table, crafted from dyed grass and palm leaves, hosts her customers. “In my culture, if you have one meal, you share it with someone. My family would sit around my grandma’s table and tell each other about our day. Now everyone wants to sit at my table. “Sometimes I sit in my kitchen and think: ‘Now people know my culture.’ I still go back home to fill my suitcase with the berbere spice that my mum makes, to use at my restaurant.” Misir wot (spiced red lentils) Serves 2, generously 3 tbsp oil of your choice 2 big red onions, peeled and finely diced 3 cloves garlic, peeled and finely diced 1in piece ginger, minced 70g berbere spice mix (from the spice or world food section of big supermarkets) or paprika and cayenne pepper 1 tsp black pepper 500g red lentils Salt to taste Flatbread or injera to serve Place oil in a medium stock pot on a medium-high heat, add onions, garlic and ginger, and cook, stirring, for eight to 10 minutes, until golden brown. Add berbere spice and pepper, and cook, stirring, for five to seven minutes more; turn down heat, if need be, to prevent it catching. Add 250ml cold water and lentils, turn down heat and cook, stirring, for 20-25 mins, until it turns thick. Simmer for two minutes more, add salt and serve on flatbread (we use Ethiopian injera bread). Italian: Casanova, Cardiff Antonio Cersosimo, 45 “I wanted to live abroad and being in the EU made that easy,” says Antonio Cersosimo, who was a physics student when he left Italy for Wales in 1999, aged 22, to improve his English. Now he runs one of the country’s best, authentically Italian restaurants, where regulars visit twice a week and the menu uses a mix of local ingredients and Italian imports, including wine, truffle and salami, which are increasingly hard to come by. “The ripple effect of Brexit, coronavirus and the Suez canal blockage has been chaos,” he says. “Prices have gone up. In some cases we’re the only ones in the UK buying from small, family producers, so they simply had to stop exporting to us.” When he opened in 2005, it marked a departure from the garlic bread and lasagne served in Wales’s Italian cafes. “I’d never had garlic bread in my life. In my grandparents’ village in Calabria, we ate polenta or risotto. In Milan, where I was raised, my mother made her own passata and sourdough.” He says successive generations of immigration to the UK have changed attitudes to new cuisines. “When we first opened, I’d put goat and octopus in the bin every week because people wouldn’t try them – now they’re our bestsellers. “I was part of the second wave of immigrants. We came not because we had to but through choice, so we brought a different approach – less need to assimilate. I could make bolder choices with the food I cooked because, if it didn’t work, I could go home.” Ragù di agnello e fave (ragù of Welsh lamb and broad beans) Serves 4 For the ragù 1 small onion, peeled and finely diced 2 small carrots, trimmed and finely diced 3 sticks celery, finely diced 1 small leek, trimmed and finely diced 1 tsp dried mint Extra-virgin olive oil 400g Welsh lamb shoulder, trimmed and cut into small cubes 250ml white wine 1 large tomato, peeled and roughly chopped 400g broad beans, shelled (or frozen and defrosted) For the gremolata butter 30 fresh mint leaves Zest of 1 orange 1 clove garlic, peeled 100g unsalted butter, at room temperature To finish 400g orecchiette Grated pecorino If possible, make the ragù the day before and store it in the fridge, because it improves the flavour. In a thick-based saucepan or casserole dish, saute the chopped onion, carrot, celery, leek and dried mint, stirring often, for five minutes. Meanwhile, fry the lamb cubes in a frying pan, in extra-virgin olive oil, in batches if need be, until nicely coloured, then add to the vegetable pan. Deglaze the lamb pan with the wine, then pour over the meat, add the tomato and cook very gently for an hour and a half, until the lamb is very tender. (If the meat looks as if it’s drying out too much, add a little water.) Finely chop the fresh mint, orange zest and garlic clove for the gremolata, then stir into the soft butter. In a large saucepan, bring five litres of salted water to a rapid boil, add the pasta and cook for at least two minutes less than the stated cooking time – for this recipe, you want it very al dente. Drain the pasta, reserving a little of the cooking water, then return the pasta to the saucepan, pour in the ragu and broad beans, and cook gently, stirring, on a low heat for two to three minutes. Turn off the heat and stir in the gremolata butter. Serve in large pasta bowls, topped with the grated pecorino and a generous drizzle of extra-virgin olive oil. Gambian: Parkers Arms, Newton, Lancashire Stosie Madi, 51 At the height of summer, pre-Brexit and pre-pandemic, Stosie Madi’s multi award-winning pub would cook for 300 people over a weekend, opening six days a week. This summer’s staffing shortage has halved their week and their capacity. “It is heartbreaking. We could still be cooking for those numbers – we have the demand – but we don’t have the staff. After being closed for 18 months, we have not been able to capitalise on the boom that followed.” With no local transport, and based in a wealthy hamlet where teenagers are not looking for work, Madi has relied heavily on staff from eastern Europe, often living on site. Her four core staff are Brits and one Romanian, who has been there for four years. “Brexit has been a nightmare. It stripped that workforce away. If something doesn’t change drastically, I can’t see how independent restaurants can survive.” Madi describes herself as a “French-born Gambian with Lebanese origins”. She was born at the end of colonial rule in West Africa and followed her parents into hospitality, opening a jazz club in her 20s, then a restaurant. The political situation forced them out when her daughter Laudy was 10. “We witnessed defenceless children being shot at in front of us. Seeing poverty around us worsen, people disappearing, friends and colleagues threatened or jailed for political opinions was the last straw.” Rural Lancashire, the home of her long-standing friend and business partner Kathy Smith, became an unlikely new start and a culinary success. Its location, in the Forest of Bowland, was pivotal when they took on the Parkers Arms in 2007: “We wanted to cook food from the land around us, to be self-sufficient.” Citrus is one of their only imports and everything from ice-creams to bread, chutneys and pies is prepared on site: “I dream in ingredients. My cooking draws from my multinational background and my new, British one. One dish always on my menu is a pie – a dish from Middle Eastern culture, made with northern veg and the same pastry recipe I ate at school in Africa. Yet what could feel more British?” Beetroot, beet leaves and herb fatayer Makes 4 large pies 1 bunch beetroot with 3-4 beets and vibrant leaves 1 small bunch coriander, roughly chopped 1 small bunch mint, leaves picked and left whole 1 small bunch thyme, leaves picked 1 small bunch flat-leaf parsley, roughly chopped 4 large garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped 2 red chillies, finely chopped (pith and seeds discarded for less heat) 1 large red onion, peeled and finely sliced 1 tbsp ground cumin For the dough 375g wholewheat stoneground flour 1 tsp salt 50ml rapeseed oil 125g warm water 100g live sourdough (or 7.5g instant dried yeast or 15g live yeast) Pick the beetroots off the bunch, reserving the stalks and leaves. Cover beets with cold water, bring to a boil, then simmer until soft but still holding their shape. Drain, leave to cool, then peel, chop and put aside. Mix the flour and salt in a bowl, add oil and rub through. Pour the warm water on to the sourdough starter, stir gently to dissolve, then pour into the flour mix and bring together into a ball. Cover with a cloth and leave in a warm place for 30-60 minutes until doubled in size. Turn out and knead for five to 10 minutes (or work for five minutes in a food processor with a dough hook). Put in a lightly oiled bowl, cover with a clean cloth and leave in a warm place overnight, until doubled in volume. (The dough can now be frozen for up to three months; just defrost before using.) Toss all the filling ingredients together well, check seasoning and allow to sit for 30 minutes to wilt the herbs and leaves, and create a sauce. Stir well and proceed to fill the pies. Gently deflate dough before portioning. For four large pies, divide into 160g balls (65g balls for 10 small pies), then cover with lightly oiled greaseproof paper. Roll dough into circles on a lightly floured surface. Place a spoonful of filling in the middle. Bring two sides together and pinch to close. Bring the third side up so it looks like a triangle and pinch shut. (You can freeze at this stage for up to three months; bake straight from frozen following the method below, but add 5-8 mins baking time.) To bake, brush lightly with rapeseed oil, sprinkle with sesame seeds and sea salt (optional) and place on lightly oiled nonstick trays, then bake in a pre-heated oven at 200C (180 fan) for 10-12 mins, until golden brown and crisp. (The pies can be frozen for up to three months; just defrost and reheat until crisp.) Delicious hot or cold, with whipped tahini or spicy tomato sauce and a crisp salad. Nepalese: Yak Yeti Yak, Bath Sera Gurung, 58 Sera Gurung opened Yak Yeti Yak with his wife, Sarah, 18 years ago to satisfy his desire for an authentic taste of home. He grew up in Armala, northern Nepal, without electricity or tap water. “Fresh vegetables grew outside and we kept buffalo and goats. My siblings and I would watch our mother cook on the open fire in the middle of the house.” Meat was a luxury and pork was forbidden. “As a boy, I’d travel to get it, then cook it on a fire by myself. It is still my favourite dish on my menu.” Gurung was studying business in London when he met Sarah in 1989. They returned to Nepal together for five years, before settling in the UK. At Yak Yeti Yak, tucked away in the basement of three Georgian townhouses, their core team has been with them more than a decade, serving customers on floor cushions, under walls adorned with rice dollies, fish traps, nets and Nepalese art. At this point in the pandemic, Sarah says, they are still in survival mode. “A few younger, newer staff liked furlough too much,” she says. Young employees saved their wages in lockdown and left when it was time to reopen. “Finding new staff to replace them and extra staff to keep up with Covid sanitation is difficult,” she adds. This has limited their capacity. Gurung says: “I’ve had people travel to Nepal after eating here, then come back to tell me my food is better. One Michelin chef sends his kitchen porter for takeaway at the end of his shift. In our culture, a guest is like a god, to be respected. To hear they love the food of my home country feels wonderful.” Pork belly bhutuwa Serves 4 with rice, dal and a vegetable dish, or a generous 2 with just rice 450g pork belly strips 1 medium onion, peeled 1 tomato 3-4 spring onions 60ml rapeseed or vegetable oil 1 tbsp ginger, finely grated ½ tbsp garlic, finely grated 2 ½ tsp Kathmandu masala (thehimalayanspice company.com) or garam masala 1 tsp salt 60ml water Cut pork into 3cm squares. Cut onion into quarters from tip to root. Roughly chop tomato. Trim and cut spring onions into 4cm lengths. Heat oil in a large, heavy-based pan or wok until shimmering, then stir-fry pork belly until browned all over. Add onion, ginger and garlic, fry, stirring, until the onion is translucent, add the masala and salt, and cook for up to a minute, until the spices start sticking to the bottom of the pan. Add water, stir to lift any bits stuck to the bottom and reduce the heat to medium. Cover and cook until the pork is cooked through (it should give off lots of juice; if not, add 60ml more water). Remove the lid, return heat to high and cook until liquid evaporates, pork sizzles and the juices caramelise on the bottom of the pan. Stir and scrape the caramel to prevent it burning; as soon as you have difficulty scraping the caramel from the pan, stir in the tomato, which will lift it as it cooks. Add spring onions, cook long enough to soften slightly, then taste for salt, adjust and serve. This is a lovely, rich curry that goes well with fried rice, pilau rice or flatbread. As with most Nepalese curries, it is dry; for gravy, add 250ml water and 2 tbsp light soy sauce with the spring onions, and stir well. Syrian: Arabic Flavour, Aberystwyth Ghofran Hamza, 23 “I didn’t even have time to switch on the kitchen equipment before the pandemic hit,” says Ghofran Hamza, a refugee of the Syrian war who planned to open Aberystwyth’s first Arabic restaurant in March 2020. When she did eventually open the doors, a year later, 200 people queued to eat there. “I will never forget that day,” she says. After leaving her home, in north-east Syria, for Lebanon in 2012, Hamza’s family relied on UN food parcels. “When war started, we would go out and never know if we’d make it home,” she says. “In Lebanon, we went a long time without work. The house we were in wasn’t fit for animals.” They were given a home in the UK in 2018. Hamza cooked with her mother and brother (she also has two younger siblings) to raise money for refugee families. “There is a Syrian community here of about eight families. We wanted to buy children clothes and send them on summer activities. The town loved our food.” A restaurant was never part of the plan. “But Mum and I walked past a place for rent and called the landlord. He kept rates low for us. People warned me that running a business when we’d been here just a few months would be too much for a young woman, but I saw a chance to create something.” Hamza is studying for a degree in international politics and Spanish while running the restaurant. She employs two staff – one local person and one student. “Locally, there were many people looking for work but to find someone who has grown up eating or cooking the same food is hard,” she says. “As a girl, I would watch my mum prepare stuffed vine leaves from scratch. When we moved here, she taught me how to cook. Now you can’t tell the difference between her food and mine. “In Lebanon, I went without food; now I cook for others. My journey has come full circle. It’s hard to think of my friends back home, but when I cook, it’s a little bit of the food we shared.” Stuffed vine leaves Serves 6 1 large jar (908g) vine leaves in brine (you can get them at any Middle Eastern food shop; the quality makes a big difference to the dish, so get the best you can afford – I use California Gardens) For the filling 420g short-grain rice 100g parsley, finely chopped 6 tomatoes, finely chopped 2 big onions, peeled and finely chopped, or 1 bunch spring onions, finely chopped 5 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped 60ml olive oil or vegetable oil For the spice mix You can use any spices you wish, but the essentials are: 2 tbsp tomato paste 1 tsp black pepper 2 tsp citric acid, or the juice of 4 lemons 1 tbsp salt In addition Enough discs of sliced tomato, potato and onion to line your pan (around four slices for a medium pan) Put all the filling ingredients in a bowl and stir to mix. Before adding the spice mix, try some so you know whether to adjust the flavour by adding more lemon or salt. It should be a bit salty and sour. Combine the filling with most of the spice mix, leaving a little spice back for later. Drain and wash the vine leaves. Lay a leaf soft side down on a board, with the hard side facing up. Spoon the same amount of filling into each leaf, then fold it in at the sides first before rolling it up like a wrap. (The process is quite time-consuming.) At the bottom of a large, heavy pot, put slices of tomatoes, potatoes or any vegetables you like to prevent the leaves from burning, then cover with a layer of stuffed vine leaves. Add the remaining spice mixture at the bottom of the pot or between each layer of vine leaves to retain flavour. Repeat in layers until all the vine leaves are in the pot. Add water to cover and seal with a plate (you might want to place something heavy on top to keep it in place). Bring up to a boil, reduce the heat to medium and leave to cook for at least an hour. If they are soft, they are ready; if not, cook for up to 30 minutes more, then serve at room temperature, to six people as a main dish, 12 as a side. Mexican: Mestizo, London Roberto Alvarado Rios, 71 In autumn, a competitor walked in and tried to poach the Spanish staff at Mestizo, a bright, cosy restaurant and tequila bar in Camden, near Regent’s Park in London. “I was shocked,” says owner Marysol Alvarado. “I would never do that. It shows how desperate the industry is. We had already lost staff from the floor, the kitchen. They left because of the pandemic and never returned because of Brexit. Every restaurant owner is struggling.” Marysol and husband Roberto came to the UK from a restaurant background in Tecamachalco, central Mexico, in 1997 and opened Si Señor, in Soho, with an ambition to deliver traditional cuisine to Brits. In 2001, though, they were forced to close when the rent went up. The pandemic threatened financial ruin again – the family put their entire savings into keeping their restaurant, and the Mexican market next door, going. “The supply chain has been menacing,” Marysol says. “The customer may never feel this, and perhaps gets mad about not being able to get served their favourite tipple, but certain food and drink items are just not available any more.” Now the lively, 80-cover spot is thriving again, thanks to loyal locals and a solid reputation – a favourite dish is mole poblano (meat in a chocolate and chilli sauce). “Our menus are inspired by all parts of Mexico, by my mother and mother-in-law,” Marysol explains. “We are not fancy, but we are ambassadors for the food, flavours, colours of home. When Mexicans come to eat here, they remember when their grannies cooked for them: Mi casa es su casa.” Chicken enchiladas Serves 2 300g chicken breast 1 bowl (size to your liking) cooked whole black beans Cooked rice (amount to your liking) A little olive or vegetable oil 4 corn tortillas (2 per serving) 300ml salsa verde for enchiladas (ready made from mestizomarket.com) Roast or poach the chicken with your preferred seasoning and/or spices, then shred. Heat the beans and rice, ready to be served as sides. Once done, grease a pan with oil and put on a high heat. When the oil is hot, soften the tortillas by dipping them in for five seconds (use tongs), taking care not to leave them too long, as they will go crisp and won’t fold easily. In another pan, warm the salsa verde. Stuff the tortillas with the shredded chicken, roll to enclose the filling, then cover in the hot salsa verde. Serve with the rice and beans.At 37 years old, LeBron James is having one of the best seasons of his 18-year NBA career. The Los Angeles Lakers star is averaging 28.8 points (his most since 2009-10), 7.6 rebounds and 6.4 assists in 33 games this season, shooting 51.7% from the field, 36.4% from three and 75.4% from the free-throw line, all above his career averages. After a relatively slow start and then an abdominal injury that sidelined him for eight games, James has been an MVP-level player over his last 15 games, averaging 33/9/6 on 53/37/75 shooting splits with 1.5 steals and 1.3 blocks. And yet his Lakers – who entered the season as title contenders and who are 15 months removed from winning an NBA championship – are 22-23 on the season, including 6-9 over that same stretch. They currently rank eighth in the Western Conference standings, firmly in the play-in tournament if the season were to end today. Worse than that, the Lakers are experiencing internal strife, with head coach Frank Vogel reportedly on the hot seat fighting for his job, and the stubbornly proud Russell Westbrook being benched down the stretch of their most recent home loss to the Indiana Pacers on Wednesday night. Vogel explained his benching of Westbrook as: “Playing the guys that I thought were going to win the game.” And Westbrook said he was “disappointed” by the decision but remains determined to figure it out with the Lakers, saying, “I’ve done everything that’s been asked of me here, and I’ll continue to do so and ride this out as long as we can toward our ultimate goal – and that’s to win a championship.” But are Vogel and Westbrook actually at fault for the Lakers’ struggles this season? Or was the composition of this team doomed from the start? To be fair, the Lakers are missing 28-year-old big man Anthony Davis, who has missed 15 games and counting with a sprained MCL in his left knee but could return as soon as this week. But it’s not like the Lakers were world-beaters before Davis’ injury, going 13-14 with Davis in the lineup this season as he struggled to shoot the ball (17.9% from three) and provide the requisite spacing for James and Westbrook to co-exist. Clearly, the Lakers’ problems go beyond injuries or bouts with Covid-19, which every NBA team has dealt with this season. In reality, the problems date back to the offseason, when the Lakers front office – led by general manager Rob Pelinka and no doubt advised by (assistant GM) LeBron James – made a number of questionable decisions that culminated in the roster being ill-fitting and the players being by far the oldest in the league, with an average age of 30.0. By adding several past-their prime stars including Carmelo Anthony (37), Dwight Howard (36), Trevor Ariza (36), DeAndre Jordan (33), and to a lesser extent even Westbrook (33), the Lakers bucked the league-wide trend of youth in favor of veterans. But those veterans have struggled to perform, especially on the defensive end of the floor, where they contribute to the Lakers’ 20th-ranked defense. Plus, where the Lakers did go young, they seem to have made a significant mistake, choosing to re-sign unproven but promising 21-year-old combo-guard Talen Horton-Tucker to a three-year, $31m contract (including a player-option on the final year) instead of holding on to a proven thing in 27-year-old shooting guard Alex Caruso, who spent his first four seasons with the Lakers and fit in perfectly besides James. Horton-Tucker has been disappointing and inefficient this season while Caruso, who signed a modest four-year, $37m contract (including a partially guaranteed final year) with the Chicago Bulls this offseason, has been better in virtually every statistical category and has helped drive the feel-good Bulls to the top of the Eastern Conference. But the biggest miscue of all was the Westbrook trade. After going 42-30 last season – a disappointing record at the time but one that they would do anything to have now – the Lakers took a swing for the fences, trading Kyle Kusma, Kentavious Caldwell-Pope, Montrezl Harrell and the No 22 pick in the 2021 NBA draft to the Washington Wizards for Westbrook. Sure, the 2017 NBA MVP was coming off a fantastic second-half of the season with the Wizards, where he (and Bradley Beal) willed the team to a 18-7 finish and the 8th seed, averaging 23/14/14(!) on 45/33/74 shooting splits. But Westbrook was always going to be a clunky fit besides James (and to a lesser extent Davis), because while he is one of the most electrifying and athletic point guards to ever play the game, he is ultimately a non-shooter who needs the ball in his hands to succeed. It never made sense to take the ball out of James’ hands – arguably the greatest on-ball player the NBA has ever seen – to accommodate Westbrook. Plus, the Westbrook trade made the Lakers financially inflexible and bereft of meaningful assets. As one of the highest-paid players in the NBA, Westbrook makes $44m this season (and $47m next year), so the Lakers were forced to fill out the rest of their roster with minimum-salary contracts – hence the old players at the end of their careers. Clearly, the Lakers took a swing and missed. But they haven’t struck out just yet. After all, this is the Lakers we are talking about, and normal rules do not apply to the NBA’s most glamorous franchise; nor do they apply to teams led by James, arguably the greatest basketball player ever, who is relentlessly chasing his fifth ring. Davis will be back soon, and Vogel will try to make the Westbrook-James-Davis trio work for as long as he remains in the coaching chair. The good news is that the Lakers have been very good when those three share the court and even better when they do so without a traditional center, outscoring opponents by 12.2 points per 100 possessions in those lineups. It will be key for the Lakers to build continuity in the second half of the season, as they have already used 21 different starting lineups and their most-used five-man lineup has played just 68 minutes together, while every other NBA team has had at least one lineup play a minimum 100 minutes together. Still, the roster is not balanced or deep enough to make a run at a title as currently constructed. And that is what they intend to do considering two of their three best players are 33 and 37 years old and the other one has a history of injury problems. In other words, the time is now. The Lakers have very few avenues to improve their roster ahead of the February 10th trade deadline, with Horton-Tucker, Kendrick Nunn, and a 2027 first-round pick the only real assets that they could deal. But they will make a run at impactful two-way players such as Detroit’s Jerami Grant or Sacramento’s Harrison Barnes, it’s just unclear if they have enough assets to get a deal of any significance done. For the time being, the Lakers are about to embark on a six-game road trip after a relatively easy, home-based schedule to start their season. In other words, their biggest test is yet to come.“Stagey” is a term generally used as a slight against a film, evoking that stiff, musty sense of confinement so particular to a bad play. But it doesn’t have to be. Some films use the restrictions of theatre – a small cast, a single location – to match on camera the intensity and intimacy of live performance, fused with the very screen-specific benefits of the closeup. American actor turned director Fran Kranz’s impressive debut feature, Mass (now streaming on Sky Cinema), is one such film. Set entirely within a suburban Episcopal church, and mostly within the four walls of a bland function room, it is stagey in the tensest, tautest sense. The setup is simple and wrenching: the church hall has been chosen as a neutral space for peace talks of a kind, between two sets of parents who are at once strangers to each other and inextricably connected by the tragedy of a school shooting – that most increasingly, queasily familiar of American atrocities. Depending on your point of view, there’s either much to be said here or nothing at all: eventually, they opt for the former, talking through waves and counter-waves of grief, guilt and white-hot anger. You watch it thinking Kranz has done justice to what must have been an exceptional play, though the surprise is that it’s no adaptation: an original screenplay that deftly articulates specific personal crisis against a wounded national conscience. In an exercise of four people talking, of course, it helps if the four happen to be tremendous actors. Jason Isaacs, Ann Dowd, Martha Plimpton and Reed Birney make for an exquisite ensemble, one person’s rage bouncing off the other’s vulnerability, their silences as loaded as their shouting matches. It’s tempting to call it a great actors’ showcase, but that makes it sound like the film is under glass: Mass, for all its rigorous minimalism, feels full-blooded, with characters you want to reach out and touch. Kranz’s debut thus joins a fine subset of single location films that feel bigger and richer than the sum of their parts, or the square footage of their set. Some of the best of them, of course, are taken directly from the boards. There has perhaps never been a better theatre-to-film transfer than Mike Nichols’s scorching, tonic-bitter take on Edward Albee’s Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (1966; Apple TV), which honoured the bilious text while riffing on the fascination of Hollywood’s most volatile celebrity couple, Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton. Hitchcock was a dab hand at single location cinema – also proved in Lifeboat and Rear Window – but in his 1948 film of the Patrick Hamilton play Rope (Chili), the illusion of being shot in one real-time take added a jittery urgency to its suspense mechanics. William Friedkin’s underrated Bug (2006; Google Play), meanwhile, used the spatial restrictions of Tracy Letts’s play to amp up the claustrophobic nature of its conspiracy-minded psychodrama. 12 Angry Men (1957; Amazon) began as a teleplay, and later made its way to stage, but found its perfect form in Sidney Lumet’s blazing, debate-driven court drama, which ensured that no one can ever do jury service again without at least briefly pondering a righteous, me-against-the-world speech. There’s no such grandstanding in Louis Malle’s My Dinner With Andre (1981; Curzon), which instead uses the limitations of its single restaurant table setup to tune into the wayward, circuitous rhythms of human conversation. Far from that film’s genial naturalism, Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant (1972; BFI Player) reaches an overwhelming melodramatic pitch as it explores female co-habitation and co-dependency from one woman’s bedroom. Finally, single location films needn’t always confine themselves to the great indoors. Wolfgang Fischer’s superb, little-seen maritime thriller Styx (2018; Apple TV+) played out a life-or-death refugee crisis on the deck of one small sailboat, while Steven Knight’s Locke (2013; Now TV), starring Tom Hardy, sees a family man’s life come apart behind the wheel of a moving car on the motorway. Mass, in all its small beauty, seems positively epic by comparison. Also new on streaming and DVD The Nest (Picturehouse) Canadian writer-director Sean Durkin took 10 years to follow up his breakthrough film, Martha Marcy May Marlene, with another feature, but this skin-prickling, extraordinarily well-acted domestic nightmare starring Jude Law and Carrie Coon proves he was no flash in the pan. Tracing an Anglo-American family coming apart at the seams after moving to a Surrey mansion in the 1980s, it mingles lacerating marital drama with the heavy dread of a horror film. Bad Luck Banging or Loony Porn (Amazon/Apple TV) Romanian director Radu Jude won the Golden Bear at Berlin last year for this rude, raucous, intellectually fizzing black comedy, in which a Bucharest schoolteacher fights to save her job and clear her name after a personal sex tape of hers hits the web. The shadow of Covid era adds further layers of panic chaos to a bumptious satirical provocation. Dear Evan Hansen (Amazon/Apple TV) Last year brought us a surfeit of ambitious screen musicals with decidedly mixed results – none more disappointing than this beige, bloodless adaptation of the Tony- and Olivier-laden smash about a misfit teen caught up in the ramifications of an ill-judged lie. Diehard fans of the show may still be moved, though it gives the unacquainted no clue as to what the fuss was about.My right arm was out of action for weeks last year and it caused me to ponder again how ill-served those with long-term and more serious motor difficulties are by consumer industries, including beauty. It’s extremely hard to remove shiny screw-top lids, operate pipettes and prise open stiff palettes when you have only one or no working hands. Despite its feted 2019 inception, Grace Beauty – a brand specialising in stylish ergonomic grips for everyday makeup – has all but vanished, so for the time being, it’s a matter of seeking out existing products with accidental benefits. I found the matte finish of the lids and (refillable) plastic bottles from Skingredients easy to lift off and replace one-handed, and the pumps sufficiently sturdy for good purchase. Skin Good Fats, from £44, a creamy, barrier moisturiser for all skins, is my most used. Almost all Drunk Elephant products (C-Firma, £52.80, is an outstanding vitamin C serum) feature twist-up pump dispensers that can be operated one-handed and dispensed directly on to the face. Milk Makeup has similarly accessible packaging: its chubby, non-slippery sticks of colour (Mini Lip+Cheek, £16.50, is an essential) can be twisted up easily, then daubed and blended without the need to grip a brush (though Kohl Kreatives has an extensive line of makeup brushes designed for those with motor disabilities, from £8.99). Makeup palettes can be tricky to handle, but Viseart’s Pro and Petits Fours shadows come in gatefold cardboard-lidded palettes that flip open without a clasp, then sit flat, so you won’t have to chase it around the tabletop with a brush. The eyeshadows are impeccable. To finish the look, Lottie London’s wing edition stamp liner, £5.95, requires less dexterity than a traditional eyeliner. You simply press the rubber stamp nib on to each eyelid for identical feline flicks. All this comes at a cost, inevitably, and there is gross unfairness in being penalised for the privilege of using everyday items. Hope came in Olay’s December piloting of its easy-open lid, a limited run of chunky tops with winged handles that will fit all Olay moisturisers, as part of manufacturer P&amp;G’s pledge to make its packaging more accessible for people with disabilities. The new lids are so far available only in North America, but hopes are high for a UK release. Big change comes from huge brands, and this one is overdue.One night last week, I sat in my kitchen with my eyes closed, inhaling the rich, earthy scent of tomatoes. I felt transported: I was in an Italian garden, sun-dappled leaves swaying as I picked the plump, ripe fruit for a late pasta dinner with my large and beautiful family. I was, in essence, one of the puppets from the Dolmio adverts. But the smell wasn’t coming from a tomato. It was coming from a candle. How did they make it smell so real? I called my boyfriend over to share in this miracle. He put his face right over the flame, said that it smelled like burnt nose hair and quickly lost interest. But I remained tickled by this magic trick. A candle, that smells like tomatoes! There is something in the air at the moment, and it’s not just vine tomato candles: ever more eclectic smells – from the uplifting to the downright bizarre – have been making their way into perfume and candles. Is it a consequence of having been so smell-starved, so downright bored during the pandemic? An increased desire for the things we buy to give us experiences beyond mere enjoyment? And why do people want to smell weird stuff? Our interest in these smells has now spread outside our homes and into our cultural, public spaces. The past year alone has seen: an exhibition of floating machines perfumed with smells of coal, marine life and vegetation at Tate Modern; a gallery in the Hague infused with the fishy odour of a 17th-century Dutch canal; and a dedicated olfactory art space launched in New York. Olfactory art is far from new. Coffee beans were roasted behind a screen to create “the smell of Brazil” at the International Surrealist Exhibition of 1938. And let’s not forget the experiential dining experience at places like El Bulli and the Fat Duck at the start of this century. But the fact that we still view it as something of a novelty suggests we still view smell as a lesser sense. Novelty scents have been around for a while. In the US, Demeter Fragrance Library was established in 1996 selling perfumes based on everyday scents. It started with Dirt, Grass and Tomato, and has since expanded into more unusual smells like Play-Doh, New Car and Funeral Home. Yankee Candles’ off-the-wall options have included Bacon, Schnitzel with Noodles, and something rather unnervingly called Man Town. Anya Hindmarch sells candles that smell like pencil shavings and chewing gum. D. S. and Durga make several weird scents, including one called Burning Barbershop, which is supposed to smell like a specific barbershop in New York state that caught fire. I’ve never been, but the pleasing woody smell made me want to. Recent years have seen a rise in avant garde scents and more prosaic smells, says fragrance writer, Lizzie Ostrom. Perfumed goods used to be about beauty and vanity, she says. “But now we’re thinking, ooh, what is it that a fragrance can do? And what sorts of fragrances might I like that aren’t just the usual scents that I thought I wanted to wear?” Surprisingly, it seems the pandemic only increased our olfactory desire. We didn’t have any nights out to smell nice for, yet somehow the fragrance industry didn’t suffer at all – perfume sales were up 45% in the first quarter of this year. “I think people discovered that fragrance was not just for someone else to smell and admire, but is primarily a personal experience, with the power to make you feel good about yourself,” said public relations specialist Daniel Williams. Scented candles saw a huge boost in sales, too. Deprived of many kinds of stimulation – including smells other than that of our own homes or our breath inside a face mask, it’s no wonder we turned to scented candles. If we were going to be stuck in our homes 23 hours a day, we might as well make home a nice place to be. One of the many unhinged habits I developed during the winter lockdown was sitting in my bed holding a scented candle in both hands, breathing deeply from the flame and thinking, “what am I doing?” Looking back, I think my nose was hungry. Loss of smell as a side-effect of Covid has been a common experience in the past 18 months, and people who regain their sense of smell often report that it comes back in patchy, faulty ways – smelling things that aren’t there, or favourite foods now smelling like sewage. Doctors have recommended “smell training” : buying essential oils and sniffing them repeatedly as a sort of nose physio to try to retrain the body to sense aromas. Remedies for smell loss trending on social media include eating burnt oranges. “Getting their sense of smell back has for millions of people a real source of relief and joy – and perhaps now they’re wanting to really explore,” Ostrom said. Vegetables are having a moment – as well as the Urban Apothecary vine tomato candle that so impressed me, I could have a Loewe room spray that smelled like coriander or beetroot – but there are also candles that smell of chlorine, and perfumes with a base note of asphalt. And all the talk of everyday smells magically replicated at the light of a wick or the pump of an atomizer has a touch of 1999 about it, of scratch-and-sniff cards, and dorky experiments with Smell-o-vision. Last year, a lingerie brand released a range of “pillow mists”, supposedly designed to help you sleep, that smelled like celebrities such as Harry Styles and Maya Jama. Hotels, cars, sports stadiums have “signature scents”. McDonald’s did a line of Quarter Pounder-scented candles in February 2020. Products are also increasingly taking inspiration, although one hopes not ingredients, from the human body. There’s the infamous Goop vagina candle, of course, but that’s nothing compared with a scent called Vulva Original. The Amazon listing promises “intense scent of a vagina”, and it has some of the more disturbing reviews I’ve read in my time, including: “I have met several girls and I know what that smells like …” But for something truly out there, Etat Libre d’Orange’s Sécrétions Magnifiques is just the thing. The scent claims to smell of blood, sweat, sperm and saliva, and reviewers describe it as “upsetting”, “completely unwearable”, and like “sweaty debauchery in the locker room of an indoor pool with rusty metal ladders”. How much is this all just gimmick, simply another way to sell us stuff? Prof. David Howes, director of the Centre for Sensory Studies in Montreal and co-author of Aroma: The Cultural History of Smell, is rightly sceptical of this sort of marketing strategy, which relies on dodgy science about smell appealing to a primitive part of our brains: “The idea is that marketers can get under the conscious defences of the cerebral cortex by using smell to market things, which I think is rubbish. That kind of physiological reductionism is really just another marketing ploy.” Still, we ought to be wary of crying gimmick at any unusual smell experiences – and scents in art galleries – because we’re not trained to take smell seriously. Because of the Proustian madeleine moment, we in the west tend to connect smells with memories and emotions. We don’t think of, say, communication, or knowledge. Philosophers Aristotle, Kant and Hegel believed that the sense of smell it should be considered below sight and hearing, and Freud had almost a horror of smell, referring to it as something that we needed to move beyond now that we were no longer going around on all fours like dogs. Howes goes as far to say that we live in an odour-phobic society. “Witness all of our deodorising and then re-odourising rituals: the morning shower followed by adding all these artificial scents.” Why should smell remain such a neglected sense? Why should people wear one perfume but have a wardrobe full of clothes, several Spotify playlists, and eat different meals every night but balk at filling their living rooms with different scents? Just as we can learn to like fine whisky and coffee, we can learn to appreciate stranger smells – and perhaps should. “Our noses are woefully uneducated now,” Howes told me, “and I’m very much in favour of liberating the nose. It has been kept down for too long.” Last week, I came across a scent called Stercus. Made by perfumer Allessandro Gualtieri, Stercus is Latin for dung. “He [Gualtieri] is eccentric to say the least,” said Daniel Williams of the PR agency. “You’re sitting there at a press launch and when you ask him what the smell is based around, he tells you it’s his anus.” When this bottle – which I’m sorry to have to tell you is brown – arrived at my flat, I interrupted my housemate watching a documentary about space and asked him to smell it with me. I gave it a couple of spritzes, and waited. “It’s like if you used a leather bag to steal a load of vanilla candles” he said, confusion on his face. I told him what the special note was, and we both sat there sniffing the air and thinking about arseholes. “I kind of like it,” he said. If you didn’t know what the scent’s origin was, you wouldn’t necessarily suspect, although there is an unmistakable note of the farmyard about it. Maybe all this is only the beginning. Maybe in 50 years’ time, when we’re stinking to high heaven of all manner of as-yet unimaginable futuristic smells, we’ll look back and think: “Chewing gum candles? Anus perfume? That’s nothing.”Chopping down trees is not how most people would expect a river restoration project to begin, but Janne Raassina – who is expertly using a chainsaw to take down four or five earmarked trunks around the Särkkäjoki River in remotest eastern Finland – explains that the rotting wood will be hugely useful to the ecosystem. “This is a huge buffet for insects, and it’s something that has been missing in our nature for 100 years,” he says. “We are creating the food chain from scratch.” Finland is the most heavily forested country in Europe, with about 76% of its land area cloaked by trees. However, this impressive statistic disguises the ecological damage that has been inflicted by the forestry industry over the last century or so. The old growth has almost entirely vanished, replaced by the skeletal monocultures of commercial plantations; today, less than 5% of Finland’s forest cover is more than 120 years old. These are a pale imitation of the lichen-laden, berry-filled forests of old – and the wildlife has suffered as a result. Rivers have been another casualty of Finland’s rapid industrialisation. From the 1850s, before the age of roads and rail, its waterways were engineered into unobstructed channels to create a vast fluvial transport network. Rapids were removed and bends straightened to allow logs to float hundreds of miles downstream for processing. The supply of dead wood that would once have fed into the rivers dwindled as the surrounding birch, pine and spruce was cleared. Though timber floating stopped by the 1980s, its legacy of sterility persists: the diversity of habitats that would have existed throughout the meanders and wetlands of a natural river system never returned, and the forestry industry continues to deprive these ecosystems of their dead wood. Studies of individual rivers have shown, in some cases, the complete decimation of once-thriving populations of fish. The stream that flows before us looks healthy enough, but, says Raassina, it is ecologically dead. All the creatures you would expect to see here – including fish, mayflies and other insects – have vanished. An investigation into the tributaries of the Lieksanjoki River failed to return a single brown trout. “We’re basically starting from zero. Our nation has been so shortsighted,” says Raassina. He and his two contractors, Janne Ratilainen and Henri Leskinen, have been tasked with restoring life to this 12km (7.5–mile) stretch of the Särkkäjoki, as well as 1.5km of another stream, the Rännänjoki, that crosses into Finland from Russia. Both flow into the larger Lieksanjoki river in the North Karelia region of eastern Finland. As well as adding dead wood to the water, the restoration work has involved adding gravel to the riverbed, recreating old spawning grounds for fish, and moving rocks from the riverbank into the water to hide the juveniles from predators. “The fish have all the instincts, but nowhere to practise them,” says Raassina. Some might hesitate to call this rewilding; with the need for chainsaws and a lot of manual labour, no one could suggest that they are taking a hands-off approach. However, the emphasis is ultimately on creating an ecosystem that will sustain itself over time, without the need for constant intervention. Raassina’s enthusiasm for the concept is immediately apparent: he has turned up for the day in a hoodie and a baseball cap, both emblazoned with “Rewilding” in an eye-catching comic sans. “I think rewilding is a really good term. I haven’t found any better in Finnish,” he says. While the focus is initially on creating healthy habitats, the ultimate mark of victory will be whether the trout return to them. Ideally, these would repopulate the river by themselves, but given the absence of the species in the surrounding area, it is likely that they will have to be reintroduced. It is a small start to a monumental task. The country has about 650 rivers. About 90 of these are major rivers that discharge into the sea or across borders; the rest are tributaries. But the Finnish public has embraced the task of river restoration. Because 60% of Finland’s forests are divided up between hundreds of thousands of private landowners, this has created plenty of work for Raassina, who initially turned down the project because he was too busy. What makes this project notable, however, is that the state-owned forestry company Metsähallitus is at the helm. It owns almost a third of Finland’s land, and without this powerhouse onboard, efforts to restore life to the “land of a thousand lakes” will always be piecemeal. If the agency can be persuaded of the value of this work, the potential for Finland’s river systems is enormous. Metsähallitus has worked on water-based restoration projects before, but this is the first time it has explicitly addressed the small creeks and their catchment areas that crisscross the larger part of the land. “Metsähallitus has been known for restoring swamps and marsh mires, but not so much creeks, rivers and lakes. But more and more, the focus is also turning to these water ecosystems nowadays,” says Arttu Kuiri, who designed the North Karelian part of the programme. He adds that every single one of Finland’s smaller streams would benefit from restoration, but with funding of just under €1m they had to settle on nine river basins. “People are starting to understand that rivers and clean waters are like the heart and lungs of the country,” says Kuiri. “Finland doesn’t really have anything else other than nature, and if we are going to ruin that, it doesn’t end well.” The scale of the damage means that wholescale river restoration will be no easy task. At Särkkäjoki, Raassina points out that a layer of sediment has gathered on one of the larger rocks. It is barely noticeable – a fine dusting of dirt – and yet it points to another major problem: soil erosion. Finland’s vast peatlands have been carved up by drainage ditches over the years, destabilising its once-waterlogged soils in the name of timber production. If the country is to have healthy rivers again, looking beyond the banks and towards the wider landscape will be essential. Kuiri agrees on the need for humans to set the wheels in motion. “We had good rivers and they have been healthy, but in a hundred years we have done so much bad to them. We need to revoke that – and the stones won’t move themselves.” For now, in North Karelia, the Särkkäjoki looks like it has lost a fight with a particularly industrious beaver – and that, of course, is the point. The chainsaw has done its work.“We must learn to live with Covid in the same way we have to live with flu,” Sajid Javid told the nation this week. For most people, the parallel with flu is now valid: vaccinations and acquired immunity have defanged Covid to the point that there is no longer much risk of becoming severely unwell. However, the pandemic’s finishing line has not yet come clearly into focus for a sizeable minority in society. In England, 3.7 million people fall in the clinically extremely vulnerable (CEV) category, including those with blood cancers, an organ transplant, kidney disease and other conditions linked to immunosuppression. “It feels to me that lying behind the [lifting of restrictions] is the idea that probably everyone’s going to get it and everyone will be all right,” said Gemma Peters, the chief executive of Blood Cancer UK. “In our community, that isn’t true. If more people get it, more people will die.” Starting from a far higher level of risk, those with suppressed immune systems also get less protection from vaccines and are accounting for an increasing proportion of ICU admissions and deaths. Yet many feel like a “forgotten minority”, according to Maggie Wearmouth, a GP and member of the government’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI). “It’s fairly mind-blowing,” Wearmouth said. “They are an important and hugely vulnerable group that have been forgotten. I feel quite angry on their behalf.” According to Wearmouth, this is not simply a case of these people being fundamentally frailer and more susceptible to all illness – although this will be true for some. Many of those with slow-growing blood cancers, for instance, would outwardly appear healthy and have lived essentially normal lives pre-Covid. Some felt no need to disclose their condition to friends, or even their children, before the pandemic. The emergence of a new virus changed things for this group because it required building up immunity from scratch at a point in life when the immune system was compromised either through illnesses or treatments. Early vaccine data for blood cancer patients – of whom there are 250,000 in the UK – found little or no antibody response to the first dose of vaccine. More recent data, published this week in the Lancet, showed that for dialysis patients, even after two doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab and one dose of Pfizer/BioNTech, more than half did not have detectable levels of antibodies against the Omicron variant. This is not to say that vaccinations “don’t work” for these groups, but that immunity needs to be built up over repeated doses and may never be as robust. Michelle Willicombe, a nephrologist and senior clinical lecturer at Imperial College Healthcare NHS trust, said: “Covid infection still remains a real threat to immunosuppressed patients in particular within the clinically extremely vulnerable groups. Not all immunosuppressed patients have mounted immune response to vaccinations, even after four doses.” “Life for them can’t carry on as normal,” she added. Despite the lower efficacy of vaccines in vulnerable groups, the roll-out of third doses before the Omicron wave struck was slow, meaning that many are yet to have a fourth dose, which they would now be eligible for if things had moved quicker in the autumn. According to UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) data, 84% of those in the extremely vulnerable category have had a third or booster dose, but the figure is expected to be far lower for fourth doses (UKHSA did not have available data). “I’ve got a real worry about this,” said Peters. “Probably half the calls to our support line are people who are struggling to get their fourth dose.” There is a viable pathway to a more normal life, despite it being a longer and more difficult one, according to Peters. Newly available antiviral drugs, including Pfizer’s Paxlovid and Merck’s molnupiravir, significantly reduce the chances of hospitalisation and death if taken during the first few days of illness and are now available to those in the vulnerable category. Some countries, although not the UK, are using monoclonal antibodies as prevention against infection in immunosuppressed people who have not mounted an immune response to vaccines. Some argue they should be made available in the UK, particularly if new immunity-evading variants emerge. There is also a concern over whether free lateral flow tests will remain available to those in the vulnerable group so that they can continue to ask family and friends to test before meeting up. “If we had all of that in place it would give people a roadmap to a world where it becomes endemic and they can still see their friends,” said Peters.“She’s just a middle-aged woman, what would she know about it?” In a small classroom on a dark winter afternoon in east London, a group of students are talking about deciphering the meaning behind a tweet. The group is discussing how language and information are used online for political influence, particularly by anti-vaccination campaigners in the middle of a pandemic. Today they are unpicking social media posts by the mother of a child with autism, who is falsely linking that condition with the MMR vaccine. But these teenagers see through it. “She’s not a doctor,” one said. “She’s trying to say she knows something, but she doesn’t.” These year 12 students at Hackney’s Mossbourne Academy are discussing how to interrogate information online and be sure that you can trust what you read. It is part of a lesson in political literacy, taught by the social enterprise Shout Out UK, which aims to make sure children leave school knowing how democracy works and how they can help to bring about change. Students have learned about the first-past-the-post voting system, discussed the role of the House of Lords, and are now debating the media and conspiracy theories and how they affect politics and society. Mossbourne, in Hackney Downs, introduced the lessons after seeing the effect of the Brexit referendum result on students. “That day there was a sadness; an atmosphere existed in the school,” said Nick Redgrove, the school’s higher education support officer. “Rather than there being a direct interest in politics, [the pupils] wanted to know why. Since then we have done a lot more in terms of engaging them in current affairs.” The presidency of Donald Trump, the troubled leadership of Boris Johnson and movements such as Black Lives Matter and #MeToo have kept pupils interested. But where Mossbourne Academy has acted, thousands of schools have not. A report from the all-party parliamentary group on political literacy, the University of Sheffield and Shout Out, published in November, found that thousands of pupils are leaving school without receiving any political education at all. A survey of 3,000 teachers working at more than 2,000 English secondaries suggested that one-fifth of schools were teaching no political literacy material at all, in citizenship lessons or even in tutor group sessions or one-off political events. “That’s pretty shocking when you think about how many students are involved,” said Dr James Weinberg, one of the report’s authors and a lecturer in political behaviour at the University of Sheffield. The study, commissioned by the all-party group 20 years after the introduction of citizenship classes, found political education to be in a dire state. The pressure on teachers to meet exam grade targets is squeezing out these lessons, Weinberg explains. “Even where schools say they do citizenship education, often it’s just part of PSHE [personal, social, health and economic education]. In most places these subjects were being lumped together as there wasn’t enough time to do them separately.” Citizenship became part of the national curriculum in 2002 after the Crick report. But the subject has been edged out and neglected in many schools, and academies do not have to follow the national curriculum. The study did not ascertain whether academies were more likely to have dropped political literacy teaching. Alex Thirkill, of the Beacon school in Banstead, Surrey, an academy, has taught citizenship and managed its teaching across his career. He said he was not surprised by the findings. “There was never a golden age of citizenship education. It was born on life support,” he said. “As pressures on schools for results, and financial pressures, have grown it has become less and less important to schools. If you said to me 50% of schools [weren’t covering political literacy], I would have thought that would be more accurate.” The study also revealed that many teachers feel ill-equipped to give students the information they need. About 60% of those polled said they felt responsible for developing young people’s political literacy but the majority (79%) did not think their training or professional development had given them the skills to do so. Teachers of humanities were more likely to feel confident in this area than those with a background in Stem subjects. However, 43% of science teachers said they had delivered political literacy teaching at least once in the last year, often in form time or “drop down days”. There are other problems. “Teachers might dodge this responsibility because they fear difficult conversations and also the comeback,” said Weinberg. “They fear what parents or communities might do if they say the wrong thing to students; the politicisation of education has been salient in recent years.” Individual teachers worry they could be vilified on social media for comments made in class, taken out of context. This anxiety about ramifications is also a consequence of the Prevent programme, according to Weinberg. He describes the policy of involving teachers in terror prevention as having “heightened teachers’ sensitivity to the discussion of controversial issues in the classroom”. Inequality is a factor in patchy provision. “The differences between schools serving affluent and less affluent areas was really shocking to me,” said Weinberg. Students at private schools were more likely to receive a detailed grounding in political literacy than those at state schools. But Weinberg’s study found pupils at schools in the most deprived boroughs were much less likely to receive any political education than those in wealthier areas. Simon Fell, the Conservative MP for Barrow in Furness and a member of the parliamentary group that commissioned the report, said the findings demonstrated the urgency of “trying to get young people engaged in politics and showing that politics matters to them”, and he said he believed the government should find ways to do that. Fell said this should not mean extra demands being dumped on teachers, but that the teacher training curriculum should be rewritten. “It’s on the Department for Education to be looking at this … to be funding the training of teachers so they are properly qualified to do this.” But meanwhile, how to get this work embedded into an already very busy curriculum? At St Birinus school, a boys’ comprehensive in Didcot, Oxfordshire, one member of staff coordinates all work on politics, from visits from MPs and holding shadow elections to, recently, a mock Cop climate conference. The deputy headteacher, Briony Bowers, said it had been easier for the school to manage this work when one teacher took the responsibility to pass on the curriculum and train the staff in how to deliver it, so “it’s not about individual teachers needing to feel like they have got that knowledge”. But Bowers said that did not remove the main barriers to giving pupils a good political education: time and money. “There is this tendency to think schools can do everything, and we don’t have the capacity.” Matteo Bergamini, the founder of Shout Out UK, said the consequences of not prioritising this type of education were showing. He pointed to statistics from the 2019 general election. “Only 47% of 18- to 24-year‑olds turned out to vote. In 2018, just 2% of children in the UK were found to have the skills to establish whether a piece of online information is fake. “This is why political literacy matters. If we don’t equip young people with the tools to understand the world around them – and how to change it – then we’re not just disenfranchising them, we are delegitimising our democratic process. Not providing those tools weakens our democracy.”The government has announced the lifting of all plan B restrictions in England from 26 January, which include compulsory mask-wearing in shops and on public transport, and the guidance to work from home. Among the 3.7 million clinically extremely vulnerable people in England, the removal of these measures has raised concerns around their health and welfare. Three people who have been shielding throughout the pandemic told the Guardian about their experiences. ‘I can’t see myself going out in the near future at all’ Lesley Brown, 60, a former IT business analyst from Stockport who retired last year, lives with her 27-year-old daughter who has Down’s syndrome. Both are clinically extremely vulnerable and have shielded together since March 2020. “I’m immunosuppressed due to the drugs I take for rheumatoid arthritis, so we’ve been shielding even when official restrictions have been lifted,” said Brown. “We’ve just not been anywhere for two years: pubs, cinemas, theatres, not even shops really. “The lifting of plan B restrictions is appalling,” she said. “I can’t see myself going out in the near future at all if people aren’t wearing masks now. My plan for retirement was to travel around the world, but my trip to India was cancelled. Even travelling on a plane would be stressful because the air on the plane is circulated, so we haven’t taken that risk at all.” Brown has coped with the isolation by going on twice-daily walks with her dogs, Rosie and Otis, and by talking to her other daughter and son regularly on Zoom. But she is concerned that her daughter has lost independence. “My daughter lost the opportunity to have her own flat. I’ve been trying for years to get her into her own accommodation, and the opportunity finally came up in Christmas 2020, but they wanted her to move in shortly before the lockdown. I wouldn’t have been able to visit her for several months, so we missed that opportunity and she’s still living at home.” ‘It’s the worst point in the year to lift restrictions’ Kate*, 49, who works for a university in the Midlands, is clinically extremely vulnerable after her spleen was removed after an acute illness in 2019. She started shielding when she took up her role at the university, a week before the government’s shielding programme officially began in March 2020. “To be fair to the government, they did try in the beginning,” said Kate. “Shielding was handled well. We had letters to show to employers saying we should not be forced back to work. We had offers of support, and the uplift in universal credit was good for those who needed it. But over the last 12 months there has been almost nothing.” Kate calls the lifting of plan B restrictions “a complete nightmare”. “I think this is the worst point in the year to be doing this. For them to say everyone can skip wearing masks again is genuinely frightening. “Luckily for me, my employer has assumed I am continuing to shield, even though the government doesn’t support it. But I’m in support groups on Facebook where people in my sort of situation have been forced back into customer-facing jobs, which is appalling. You have the right to ask your employer not to do this, and there’s disability discrimination law, but there’s only so much you can do. Most people don’t have the money, time or the energy to fight it. “In my previous job, I probably would have been back in the workplace six months ago, and been ill as a result. It shouldn’t be a case of luck; there should be a clear policy for the clinically extremely vulnerable. We’ve had new starters in my team and I’ve had to explain that they won’t be seeing me as I have a dispensation to work from home. But that shouldn’t be something I have to explain.” ‘It’s easier to shield in France’ Like Lesley Brown and Kate, Dave, a 66-year-old retired social services worker from Devon, has been shielding since March 2020 due to a history of leukaemia and heart problems. “From the outset, my wife and I completely closed down,” said Dave. “Apart from going out for walks, neither I or my wife have really socialised since it all began. We just didn’t see family except for WhatsApp, until some contact very recently. They’ve been very responsible with tests and so on – but even then we only met outside for a picnic.” In the summer of 2021, Dave moved to rural France, a decision he had planned before the pandemic. Dave says he “feels safer” living in France than in Devon. “The difference was palpable when we arrived and saw people were wearing masks. It’s easier to shield in France because here there are Covid vaccine passes. For people like me, the vaccines have little or no effect, but I live in a rural area, so I can sometimes go to the food shop and the pharmacy when it’s quiet. “In England, there has been more emphasis on personal freedom,” he said. “While there have been controversies about restrictions in France, there seems to have been more emphasis on pulling together here. I feel the medics, social workers and care workers aren’t being listened to in the UK, and the country would get behind them if the government gave them more credence and there was more awareness of the medically vulnerable.” Some names have been changed.The cost of living crisis means many Britons are desperately casting around for ways to save money this winter. Yet each year the average family throws away more than £700 of perfectly good food – so could tackling this waste be a win-win for you and the environment? “You are literally throwing money in the bin by wasting food,” says Helen White, Wrap’s special adviser for household food waste. The charity, which works to reduce waste and promote efficient use of resources, estimates that a family with children could save £730 a year on average by not binning food. “That money could come into very sharp focus as we move further into this year,” White says. The annual financial cost of these uneaten meals is of a similar magnitude to the predicted step up in gas and electricity bills when the government’s energy price cap is reset in April. Households are already under financial pressure, with official data for December showing inflation at a near 30-year high of 5.4%, driven by the higher cost of clothes, food and footwear. The upward march of food prices – milk, for example, costs 8% more than a year ago, while margarine is up by a massive 27% – makes avoiding waste even more critical. The £730 figure is based on Wrap’s most recent food waste data, which estimates that an average family with children bins 244kg of food, or 580 meals, each year. For an individual, the estimated waste figure is 69kg, which adds up to £210. In total, Britons throw away 6.6m tonnes of food a year, of which 4.5m tonnes, worth £14bn, is edible. This waste is bad for the planet because about a third of the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions are associated with our food and drink. “It isn’t just a glass of milk, slice of bread or potato that you are wasting,” White says. “It is all the resources that have gone into producing it, so when you waste food you feed climate change.” Steps you can take to cut down on food waste The good news is that getting a grip on food waste can start with small lifestyle changes, such as writing a meal plan or shopping list, or just checking your fridge is set at the right temperature. Wrap’s Love Food Hate Waste website is full of ideas, including recipes for commonly wasted foods such as potatoes or chicken. A simple thing to do is to check whether your fridge is cold enough. Fresh items such as milk – the third most-wasted food in the UK after potatoes and bread – perish quickly if they are not stored at the correct temperature. The average UK fridge temperature is running at 6.6C when it should be below 5C, according to the charity. A fridge thermometer can be picked up for less than £5 in shops including Wilko and Currys, and could prove a good investment. Love Food Hate Waste also has a useful section that explains how to adjust your fridge’s temperature. A recent consumer poll conducted for Sainsbury’s revealed one in five consumers said the reason they waste so much food is they “don’t know what to cook”. The supermarket’s latest marketing push highlights homemade soup as a low-cost nutritious meal that is a good way to use up veg and leftovers that would otherwise go to waste. “Do a little bit of planning,” White suggests. “Write a shopping list or use your phone to take a picture of what is in your fridge or cupboards, we call them a ‘shelfie’, so you don’t buy a double of something you’ve already got. “Meal planning is not for everyone but if it appeals to you, especially with a focus on saving money, I can really recommend it.” At the same time, it is worth remembering plans can change during a busy week. “You’re not going to cook from scratch seven days a week,” she says. “Maybe just plan for five and give yourself the opportunity to have a takeaway or meal out, or just get something out of the freezer.” Know when to throw it out An important thing to get a handle on is the difference between the use-by and best-before dates on food packaging. That way you can avoid food poisoning and jettisoning products that are still OK to eat. A use-by date is about safety, says the Food Standards Agency. You can eat food until and on the use-by date but not afterwards as it could be unsafe to consume, even if it has been stored correctly and looks and smells fine. A best-before date is an indicator of quality rather than safety. Food is safe to eat after that date but its flavour and texture may not be as good. A 2011 survey by Wrap found a high level of understanding about date labels among consumers. However, a sizeable minority incorrectly associated a best-before date with safety. This confusion is “100%” contributing to food waste, says Jamie Crummie, a co-founder of the food waste app Too Good to Go. Its more recent poll found 45% of UK adults were confused about the meaning of best before. The decision by food companies to carry use-by dates on products better suited to best before is also contributing to waste, he says. That products have not been used in time is the main reason given for food waste in the home and is behind about 40% of the total. A third of the time, this “not-used-in-time” decision is based on the date label and these actions add up to about 15% of food waste. Companies that can help Too Good to Go is one of a growing band of companies focused on tackling the huge quantities of food waste generated in and out of the home. The company allows people to buy discounted food from restaurants and shops, while other services, such as Olio, help people rehome unwanted food from their fridge. By sharing food waste tips and advice with its 7.5 million users, Too Good To Go aims to educate people around the “big picture”, Crummie says. Its “look, smell, taste, don’t waste” campaign, which seeks to improve understanding of date labels, has so far enlisted 40 brands, including big names such as Nestlé, Danone and Onken. The companies have switched from use-by to best-before dates on products, including milk, yoghurt and cheese. Prompts on the packaging also encourage consumers to use their senses to gauge edibility. Milk is wasted on a vast scale, with more than 490m pints poured down the kitchen sink every year. About 85m of those pints are dumped because consumers are adhering to the use-by date even though the milk may still be good. Morrisons recently announced its plan to replace the use-by date on its bottles with a best-before one. Arla, the dairy co-operative behind the Cravendale brand, made the same switch in 2019. If you find yourself regularly pouring milk down the sink at home, it might be time to have a rethink, White says, as we often buy a certain quantity out of habit. She suggests buying smaller containers and, if you are worried about being caught out, to keep one in the freezer as a backup. “If you understand what a date label is telling you, you can make better decisions in the home because you will be able to use up more of the food you buy,” she adds. “I want food to go into bellies not bins.” The detail behind use-by and best-before dates Use-by dates are about safety. They are applied to food that goes off quickly and could cause food poisoning after a short period of time, such as fresh fish or ready-to-eat salads. The food will be unsafe to consume after the date. The product’s life can be extended by freezing, although you need to do this before the use-by date expires. Best-before dates, sometimes shown as BBE (best before end) are about quality not safety. The food will be safe to consume after this date but may not be at its best: it may lose flavour or go stale. These appear on a wide range of products including frozen, dried and tinned foods. Whether a food business applies a use-by or best-before date depends on factors such as the degree of processing and the microbiological risk associated with the product, as well as anticipating how it might be used and stored at home. Ten most wasted food and drink items in UK homes Potatoes (fresh) Bread Milk Meals (homemade and pre-prepared) Fizzy drinks Fruit juice and smoothies Pork, ham and bacon Poultry (chicken, turkey and duck) Carrots (fresh) Potatoes (processed) • Data from WrapBrendan Rodgers blamed naivety for the extraordinary way Leicester allowed victory to turn into defeat against Tottenham on Wednesday, but his team are becoming old hands at shooting themselves in the foot. There is mitigation: they have been hampered by injuries all season and are still without a raft of key players. But they still need to wise up quickly if they are to retain hope of reaching Europe. Brighton have similar ambitions and are in much better form – all they need to do is sharpen their finishing and they could add to Leicester’s woes. Paul Doyle Sunday 2pm Venue King Power Stadium Last season Leicester 3 Brighton 0 Referee Martin Atkinson This season G12 Y31 R2 2.75 cards/game Odds H 8-5 A 9-2 D 12-5 LEICESTER Subs from Ward, Jakupovic, McAteer, Daley-Campbell, Vestergaard, Justin, Choudhury, Pérez, Soumaré, Brunt Doubtful None Injured Evans (hamstring, Apr), Fofana (ankle, unknown), Bertrand (knee, unknown), Pereira (calf, Feb), Castagne (hamstring, Apr), Vardy (hamstring, Mar) Suspended None Unavailable Ndidi, Mendy, Iheanacho (all at Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y26 R1 Form DLWLWL Leading scorer Vardy 9 BRIGHTON Subs from Scherpen, Welbeck, Alzate, Ferguson, Lallana, March, Dunk Doubtful Dunk (knee), Lallana (hamstring) Injured Sarmiento (hamstring, Feb), Mwepu (hamstring, Feb), Duffy (ankle, Feb), Steele (back, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Bissouma (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y42 R1 Form LWDWDD Leading scorer Maupay 7Liverpool have already dispelled most of the doubts about how they would cope while Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané are at the Africa Cup of Nations. They are yet to lose without their star forwards but Jürgen Klopp knows there is no room for error if they are to maintain any hope of reeling in Manchester City. Crystal Palace have lost their past nine league meetings with Liverpool by an aggregate score of 27-5 but will be mightily relieved not to be facing Salah and Mané, as they have contributed 17 of those goals between them. Palace are boosted by Jordan Ayew’s early return following Ghana’s Afcon exit. Stephen Hollis Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Selhurst Park Last season Crystal Palace 0 Liverpool 7 Referee Kevin Friend This season G7 Y39 R1 5.71 cards/game Odds H 5-1 A 8-13 D 10-3 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Guaita, Matthews, Milivojevic, Mateta, Benteke, Kelly, Banks, Hannam, Riedewald, Street, Rak-Sakyi, Clyne, Ayew Doubtful None Injured McArthur (hamstring, Feb), Tomkins (unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Kouyaté, Zaha (both at Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y37 R1 Form WDLWLD Leading scorer Gallagher 7 LIVERPOOL Subs from Kelleher, Adrián, Pitaluga, Williams, Gomez, Matip, Tsimikas, Milner, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Morton, Gordon Doubtful Oxlade-Chamberlain (ankle), Fabinho (ankle) Injured Thiago (hip), Origi (knee), Phillips (fractured cheekbone), Elliott (ankle, 6 Feb) Suspended None Unavailable Salah, Mané, Keïta (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y28 R1 Form WWDLDW Leading scorer Salah 16The dynamic has changed before Chelsea and Tottenham meet for the third time this month. Chelsea dominated their rivals in the Carabao Cup semi-finals but Thomas Tuchel’s side have stuttered in the league and Spurs are on a high after their dramatic win at Leicester. Harry Kane is scoring again and Antonio Conte, who remains unbeaten in the league since his arrival in north London, will sense a chance to drag his old team into a battle for a place in the top four. Jacob Steinberg Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Stamford Bridge Last season Chelsea 0 Tottenham 0 Referee Paul Tierney This season G16 Y66 R1 4.19 cards/game Odds H 13-18 A 9-2 D 13-4 CHELSEA Subs from Bettinelli, Bergstrom, Hudson-Odoi, Jorginho, Chalobah, Simons, Sarr, Hall, Ziyech, Hudson-Odoi, Vale, Loftus-Cheek, Barkley, Saúl, Werner Doubtful Chalobah (hamstring) Injured Christensen (Covid, 5 Feb), James (hamstring, 27 Feb), Chilwell (knee, unknown) Suspended None Unavailable Mendy (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y37 R1 Form DWDDLD Leading scorer Mount 7 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Doherty, Gil, Rodon, Alli, Ndombele, Clarke, White, Bergwijn, Lo Celso, Scarlett, Paskotsi, Sessegnon Doubtful None Injured Romero (hamstring, Feb), Son (knock, Feb) Suspended None Discipline Y34 R1 Form WDWDWW Leading scorer Son 8Pedro Almodóvar is in Madrid at his production company El Deseo (The Desire). El Deseo could not be a more fitting name: desire has been at the heart of his films. All sorts of desire: for love, sex, justice, acceptance and truth. Behind him are DVDs, books and a phalanx of awards. He has five Baftas, five Goyas and is the only Spanish director to have won two Oscars (best foreign film in 1999 for All About My Mother and best original screenplay for Talk to Her in 2002). He is sitting on a purple chair, wearing a pink jumper, his hair quiffed into a punky white meringue. You suspect that every colour in Almodóvar’s life has been carefully handpicked – just as in his films. His back is ramrod straight, his manner both warm and regal. Almodóvar is a man used to being in control, and today there is a translator (despite his fluent English), assistant and publicist at his service. When I met Almodóvar previously, in Madrid in 2004, he was tense throughout our conversation, and only began to relax after the interview. At the end, he gave me a copy of a calendar I had admired, featuring pictures he had shot on location. He signed it “Things are simpler and yet more complicated”. Somehow, it seems to sum up his films and worldview perfectly. Things are rarely as they first appear in Almodóvar’s films. Transformation is a recurring theme in Parallel Mothers as it is in all his work: characters are changed by surgery, mishaps, performance (his protagonists are often actors by profession) and gender fluidity. The young Almodóvar wanted to observe and celebrate the new Spain, then in the midst of La Movida Madrileña (known as the Movement or the Happening), Madrid’s counter-cultural flourishing that developed in the transition to democracy and in opposition to all that had gone before. La Movida was punk, promiscuous, queer, anti-clerical and rampantly hedonistic – just like Almodóvar’s films. “When I was making my first films, everyone around me was really young and wanted to live their lives and enjoy themselves. The first couple of films I made, Pepi, Luci, Bom and Labyrinth of Passion, had their genesis in a time. For me that was apolitical.” Being apolitical at the time was effectively a political statement, he tells me over Zoom. So he made films that celebrated the present. Almodóvar didn’t just satirise nuclear families as his compatriot Luis Buñuel had done a few years earlier – he obliterated them. In early films such as Dark Habits, Law of Desire and What Have I Done to Deserve This? he created his own families of pregnant nuns, transgender prostitutes, mariticidal wives, drug‑dealing sons, and bullying patriarchs destined to be seen off with a cosh to the head in the first act. His films played out in their own moral universe: women tended to go unpunished for crimes committed against men who’d simply got their just deserts; a man who rapes a comatose woman is portrayed sympathetically in 2002’s Talk to Her because he loves her (the rape awakens her and allows her to live again). Almodóvar has the ability to shock people of all political persuasions. Yet behind all these cinematic celebrations of the present was a ghost. When Almodóvar started making films, he promised himself one thing: his movies would give the Spanish dictator Francisco Franco the ultimate two-fingered salute. They wouldn’t explicitly condemn his fascist politics; they wouldn’t ridicule the general who ruled Spain for 39 years until his death in 1975; they would simply act as if he had never existed. As a director, he says, he didn’t want to think about fascism and Franco back then: “It was my way of getting revenge on him. But it didn’t mean to say I’d forgotten.” But now Almodóvar has had a change of heart. He is speaking in long, fiery sentences with few pauses – a very different passion from the high-camp passion of his younger days. He is not only now willing to discuss Franco, he thinks it is essential. Now, he says, is the time to remember Franco lest his victims be forgotten. And Parallel Mothers, which received a nine-minute ovation when it premiered at the Venice film festival last September, does just that. In one way it is a typical Almodóvar film: vibrant, sexy, subversive and emotional. A pregnant woman in her 40s (played by Almodóvar regular Penélope Cruz) befriends a pregnant teenager, Ana (the wonderful newcomer Milena Smit), in the maternity ward, and all kinds of craziness develops. Alongside this runs a very different story. Cruz’s character Janis believes a mass grave outside her local village contains the bodies of those executed by Franco and the fascist Falange party in the Spanish civil war, including her great-grandfather. She is fighting to have them exhumed. It is an issue that is currently being discussed with some urgency throughout Spain, and one that Almodóvar felt he had to tackle before it was too late. Only 19,000 of the estimated 114,000 civilians who disappeared during the 1936-39 civil war, and throughout Franco’s dictatorship, have been recovered since his death. Many are thought to have been dumped in mass graves – and time is running out to get to the truth. “The whole issue of these common graves from the civil war is becoming more pressing as the days go by,” Almodóvar says. “Those remains have been in the mass graves for so long that they may not even be identifiable any more when they are exhumed. There may be no family members left to identify them.” Born in 1949, Almodóvar grew up in rural, traditional La Mancha. His father ran a petrol station, his mother a bodega where she sold her own wine. His parents hoped he would become a priest and sent him to a religious boarding school at the age of eight, where he developed a hatred for religion and a love of cinema. After watching Warren Beatty in Splendor in the Grass he realised he was attracted to men (though for many years he was bisexual). In 1967, he moved to Madrid, against his parents’ wishes, to escape poverty and become a film-maker. For 12 years he worked as an admin assistant at the phone company Telefónica to support himself financially. I ask how Franco’s reign affected him as a child. “When you’re a boy, your life is different. I was very happy when I was young. I wasn’t aware really of what was going on around me. I was aware we didn’t have any money, but life is full of treasures when you are young – and they are not material treasures.” He became aware of Franco when he was sent away to school. Franco aligned himself with Spain’s Catholic church to forge a dual dictatorship, and it didn’t take Almodóvar long to realise he would never become a priest. “The schools were run by priests and that was a nightmare.” He says he was lucky – he was not sexually abused, but plenty of his friends were. This is a subject he addressed in the 2004 film Bad Education. “So many boys were abused by these priests in all the schools. As well as the impoverished education, I spent the whole time at school terrified that the priests would molest me. All my life since then I’ve fought against that Judaeo-Christian education. That’s the thing I most deplore in all my childhood.” As a teenager, he started to understand how oppressive life was. “I felt afraid of the ‘Grey Uniforms’ as we call them, the national guard. The policemen were the ones repressing us. I realised that there were films we could never get to see in Spain, there were books that never got to us, there were things we couldn’t buy. I remember the total darkness of that time.” Then came the liberation of La Movida. The late 1970s and 1980s was a wonderful time to be young, he says. Madrid became known as “the city that never sleeps” – everything was possible, nothing taboo. The two women at the heart of Parallel Mothers could represent the two Almodóvars – of yesteryear, and today: Cruz’s Janis and the younger Ana sum up the debate dominating Spain in a simple, impassioned exchange. Ana tells Janis you have to focus on the present to live a fulfilling life; a furious Janis replies you can only make sense of the present if you understand the past – and to fail to do so is a betrayal of your ancestors. After Franco’s death the political parties of Spain forged the Pact of Forgetting. The pact stated that in order for there to be a smooth transition to democracy, there would be no prosecutions for those responsible for human rights violations or similar crimes committed during the Francoist era. Not surprisingly, it was controversial. Today, Almodóvar says the notion of forgetting is nonsense. “You can demand it in a symbolic way. What you can’t do is ask people to forget. The families of victims of the civil war will never forget them. Remembering is part of the soul of who we are.” Back then, many on the left believed there would be another coup without the pact, not least because many Franco loyalists were still active in politics. Indeed, there was an attempted coup by some police and military officers in 1981, four years after the pact was signed. Almodóvar believes that the pact was pragmatic at the time, but should have been challenged as soon as democracy was re-established. “After the left had been consolidated in political power, we should have gone back to the whole scene of the mass graves and all those crimes from Franco’s dictatorship that were still unresolved. What Franco did was bury those people so deep into the ground that he almost denied their very existence.” Last year, the leftwing government approved a new Democratic Memory bill to tackle the legacy of Franco’s dictatorship and the civil war that preceded it, with measures to honour those who suffered persecution or violence. If it comes into law it will create two remembrance days to honour the victims and the exiled, and an official registry of the victims will be set up. It will also promote the search and exhumations of victims buried in mass graves. Does Almodóvar think the Democratic Memory bill has come too late? “I’m not sure if it’s too late, but better late than never.” He points out that the left still doesn’t think the new law goes far enough because it will not redress all the property and assets that Franco stole from the victims. But Almodóvar also worries that Spain is returning to the darkness. As with so many countries, the populist far right is on the rise, and politics is becoming increasingly polarised. The far-right Vox is now the third-largest political party in parliament, and Almodóvar is alarmed by its influence. Hard-won freedoms and truths are already being reversed, he says. “What they are doing is revisiting and revising what happened. They are telling the civil war history from their ideology, which is totally Francoist in nature.” Vox’s historical revisionism blames the Second Republic, which brought democracy to Spain in 1931, for the civil war, rather than Franco’s military coup. “It’s really important for people to be able to make this distinction between the truth and fake news.” He pauses. “The expression ‘fake news’ falls short of what they are doing with these lies.” Does he fear a return to fascism in Spain? “I’d love to say I don’t fear that there may be a return of fascism, but I think that might be going too far. We certainly have to understand the importance of the fact we have Vox now in politics. That we have a far-right party which is now the third political force here is unbearable, and unacceptable.” The bigotry that is reflected in the rise of Vox can now be seen in everyday life, Almodóvar says. “The last 30 years we never saw the homophobic attacks we’re starting to see on the streets of Spain now. This party is seriously homophobic, anti-women, extremely racist. I wouldn’t say I’m afraid, but I am very worried about them.” For all its labyrinthine plotting and breathless romance, Parallel Mothers is probably the closest Almodóvar will ever get to a polemic: a simple plea to honour the victims of Franco. “There is a moral debt now in society to the families of these victims who were fellow citizens fighting to defend our democracy, which is why it’s so timely to have this theme in my film today.” Almodóvar is not only aware that time is running out to redress the crimes of Franco; he knows that if he hadn’t addressed the issue now, it might well have become too late for him, too. He has been conscious of ageing and obsessed with death ever since he was a young man. Before Parallel Mothers, he made Pain and Glory, a film about an ageing director Salvador Mallo (played by Antonio Banderas) in an existential and physical rut, suffering migraines, backaches, depression, tinnitus, the works. “Without film-making my life is meaningless,” Salvador says. Almodóvar has said the movie is autobiographical. The difference between Salvador and him is that the fictional director was suffering writer’s block. By contrast, Almodóvar has spent the past quarter century creating classic after classic. He consistently draws phenomenal performances from his regular actors. Most of them are women. Some have gone on to become huge Hollywood stars, such as Cruz (he once said only Cruz could make him reconsider whether he is gay), Antonio Banderas and Javier Bardem. There is an astonishing sensuality in his films: everyday acts such as chopping vegetables or making a cup of coffee leave you purring with pleasure. His stories are as rich as the colours and imagery he uses to illustrate them. Over the years his movies have remained as outre as ever, but they have become more serious and affecting. His genius has been to make the outlandish believable. And again he pulls it off in Parallel Mothers. What gives his films their heart is his love for his protagonists and their optimism. However tough their lives, they tend to pull through in one way or another, their hope still intact. There is a profoundly moving scene at the end of Parallel Mothers that unites past and present, victims and survivors. Action triumphs over quiescence, remembrance over forgetting, hope over fear. I ask whether Almodóvar shares the optimism of his characters. He has been so solemn talking about Franco’s legacy, but finally I see a familiar twinkle in his eye. “Yes. Although the current times we are living through, the economic circumstances, the political circumstances, the health circumstances are not the best of times any more, every single morning I get up I make myself feel optimistic because you always gain from it.” He allows himself a smile. “Yes, for me, optimism is something I am an absolute activist about.” Parallel Mothers is in UK cinemas from Friday.Arsenal have no excuses if their dismal form in cups continues in the league against Burnley. Mikel Arteta’s side may have struggled recently but they face a team bottom with only one win, recovering from numerous Covid cases and missing their best player, Maxwel Cornet. The Ivorian is into the last 16 of the Africa Cup of Nations with his country and his absence leaves Sean Dyche’s goal-shy side alarmingly short in attack. Arsenal may have shortcomings of their own thanks to the folly of Granit Xhaka and Thomas Partey receiving red cards in successive Carabao Cup matches against Liverpool but if they fail to return to winning ways on Sunday then the dream of returning to the Champions League could start to fade. Graham Searles Sunday 2pm Venue Emirates Stadium Last season Arsenal 0 Burnley 1 Referee David Coote This season G12 Y56 R2 4.83 cards/game Odds H 2-5 A 9-1 D 4-1 ARSENAL Subs from Hein, Okonkwo, Tavares, Marí, Soares, Bierith, Giraud-Hutchinson, Patino, Salah-Eddin, Nketiah Doubtful None Injured Soares (hip, unknown), Chambers (neck, unknown), Leno (back, unknown), Aubameyang (heart, unknown) Suspended Xhaka (last of two), Partey (one match) Unavailable Elneny, Pépé (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y31 R2 Form LWWWWL Leading scorer Smith Rowe 8 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Pieters, Bardsley, Thomas, Collins, Vydra, McNeil, Roberts Doubtful Roberts (match fitness), Taylor (knock), Gudmundsson, Collins, McNeil, Pieters, Vydra (all Covid) Injured Barnes (hamstring, Feb) Suspended None Unavailable Cornet (Africa Cup of Nations) Discipline Y34 R0 Form DDLDLL Leading scorer Cornet 6It was not meant to fall apart as fast as this. After Boris Johnson won the general election in December 2019, he declared in a victory address: “I, and we, will never take your support for granted.” The prime minister’s 80-seat majority, a victory for the “get Brexit done” campaign, appeared to leave him impregnable. For 18 months after, Johnson continued to defy political gravity despite repeated missteps, as the pandemic came to Britain’s shores. “Johnson eyes decade in power,” splashed the Times in May after the Conservatives routed Labour in the Hartlepool byelection, a seat held by Labour for 47 years, with a swing of 16 points. “Jabs, jabs, jabs to jobs, jobs, jobs,” Johnson said, optimistic that a talent for soundbites could amount to a delivery programme for government. Less than four months ago, the Conservatives were again riding high at their party conference in Manchester. Johnson delivered a policy-light, joke-heavy speech on 6 October – this was “politics as light entertainment” said the Guardian sketch writer John Crace. The government’s wildlife plans were described as “build back beaver”; renewing UK beef imports to the US as “build back burger”. The moment it turned is clear: November’s misguided attempt to overturn the punishment for Owen Paterson, after the Tory MP was found to have breached parliament’s longstanding ban against paid lobbying. His case was taken up by a group of his Brexiter allies. Johnson backed it, the vote in parliament was won – and the argument in the country immediately lost. “Shameless MPs sink back into sleaze,” splashed the Daily Mail. “That is not what we do in this country, it’s what they do in Russia,” the Labour MP Chris Bryant said. Labour refused to work with the Tory proposals and the Paterson plan had to be embarrassingly withdrawn. Johnson blamed colleagues afterwards – he had been led to believe there would be cross-party support for the plan. “It was put to me by colleagues,” he later sheepishly told MPs. At first the return of sleaze allowed journalists to write broadly about Tory MPs’ second jobs, including the near £6m earned by the barrister and MP Geoffrey Cox. Labour started to tick ahead while Johnson’s jokey touch deserted him in a rambling speech about Peppa Pig World – “my kind of place” – to the CBI conference. It got close to home in December. A Daily Mirror story about Johnson and Downing Street staff attending Christmas parties a year earlier, when London was under Covid restrictions, led to a drip-drip of revelations. But this time it was about the conduct not of other Tory MPs but of Johnson himself and the No 10 he ran. “All guidance was followed,” Johnson said. Downing Street even tried to deny parties took place. That was utterly undermined by the emergence of a video showing the former press secretary Allegra Stratton joking about “a Downing Street Christmas party on Friday night”. A tearful Stratton quit the next day. Voters with their own very different memories of lockdown were already unimpressed. Paterson had been forced to resign and his North Shropshire seat, normally one of the Conservatives’ safest, fell to the Lib Dems on a 34-point swing. “Boris Johnson, the party is over,” the winning candidate Helen Morgan declared – except that it wasn’t. Days later the Guardian published a picture of the prime minister having wine and cheese with his wife and staff in the Downing Street garden on 15 May 2020, the tail-end of the first lockdown. It was a work meeting, No 10 said, but the public reached their own conclusions. Johnson limped on to Christmas, while Sue Gray, the civil servant tasked with investigating, had an expanding list of parties to look at. There was little respite in January as the focus concentrated on the prime minister. Lord Geidt, his ethics adviser, concluded Johnson had acted unwisely in failing to disclose a WhatsApp exchange the prime minister had with Tory donor Lord Brownlow, who provided £58,000 of the cost of refurbishing the Downing Street flat. Johnson had previously said he did not know where the money came from and says he thought Brownlow was organising, not providing, funds. The message showed him asking the donor for the cash because the flat was “a bit of a tip”. Giving a “humble and sincere” apology, Johnson said he “did not recall” the begging message because it was contained on an old phone. Next came the email. “Please join us from 6pm and bring your own booze!” wrote Johnson’s principal private secretary, Martin Reynolds, as he invited staff to an event on 20 May 2020 in a missive obtained by ITV News. Within minutes journalists were reporting Johnson himself was there. After a day in hiding Johnson apologised, although he still argued he “believed implicitly that this was a work event”. While people around the country had been fined for breaching lockdown, discipline at Downing Street appeared nonexistent. Two drinks parties were held on 16 April 2021, the night before Prince Philip’s funeral, where the mourning Queen had stood alone. Johnson wasn’t present this time but staff had slipped off to the Co-op on the Strand armed with a suitcase to stuff full with bottles of wine, it was said. Even Johnson gave the impression he could not take much more, admitting he had to apologise to the monarch, and staring downcast with bloodshot eyes in an excruciating 16-minute Sky News interview. “Nobody told me that what we were doing was, as you say, against the rules,” Johnson said, although it was he who had been setting them for the country. The problems have mounted at a time when the cost of living is rising by 5.4% and energy bills are soaring. The current count of Downing Street lockdown-breaching parties stands at 15, but there is still a belief at Westminster there are more to emerge. Gray’s inquiry is yet to report and parts of the Conservative party are in open revolt, with dozens of letters of no confidence sent in by disgruntled MPs. But overriding all is the damage to Johnson’s reputation from the misjudged manoeuvres, evasive answers and revised declarations. “The public connected with Johnson on an emotional level like no other politician before,” said Martin Boon, a founder of polling firm Deltapoll. “Quite simply, he has taken a machete to that.”With Ghislaine Maxwell’s criminal conviction working its way toward an appeal, and Virginia Giuffre’s civil case against Prince Andrew caught up in arguments over evidence and depositions, another high-profile case linked to the convicted sex trafficker Jeffrey Epstein is working through the New York court system. It too is dragging in some of the biggest names in elite New York society, in this case sending shockwaves through the rarefied world of Manhattan finance. Leon Black, one of New York’s wealthiest men with an estimated net worth of $13.2bn, according to the Bloomberg Billionaires Index, and formerly chief of Apollo Global Management and chairman of the Museum of Modern Art (Moma), is locked in a bitter dispute with Guzel Ganieva, a Russian model and former mistress who accused him of sexual violence and claims she was pressured by Black to engage in sex acts with Epstein. Over recent months, the dispute between Black, 70, and Ganieva has escalated with a series of back-and-forth lawsuits in which the accusations have grown ever more serious, and spiraled out to draw in figures from some of Manhattan’s most powerful social circles. Ganieva’s initial allegations of defamation, intentional infliction of emotional distress, gender-motivated violence and retaliation, were first revealed in tweets early last year, and followed revelations about $158m in payments Black made to Epstein for tax advice and financial services that precipitated his stepping down from Apollo and Moma. In June, Ganieva sued Black in New York state court, described above, claiming he forced her to sign a 2015 non-disclosure agreement about their six-and-a-half-year relationship, and had defamed her by claiming she tried to extort him by threatening to go public with their relationship. Lawyers for Black have said Ganieva’s lawsuit is “a work of fiction” and said he made payments only to secure her silence about their relationship. Black has said he refused Ganieva’s initial demand for $100m, but reached an agreement that in exchange for a confidentiality deal he would forgive $1m in loans and pay her $100,000 a month for 15 years. He also gave her $2.75m to help her obtain a British visa or passport. Now the dispute has become even more acrimonious. After Ganieva accused him of sexual abuse, Black did not merely reject Ganieva’s accusations or counter-sue in New York civil court – the same jurisdiction that she sued him – but filed a US federal lawsuit under conspiracy and racketeering statutes normally used for busting mobsters and drug traffickers. Ganieva’s complaints “are shams”, Black’s attorneys countered in the federal case, and though they said his relationship with Ganieva was “regrettable”, they said her claims were “fraudulently designed to mislead the New York state court and (more directly) to defame and bully Mr Black into adding to the extortionate payments he already has made to prevent Ms Ganieva from further destroying him”. In the lawsuit, Black claimed that Ganieva and her lawyers at Wigdor – a firm that has been at the forefront of civil settlements with men accused of sexual misconduct during the #MeToo era, such as the disgraced mogul Harvey Weinstein – conspired with others to extort him and destroy his reputation. Black’s lawyers said in the complaint: “They waged war on multiple fronts and had multiple goals – among them, to get more money through extortion or a fraudulently induced litigation award; to destroy the reputation of Mr Black and his business; to undermine his career; to interfere with his business relationships; and to raise concerns about his leadership of the company he created and nurtured for the last 30 years.” Black’s attorney in the federal action is Susan Estrich, a legal scholar who became known as manager of Michael Dukakis’s 1988 presidential campaign and later defended the former Fox News executive Roger Ailes against claims of sexual harassment. In court papers, filed in Manhattan, Estrich has described Ganieva and her lawyers at Wigdor as perpetrators of a wide-ranging extortion scheme “to try to get even more from Mr Black – or destroy him in the process”. The defendants “duped and manipulated the media and the courts, using the mails and the wires, to orchestrate an assassination of Mr Black on every level”, according to Black’s lawyers. But Estrich has also alleged that the conspiracy includes unnamed co-conspirators or “John Does”, that include two “flacks”, or PR specialists, and a financial backer with deep pockets to “go head-to-head with a billionaire”. Black’s lawyers have also said they plan to find out who is paying Wigdor’s fees in Ganieva’s action against him. Ganieva has agreed to pay Wigdor 38% of any money she received from Black, according to an agreement letter filed in the case. Ganieva and Wigdor deny the claims against them. Wigdor filed a motion to dismiss, calling the action “frivolous as a matter of law” and arguing that “Black and his counsel know that there is no evidentiary support or good-faith basis for their contrived and defective ‘Rico’ [Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act] and ‘defamation’ claims.” Lawyers for the financier say an amended complaint will be filed in the coming days that will further expose the alleged conspiracy against Black. Recent court disclosures offer a clue to which direction that may be headed. Black’s lawyers have requested that the presiding judge allow them access to private records involving some of New York’s most prominent businessmen, including his partner at Apollo, Josh Harris, the owner of the Premier League football club Crystal Palace, who agitated for Black to step down after Black’s payments to Epstein were revealed. Jonathan Rosen, an attorney for Harris, described Black’s insinuations as “desperate and absurd” and denied any connection between Harris and Ganieva or her lawyers. “Mr Harris has nothing whatsoever to do with the deeply troubling situation Mr Black finds himself in, and any statement or implication otherwise is unhinged at best,” Rosen told the Guardian. Others included in Black’s Rico action are Steven Rubenstein, the New York public relations executive whose clients have included Rupert Murdoch, Bill Gates and Donald Trump; and Michael Rubin, a sports merchandise billionaire and co-owner, with Harris, of the NBA’s Philadelphia 76ers. According to court documents, Black’s attorneys wanted to know of any contact that Rubenstein had with nine named individuals, including Ganieva, her attorneys and reporters. Rubenstein and Rubin have also objected to being dragged into the case. Rubenstein’s attorneys said in court filings that “any private citizen should be aghast that [a bystander to a lawsuit] could be made the subject of a subpoena calling for all their telephone records simply at the whim of a litigant.” Jeanne Christensen, a lawyer at Wigdor named in the action, believes that instead of filing a counter-claim in Ganieva’s original state court claim against the financier, Black had filed a new case in federal court that potentially moves faster. “He’s basically just trying to intimidate our client by filing a separate lawsuit against her,” Christensen told the Guardian. “It’s a tactic to cause potential division between her and her lawyers. He’s hitting her from as many sides as he can. It’s pretty bad.” Bennett Gershman, a former prosecutor in the New York state anti-corruption office who teaches law at Pace University, said he could not think of another civil sexual harassment case that has been returned in another court with a Rico complaint. “This is well beyond what you usually see,” Gershman told the Guardian. “I’ve never seen a litigant bring a Rico action against a woman who we thought had settled to the tune of a million dollars a year. It’s spinning out of control in terms of being personal, vindictive and inflammatory. US litigation is often adversarial and contentious, but this is well beyond that. They’re going at it tooth and nail.”In February 2020, when the novelist and doctor Roopa Farooki first sat down to write her latest book, coronavirus was “something that was kind of buzzing around” in the background. “Those of us going to work every day in a hospital, we weren’t really aware of it; we were just blindly doing our job, day by day, patient by patient. Knowing there was this thing happening, but it was insidious. There was a clue here or there, but we weren’t absolutely sure how far it would affect us, or how far it would change us.” Farooki’s sister Kiron had just died of breast cancer. Kiron was 48, a solicitor and a mother. She had previously been unwell, but the cancer had gone into remission. “We thought she had beaten this thing,” says Farooki. Her sister was straight-talking, fierce in her love, prone to doling out advice whether Farooki wanted to hear it or not. “She was super-amazing at everything she did.” To process it all, Farooki did what she has done since she was a little girl: she wrote about it. “Before she passed away, she saw that I was thinking about her and writing about it. She wasn’t angry about it. But you always worry when you write about someone that you’re twisting yourself into someone else’s tragedy.” Weeks later, buffeted by grief, Farooki would find herself working on the frontline of the Covid-19 pandemic, covering the acute medical ward in an A&amp;E department at a hospital in the south-east of England. At night, bone-tired, she would come home, attempt to spend a few precious minutes with her four children, aged between nine and 14, and then type late into the night, frequently waking up with her head on the keyboard. The resulting memoir, Everything Is True: A Junior Doctor’s Story of Life, Death and Grief in a Time of Pandemic, is an attempt to make sense of a bewildering and frequently terrifying period in Farooki’s life, as the grief-stricken doctor grappled with the loss of her beloved sister and the realisation that she might become one of the 850 healthcare workers thought to have died in the first wave of the pandemic. Over Zoom, Farooki tells me she is exhausted, and possibly unwell, although she does not seem it, speaking in long, forceful bursts of high-tempo, uninterrupted speech. It is her first day off in a run of nine days, and she is worried she may be about to develop Covid symptoms: one of her colleagues recently tested positive, “so everyone on the ward is counting down to when they’re going to get symptoms again.” We speak as Britain is witnessing the start of a wave of Omicron infections: later, checking back in, Farooki tells me that her Trust is on the brink. “Bed availability for new admissions is compromised,” she says, “meaning that, in practice, there just isn’t the space, so patients who’ve been admitted may have to wait hours receiving treatment in a chair until someone else is discharged.” A disturbing number of patients have not been jabbed. “The only patients since the summer that I’ve had to admit for oxygen or treatment with Covid are the unvaccinated. Some were in their 20s and 30s and had freely passed the infection to their families.” Before retraining as a doctor in her 30s, Farooki authored eight books, writing her first novel, the well-reviewed Bitter Sweets, while she was pregnant with her first child and renovating a house in France. Her novels, which often examine complicated and shifting family dynamics, have won her comparisons to Monica Ali and Zadie Smith. She was nominated for the Women’s prize for fiction three times. But despite the critical acclaim, the life of a novelist wasn’t enough to sate Farooki’s ambitions. “I’ve actually always wanted to be a doctor,” she says. “It was just one of those things that wasn’t possible when I was younger.” She won a scholarship to a private girls’ school, but on the condition she chose arts subjects for her A-levels, which she was strongest at. “With those A-levels,” she explains, “you don’t go into medicine.” In 2014, she published what she thinks now might be her final novel, The Good Children. “It’s hard to think about writing novels at the moment. You need a lot of space and clarity to create and inhabit an imaginary world,” Farooki says. Her children were all in school, and suddenly medicine seemed a possibility. “I studied physics, biology and chemistry books I took out of the library for about three to six months,” she says proudly, “and I sat the graduate entry exam for medicine. And with that I could go to medical school. It was that straightforward.” Everything Is True is written in a fragmented style, with snippets of imagined conversations with Kiron interspersed with details of the patients Farooki treats and the occasionally fraught conversations she has with her husband, who is concerned she will bring a deadly virus into their home. At times, the stoical medical professional is undone by the horror she witnesses. “Death is all around,” she writes as the toll passes 40,000. “It’s everywhere, and the air is constantly crackling with the expired electricity of it. The sound of breaking hearts is deafening.” The memoir covers the first 40 days of lockdown. While the public sat at home, baking and Zooming, “we all marched into hospital and kept going”, says Farooki, “day after day”. She wrote Everything Is True for an imagined “future self who wouldn’t believe this had happened. I thought I was writing it for someone who would have forgotten all these terrible things, like you forget things that are tragic. Like you forget the pain of childbirth. To remind me that these terrible times happened, because it’s important to take account and to bear witness to this.” She never intended for it to be published. “It was a cathartic outpouring,” she says. “I was writing it for me. I started writing about Kiron and it just unleashed itself, like a flood around me. And I found some comfort in trying to make sense of the insanity of the day. To try and put it in some kind of form.” More than anything, Everything Is True is an attempt to elude the smoothing passage of time. “I was afraid we would forget,” she says. “Forget what this felt like. And forget to hold those accountable. And [I was] holding myself accountable as well in some way. To say: ‘This was an extraordinary time and this is what I did. Did I do enough? I don’t know.’” In the book, Farooki writes of being exposed to Covid-19 repeatedly when admitting patients to the acute medical ward. “You’ll soak it [the virus] up in your hair like a sponge,” she writes. “You’re going to get it, too. It’s inevitable.” The PPE provided is inadequate. “What was considered the appropriate PPE,” she says, “was always based on what was available … it was certainly not fully safe.” Staff secretly stashed scrubs in their lockers, as there weren’t enough to go round, and joked about whether their colleagues would save ventilators for them should they sicken. Inevitably, Farooki fell ill with Covid-19, even discussing her funeral plans with her sons in the event of her death. “I remember being kind of annoyed and hugely relieved at how normalised it had been for them,” she says. “They could say: ‘OK, Mum, if you want to talk about your funeral, what kind of cake do you want? Let’s get it right.’ I was thinking: ‘Oh my God, you’re monsters,’ but I was also thinking: ‘This is what the pandemic has done for us – we can actually accept and talk about death.” Farooki rejects the hackneyed battle metaphors so overused by politicians throughout the pandemic, and the corollary sentiment that the public should somehow accept doctors and nurses dying while executing their duties. “We’re not soldiers,” she says. “We signed up to care for people. This is all we signed up for. [The government] felt like they could take advantage of the fact that no one would ever not go in or not look after their patients … so the whole narrative about the bravery – we weren’t brave. We didn’t do it with any particular consent or decision-making. We were just put in that position because of the career we’ve chosen, because we’re in a caring profession, because we would never let someone deteriorate and die if we could do something about it.” She found the weekly clap for the NHS a performative, futile gesture. “It meant nothing,” she says. “It felt like it was a way to pretend that you were doing something, without actually having to do anything concrete. It felt like someone rewearing last year’s poppy. It was symbolic just for the person doing that, but it didn’t actually mean anything for the person who was on the receiving end.” What stands out from reading Everything Is True is how flattening the portrayal of NHS staff as heroic, willing lambs to the slaughter truly is. Farooki writes about how some doctors faked illness to avoid working on the most dangerous wards, and others contemplated leaving the profession entirely. A continual theme is the doctors’ anger at being forced to work for weeks without a day off, while their managers protect their own leave. “There was a point where it just felt that we were relentlessly being told that it had to be all hands on deck, and there wasn’t really informed consent about it,” she says. Farooki remembers one particularly strung-out colleague. “She said: ‘I didn’t even want to come in today. I just wanted to resign.’ There was this sense of unbearable fatigue.” She is also unflinching when it comes to documenting the strain Covid puts on her relationship. “Your children’s father is scared of you … He barks: ‘You’re putting our lives at risk,’” she writes. She recounts how Kiron told her that she thought they should separate, before she died. Are they still married? “We’re still together,” she says. “We have our four children. And I will say this: it was a very, very difficult time for everyone … we’ve all had times where relationships were absolutely pushed to breaking point, going through all of this.” Everything Is True is at its most affecting when Farooki writes about the patients she couldn’t save. Not all of them died of Covid; she is at pains to emphasise the hidden victims of the pandemic, from the person who wasn’t able to be assessed for a life-saving liver transplant to the elderly woman who stayed away from hospital for fear of burdening the NHS, until it was too late for doctors to save her. “This is how Covid was taking people from us, because of not being able to provide them the care they needed,” Farooki says. Farooki describes herself as “not generally political”, though she expresses frustration at the mishandling of the pandemic and the government’s sluggish response to unfolding events in Italy and China. “It’s a story of poor communication and mismanagement,” she says, “and the people who did actually have information, not doing enough and not doing it in a timely way.” She is alarmed by the fact that, more than a year on, it does not appear that politicians have learned their lesson. “There are still learnings that are not being put into action,” Farooki says. “We are still not learning about how to communicate the risk, how to effectively care for each other, about something even as straightforward as acknowledging the increased risk to people of BAME origin.” Although Farooki spent most of the first wave of the pandemic in a haze of exhaustion and overwork, one news story did cut through: that of Boris Johnson’s admission to intensive care. “I don’t want to criticise whatever decision the physicians in charge of his care made … but in my very limited experience of working in ITU, you would not have taken that bed from someone if it was just for oxygen,” she says. “You can provide that in most wards in the hospital. I felt that it was another example of something feeling unfair, I think. Of there being one rule for them and another rule for us.” She wrote Everything Is True in the sincere belief that, by the time it was published, the pandemic would have receded from UK shores. Nearly two years on, that seems like a touchingly naive hope. “It’s quite hard to think about,” says Farooki. “But it’s not really over. I still have colleagues literally a few days ago who are PCR positive. My daughter was PCR positive. There are new variants. You don’t know whether it will ever actually be over. So we live still with the possibility of death.” • Everything Is True by Roopa Farooki is published by Bloomsbury.Just to the south of London’s great stations for the north – Euston, St Pancras and King’s Cross – an old and rather careworn neighbourhood serves the traveller’s needs. Cheap beds, cheap food and drink, drugs probably, sex formerly. Finer amusements had been planned for the site: in 1830 a project known as the Royal Panharmonium Pleasure Gardens, which was to include a theatre, ballroom and music gallery, went bankrupt before it was finished. In its place came a square and a few streets of modest brown-brick houses, built just before flat-fronted Georgian went out of fashion. Knowing no better, I stayed in a comfortless room there on a winter’s night in the 1960s. Shillings fed the meter for the gas fire, a light bulb hung from the ceiling, and in the early hours of the morning the door shook with a tremendous banging as a man’s slurred voice called out for a woman. The area is more respectable now, but in some ways nicely unchanged. True, there’s a Travelodge and a Comfort Inn, but also a Macdonald hotel and a Jesmond Dene hotel, which speak of a time when travellers coming or going from stations north of the Tyne liked to be reminded of home. Thomas Morris and his wife Eileen (nee Shakespeare) moved to the district just before the second world war. Morris was a Londoner of Welsh ancestry, whose father had migrated from rural Cardiganshire and set up shop as a grocer and dairyman in the East End somewhere around 1900: a typical story of a time when Welsh migrants were estimated to own half the dairies in London. His wife died soon after Thomas was born in 1908. Father and son went on living together in Hackney until 1934, when Thomas married Eileen, daughter of a printworks compositor. He and his bride moved first to the set of parallel streets in north London known as the Harringay Ladder, and then to Birkenhead Street and its fine view north to the facade of King’s Cross station and the occasional drift of steam and smoke escaping through its arched roof. Their daughter Gillian was born here in 1939, with her father’s occupation described as “motor lorry driver” in the register. But he got on. He became a car salesman for an Austin dealership, joined the Conservative party, won a seat on St Pancras council and eventually served a year as its mayor, by which time the family had moved a few hundred yards from Birkenhead Street to a flat in Queen Alexandra Mansions, a giant slab of Edwardian red brick behind St Pancras town hall. The car showroom was only 10 minutes’ walk away, the council chamber lay just across the street, and, when the time came, Gillian found a job around the corner in Gray’s Inn Road in the offices of the Sunday Times. She was hired as a secretary to the city editor, William Rees-Mogg. Their subsequent courtship was prompted by his colleague, the writer Hunter Davies, who tipped him off that she was threatening to quit; he was so absorbed by the gold standard that she might as well not have existed. (In his written account, Davies said: “Hey, have you heard about Gillian? She is going to leave.” “Who?” “Your blooming secretary, that’s who! You have missed your chance there, William.”) And out of this happenstance came a long and happy marriage and five children, the fourth of them christened Jacob William. So far as I can tell, the leader of the House of Commons and lord president of the council rarely mentions this side of his ancestry. Not, I suspect, because he’s ashamed of it – a lorry driver’s rise to town mayor perfectly illustrates the Tory faith in individual enterprise – but because it doesn’t fit the caricature he has made of himself. The top hat, the tailcoat, the waistcoat, the striped trousers, the white tie, the six elaborately named children (one of them Alfred Wulfric Leyson Pius), the drawl, the languor: matched with a grandad who drove a lorry, such a creation becomes a pitiable mountebank, Alfred Doolittle dressed for a wedding, rather than the courtly eccentric, the “honourable member for the 18th century”, which is how Rees-Mogg likes to present himself. His paternal forebears are a greater support, having lived in large stone houses that, though no longer in Rees-Mogg ownership, still stand and bear names. The manor at Farrington Gurney, Cholwell House at Temple Cloud, Ston Easton Park (“exceptionally sumptuous” – Nikolaus Pevsner) near Bath – a train of Somerset dwellings that began in the 17th century, to be joined by a second train of a similar kind when in 2007 Jacob married Helena de Chair, the daughter of Somerset de Chair and his fourth wife Lady Juliet Wentworth-Fitzwilliam, previously the Marchioness of Bristol. He is said to have proposed at Lady Juliet’s country house under one of its six Van Dycks. The weight of all this social connection and genealogy – the coats of arms, the Latin mottos, the drinks trolley – might weaken the mind of most of us, like a blow to the head with a Debrett’s Guide. Rees-Mogg, despite his enthusiastic immersion in it, remains as sharp as a tack. His assets include a £5m house in Westminster and the freehold of a building in Pall Mall, reported to be worth £4m. In 2020 his dividend from Somerset Capital Management, the investment firm he co-founded, came to £800,000 (last year he’s thought to have made £200,000 less). He has a London flat. When in Somerset he and his family live at Gournay Court, a 17th-century house that was restored and enlarged by King George V as a home for his epileptic youngest son, Prince John, who died before it was ready. A household presence is his old nanny, Veronica Crook, now nanny to his children; the same nanny that he took canvassing with him when he contested the former mining constituency of Central Fife in the 1997 election, perhaps in a misplaced attempt to be lovable or, more probable, to be noticed. We met once, at a village hustings in North East Somerset during the 2010 election campaign. A predictable sentiment follows: he was charming. But onstage I notice he said something twice for emphasis: you don’t make the poor rich by making the rich poor. Nobody in the audience looked particularly rich but there were sounds of agreement. With 41.3% of the vote, he won the seat and went on increasing his majority with a 49.8% share in 2015 and 53.6% in 2017, dropping only 3.2 percentage points in 2019. And during these years he praised Donald Trump (“our greatest ally after Brexit”), questioned the effects of climate change, suggested that his party should collaborate with Ukip, praised Nigel Farage, fought for the hardest of Brexits, and doubted the “common sense” of the victims of the Grenfell fire. The people of North East Somerset seem to like him. This week, walking around the streets of King’s Cross to see where his grandparents had lived, I began to hum the old music hall song: “I’m Burlington Bertie, I rise at ten thirty / And saunter along like a toff / I walk down the Strand with my gloves on my hand / Then I walk down again with them off …” The male-impersonator Ella Shields made the song popular towards the end of the first world war. Like Rees-Mogg, she favoured a top hat and tails while performing – a swell’s outfit and a disguise. Ian Jack is a Guardian columnist • This article was amended on 24 January 2022. An earlier version said that Rees-Mogg had taken the North East Somerset seat from Labour in 2010; in fact it was a new constituency (although it covered much of the same area as the former Wansdyke constituency held by Labour).Juuso Westerlund was passing his family bathroom when he noticed his youngest son, Antero, had climbed up on to the toilet seat. The six-year-old had just finished his evening bath; he didn’t notice his father in the doorway. As the boy studied his body in the steam-clouded mirror, the Finnish photographer snapped a silent photo. It would later become part of his Heartbeats collection, which is being exhibited at the Latvian Museum of Photography, in Riga. “The collection is the story of my boys,” Westerlund says. “The photographs are like love poems to my sons.” Westerlund says he wouldn’t have dreamed of putting away, or later editing out, the half-empty handwash bottle or unplugged toothbrush charger. “I’d never stage a photo like this, and I’d never tidy up the space,” he says. “The world is filled with pictures of kids, and I don’t want mine to be polished or perfect. I just want to capture everyday moments and their special magic.” Westerlund always asks Antero, and his elder son, Erkki, permission to share pictures of them, but says they have become less interested in his exhibitions as the years have passed (Antero is now 10). This doesn’t bother him: “They’re my memories, not theirs,” he says. He does, however, hope they will treasure them once they reach adulthood. Reflecting on the photo five years after it was taken, Westerlund is struck by how sincere his son looks. “I’m not a big man, so it’s not that he’s comparing himself to me. Instead, he is asking himself: how do I look today? How do I appear to other people?”The Wiggles have taken the top spot in the Triple J Hottest 100 with their cover of Tame Impala’s 2012 song Elephant. The children’s performers had a viral hit in March when they transformed the track for Triple J’s cover series Like a Version, infusing it with the chorus from their song, Fruit Salad. The group posted their delight at the victory on Twitter. While it may seem like an unlikely victory, it’s not the first time a Like a Version cover has done well in the Hottest 100. As Shaad D’Souza points out, covers with novelty value often resonate with listers – DMA’s cover of Cher’s Believe got to No 6 in 2016 and Alex Lahey’s cover of a My Chemical Romance track went to No 83 in 2020. The Wiggles did, however, edge out the song that was widely tipped to win the annual poll. The Kid Laroi and Justin Bieber were favourites to win with their collaboration Stay, which has now hit No 1 on song charts in more than 20 countries. Stay instead came in second place. Had Stay topped the poll, it would have made 18-year-old Kamilaroi rapper Laroi, who grew up in the Sydney suburb of Waterloo, the first ever First Nations artist to reach No 1 in the Hottest 100. The Perth four-piece Spacey Jane placed at No 3 with their track Lots of Nothing, one of three songs they had featured in the countdown. The Disney actor turned popstar Olivia Rodrigo was another of the big winners in this year’s poll. Her song Good 4 You placed at No 4 in the countdown, with a further four tracks from her debut album, Sour, also making the Hottest 100. Commercial pop acts Bieber and Rodrigo both placing in the top five is reflective of a shift in the station’s attitude towards mainstream pop music – in 2015, Taylor Swift’s track Shake It Off was banned from entry into the Hottest 100. Another pop favourite, Billie Eilish, who topped the poll two years ago and was the most-played artist on Triple J in 2021, placed at No 5 with Happier Than Ever. Local acts such as Rüfüs Du Sol, Lime Cordiale and Ocean Alley also each had multiple tracks in this year’s poll. Further down the poll, Genesis Owusu, who collected four Aria awards at last year’s ceremony for his acclaimed debut album Smiling With No Teeth, placed at No 75 with Gold Chains. Amyl and the Sniffers landed at No 28 with their track Hertz. The Hottest 100 wasn’t the only countdown under way on Saturday: on Twitter, the account @OzKitsch provided comic relief with its “Coldest 100”, which looked back on curious Australian music moments. In a nod to the Wiggles cracking this year’s Triple J poll, their countdown was topped by a 2014 video of the group performing a musical number about poppadoms. The Hottest 100 comes after another difficult year for Australia’s music industry. The pandemic forced the widespread cancellation of music festivals and live tours in 2021, costing thousands of industry professionals their livelihood and prompting some artists to find work elsewhere. The I Lost My Gig collective has estimated that since March 2020, the Australian live music sector has lost an average of $64m in income each month. More than 2.5m votes were submitted in this year’s Hottest 100. On Friday, Triple J aired the Hottest 200, revealing the songs that placed from 200-101 in this year’s poll, with the Sydney pop artist May-a placing at No 101 with her single Time I Love to Waste.About a dozen Tory MPs have made similar allegations in the last few days to a colleague who claims the party’s whips have engaged in blackmail, the chair of the Commons standards committee has said. Chris Bryant’s remarks come as William Wragg, the senior Tory backbencher who accused No 10 of trying to blackmail MPs seeking to oust Boris Johnson, prepares to meet the police over his allegations. Bryant, the Labour MP for the Rhondda, said he took the allegations very seriously and underlined that they were a matter for the police. He said about a dozen Tory MPs had told him in recent days that whips had either threatened them with having money pulled from their constituencies or promised funding if they vote “the right way”. “I have even heard MPs alleging that the prime minister himself has been doing this,” Bryant told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme. “What I have said to all of those people is that that is misconduct in public office. The people who should be dealing with such allegations are the police. “It is illegal. We are meant to operate as MPs without fear or favour. The allocation of taxpayer funding to constituencies should be according to need, not according to the need to keep the prime minister in his job.” He described the government’s levelling up fund as “an open opportunity for government ministers to corruptly hand out money to some MPs and not to others”. The fund has been a source of controversy. Two councils in England represented by Tory ministers have received funding despite being among the least deprived fifth of local authorities nationwide. Downing Street has said it will not launch its own inquiry into Wragg’s claims, despite calls for it to do so. A No 10 spokesperson said it would only open an inquiry if it were presented with evidence to support the allegations. The former Conservative MP Christian Wakeford also made blackmail allegations. He claims whips told him his constituency would lose funding for a new high school unless he voted with the government. Wakeford, who defected to Labour last week, said: “How would you feel when they hold back the regeneration of a town for a vote? It didn’t sit comfortably. That was the start of me questioning my place, where I was and ultimately to where I am now.” The blackmail allegations are just one source of acute pressure on No 10. Johnson also faces calls for transparency over the Sue Gray inquiry into the Downing Street parties. The opposition has asked that the full evidence be published after it emerged that the report was likely to just be a brief summary of findings. Labour and the Liberal Democrats called on Friday for all accompanying evidence – including emails and witness accounts – to be released alongside the report’s publication. When asked whether the prime minister should step aside over the more than 15 parties alleged to have taken place, several Conservative MPs have said they will wait for the report’s findings before deciding whether to back him or not. If they are unsatisfied, he could face a no-confidence vote. The report is expected to be ready at some point from the middle of next week, according to government sources.For years, the San Francisco underground drag performer and cinephile Peaches Christ has filled the city’s renowned Castro Theatre with her Midnight Mass series, juxtaposing cult film screenings with live, drag-parody re-enactments and onstage interviews. These loving but irreverent late-night events have been a staple of LGBTQ+ culture at the city’s pre-eminent arthouse theater, itself one of the most visible landmarks in San Francisco’s most famous gayborhood. As Peaches Christ puts it: “Cinema has been my religion, and the Castro is our Vatican.” And now, one month after hosting the US premiere of The Matrix Resurrections and a few months before its 100th anniversary, the owners of the opulent, 1,400 seat movie palace announced that it may soon become primarily a venue for live entertainment and no longer screen many films at all. Wednesday’s news sent shockwaves through the city’s artistic and cinematic communities, revealing a partnership between the Castro and Another Planet Entertainment (APE), a Bay Area concert promoter. Known for preserving other historic venues – and for producing Outside Lands, a three-day music festival typically held in Golden Gate Park every August – APE stated that it plans a major renovation of the interior and the renowned marquee, as well as a dramatic shift in the types of events the Castro will become home to. “We want to present all sorts of programming in the theater – comedy, music, film, community and private events and more,” the promoter said in a release. The news stunned local film-makers and festival programmers, who urged APE to solicit community input – so much so that the promoter rushed to mollify the reeling city, saying nothing untoward would happen overnight. Century-old movie houses and single-screen theaters have been disappearing from San Francisco for years, victims of rising operating costs and the popularity of streaming services long before the pandemic struck. But as a cultural institution, the Castro Theatre is unique. It’s home to numerous festivals and premieres as well as matinee screenings of the camp Hollywood classics such as Grey Gardens and Auntie Mame. A destination for American cineastes, it’s where you might see a painstakingly restored 1940s noir, witness the director Peter Bogdanovich badmouthing Cher during a Q&amp;A, or just sing along to Grease. The Castro had already gone dark for 15 months during Covid, reopening in June 2021 to host the 45th edition of Frameline, San Francisco’s long-running LGBTQ+ film festival. In continuing a longstanding tradition of preceding each film with live music from the in-house organ – no longer a “Mighty Wurlitzer” but arguably the largest pipe-digital hybrid organ in the world – the theater’s return embodied last summer’s burst of optimism, when California briefly relaxed its pandemic restrictions on indoor gatherings. It’s also very, very gay: San Francisco, the theme, revived by Judy Garland, from the 1936 disaster movie of the same name, is always the last song before the curtain goes up. Consequently, the theater’s large and vocal queer fan base was particularly saddened by the prospect of losing it for good. “We know that there won’t be the same volume of film screening at the venue, and of course we are very sad about that,” said James Woolley, Frameline’s executive director. However, he confirmed that the festival’s 46th iteration, an anchor of San Francisco’s Pride Month festivities, was still on for June. Although Peaches Christ was initially dismayed, a call with APE eased her mind. “They assured me that the programming would be very considered. They’re not going to program it the way they would Bill Graham or remove the seats,” she said, referring to a much larger venue that welcomes EDM DJs and more mainstream musical artists. While concerned that the Castro might become exclusively dedicated to live performance, Peaches noted that comedy festivals such as Sketchfest had long since broadened the scope of what the theater did. Second-run film screenings were hardly its bread and butter. “As much as I’d hate to see the repertory calendar disappear, if you went to the screenings, nine times out of 10 it was less than half full,” she said. “I’ve run a movie theater and I’ve been in the business a long time. I knew it wasn’t a sustainable model.” Peaches is optimistic about APE as a local entity, far smaller than national enterprises such as LiveNation. Promising to fulfill her existing contract, they also assured her they would install a new movie screen, improve accessibility for people with disabilities, and make other needed repairs. “What the general public doesn’t see is that the Castro needs a huge electrical upgrade,” she said. “The old wiring led to sometimes tripping breakers. It was stressful.” Still, the underlying economics are what they are, which is why many San Francisco theaters are now derelict (or repurposed as gyms). “The theater business is hard, and I think it’s especially hard for single-screen independent historic art house cinemas. You can only charge so much for a movie theater ticket,” said Lex Sloan, a film-maker and the executive director of the 110-year old, single-screen Roxie Theater, San Francisco’s oldest such venue. “We’re more than just movie theaters. We’re places where people make memories and find new friends. Places like the Castro and its programming are quintessential to what makes San Francisco weird and wild.”Campwell, near Bath Comprising yurts, A-frame log cabins, shepherd’s huts and roundhouses, this off-grid retreat in 16 hectares (40 acres) of woodland near Bath was created by a green woodworker as a low-impact village, where a large group or several small ones can get together to embrace the good life. Cabins sleeping 2-4 sit amid lush greenery, with wooden decks and a communal kitchen and dining area. Guests are encouraged to lock their phones away. Wild fitness, yoga, archery lessons, foraging and bushcraft, swimming in a nearby lake or hiking to the local pub are the order of the day, and the site often hosts yoga retreats and workshops. Sleeps two, from £79 a night, hostunusual.com Windsworth House, Looe, Cornwall What could be better than sipping a beer in a wood-fired hot tub overlooking the sea? It’s all about the great outdoors at this stone cottage on a hillside smallholding, part of the Caradon coastal reserve above Looe Bay. The reserve covers half a mile of quiet south Cornish coastline, home to rare butterflies and bats, and the South West Coast Path runs through it. A labyrinth and monkey sanctuary are close by, with the beach directly accessible from the sloping gardens. It’s off-grid but has solar electric lighting, heating and hot water. Sleeps eight, from £710 for seven nights, oneoffplaces.co.uk Romney Marsh Shepherds’ Huts, near Aldington, Kent If you’re a family of two, or have children old enough to sleep in their own hut next to yours, these stylish shepherds’ huts on the ethereal and sparsely populated Romney Marsh are an inspiring spot for a digital detox. The owners run an artisan wool business, Romney Marsh Wools, and the huts share a field with their flock of ewes. The brand’s woollens and lanolin toiletries are supplied for guests and activities such as cycling the Royal Military Canal to Folkestone, taking a marsh Jeep safari, and lessons in photography or creating felt toys can be arranged. Sleeps two, from £273 for two nights, romneymarshshepherdshuts.co.uk Causeway House, near Bardon Mill, Northumberland The Landmark Trust has restored a fantastic collection of 200 unusual historic properties but decided not to add wifi to any of them – great news for those wanting to escape the digital age. This once-abandoned farmhouse, built in 1770 in rolling countryside behind Hadrian’s Wall, is the only house in Northumberland still thatched in heather, tucked into which the Trust discovered dresses dating back to 1890, a child’s shoe, an iron key and a pewter spoon, hidden as good luck charms. Wood panelling, a range and a loft room with a canopied bed add character and there’s excellent walking from the doorstep. Sleeps four, from £257 for four nights, landmarktrust.org.uk 4 Coastguard Cottages, Weybourne, Norfolk Logging off and immersing yourself in nature doesn’t have to be a forest thing. At 4 Coastguard Cottages it’s sea and sand that will wash away any urges to check Twitter or play video games. Set above the beach in Weybourne, this cottage is one of a terrace built by Trinity House in 1904 and still has no mains electricity – using solar and wind power, and fires for heat. There’s no washing machine or dishwasher, TV or wifi, but kids will love dashing on to the sand each day, swimming in the sea, playing games and tinkling on the piano. Sleeps six from £500 for three nights, furtherafield.com High Hallgarth, near Coniston, Lake District Similar in nature, style and position to Bird How, High Hallgarth is another remote National Trust cottage offering a taste of life in the Cumbrian fells centuries ago. Little modernised, with brass beds and open fires, an outdoor loo and a tin bath that has to be filled from the kitchen tap (then taken in the kitchen or heaved out to the yard for a stargazing soak), this whitewashed 17th-century cottage lies beside a hiking trail up through Little Langdale. The impressive Cathedral Quarry caves are down the lane and the Three Shires Inn a brief ramble away. Sleeps seven, from £331 for three nights, nationaltrust.org.uk Resilient Woodlands Retreat, Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire A “tree talk and walk” to learn about sustainable woodland, coppicing and conservation is part of the programme at this tech-free retreat. In an elevated position between the Severn and Wye valleys, and overlooking the Severn estuary, the two smart four-person cabins have covered terraces and wood-fired hot tubs, handcrafted wooden kitchens, and woodsy details such as whittled hooks. Sessions in charcoal-making, cooking over fire and woodland foraging might fill your days, along with hiking, biking, kayaking and forest bathing. Definitely no emailing or Zooming. Sleeps four, from £125 a night, two-night minimum, resilientwoodlands.co.uk Unplugged, Hertfordshire, Essex, East and West Sussex Switching off from technology is the primary aim of a stay at Unplugged, a series of black, Scandi-style cabins in secret locations. Phones are locked away during a stay, but analogue alternatives are provided, from Polaroid cameras and a cassette player with 1980s tapes to an old Nokia for emergencies. Cabins have just one double bed so aren’t aimed at families but you’re welcome to squeeze in. Each has a huge window looking on to fields and there are interesting places such as vineyards and rewilding projects within walking distance of all. The minimum stay is three nights: any less and guests won’t feel the benefits of the detox, say the founders. From £195pp for three nights, unplugged.rest Engine House, Whitchurch, Shropshire The Engine House once produced electricity for the main house on the Whitewell estate near the Welsh border but is now an off-grid retreat. With a simple exposed-brick interior with antique furniture and colourful rugs, the conversion is a calming place from which to explore the estate’s woodland and lakes. Hammocks, table tennis, fishing rods and a pianola provide fun, illumination comes from solar fairy lights and candles, and there’s a woodburner for warmth. New arrivals are treated to mead and honey from the estate’s apiary, and can walk to local farm shops. Sleeps four, from £415 for three nights, airbnb.co.uk The Straw Cottage, near Llandrindod Wells, Powys Candles and lanterns, gas lamps and solar lights create atmosphere at this straw-bale cottage, constructed using centuries-old methods. With a roof insulated with sheep’s wool, no electricity or wifi and few mod cons, this intriguing home set on its own three acres on Ty Gwyn Farm offers true escapism. Guests fall asleep to the sound of a burbling brook, wake to birdsong and can chill in the woodland hammock and swing before firing up the veranda barbecue for supper. Young explorers can build dens, play in the stream, follow a treasure hunt and toast marshmallows by the fire. Sleeps four, from £245 for two nights, tygwynfarm.co.uk Honeydown, Hatherleigh, Devon Set 50 metres apart in oak woods are five architect-designed wooden pods, nicknamed “Truffles” by the designer and owner of the site. Sleek interiors have woodburners, sheepskins and hammocks but no modem; outside, sheltered cooking areas have fire pits and strings of lights. Each pod has a double bed plus an extra bed for kids if required, and a private bathroom with hot shower in a block nearby. Dartmoor is within easy reach, as are the beaches of north Cornwall. Sleeps two adults and two children, from £105 a night, canopyandstars.co.uk East Lodge, Banchory, Aberdeenshire Other than the lack of wifi, East Lodge is a perfectly normal, contemporary cottage in the spectacular grounds of turreted Crathes Castle, owned by the National Trust for Scotland. Arch latticed windows accompany modern conveniences including a telly and DVDs for movie nights, though you may prefer to switch off and focus on outdoor fun in the vast grounds and gardens, spotting buzzards, bats and deer on six marked nature trails or tackling the Go Ape high ropes course. Sleeps four, from £412 for two nights, snaptrip.com Oak Tree Cottage, Cilgerran, Pembrokeshire With an adventure playground and willow maze on the doorstep and nature trails to explore, nobody will be begging to play Roblox here. The whitewashed cottage lies on the Teifi Marshes nature reserve, home to incredible birdlife such as kingfishers and barn owls, otters and even water buffalo. Lively Cardigan town is only a few miles away and the reserve has a cafe and numerous bird hides among its marshes, reed beds and woodland, for those who want to swap tweeting for some mindful birding. Sleeps four, from £493 for seven nights, welshwildlife.org Shepherds’ Retreat, Gortin, County Tyrone Granite peaks, vivid green fields and speeding clouds are your only neighbours at this remote cottage on a private forestry plantation and sheep farm in the Sperrins. Glass doors open straight on to this landscape, and though there’s no phone reception or wifi, there’s a TV with DVDs, and plenty of books and games to enjoy by the fire. There are stone circles and mountain bike trails nearby. Sleeps four, from £278 for seven nights, sykescottages.co.uk Laggan Cottage, Scottish Highlands On the Ardnish peninsula and accessible only by boat – or a three-hour hike – this comfortable off-grid pad is seriously isolated. There’s nobody for miles around, bar the occasional kayaker, almost zero mobile signal and no TV. Paraffin lamps, wood-burning stoves for hot water and a Calor gas cooker are the only mod cons you get, allowing a total focus on the sublime surroundings. It is perfect for a week of hiking, swimming and watching the wildlife. Sleeps five, from £1,050 for seven nights, independentcottages.co.uk“If the Chinese script is not abolished, China will certainly perish!” So said the literary author Lu Xun in the 1930s, and many in China agreed. History has proved him wrong, of course. How the country went from rags to first ruin, then riches has been the stuff of headlines for over a century. Yet far from being abolished, the script (known as hànzì) was successfully pressed into service for all sorts of modern technologies. In Kingdom of Characters, scholar Jing Tsu introduces us to a tumultuous century and a colourful cast of (human) characters. In 1900, China was a great power in steep decline. European imperialism had played its usual shameful part, but there were other reasons for the country’s plight. Some of these problems were linguistic in nature. More than 80% of the population could neither read nor write, including most women. Nobody except officials spoke a standard language, and the numerous varieties of Chinese made communication beyond regional borders impossible. However, widespread illiteracy and the absence of a standard language were common in countries around the world and were living memories even in Europe. More peculiar was the fact that written Chinese reflected the state of the language as spoken 2,000 years ago rather than any of the modern vernaculars – imagine the French doing their correspondence in Latin. But the real trouble lay elsewhere: in the Chinese writing system itself. Ancient, revered and the vehicle of a great civilisation, the character-based script had downsides that were becoming more and more pressing in a technological age. The main thing to understand is that it’s nothing like an alphabet. Alphabets typically consist of 20 to 40 letters that represent single sounds. Such a low number makes for convenient keyboards. It also keeps code sets for telegraphy (such as morse) and computers sweet and simple. Chinese characters, on the other hand, represent meaningful syllables, and there are many thousands. Quite a challenge, then, to build a mechanical typewriter, or to remember the correct morse code for each one. Moreover, the letters of an alphabet have a fixed sequence, and any user can rattle them off. Characters have no such order. And while workarounds were developed for the sake of dictionaries and catalogues they were error prone and time consuming. Yet another linguistic problem was not inherent in the script, but annoying all the same: the lack of a standardised method for transliterating the characters into the Roman alphabet or other scripts. As a result, Chinese words, including names, could be rendered in many different ways: for example, the province we now know as Sichuan used to be spelt either Se-tchuen, Szechw’an or Ssu-ch’uan.Make no mistake: these were hard problems with far-reaching social and economic consequences. To make things worse, they had to be solved against the backdrop of a collapsing empire, a civil war, several foreign invasions, another civil war, Mao’s disastrous Great Leap Forward and his horrific Cultural Revolution. Yet solved they were, by a combination of ingenuity, determination and cultural pride, with the occasional admixture of diplomacy, power-play and a little luck. This is where the author is at her best: she brings to life the individuals who gave their all to solve China’s problems with language technology, even as political and social turmoil was raging around them. She describes their long struggles with the beloved script, their hardships (jail, flight, hunger, technical glitches), their many defeats and the rare but rewarding triumph. She portrays Wang Zhao’s Chinese alphabet, ultimately surpassed by Zhang Taiyan’s alternative bopomofo system. She writes about several inventors of Chinese typewriters, none of them commercially successful, and the men who made it possible to send a cable in Chinese. There’s a cameo for long-lived Zhou Youguang, who co-invented pinyin, the modern system for writing Chinese in the Roman alphabet. And so it goes on, up to and including the full integration of Chinese into the digital ecosystem. This focus on colourful individuals makes the book lively, but it’s not without its problems. The people we get to know best, those we keep company in their eureka moments and their long struggles, are often not the ones whose ideas end up prevailing. As a result, we get to know a lot more details about “also-ran” inventors and their inventions than about the ones who actually shaped modern China. More unfulfilling still is that we don’t really come to understand all these fascinating innovations – not me, anyway. For a work on language technologies, the descriptions of the linguistic nuts and technological bolts are less than crystal clear. That is the main flaw in a book full of lovingly presented individual portraits and fact-filled stories. • Gaston Dorren is the author of Babel: Around the World in Twenty Languages. Kingdom of Characters: A Tale of Language, Obsession, and Genius in Modern China is published by Allen Lane (£20). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy of Kingdom of Characters at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.“The question comes almost as soon as we step inside the remote cottage in the western Lake District: “Where’s the telly?” The door of the holiday cottage in Eskdale opens straight into the tiny lounge, and in the space where the TV should be there’s only a simple fireplace, a wooden bookcase stuffed with maps and nature books, and a couple of high-backed armchairs. “Well, can we go on the iPad then?” is the next request. Then, when they’re informed that no, we didn’t bring it, comes, “Can I go on your phone?” There is a look of confused disbelief on my children’s faces when I explain that there’s no internet, no computer, not even a phone signal, and that, in fact, we’re not going to be looking at screens of any sort for our entire week-long stay. They are young enough to not immediately kick off and storm out, but I imagine the scene would be rather different if they were teenagers. Doing a digital detox wasn’t my main motivation for escaping to this remote hideaway – the thrilling scenery and sense of isolation are the big draws – but the lack of wifi is a huge bonus. Though my children are only six and eight, their predilection for screen-based entertainment is increasingly tiresome. They may not yet have their own mobiles or tablets, but the shows they like are streamed online, they long for free rein on YouTube, are desperate to join in the school craze for FitBits, and adore “doing funny faces” – creating long strings of emojis on my phone to text to their friends (or rather their friends’ parents, who are bombarded with messages of 200 watermelons). Most of their homework is done online. The digital world encroaches. Putting a complete, non-debatable stop to it for a while feels essential. I’m not alone in craving this. January’s flood of wellbeing-related travel publicity contains more mentions of digital detoxes than ever, with tour operators such as G Adventures predicting it as a huge trend, exacerbated by lockdowns. All that Zooming, digital home-schooling and Netflix-bingeing made it seem like every aspect of our existence was lived online. Many of us feel screen-sick, desperate to disconnect. My family’s antidote in recent years has been to escape to various off-grid Cumbrian cottages: this is our second stay at National Trust-owned Bird How, which is on a quiet lane that ends at the next farm. It is basic. The mattresses are hellish – a detail much lamented in the visitors’ books – and there’s no bathroom, only a sani loo in a cobwebby space beneath the cottage, accessed from the outside (no fun at 3am in torrential rain), and a shower bag that you fill from the kitchen tap (there is hot water and electricity) and hook up outside, in view of the occasional rambler. All of this creates a sense of adventure, of course, and with no other building in sight, it feels like you have this phenomenal valley to yourself. After their initial shock, the kids get by without watching Avatar: The Last Airbender with surprising ease. We hang out in the wild garden, through which a small stream trickles, with novels and colouring books, and eat on a picnic bench under the tree. We go hiking, and my daughter embraces wild swimming, throwing herself into freezing Eskdale pools, secret canyons in neighbouring Duddon valley and any filthy-looking moorland pond. At night we watch for bats and the bright headlamps of drivers tackling the terrifying Hardknott Pass above: they sometimes bob slowly down in reverse when they lose their nerve. As the week goes on, complaints about the lack of screens are more easily quashed by the suggestion of a game of Uno or a walk to the Brook House Inn for ice-cream. The surrounding fields come into their own for imaginary play, even if it is TV-inspired – I spend a huge amount of time pretending to be wildlife presenter Steve Backshall chasing rare animals – but at least we’re tearing down grassy slopes and scrambling along streams in the process. My partner and I take turns to go out running, and on one of mine, up a bracken-choked path on the valley’s opposite flank, I call across to the others, barely visible at the cottage. I’m overjoyed to catch their hoots of response on the wind, so take off my jumper and wave it madly like a flag, rewarded by the blur of red cloth their ant-sized forms wave back. This rudimentary communication, not unlike that used by Roman soldiers stationed nearby at Hardknott Fort 2,000 years ago, gives me a burst of happiness no number of Instagram likes could match. It may be tougher to convince older children and teenagers that a spell with no wifi is a good thing, but growing awareness of the mental-health benefits of switching off, studies of the detrimental effects on adolescent brains of social media and overuse of technology, and the way wellbeing is in vogue may make them less resistant than you might expect. Many have embraced mindfulness, yoga and veganism – why not this? When our tech habits are so deeply ingrained, we can’t rely on flaccid promises to use our phones a bit less. Going somewhere like Bird How means there’s no choice. Perhaps like dry January, we must force these experiences on ourselves. A cold turkey digital detox can’t be argued with, especially when it comes with such appealing trimmings. Bird How sleeps four, from £499 a week, nationaltrust.org.ukJo Leach didn’t tell anyone about her postnatal depression. It came on after her second child, Hayden, was born on Christmas Day 2011. With two children under two, she sometimes wouldn’t leave the house for days at a time. “I didn’t know what was happening to me,” says Leach, 41, who lives in Stroud, Gloucestershire. “There was this overwhelming feeling of being really anxious and panicky.” She didn’t tell anyone – not even her partner or her mum. “I was embarrassed,” says Leach. “I felt alone.” Postnatal depression (PND) is common, and affects more than one in 10 women within a year of giving birth, but Leach did not know that at the time. Going to the supermarket or the park was hard work. She avoided crowds. “I was just surviving,” she says. “Getting through each day and keeping the children alive, and making sure they were fed and happy. I struggled to look after myself. I wouldn’t eat properly. It was all about them.” She lost a lot of weight. Before she had children, Leach had always worked. She struggled with being at home full-time. “I had too much time to think,” she says. “I was on my own all day long with the kids. I wasn’t doing anything except looking after them. I’d worry about everything.” If the kids were ill, she would panic. She’d become terrified something would happen to her and she wouldn’t be able to look after them. One child hated going to her playgroup, so Leach would feel horrifically guilty every time she sent her there. She had always wanted children, so couldn’t understand why she felt so sad all the time. In spring 2013, Leach broke down in an emotional phone call to her mother. “I told her everything.” She told her husband not long afterwards. “It was a relief that people knew,” she says. “I didn’t have to keep making excuses for why I didn’t want to go places, or would leave early, or cancel at the last minute.” Leach was referred to local support group Mothers in Mind, run by Home-Start, a community network that helps families with young children. She remembers her first meeting, in a Scout hut. “I didn’t want to go. We all sat around and had to introduce ourselves. I burst into tears and said, ‘I can’t do it.’” She struggled with feelings of guilt and shame: many women with PND feel as if they have failed their children or are not living up to societal expectations of proper parenting. “Before I had kids,” says Leach, “I used to think about how I couldn’t wait to stop working and stay home with my children. And then there was this big shock of being at home, and realising that I hated it.” Over time, the support group became a lifeline. “It’s peer support. So many mums come in to the group, and make friends and help each other,” she says. “Everyone makes you feel so at ease.” Leach is now a volunteer facilitator with the group, using her experience to support other mums struggling with PND. She helps run two groups a week, and also assists with arts and crafts programmes. “She supported so many mums online during lockdown,” says Tracey Edwards of Home-Start, “as well as completing two mental health training courses, and home-schooling three children. She’s an inspiration to every mum in the group.” Such groups are a lifeline to women, particularly in an era of ever-constrained NHS budgets. Leach was given 12 sessions of cognitive behavioural therapy for her PND. “It wasn’t enough,” she says. “They got me another two sessions, but that was it. They said that if you still need help, you’ll have to go back on the waiting list. But I didn’t feel better. It would have been nice to do CBT until I felt better.” At the group, Leach tells women there’s always hope. “There are people out there who feel like I did,” she says. “I want them to know it’s OK, and they won’t feel like this for ever.” After so many years of attending and then leading the group, Leach feels incredibly strongly about the power of community. At Leach’s request, we arrange a spa day. “I never get to be pampered,” she says. The Greenway Hotel and Spa in Cheltenham offers her a complimentary spa package. “I didn’t know what to do with myself when I got there,” says Leach. “because I’m not used to that sort of thing. But when I relaxed I enjoyed it.” She swam in the pool, basked in the steam rooms, and had a facial and a massage. “It does you the world of good, doesn’t it?” says Leach. “I felt really happy afterwards. It was a bit of time for myself.” It is a fitting treat, says Leach, because the importance of taking time away from the kids often comes up in her support groups: “We always say to the mums, they need to find time for themselves. That’s what the group is all about: a space for them to sit and chat, a bit of time for them.” Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comPlump raspberries, fat gooseberries and cascades of black, red and white currants all start from one place: an annual chop. Pruning soft fruit is how you maintain vigour and fruit quality. Soft fruit needs sun for sweetness but dislikes humidity and stagnant air – it makes those soft, juicy berries rot quickly. Congested branches, particularly up against a fence or in a corner, will slow down air movement and help spread disease. Pruning rectifies this. There are two main groups: cane fruits (raspberries, blackberries and hybrid berries, such as tayberries); and bush fruit (gooseberries and black, white and red currants). For both, the idea is to remove old, less-productive stems to encourage new growth. With cane fruit it is simple. Summer raspberries, blackberries and hybrid berries all fruit on year-old wood. The old canes should be removed immediately after fruiting in late summer. If you haven’t done this, you’ll have to take a punt on telling the new canes from the old and have a go now. Anything with a buff-coloured (rather than green) stem, with old fruit peduncles (stalks) is last year’s – cut this back to the ground. Tie in the new canes so they don’t whip around in the wind. Autumn raspberries fruit from September onwards on this year’s growth and should be pruned next month, removing all the canes to ground level to make way for new ones. Bush fruit is a little more complicated. These crop on wood that is at least a year old. But by the time it gets to three or four years old, this wood starts to be unproductive. So, you are doing two things when pruning: aiming to create a framework that allows sun and air to the middle, a sort of goblet shape; and keeping the plant in productive wood. The oldest wood will be the darkest; two-year-old wood can be silvery; and year-old wood tends to be buff-coloured. Gooseberries and red and white currants need to be spur-pruned. The spurs are buds that will produce flowers and fruit. Take out a third of the oldest wood, cutting back to vigorous shoots lower down to maintain growth. Remove anything that is diseased, dead or dying. Then reduce the other shoots by a third, to a spur, and remove branches that might become weighed down with fruit – these encourage mice and rats. Blackcurrants are easier. You just cut out as much dark, three-year-plus wood as possible, then remove any weak or crossing stems, as well as any less-productive two-year-old wood (grey in colour). Finally take out any low, horizontal branches by pruning to a strong, upward-growing shoot, to restrict the spread of the bush. This should be done by early February before buds begin to burst.Overseeing the gardens of a city museum is a somewhat atypical post in the gardening world, but a fantastic one (as head gardener at London’s Garden Museum, I should know). Horticulture is combined with history, education and storytelling, which inform plant choices, design and presentation. Errol Fernandes, head of horticulture at south London’s Horniman Museum and Gardens, which houses the collection of the 19th-century tea trader Frederick John Horniman – says conversations with visitors regularly stray beyond gardening into the realms of art, collections and curation. Fernandes, who took on the role last spring, oversees 16½ acres of tropical, medicinal and rockery plantings, mature trees and large areas of parkland grass. He draws inspiration not only from his horticultural studies and experience, but a background in art and curation (he initially studied fine art, painting and photography). A painter’s eye, therefore, informs his approach to planting and garden maintenance. We meet on a gloriously bright, late-autumn morning in the museum’s award-winning Grasslands Garden, designed by plantsman – and Olympic Park landscape designer – James Hitchmough to reflect North American and South African native prairies. Fernandes is busy editing the garden in preparation for winter. Traditionally, perennials are cut back entirely to ground level in autumn, or in early spring ahead of new shoots. However, Fernandes argues that, with considered editing, these gardens can be enjoyed throughout the winter. “Though we keep as much in place for wildlife as possible, we’re also cutting away bits that are letting down the picture,” he says, indicating a section recently worked on: an array of shimmering ornamental grasses and perennials that have lignified (grown woody), glowing gold, silver and maroon-pink. “In the past, these beds were left until February, but we’re recognising that there is a balance between naturalistic planting looking intended and looking unkempt. I think it’s really important to step back and observe.” Describing his approach to composition, Fernandes uses terms more common in photography and painting: apical points, triangular repetition, aspiring towards a sense of balance. “We’re all very used to pointing our camera at things and I encourage my team to do the same – to imagine the viewfinder and assess what’s spoiling that image. Has a plant collapsed? Is there something there’s too much of? You want the plants to be able to jostle together but not outcompete each other, so close attention to what is happening on the ground is important, too.” He sees the autumn into winter period as a time of adjustments, where he might chop back a plant “if it’s flopping too much” and let others die back gradually to prolong interest. “I think the contemporary horticulturist looks at structure and form in a different way. We are looking at seed heads, sepia tones. We often talk about how a plant dies – does it die gracefully? That’s really important here.” In the Grassland Garden, tall seeding plumes of goldenrod (Solidago speciosa) and wild quinine (Parthenium integrifolium) contrast with the darker tones of echinacea and false indigo (Baptisia australis); the sharp outline of the tall sea holly (Eryngium yuccifolium) sits against feathery bluestem grass (Schizachyrium scoparium) – all perennials with fantastic winter attributes. “It’s important to have species that provide contrast,” says Fernandes, “and a good range of textures, too, from soft to rigid and spiky.” Before turning to professional gardening, Fernandes worked in fashion editorial then in outreach roles at the Tate and the V&amp;A, before doing an MA in art psychotherapy. Being introduced to horticultural therapy inspired him to retrain as a gardener, studying at Capel Manor College in Enfield, on the edge of north London. The course offered Fernandes a sense of belonging: “It felt like, finally, this was where I needed to be. This is what my passion is.” After graduating, however, he was surprised at how hard it was to secure a horticultural traineeship. “I attended interview after interview. Many national, leading horticultural institutions repeatedly fed back that it had been between me and an equally strong candidate; my college tutor was scratching his head saying: ‘Why aren’t they giving it to you?’ It just felt odd that it was such a struggle.” He eventually landed a traineeship at the esteemed Chelsea Physic Garden and went on to work at Kenwood House on Hampstead Heath before joining the Horniman. However, his experiences have led him to question a lack of diversity in horticulture (he is a British-born Asian of British immigrant parents from Africa). Fernandes grew up with an interest in it – his mother was a florist. “But I couldn’t imagine myself in that profession; I didn’t see anybody like me – a person of colour – within it.” This is a complex issue, he says, and deeply rooted. “My mum used to take us to various houses and gardens, and sometimes we’d get quite a frosty reception. We knew what it was about, though my mum tried to shield us. I think the industry, and society as a whole, often find it difficult to imagine people from diverse backgrounds working in horticulture, particularly in higher-level positions. In a strange way I’ve had to fight through my own bias to be here.” But there are encouraging signs, he says. He recently met three young students of African and Afro-Caribbean descent at a Horniman gardening study day: “I asked each of them about their journey into horticulture. It felt like a profound shift.” Fernandes’s enthusiasm for making horticulture more inclusive and diverse is well suited to the Horniman, which is endeavouring to engage new audiences within its south London community. Right now, his creative energy is turning to fresh projects in the garden – plans for 2022 include planting a micro-forest to provide a green buffer between the gardens and the busy, polluting South Circular road; and an educational border filled with drought-tolerant plants. Reducing mowing to increase biodiversity is a priority – roughly an acre of lawn is given over to long grass and mown paths – as is a more sustainable approach to planting, with plans to replace the traditional annual bedding in the historic Sunken Garden with longer-term schemes. “Bedding is so wasteful,” he says. “The constant intervention that it requires has a negative effect on the health of the soil. So we’ve been thinking more carefully about what we plant now, including more ‘perennial’ bulbs – tulips, narcissus and hyacinth – that can stay in the ground for two to three years.” Fernandes is also keen to deepen the link with the museum’s internal displays. Its extensive musical instrument collection is reflected through plantings such as bottle gourd (from which percussion instruments are made) and Arundo donax (used for woodwind reeds). Fernandes is now looking to interpret the taxidermy bird collection, with illustrative, informative new planting. Gardening must continue to address issues such as sustainability and waste, and the challenge of our changing climate. But artistic vision can inspire change, too: there seems to be an increasing crossover between art and gardening, championed in recent years by galleries such as the Hepworth in Wakefield and Hauser &amp; Wirth in Somerset (and before that Derek Jarman’s Prospect Cottage in Kent). “For me, gardening is an artistic, creative process,” says Fernandes. “I entered into it for love, and then passion got ignited.”Over the last few years, the very best he has produced, Dan Evans has grown accustomed to the sensation of being the last British man standing in any given tournament. Plenty of times he has soared, but on Saturday evening his game crumbled before the John Cain Arena crowd. Evans’s Australian Open ended in brutal fashion at the hands of an efficient and mature Félix Auger-Aliassime. The ninth seed withstood early pressure and then picked Evans apart by the end, winning 6-4, 6-1, 6-1 to reach the fourth round at the tournament for the first time. Afterwards, Evans noted the quality of Auger-Aliassime’s play but he was, as ever, honest in his assessment of his performance. “I panicked on the court,” Evans said. “It was total. I missed my chance and I panicked a bit and that happens in tennis. I’m not going to sit here and say he was too good. I panicked and I felt that.” There was reason for Evans to believe that he could engineer a better ending. He has started the year strongly, winning his first five matches across the ATP Cup and a Sydney semi-final run. When he and Auger-Aliassime met in the final of the Murray River Open played at Melbourne Park last year, Evans steamrolled Auger-Aliassime 6-2, 6-3. After his easy first-round win over David Goffin, Evans’ second-round opponent, Arthur Rinderknech, withdrew on the morning of their match. Evans initially thought it was a great slice of luck but the break ultimately worked against him, robbing him of his rhythm and leaving him with extra time to overthink his third-round match. He had never experienced this situation in a major. “I’m not making excuses but it wasn’t easy to have a walkover and I sort of lost my momentum a little bit and I never had that before, two days off,” he said. “It was difficult. I thought about the match quite a lot and probably overthought it. And to be honest, he was way better than me as well. But I think I didn’t get my game on court.” The first set played out to an unusual soundtrack, a concert across the Melbourne Park grounds, with the off-pitch belts of a cover singer botching Beatles and Elton John songs. “I don’t know what that was, but actually, they should have kept it on,” said Evans, smiling. “I played better with it on. No, It was probably the best part of the match, listening to that, I think Rocket Man by Elton John.” In the early stages, Evans appeared to have settled well. He attempted to pin Auger-Aliassime in his backhand corner with his backhand slice, complicating the Canadian’s attempts to dominate with his inside-out forehand while looking to expose Auger-Aliassime’s impatience. He was initially successful, yielding early break points at 2-2 and 4-4. But the 21-year-old is a different player to the youngster who froze in their final a year ago. He is now consistently making deep runs in big events, having reached the Wimbledon quarter-finals and US Open semi-finals in his most recent majors. His experience is growing and he sits at a career high of No 9 after leading Canada to victory in the ATP Cup. “I think I’m just more relaxed and more composed and have better self-confidence that I can go into second week, I can go into quarters or more,” he said. Under pressure in the first set, Auger-Aliassime served extremely well and directed his forehand with clarity to hold serve twice from break point down. Then, at 5-4, Auger-Aliassime landed returns, demonstrated his improved shot tolerance by grinding out errors from the Briton and reached set point a 30-40. Evans responded by dumping a routine forehand drive volley into the net. He then double-faulted twice in his opening service game of the second set and the momentum definitively shifted as Auger-Aliassime ended the match with 14 of the final 16 games. Despite the frustration, Evans closed off his day by stressing the positives before a long season to come. “I started the year well, I’ve had some good wins, had real momentum going into the match and one match is one match. I’ve got to forget about it,” he said. “It would be another mistake if I keep worrying about that match what’s just happened, so it’s just time to park it and move on.” Meanwhile, Daniil Medvedev, the second seed, outclassed Botic van de Zandschlp 6-4, 6-4, 6-2 to reach the fourth round. Stefanos Tsitsipas later survived the talents of Benoît Paire, advancing 6-3, 7-5, 6-7 (2), 6-4.On Joe Manchin’s US Senate website, you can click on “Help from Joe”. American democracy (not to speak of another Joe) desperately needed his help this week. What it got instead was notes cribbed from constitutional law 101, selective and self-serving worship of a distant deity known as “the Founders”, and sanctimonious invocations of bipartisanship. The battle to secure free and fair conditions for voting through a simple Senate majority seems lost for the moment; and Republicans – who call for bipartisanship only when they happen to be in the minority – are gloating. But we should not move on so quickly. Otherwise, like dirt, the deeply misleading claims about the filibuster preventing a “tyranny of the majority”, advanced by Manchin and commentators thinking the point of politics is moderation for its own sake, might come to stick. The authors of the US constitution did indeed fear a tyranny of the majority. And they were agitated by the thought of decisions taken without proper deliberation; after all, even these men of the Enlightenment could not shake longstanding prejudices about the great unwashed masses falling victim to their “passions wresting the sceptre from reason”, as James Madison put it (adding for good measure that “had every Athenian citizen been a Socrates; every Athenian assembly would still have been a mob”.) Yet the framers worried no less about a tyranny of the minority. While they built in plenty of checks and balances, they did not seek to give veto powers to a minority within the Senate. After all, the latter was already through other designs the place for what Jefferson called a “natural aristocracy” to cogitate and deliberate. The chamber was not directly elected by the people before 1913, but both before and after, it has had an inbuilt bias for minorities, since every state, no matter how small, gets two senators. Never mind the filibuster: we have long been in a situation where Republicans can rule without a majority of the country behind them (for instance, by ramming through appointments to the US supreme court). Politicians like their constitutional legacies a la carte: what better than having the imperative to preserve your personal power be directly deduced from the wisdom of the framers? Yet an honest reckoning with history must face up to the fact that much we take to be indispensable for democracy was not only unforeseen in the 18th century, but positively abhorrent to the men meeting in Philadelphia. Most important, the Framers sought to avoid the very thing that today makes Manchin’s calls for consensus an act of bad faith: political parties, and an uncompromising spirit of partisanship (or what the Founders called “faction”) in particular. Evidently, Manchin himself does not quite believe in deliberation; why else have a huge placard with big, shouting letters next to him while delivering his speech? And just as evident: were he really so concerned about policies always having “input from all corners of the country”, why not require unanimity? If 51 can constitute a tyranny of the majority, why can’t 60? Biden asks what Republicans are for, and what McConnell wants, but the answer has been obvious for a decade or so: make his presidency fail. After all, the present minority leader honed his dark arts of political destruction during the Obama years. Of course, there is nothing wrong with an opposition opposing. In fact, that’s its job: it is supposed to offer a systematic alternative to what those who gained a majority are trying to do and hold those in power accountable. But that’s really as far as it goes, when it comes to what Manchin calls “the opportunity for the minority to participate”. A minority should have its say – but a majority must get its way. To enact what you have been empowered to enact does not mean, as Manchin puts it, “abandoning our Republican colleagues on important national issues”. It means not abandoning the people who put their trust in your ability actually to get stuff done. What defenders of the filibuster want is for the minority de facto to hold power. A supermajority requirement is not somehow neutral. It means opting for the status quo in a political system that its defenders, from the ancient Athenians onwards, always admired for its capacity to learn and innovate. Innovation does not mean you rush headlong into things – again, ancient prejudices echo when Manchin associates abolishing the filibuster with encouraging “volatility”, “haste” and “transitory passion”. The Trump tax cuts were the most rushed legislation in recent years; the measure was as incomprehensible to many senators voting for it as it was a delight for the lobbyists who had written it. Conversely, laws to reduce gun violence have been debated for years and have enormous, well-considered support among the supposedly fickle and irrational people – and yet something like the bipartisan Manchin-Toomey bill, agreed after the Sandy Hook massacre, died in a political institution that makes some more equal than others. Plenty of historians have pointed out the use of the filibuster to preserve white supremacy. But even if the filibuster were not what Obama called a “Jim Crow relic”, the willful misunderstanding of legitimate minority input as minority rule is unacceptable: it disrespects the majority of citizens. There is no evidence that it leads to more bipartisanship; and there is no reason to believe that, as the master of mixing the maximum number of metaphors from West Virginia says, its end would “pour fuel on to the fire of political whiplash and dysfunction that is tearing this nation apart”. Even if one is not particularly concerned with the finer points of democratic theory (such as: if you get fewer votes, you lose the election), one should find the filibuster unacceptable because it disables government. As Biden keeps saying, democracy has to deliver for citizens. A system that turns into what Francis Fukuyama – not exactly a raving lefty radical – calls a vetocracy cannot do so. Jan-Werner Mueller teaches at Princeton and is a Guardian US columnist. His most recent book is Democracy RulesEarlier this fall, in the quaint days when our variants had progressed only an eighth of the way through the Greek alphabet, I made a seemingly impractical trip: I unstuck myself from the couch where I’d been working the previous 18 months, kissed my husband and three children goodbye, and traveled to a DC suburb where, for 10 waking hours, I sat next to my friend on her couch, and worked, and hung out with her three children. Then I commuted six hours home. After months apart, during which we’d communicated almost solely in sentence fragments on WhatsApp, we had a single hour of child-free chatting over a bottle of wine – at 9 o’clock, we were both too tired to stay awake, so crawled into beds in adjacent rooms. And when the sun rose, we teamed up to shove tiny feet and hands into boots and gloves while, perhaps a little too on-the-nose, Elton John’s I’m Still Standing blasted over the living room speakers, then drove the girls to school. On the relaxation scale, it clocked in closer to “gut renovating your apartment” than “spa”. But those measly 10 hours, full of random, unprompted hugs and the knowledge that we could just exist, in the same place, with no real agenda – Eating takeout! Chatting in a car! Or while doing the dishes! Blowing raspberries on the one-year-old’s tummy as the other one plowed through emails! – replenished a part of my social life that has languished perhaps more than any other lately: a type of socializing that falls under the heading of hanging out. I don’t know about your 2022, but so far, mine seems allergic to it. It might be my life stage – as the mother of three children under six, my days have been highly scheduled for ages, with most of my unstructured time spent in the company of people who think the world’s greatest joke is to wear a diaper as a hat. When was the last time I went to a bar and let the night unfold? But sprinkle a little lingering pandemic on to America’s highly isolated family unit, and there’s the death knell of my chillaxing. With Omicron raging in New York right now, sure, I see friends, but mostly outdoors on one of those hyper purposeful, frigid Victorian walks we urbanites have once again started to sprinkle throughout our days, like some modern version of Jane Austen characters out on the heath. “It’s all scheduled,” one friend said when I lobbed a question out into our WhatsApp chain to see if anyone else was experiencing the same thing. “There’s no space to just be and let conversation flow.” “It makes all time feel loaded,” another responded. “I avoid people because I’m meant to give an important report.” To be sure, chillaxing can be seen as a relatively minor casualty of the pandemic – it’s not losing a job, or a family member, or any number of other tragic things that have befallen so many of us – but as a building block of our species, evolved from monkeys who’ll groom each other in groups for hours, it makes us, in a very real sense, human. In the intervening months, those 10 hours with my friend have served as the equivalent of my own personal bowl of Xanax. I think back to our time together, as my unvaccinated two-year-old gets a cough and can’t go to school, or the case counts tick up, yet again, and am calmed. With isolation periods a continued reality for the next few months – perhaps longer, for what has Omicron underscored other than the unpredictability of this virus, and the endless punting of a return to normal? – it seems imperative we all try to prioritize that in-person time, however hard it may be, however effortful. “We don’t realize how important physical contact – the patting and high fives and laughing together and all these things that people are constantly doing with their friends – is in building and facilitating and servicing relationships,” Robin Dunbar told me when I reached him to get his take on how this time had affected our socializing. “Those kind of things are going on below the horizon of consciousness. It’s hitting this endorphins system in the brain. And if you don’t get those hits, you’re not going to have meaningful or lasting relationships.” Dunbar is an anthropologist and evolutionary psychologist at Oxford, perhaps most famous for his eponymous number, which delineates how many stable relationships he posits a human can sustain. He puts this at around 150, with five or so close friends and concentric circles moving outwards until you get to the periphery of your network. What defines a friend is shapeshifting and complex – which is why he takes with a grain of salt various studies, like one that came out recently from the Survey Center on American Life and was widely circulated, reporting that Americans have markedly fewer close friendships than 30 years ago. (“It often depends on how you ask the question,” he said of the researchers.) But he’s defined them, variably, as someone you’d go over and say hi to if you happened to bump into each other in the airport at three in the morning, or someone you’d feel fine asking favors of, and doing favors for. And having robust social networks, and putting the effort in to maintain them, is critical to our wellbeing. In his latest book, Friends: Understanding the Power of our Most Important Relationships, out in the US next month, he labels loneliness a “modern killer disease, rapidly replacing all the more usual candidates as the commonest cause of death”. Seeing friends in person improves your mood, lowers stress, can benefit cardiovascular health, and on and on. Conversely, being lonely has been likened to smoking 15 cigarettes a day. And it’s not always about heart-to-hearts in the wee hours – sometimes it’s that shared laugh when the four-year-old insists on eating pizza bagels topped with sprinkles for breakfast (her kid, not mine, for the record). “Singing, dancing, laughter, storytelling, the rituals of religion, eating together, drinking together,” Dunbar listed, “all these things, there’s just something about doing it in the physical presence of a person that seems to ramp the effect up. It’s a weird business, some of the social business we engage in. Laughter is much more intimate that people imagine.” He pointed out that, were you to find yourself in a bar in Ulaanbaatar and someone told a joke in Mongolian, you’d laugh along, too. There are all sorts of little social cues we reflexively respond to when in the presence of other people, and there’s really no substitute. (When I brought up the metaverse, Dunbar snorted.) Last month was my husband’s birthday. With all of this swirling around in my head, I got him the gift of friendship. Pragmatically, that means a standing monthly reservation at a neighborhood restaurant and the requirement that I not join, because we’ve shared, give or take, the last 672 consecutive dinners (not that anyone’s counting). One friend pointed out that it’s essentially a playdate. But my hope is that once Omicron lets up, this structured time, to be unstructured, will nudge him to make room for the friendships most of us adults crave, and few of us prioritize. It might feel contrived, about as natural as Purell, but one could argue it’s as critical to his wellbeing – or at the very least more so than the other gift I was considering: slippers, pajamas and a book, for hanging out at home.• Despite the no-choral-singing strictures of lockdown, the National Youth Choir of Great Britain has inspired nine striking new pieces by their four rising-star composers, featured onthe NYCGB’s Young Composers 3 (NMC), director Ben Parry. In the sensuous, whispering Softly, the Welsh composer Derri Joseph Lewis explores the uneasy experience of coming out as LGBTQ+. Kristina Arakelyan has set Wordsworth’s I Wandered Lonely As a Cloud, the choral textures rich and glowing. Anna Disley-Simpson has made atmospheric settings of Sara Teasdale’s February Twilight and a poem by Rudyard Kipling. For Alex Ho, British Chinese and based in London, the racial harassment faced by the UK’s south-east and east Asian communities has prompted Hush, spiky, menacing and poetic. • “My ghost will haunt the tyrant”, blasts the mighty Cleopatra, exploding with anger and grief in Piangerò la sorte mia, one of her spectacular arias in Giulio Cesare in Egitto. It’s one of the many highlights in Handel: Enchantresses (Alpha Classics), the fourth joint venture between the crystalline-voiced French soprano Sandrine Piau and Jérôme Correas, director and harpsichordist, and his baroque group Les Paladins. Handel’s “enchantresses” include queens as well as sirens and sorceresses: Melissa (Amadigi), Almirena (Rinaldo), Alcina and Morgana (Alcina) are all here, their vocal fireworks and heartfelt outpourings interspersed with movements from Handel’s Concerto Grosso in G minor, Op 6 No 6, and the A minor, Op 6 No 4. The crown for aria of unmatched genius – each is a contender – goes to Alcina’s Ah! mio cor! With its sobbing inner parts, bass line sinking and throbbing, voice making leaps of anguish, this emotional marathon (nearly 12 minutes) is a turning point in the opera. The sorceress of the title at last learns what it is to feel love. Sizzling performances from all. • The Royal Opera House is offering streams of Gounod’s Faust (from 2019), starring Michael Fabiano, Erwin Schrott and Irina Lungu (£10 until 13 February), and Verdi’s Nabucco (current production; £16 until 19 February) starring Liudmyla Monastyrska. Don’t miss.Jonas Eidevall likes challenges so the Arsenal manager must be looking forward to Sunday’s task in hand. The WSL leaders have suffered a dramatic loss of form since December and face a Manchester City side that are on a six-game winning streak. Eidevall, under pressure after a run of one win in five games, promised Arsenal were going “to bring everything” to the game at City’s Academy Stadium. “Playing matches against Manchester City really excites me,” he said. “It’s a great football team. I like challenges in football, I like playing against good teams.” City are definitely a good team at the moment, having scored 25 goals in those six wins, conceding only three, and are clearly capable of damaging Eidevall’s title ambitions. Arsenal are still four points clear at the top of the table but second-placed Chelsea have a game in hand. Eidevall insisted his players are in good spirits, bolstered by the return of Lia Wälti and Lotte Wubben-Moy from injury, and that he can give his trio of January signings – Stina Blackstenius, Laura Wienroither and Rafaelle Souza – their league debuts. “I wouldn’t say that I would experience any problem with the spirit,” Eidevall said of his squad. “We know what we need to do better, we know what we need to develop and I feel we’re all very committed to carrying on with that.” He pinpointed the attack as key to Arsenal finding form again, hoping that Tobin Heath and Vivianne Miedema can cause City problems. “We only got to see a glimpse of Tobin before she was injured. The way we played at home at Hoffenheim was our best performance [of the season] and she was a big part of that.” The US international can contribute in both attack and defence, meaning better support for Miedema. “Viv is perfect with her movement” Eidevall said. “She has real moments of high quality on the left. However, we are playing the ball towards her where there is no space or numerical superiority. On those occasions, we need a much better support structure.” The Dutch striker’s connection with the centre-back Leah Williamson may once again be tweaked. “Keep the combination play on with the full-backs but if it is not on, we might need her lower on the pitch for central overload.” It is clear that Miedema’s movement is a focal point for both attack and defence, ensuring that Arsenal do not allow City’s most important players to flex their muscles. The high press on opposition defences from the attack, evident during Joe Montemurro’s tenure, is still alive and kicking. It will be an intriguing game, not least because of City’s return to form after a poor start to the season. They are playing at home for the first time in two months and there is a confidence about returning to the Academy Stadium. Leading their charge is Georgia Stanway, who has scored in five consecutive league games and is staking her claim for a place in the starting XI. The City manager, Gareth Taylor, said: “We want to get her up as high as possible. We’ve seen her enthusiasm and tenacity on the pitch and we’ll need it come Sunday. “We’re high on confidence at the moment but we understand the game isn’t won on confidence alone. We want to dominate as much as we can and that comes down to small details.” Those small details could be anything from playing Stanway further up, the return of Lucy Bronze from injury, or even a change in Arsenal’s attacking methods – all of which Taylor says is likely to make it a tight game. City are without their first-choice keeper, Ellie Roebuck, with Karima Benameur set to play. Taylor, however, is confident his team will benefit from having Bronze – and Steph Houghton – return and that his defence will be up for the challenge. “They give you big presence on the pitch, I think big confidence as well – they are big-game players and we’ve seen that,” he said. “Those players being involved helps the rest of the team. We have a bit more support now in a number of areas.”The UN has condemned an airstrike on a detention centre in northern Yemen as the death toll rose to more than 80. The airstrike in the rebel-held Sa’ada province on Friday morning followed a Houthi drone attack on the United Arab Emirates on Monday that killed three people. It marks an intensification of violence in the seven-year civil war between the government, supported by a Saudi-led coalition, and the Iranian-backed rebels. Hundreds of people were injured in the attack on the detention centre. Médecins Sans Frontières reported that al-Gumhourriyeh hospital in Sa’ada had taken in about 200 wounded patients was unable to provide care for any more. MSF also said 82 deaths had been confirmed, citing figures from the health ministry in Sana’a. At least 266 people had been injured, it said. The Saudi-led coalition denied reports that it had bombed the prison in a statement on Saturday morning. “The coalition will inform the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in Yemen and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) on the facts and details,” the official Saudi news agency said, citing a coalition spokesman. The coalition also said the prison had not been on a no-targeting list agreed with the UN and and had not been reported by the Red Cross. The UN secretary general, António Guterres, said in response to Friday’s attacks that the “escalation needs to stop”. In a statement issued by his spokesperson, he said the airstrikes, which included other parts of the country, had resulted in child casualties, and he reminded all parties that “attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure, are prohibited by international humanitarian law”. A separate strike in the port city of Hodeida hit a telecommunications centre, reportedly killing three children playing in a football field and downing the country’s internet access. MSF’s head of mission in Yemen, Ahmed Mahat, said: “There are many bodies still at the scene of the airstrike, many missing people. It is impossible to know how many people have been killed. It seems to have been a horrific act of violence.” The strikes on rebel-held parts of Yemen came after a drone attack on Monday in Abu Dhabi for which the Houthi leadership claimed responsibility. The UN security council condemned the Houthi attack, which killed three people and wounded six, in a statement on Friday: “The members of the security council condemned in the strongest terms the heinous terrorist attacks in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, on Monday 17 January, as well as in other sites in Saudi Arabia,” it said. “The members of the security council underlined the need to hold perpetrators, organisers, financiers and sponsors of these reprehensible acts of terrorism accountable and bring them to justice.” The UN estimates that the war in Yemen had killed 377,000 people by the end of 2021, both directly and indirectly through hunger and disease. Millions more have been displaced. It said earlier this week that the level of violence this month could soon surpass that witnessed in December, because of the number of airstrikes, drones and rockets launched, with an alarming number used against civilians and non-military targets.Long queues of lorries built up on approach roads to Dover this week because of a spike in freight traffic and not because of Brexit, the Port has said. However, drivers on the road expressed fury over the delays, describing the situation as “absolute carnage” and blaming a mixture of delays in Brexit checks and Covid paperwork. Highways England confirmed that high volumes of traffic had led to queues but with Brexit checks in place for more than a year, drivers were baffled as to why this week had been so bad. The increase in freight traffic meant that the Operation Travel Access Protocol (TAP), a temporary traffic management system, which was devised for heavy traffic times in 2015, was put in place on Wednesday and Thursday leading to tailbacks on the A20. Drivers were also reporting long delays at the inland border facility in Ashford where truckers must pre-notify French authorities of their cargo in order to get the goods vehicle movement certification necessary for boarding a ferry. Some have blamed a new software system, now in operation, which could have led to additional teething problems in Ashford. “A20 Dover TAP has indeed been in place for short periods of time this week. TAP is a well established and regularly used normal operational tool to help manage traffic flows into the Port of Dover at busy times and it has been for a number of years. This was the case yesterday as it has been similarly over the past few days,” said a spokesperson for the Port of Dover. Freight traffic usually surges in the third week of January after the Christmas break but drivers said the delays this week caught many by surprise. One driver, Ciaran Donovan, who has been posting about Brexit checks for the past three years, said it was taking “10-20m per vehicle to process paperwork”, adding sarcastically it had “absolutely nothing to do with Brexit apart from the fact Covid has nothing to do with it”. Donovan said the delays had nothing to do with extra freight volumes. “I was on a ferry last week and it was half empty. There were just 90 trucks on a ferry that can take 180. “The problem is they are taking 10 to 20 minutes to check the paperwork in both directions. A trip to Paris is now taking 20 hours more than usual,” he said. The queueing on the approach road to Dover had been a problem for months because of Brexit checks, he added. Queues appeared to have eased on Saturday, with one website that tracks driver experiences on the road claiming the queue stretched back just more than one mile. Earlier this week the Port of Dover said it was concerned queues could get much worse in September, when airport-style biometric checks are due to be implemented. Doug Bannister, the chief executive of the port, is looking for urgent meetings with the government amid fears the checks will add delays and cause danger. “As currently designed, the biometric checks work well at an airport or a rail terminal, but they’re not designed for a busy roll-on, roll-off ferry terminal. “If it is forcing people to get out of their vehicles inside of a busy port, that is just unsafe. We couldn’t allow that to happen. That will lead to increased queues, no doubt,” he told the BBC. Earlier this week the House of Commons transport select committee visited Dover as part of a fact-finding mission ahead of the introduction of the checks in September. The committee chair, Huw Merriman, said it was important that the British and French worked together to find a solution, adding: “We have to rely on the French to assist us here as well. It causes as much damage over in Calais as it will here in the Port Dover.”One of Tamara Rojo’s early acts as artistic director of English National Ballet was to mount a production of the 19th-century classic Le Corsaire. Now, as she is about to head off to the new pastures of San Francisco Ballet, her final gift to the company she has led with such dazzling daring for a decade is her own new production of Raymonda. Rojo loves these 19th-century warhorses, the legacy left by Marius Petipa that set the template for classical ballet. She thinks they make dancers dance better (which they undoubtedly do) and that they represent a history that must be reinvigorated but preserved. That, I think, is more debatable. The reason that Raymonda, first seen in 1898, has fallen out of the repertory of every British dance company – though the Russians and the French continue to dance it without much worry – is a plot (invented by society author Lydia Pashkova) that was always idiotic and is now unacceptable. Set at the time of the Crusades, it features a bland, posh-girl heroine who loves the noble warrior Jean de Brienne but is pursued by an evil Saracen. Rojo, helped by dramaturg Lucinda Coxon, has moved the action to the Crimean war. Raymonda (Shiori Kase) now leaves her family to find fulfilment as a Florence Nightingale-style nurse, and in the process finds herself torn between her feelings for her dull fiance, John de Bryan (Isaac Hernández), and his glamorous Ottoman ally Abdur Rahman (Jeffrey Cirio). Rojo preserves a lot of Petipa’s choreography, though not always in the same places, while providing linking passages herself. It’s clever, and at times it works. Antony McDonald provides sumptuously smart designs with a photographic theme, with frames enclosing the action and a ramp at the back of the stage down which, in a dream sequence, wounded soldiers process in agony, like an echo of the shades in La Bayadère. The costumes, all tartan cottons, swishing silks and pink candytuft, are brightly evocative. But transposing the choreography to a different storyline keeps some of the same problems. All the time you can feel the fierce force of Rojo’s intelligence pushing against steps that are stunning in themselves but not expressive of meaning. At too many moments the action stops so the participants can get on with some pretty dancing. The plot literally gets pushed to the sides of the stage, where soldiers suffer and Rahman makes his case to be the love of Raymonda’s life. Cirio makes him sexily compelling, but he doesn’t have enough to do. As John, Hernández scissors around the stage effectively, his charm making the most of a thankless role. Precious Adams shines as a saintly Mary Seacole figure. But though she is wonderfully fluid in her movements, Kase’s calm, delicate presence can’t provide the drama the choreography lacks; Raymonda’s decision to pursue her career rather than either man feels rushed. The chief success of the evening is ENB’s commitment to making it work. The entire company dances with passion and precision, and Glazunov’s score, often regarded as the main triumph of the ballet, is given its full worth by the orchestra under the direction of Gavin Sutherland. Rojo is leaving her company in fine, brave shape. Raymonda is at the Coliseum, London, until 23 January. It transfers to the Mayflower, Southampton, 30 November-3 December 2022Sing it back The sequel to 2016’s animated jukebox musical Sing hits UK screens this week, with Scarlett Johansson, Matthew McConaughey and Reese Witherspoon again lending their voices to anthropomorphic animals who like to, well, sing. U2 feature with Your Song Saved My Life, the sort of textbook mid-tempo-ballad-for-a-movie that chalks up an Oscar nomination without touching the sides. All the people Last year Bono and the Edge joined Dutch DJ Martin Garrix for the Euro 2020 (2021) anthem We Are the People, the sort of uptempo-ballad-for-a-football-tournament that is played at the opening ceremony and never heard again. Somewhat confusingly, the song’s video featured former Irish international Jason McAteer recreating a 2001 goal he scored for Ireland in an entirely different football competition, but that’s a rabbit hole all of its own. Stuck in a Euros you can’t get out of Few will forget the last Euros: England made the final, a fan stuck a flare in his backside, and Italy won the whole thing. In the quarter-finals, Roberto Mancini’s team dispatched much-fancied Belgium, with a stunning strike from Lorenzo Insigne getting them over the line. Forza Napoli Insigne is the current captain of Serie A side Napoli: an honour once held by Diego Maradona. The 1984 arrival of the world’s greatest footballer in Naples provides the backdrop of Paolo Sorrentino’s recent “extravagantly personal movie” The Hand of God (Netflix). She will follow This Must Be the Place, Sorrentino’s so-so English language debut from 2011, featured the first major role for Irish actor Eve Hewson, more recently seen in the Netflix series Behind Her Eyes and the BBC’s The Luminaries. Hewson is the daughter of Bono who, as well as providing a song, lends his vocal talents as a reclusive rock star lion in English writer/director Garth Jennings’s … Sing 2. Pairing notes Watch Before Jennings bestrode Hollywood, he was one half of director/producer team Hammer &amp; Tongs, makers of ingenious music videos, including the odyssey of a milk carton for Blur’s Coffee &amp; TV. Eat In Sorrentino’s Oscar-winning 2013 opus The Great Beauty, Jep, the writer-protagonist, has a working lunch of what looks like a tomato-based risotto. On sampling it, Jep wisely intones, “Reheated rice is always tastier than freshly cooked rice. The old is better than the new.”Time to wrap up after a lively evening session in Melbourne, with Marin Cilic taking out Andrey Rublev in four sets and Sorana Cirstea earning an upset win over Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova. Earlier, Iga Swiatek eased past Daria Kasatkina and into the last 16, while Alex De Minaur delighted home fans with a straight-sets win over Pablo Andújar. Thanks for joining me, it’s been fun. Until next time... And here’s the Sunday schedule: Rod Laver Arena Day session (11am local/12am GMT) Madison Keys v Paula Badosa (8) (4) Barbora Krejcikova v Victoria Azarenka (24) Adrian Mannarino v Rafael Nadal (6) Night session (7pm local/8am GMT) (1) Ash Barty v Amanda Anisimova (19) Pablo Carreño Busta v Matteo Berrettini (7) Margaret Court Arena From 1pm local/2am GMT (21) Jessica Pegula v Maria Sakkari (5) (3) Alexander Zverev v Denis Shapovalov (14) John Cain Arena From 6.30pm local/7.30am GMT Miomir Kecmanovic v Gaël Monfils (17) Here is the women’s singles last 16. Can anyone stop Ash Barty reaching her first final here, and who will emerge from the bottom half of the draw? (1, Aus) Ashleigh Barty v Amanda Anisimova (US) (21, US) Jessica Pagula v Maria Sakkari (5, Gre) (4, Cz) Barbora Krejcikova v Victoria Azarenka (24, Blr) (US) Madison Keys v Paula Badosa (8, Sp) (27, US) Danielle Collins v Elise Mertens (19, Bel) (14, Rom) Simona Halep v Alize Cornet (Fr) (7, Pol) Iga Swiatek v Sorana Cirstea (Rom) (Est) Kaia Kanepi v Aryna Sabalenka (2, Blr) So, the fourth round draws are set. Let’s take a quick look, starting with the men’s singles. Zverev and Nadal are on course to meet in the quarters, while Medvedev is the favourite in the bottom half – but there are some dangerous players lurking. (Ser) Miomir Kecmanovic v Gaël Monfils (17, Fr) (19, Sp) Pablo Carreño Busta v Matteo Berrettini (7, It) (3, Ger) Alexander Zverev v Denis Shapovalov (14, Can) (Fr) Adrian Mannarino v Rafael Nadal (6, Sp) (32, Aus) Alex De Minaur v Jannik Sinner (11, It) (20, US) Taylor Fritz v Stefanos Tsitsipas (4, Gre) (27, Cro) Marin Cilic v Félix Auger-Aliassime (9, Can) (US) Maxime Cressy v Daniil Medvedev (2, Rus) Here are Cilic’s post-game thoughts: “I enjoyed every single second of the match. I had so much fun and played great tennis. I tried to be aggressive, you can’t give these top guys the chance to hit – and I think it worked. I’m feeling really excited, it’s going to get tougher.” He thanks the crowd, festooned with Croatia kits and flags, as a convenient way to wrap up the interview. Rublev couldn’t consistently find his top gear, but that was a terrific performance from Marin Cilic, who looked close to top form there. He’ll face Félix Auger-Aliassime next, and if he can maintain this level, he’ll be a test for anyone. A slice of luck for Cilic as a net-cord bounce leaves Rublev too much to do – then an unforced error as the Russian goes long. A containing slice from Cilic drifts out, but another gift from Rublev brings up two match points... Cilic wins it with an ace, straight down the middle, and he wins 7-5, 7-6 (3), 3-6, 6-3! Fourth set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 6-3, 3-5* Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic goes for broke, three returns landing several feet away from their intended targets. Rublev holds to love, but Cilic will serve for the match... Fourth set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 6-3, *2-5 Cilic (*denotes next server) At 15-0 up, Cilic tries a drop shot for some reason – it’s not the best. That opens the door for Rublev, who battles his way to deuce. A pivotal moment? Cilic responds with a rare booming backhand, then an ace. He celebrates like a man who knows the finish line is in sight now. Sorana Cirstea serves out in style to upset No 10 seed Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova and book a fourth-round meeting with Iga Swiatek. “It’s almost midnight, so thank you all for staying and for your support,” she says afterwards. “Tonight I just tried to focus on my side of the court. We’ve known each other since we were 14 years old, we know each other’s game very well. I’m very grateful I was able to win.” Fourth set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 6-3, 2-4* Cilic (*denotes next server) So, Cilic has recovered from that wobble and needs two more games to book his place in the last 16. Does Rublev have another comeback in him? He rattles through his service game here, taking his ace count to 16. Elsewhere, Sorana Cirstea is serving for the match, 5-2 up on Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova in the decider. Fourth set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 6-3, *1-4 Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic lands his 20th ace, then produces a perfect second serve into the body. He’s taking his time between points, and backs up the break with a crafty second-serve ace. Fourth set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 6-3, 1-3* Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic gets the edge with a terrific return off a looping Rublev second serve, and earns a break point as Rublev nets a loose forehand. On the next point, Rublev has space for a winner down the line – but misses! That was very close, and he can’t quite believe it was out. It’s advantage Cilic again. Not quite the twists and turns promised so far on Rod Laver, where Cirstea has broken again and now leads Pavlyuchenkova 4-1 in the decider. She’s on the verge of reaching the fourth round here for just the second time in 14 visits. Fourth set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 6-3, *1-2 Cilic (*denotes next server) Better from Cilic, with two short Rublev returns dispatched at the net. He finishes off with an ace. Fourth set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 6-3, 1-1* Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic is still trying to be aggressive on the Rublev serve, but the timing isn’t quite there, and a couple of unforced errors allow Rublev to hold to love. Fourth set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 6-3, *0-1 Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic finds himself on a five-game skid having looked close to victory. Time for a comfort break, a change of shirt and a recalibration of serve. It’s still not back at full speed, but he holds to 30 here. Rublev wins the third set 6-3, trails Cilic 2-1! An ace, a wild swing from Cilic, a pinpoint volley and Rublev holds to love. This game has changed very quickly. Third set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), *5-3 Cilic (*denotes next server) An important game for Cilic, who had chances to go a double-break up, and is now behind. Unforced errors are creeping in, and he slips 0-30 down. Can his serve rescue him? No – a ferocious return gives him no chance, and an unstoppable forehand winner makes it four games in a row for Rublev! Pavlyuchenkova has levelled against Sorana Cirstea, winning the second set 6-2 – but the Romanian has broken to lead the decider 2-0! A few more twists and turns to come there, I’ll wager. Third set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 4-3* Cilic (*denotes next server) Terrific hustle from Rublev, who could easily be 5-1 down. He backs it up with an impressive hold, able to get into the net and outwork Cilic before sealing with an ace. Has the momentum unexpectedly shifted? Third set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 3-3* Cilic (*denotes next server) Rublev finally gets some joy on the Cilic serve, finding two testing returns and turning a 30-15 deficit into a break point. On second serve, he converts as Cilic sends a forehand into the net! In the other game still going on, Pavlyuchenkova leads Cirstea 5-2 in the second set, after the Romanian won the first. The local wildlife is causing disruption, with Pavlyuchenkova accidentally squashing a bug and Cirstea distracted by Melbourne’s famous seagulls, perched up on the rafters. Third set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 2-3* Cilic (*denotes next server) Rublev is wilting here; he is getting virtually nothing for free from Cilic, every loose shot punished. Another dominant rally brings up a double break point, and a Rublev forehand that lands in, much to his relief. A couple of big first serves get him out of trouble. Third set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), *1-3 Cilic (*denotes next server) A key stat in this battle of big serves: Cilic has won 31 receiving points to Rublev’s 14. The Russian doesn’t add to his tally here, an aggressive return going long and a 17th ace sealing the deal. Third set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 1-2* Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic senses this is his moment, and as Rublev’s serve falters he is there to pounce, sending back any short stuff with interest and earning two more break points. This time he takes it, another attacking return doing the job as Rublev finds the net. Third set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), *1-1 Cilic (*denotes next server) Rublev has to find some way to shake Cilic out of his rhythm on serve. He lands one return winner here, but he’s already 40-0 down, and Cilic promptly lands another ace. Third set: Rublev 5-7, 6-7 (3), 1-0* Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic stays on the attack, still finding clean winners – 37 to Rublev’s 24. Three break points come and go, Rublev finding enough on serve each time, and he digs out a vital hold. This has been really impressive from Cilic so far, while Rublev has played within himself. There’s better news for his fellow Olympian; Pavlyuchenkova has broken Cirstea to lead in the second set as she looks to level the match. Marin Cilic wins the second-set tie-break 7-3! The Croatian looks the stronger player now, picking off another Rublev service point – but an unforced error lets the Russian back in. A big moment a 5-3 – and Cilic fires down a 213kph serve! Set point, and an unstoppable forehand, whipped into the corner of the court, puts him 2-0 up. Second set tiebreak: Rublev 2-4 Cilic Marin Cilic just misses the baseline with another fierce return, but the next one does the trick as Rublev nets. Cilic whips an immaculate forehand across court, and responds to an excellent Rublev return before taking charge of the next rally. Rublev gets a point back on serve, but his opponent is in control at the change of ends. Sorana Cirstea wins the first set 6-3! An upset brewing on Rod Laver as Cirstea serves out the first set in style against the No 10 seed, Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova. Second set: Rublev 5-7, 6-6* Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic on the attack again, walloping a forehand and then smashing back a return on second serve. 15-30, but he snatches at a cross-court shot. Maybe a touch too aggressive, and Rublev digs in to hold. Tie break time! Second set: Rublev 5-7, *5-6 Cilic (*denotes next server) Another pair of aces, including one that catches the very edge of the line down the middle. An easy hold; can he snatch another set before the tie break? Elsewhere, Cirstea has regained the advantage in the first set, and now leads 5-2 with Pavlyuchenkova serving to stay in the set. Iga Swiatek awaits the winner. Second set: Rublev 5-7, 5-5* Cilic (*denotes next server) A brutal, 59-second hold to love from Rublev, with the Russian up to nine aces, compared to Cilic’s 12. Second set: Rublev 5-7, *4-5 Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic drops the first point, which counts as a chance in this serve-heavy battle. He fires down three unreturnable first serves, and then when Rublev gets into a rally, produces some outrageous pace to win the game. He’s looking very solid out there. Second set: Rublev 5-7, 4-4* Cilic (*denotes next server) Rublev holds with little fuss, a spinning second serve getting the job done as Cilic nets his return. On Rod Laver, Sorana Cirstea got an early break but she’s been pegged back, with Pavyluchenkova back on serve in a first set briefly interrupted by a freakishly large insect strutting across the court. Here’s Tumaini Carayol on Dan Evans’ defeat to Félix Auger-Aliassime. The last British singles player standing admitted he “panicked a bit” as the game rapidly got away from him. Second set: Rublev 5-7, *3-4 Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic whips a forehand onto the baseline and follows in to clip a cross-court volley out of Rublev’s reach. Other than that, it’s big serves aplenty, another ace sealing the hold. Second set: Rublev 5-7, 3-3* Cilic (*denotes next server) Rublev has been vulnerable on second serve – winning just four of 12 points – so a flurry of three aces is welcome here as he holds to love, finishing with a backhand down the line. Second set: Rublev 5-7, *2-3 Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic hasn’t made the fourth round at a slam for two years, but has come close to some big wins. He lost in five sets to Daniil Medvedev at Wimbledon, and in four to Roger Federer at Roland Garros. Here, Rublev rallies to 40-30 down, then plays entirely the wrong shot, a mistimed effort apologetically finding the net. Second set: Rublev 5-7, 2-2* Cilic (*denotes next server) Cilic goes for broke at 30-0 down, swinging and missing with an attempted winner on the Rublev second serve. The Russian closes out with an ace. Second set: Rublev 5-7, *1-2 Cilic (*denotes next server) Rublev has shown a recent tendency to falter against tricky opponents at slams; he hasn’t reached a quarter-final since losing to Medvedev here last year, losing to Marton Fucsovics at Wimbledon and Frances Tiafoe in New York. He can’t make a dent on the imperious Cilic serve here. Second set: Rublev 5-7, 1-1* Cilic (*denotes next server) Rublev powers to 40-0, makes a mess of a drop shot that lands an inch in front of him, then goes back to basics with a bomming ace. Second set: Rublev 5-7, *0-1 Cilic (*denotes next server) Time to go game-by-game, and Cilic makes a solid start to the second set, big serves backed by clinical groundstrokes as he holds to 15. Over on Rod Laver Arena, Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova – who won Olympic gold in Tokyo alongside Rublev in the mixed doubles – is warming up before her match with Sorana Cirstea. We’ll keep you updated on the early stages of that match. Marin Cilic wins the first set 7-5! Andrey Rublev got back on serve but with the first set seemingly headed for a tie-break, Cilic gets a chance at break point – and a hefty return forces Rublev to go long with a forehand! The former finalist takes the first set. Alex De Minaur speaks to Jim Courier: “Pretty exciting to play on Rod Laver, in front of the great Rod Laver himself! It’s a pretty amazing feeling. What more can I ask for? I love playing here, there’s no place I’d rather be.” They show a clip of him trail running with his golden retriever, Enzo, and then ask for his thoughts on his next opponent, Jannik Sinner. “A lot of firepower, he’s a hell of a player – I’m just looking forward to it, another opportunity to come out here and do what I love.” De Minaur fires down two aces, the second a 200kph scorcher – but then Andujar drills a backhand winner and soaks up the crowd’s applause. De Minaur bangs down another ace, though, and produces a second serve that Andujar can’t return. The Australian men’s No 1 is into the fourth round for the first time, after a dominant, impressive display. De Minaur breaks again! Andujar may be running out of ideas, getting bossed in a couple of rallies here and broken again as an ambitious backhand winner misses the line. De Minaur will serve for the match, with Rod Laver and Lleyton Hewitt watching on. No sign of nerves from Alex De Minaur as he holds serve to move two games away. The crowd on Rod Laver Arena are backing their man, but it’s been good-natured with plenty of appreciation for Andujar too. The “siuuus” are still there, but thankfully much less frequent. Andrey Rublev v Marin Cilic is under way, with the Croatian former finalist a dangerous opponent for the No 5 seed. It’s Cilic who has made the stronger start, breaking in the fourth game to lead 3-1. De Minaur goes on the attack in the next Andujar service game, and earns two break points after outlasting his opponent in a baseline battle. Andujar feels the pressure at last, double faulting to surrender his serve. Alex De Minaur is three games from the fourth round! Pablo Andujar isn’t going away quietly, still making his opponent work for every hold of serve. De Minaur wrongfoots him with a backhand that skids down the line, then belts an ace down the middle. It’s 2-2 in the third, with De Minaur leading by two sets to love. The order of play for day seven is out, and it’s a belter. Here are the singles matches to look out for: Rod Laver Arena Day session (11am local/12am GMT) Madison Keys v Paula Badosa (8) (4) Barbora Krejcikova v Victoria Azarenka (24) Adrian Mannarino v Rafael Nadal (6) Night session (7pm local/8am GMT) (1) Ash Barty v Amanda Anisimova (19) Pablo Carreño Busta v Matteo Berrettini (7) Margaret Court Arena From 1pm local/2am GMT (21) Jessica Pegula v Maria Sakkari (5) (3) Alexander Zverev v Denis Shapovalov (14) John Cain Arena From 6.30pm local/7.30am GMT Miomir Kecmanovic v Gaël Monfils (17) Jannik Sinner beats Taro Daniel 6-4, 1-6, 6-3, 6-1! It was a real battle for the first three sets before the Italian pulled away. He’ll play the winner of De Minaur v Andujar next – whatever happens, both players will be making their fourth-round debuts at Melbourne Park. The winning moment for Iga Swiatek, who continues her consistent form at grand slams. In the bottom half of the draw, I would say it should be between her and Simona Halep to reach the final. Alex De Minaur wins the second set, leads 2-0! The early break proves enough as the Australian serves out the second set despite some bendy-limbed resistance from Andujar. De Minaur finds a big second serve at 40-30, and his opponent nets a forehand. Iga Swiatek: “That was really intense – she plays top spin, and has the same grip to mine. At the end, the rallies were pretty long, it was just about getting the ball over the net!” She’s asked if she will watch Cirstea v Pavlyuchenkova to see her next opponent will be. “I try to stay focused and not look at the draw, so I didn’t even know!” she says. “My coach will probably watch it.” Iga Swiatek has the chance to serve out, and wobbles to 30-all before forcing an error from her opponent through brute force. Match point, and she hangs in the next rally before Kasatkina nets a forehand. Job done! Swiatek is in the same quarter of the draw as Aryna Sabalenka, who is seeded second but has struggled to get through each game so far, hampered by issues with her serve. At least she could see the funny side after serving just the 10 double faults in her win earlier: It’s all going to plan for Alex De Minaur as he chases a first-ever place in the last 16 here. He’s broken Pablo Andujar and leads 4-2 in the second, and by a set to love. And perhaps I wrote off Daria Kasatkina at the right time after all – a couple of loose points allow Swiatek to break again, and the No 7 seed powers to a love hold. She’s now 5-2 up in the second, one game from victory. Jannik Sinner appears to have regained control of his tussle with Taro Daniel – after taking the third set 6-3, the Italian breaks early in the fourth and leads 2-0. I can’t see it just now, because Eurosport 2 has switched to live skiing. Oh Eurosport. Never change! Perhaps I wrote Daria Kasatkina off too soon – the Russian has broken back and levelled the second set at 2-2. She has break points in the fifth game too, but Swiatek digs out an ace and prevails in a bruising rally to stay on serve. De Minaur wins the first set 6-4! The home hopeful makes a rocky start, slipping 0-30 down – but he fights back and earns a set point when Andujar sends an ambitious slice wide. He seals the set as his opponent nets, following some trademark baseline defence from the Aussie. Already a set up on Daria Kasatkina, Iga Swiatek is now a break up in the second, and already just four games from victory. De Minaur has hit 10 winners to Andujar’s one, and is putting pressure on the Spaniard as he serves to stay in the set. Andujar, who’s making his first ever third-round appearance in Melbourne, digs in to hold, and trails 5-4. Over on the Kia Arena, Taro Daniel and Jannik Sinner are locked at one set all, and 3-3 in the third. The winners of these two matches meet in the fourth round. Iga Swiatek wins the first set! She breaks Kasatkina again, firing a winner down the line to clinch it 6-2. She’s halfway to booking a fourth-round meeting with either Cirstea or Pavlyuchenkova. Alex De Minaur has broken Andujar for a second time – and this time backs up the break, coming in to the net to close out with a volley. His friend and mentor, Lleyton Hewitt, nods approvingly in the stands. De Minaur leads 5-3 in the first set. After easing into the fourth round earlier, Daniil Medvedev looked to build bridges with the home crowd after hitting out at “low IQ” fans shouting during his previous win over Nick Kyrgios. “I was hoping you were going to be a bit easier on me guys,” the No 2 seed said after his win over Botic van de Zandschulp. “I’ll put it this way, it’s a little easier to play a guy from the Netherlands than a guy from Australia in Melbourne.” “I think every good relationship has it’s ups and down but it’s good,” the Russian told the Margaret Court Arena crowd. “It’s entertaining, it’s real. It’s not like ‘hi guys, okay, whatever, I’ll see you next time’, there is some relationship going on.” “Hopefully I can come many more years here. As I say, I don’t think it’ll only be good ones but I hope it’ll be more good times than bad ones, otherwise it won’t work.” Over on the Margaret Court Arena, Iga Swiatek has an early break against Russia’s Daria Kasatkina, who has missed break chances of her own. The No 7 seed leads 4-1. Taro Daniel has taken the second set off Sinner, 6-1, while it’s already developed into a baseline slugfest between Andújar and De Minaur, with the first set still on serve. Six players have made it through to the women’s last 16 so far on Saturday. They include Simona Halep, who was too strong for Danka Kovinic, unable to repeat her heroics against Emma Raducanu in the second round. No 2 seed Aryna Sabalenka came back from a set down to win for the third match in a row, getting the better of former French Open finalist Marketa Vondrousova. Danielle Collins also fought back to win an epic battle with rising star Clara Tauson. Kaia Kanepi also dropped the first set but recovered to end the run of Aussie wildcard Maddison Inglis, and Alize Cornet got the better of Tamara Zidansek in a near three-hour encounter. Elise Mertens, the No 19 seed, took just over an hour to see off China’s Zhang Shuai. Alex De Minaur is up and running on Rod Laver, breaking Andújar in the first game – but the Spaniard quickly earns a chance to break straight back, and outmuscles his opponent in an early rally to level. Elsewhere Taro Daniel, the conqueror of Andy Murray, lost the first set to rising star Jannik Sinner, but leads 4-0 in the second. So, what’s been happening overnight? In the men’s draw, Daniil Medvedev eased past Botic van de Zandschulp in straight sets and Stefanos Tsitsipas got through in four sets against Benoît Paire. Taylor Fritz edged out Roberto Bautista Agut in a five-set battle, fighting back from 2-1 down. He’s joined by compatriot Maxime Cressy in the last 16, the world No 70 ending the run of Aussie wildcard Chris O’Connell in four sets. British hopes in the singles draws are over, with Dan Evans well beaten by Canada’s Félix Auger-Aliassime, who wrapped up a 6-4, 6-1, 6-1 win moments ago. It was a decent scrap in the first set, before the No 9 seed pulled away in style. He’ll face Rublev or Cilic in the next round. Hello. Home fans have been waiting since 1978 for an Australian singles champion in either of the showpiece events at their home slam, and while all the expectation is on Ash Barty, the women’s world No 1, they still have a dark horse left in the men’s draw. Alex De Minaur kicks off the evening session on Rod Laver Arena against wily Spanish veteran Pablo Andújar. After that, women’s No 10 seed and three-time Melbourne quarter-finalist Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova takes on a tricky unseeded opponent in Romania’s Sorana Cirstea. Elsewhere, former French Open champ Iga Swiatek will look to show her title credentials against Daria Kasatkina, before what could be a classic, heavy-hitting encounter between Andrey Rublev and Marin Cilic. Stay tuned.The University of Rhode Island will revoke honorary degrees given to Rudy Giuliani and Michael Flynn, key allies of Donald Trump in his attempt to overturn the 2020 election. The URI board of trustees on Friday voted unanimously to revoke the degrees, which were given to Giuliani in 2003 and Flynn in 2014. Giuliani’s doctorate of laws was given for his leadership as mayor of New York City after the 9/11 attacks, the Providence Journal reported. Flynn, a retired general and former head of the Defense Intelligence Agency who graduated from URI in 1981, was given a doctorate of humane letters. The trustees voted on the recommendation of the URI president, Marc Parlange, who said the two men “no longer represent the highest level of our values and standards that were evident when we first bestowed the degree”. Giuliani has acted as Trump’s attorney, work that led to the suspension of his law licenses in New York and Washington DC. A leader of legal attempts to overturn election results in critical swing states, Giuliani spoke at a rally near the White House on 6 January, urging “trial by combat”. Parlange said Giuliani “encouraged domestic terrorist behavior aimed at preventing Congress from certifying the outcome of the 2020 presidential election”. Seven people died around the storming of the US Capitol. Trump was impeached but acquitted. More than 700 people have been charged. Eleven members of a far-right militia have been charged with sedition. This week, Giuliani was among Trump allies served subpoenas by the House select committee investigating the attack. Trump’s former adviser, Steve Bannon, has pleaded not guilty to a charge of contempt of Congress arising from a refusal to co-operate. Trump’s final chief of staff, Mark Meadows, could face the same charge. Leading Republicans in Congress have also refused to co-operate. On Friday, the Washington Post reported that a judge has released to prosecutors more than 3,000 of Giuliani’s communications, in an investigation of work in Ukraine which contributed to Trump’s first impeachment, for seeking dirt on rivals including Joe Biden. Flynn, who was fired from the Defense Intelligence Agency by Barack Obama, became Trump’s national security adviser before being fired for lying to the FBI about contacts with Russian officials. He pleaded guilty but was pardoned by Trump. A leading figure on the far right, he has advocated a military coup and the establishment of Christianity as the state religion. Flynn has been implicated in aspects of Trump’s attempt to stay in power, including plans to seize election machines, the subject of a draft executive order revealed on Friday by Politico. He has resisted a subpoena from the 6 January committee. Also on Friday, the Guardian reported that law enforcement agencies have learned of an alleged plan by “allies of Flynn” to “gather ‘intelligence’ on top Republicans”, in order to compel them to back election audits in key states. Recommending the revocation of the honorary degrees, Parlange said: “As a civic institution, URI has the privilege and responsibility to sustain and preserve American democracy by inspiring and modeling good citizenship. Revoking these honorary degrees reinforces our values and allows us to lead with truth and integrity.” The chairwoman of the URI trustees, Margo Cook, said the board “supports the university and its mission to uphold its values, especially its commitment to intellectual and ethical leadership and fostering an environment of diversity and respect”. • This article was amended on 24 January 2022 to correct a misquoting of Marc Parlange’s letter: he wrote of “inspiring” not “insuring” good citizenship.It’s an average American salary. What could it be? $800,000? It costs more than $100,000 a year to attend the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. I don’t know what you get for that money exactly but insights into the everyday economy clearly aren’t on the syllabus. Nina Strohminger, an assistant professor at Wharton School recently asked her students how much they reckoned the average American makes a year. A quarter of the class, she reported in a viral tweet, thought it was over six figures; one student thought it was $800,000. The real figure? About $53,838, according to figures from the Social Security Administration (SSA) last year. Now, clearly, this is just an informal poll broadcast on Twitter; it’s not a peer-reviewed scientific study. Still, it touched a nerve with a lot of people because it’s a reflection of the fact that the super-rich seem to live on a completely different planet than everyone else. According to data from the New York Times the average family income of a Penn student is $195,500; 19% of its students come from the top 1% of earners while only 3.3% come from the bottom 20%. Wharton is the alma mater of people like Ivanka Trump and her father. Wharton is a place, to risk being somewhat over simplistic, that largely takes in people from rich families – these people then go on to become politicians and titans of industry and make even more money. If this poll just demonstrated that a few overprivileged students are incredibly out of touch that would be one thing. However, the myopia represented at Wharton is mirrored in society as a whole. As a Harvard professor noted in the Twitter thread, research shows that what you think others make depends on how much you make yourself. People tend to massively underestimate the gap between the rich and the poor. Want another example of this lifestyle-induced myopia? Last year, the New York Times asked the eight New York mayoral candidates how much they thought the median sales price for a home in Brooklyn was. Raymond J McGuire, an investment banker, reckoned “it’s got to be somewhere in the $80,000 to $90,000 range, if not higher”. Shaun Donovan, housing secretary under Barack Obama and housing commissioner under the former New York mayor Michael Bloomberg, guessed it “at around $100,000”. The real answer? $900,000. It’s easy to laugh at these guys but, I can’t this stress enough, there is nothing funny about any of this. These people aren’t out-of-touch anomalies: the vast majority of the people running the world don’t live like the people they represent, and seem to have absolutely no idea of the problems regular people face. In the US, the majority of lawmakers in Congress are millionaires. Meanwhile in Britain, Rishi Sunak, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, is an ex-banker who is worth hundreds of millions: much of this comes from his wife, who is richer than the Queen of England. Prime Minister Boris Johnson, meanwhile, once dismissed the £250,000-a-year ($284,000) he earned from a second job writing newspaper columns (lest you think this is normal for a writer, let me disclose that I get paid $500 for each Week in Patriarchy column), as “chicken feed”. “It’s hard to imagine these men solving a problem they don’t know exists,” said Monica Klein, a political consultant, to the New York Times, in reference to the mayoral candidates’ views on the Brooklyn housing market. And this, really, sums up the issue. Far too many politicians have no idea what it’s like to be unable to afford a house or to be swamped by student loans or bankrupted by medical bills. They have no idea about the problems the vast majority of Americans are facing – which is why none of these problems get fixed. Instead they spend their time on things that matter to people like them, AKA giving the rich bigger tax cuts. And this is a bipartisan issue, by the way: the second most expensive component of the Democrats’ Build Back Better bill is a $275bn tax cut for people who pay large amounts of property tax that primarily benefits the top 10%. This tax cut is more costly than establishing a paid family and medical leave program. Every single crisis the world is facing is ultimately a crisis of leadership. As I write in my new book (sorry for the somewhat shameless plug), we have no hope of changing anything unless we change the people in charge. That doesn’t mean just sticking more women and people of colour in power: it means breaking down the barriers that stop regular people for running for office. It means having a government that actually represents its constituents. Gwyneth Paltrow is now selling a $75 ‘Hands Off My Vagina’ candle It’s supposed to honour the anniversary of Roe v Wade, the landmark abortion ruling. $25 of each sale will be donated to the American Civil Liberties Union foundation’s Reproductive Freedom Project. Supreme court rejects another attempt to block Texas’ six-week abortion ban Gwyneth Paltrow better sell a lot of candles because the state of reproductive rights in the US has just gone from dire to extremely dire. On Thursday, the supreme court rejected an attempt by abortion providers to block Texas’ six-week abortion ban. “This case is a disaster for the rule of law and a grave disservice to women in Texas, who have a right to control their own bodies,” Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote in a dissent. The green M&amp;M has had a makeover The bad news is that women in America aren’t getting affordable childcare or paid maternity leave anytime soon. The good news is that Mars has given its M&amp;M characters a makeover to promote inclusivity; the green one no longer wears high-heels – she wears sneakers. So there’s that. Female journalists in the Middle East have had their phones hacked with Pegasus spyware That’s according to a report by Front Line Defenders and Access Now. “When governments surveil women, they are working to destroy them,” wrote Marwa Fatafta, a policy manager at Access Now, in a statement accompanying the report. “Surveillance is an act of violence.” Men are now buying NFT girlfriends Just when you thought NFT-mania couldn’t get any more inane. Barbados PM Mia Mottley wins landslide second term Mottley came to international attention last year when she gave an incredible speech at Cop26 and her government told the British monarchy that they could go get stuffed. The week in pawtriarchy Drones rarely feature in uplifting news stories but this week is an exception. A little dog called Millie that got stuck on mudflats was saved from drowning when rescuers attached a sausage to a drone and enticed her to freedom. “It was something we had never tried before,” a member of the search and rescue team said, “The sausages were the last resort.”Towards the end of Colossus, Idles’ hulking opening number, frontman Joe Talbot orchestrates a moshpit, ordering the crowd to carve out a no man’s land down the middle of the venue. “Are you ready to collide?” he roars. Then, more vehemently: “Are you ready to look after each other?” This combination of violence and compassion is Idles in a nutshell: go wild, be kind. Their shows feel like being punched and hugged at the same time.  Successful paradoxes always intrigue. The Bristol-born band have the brawn and dread of post-punk heavyweights such as Big Black or the early Bad Seeds, but none of their seething malice. Instead, and despite their musical differences, they recall the hoarse idealism of the Clash or 1980s U2: a life-and-death desperation to communicate, and to commune. It’s why they can fill Brixton Academy four nights in a row, and why many of the fans there have committed to inking the band’s name into their skin. Like no other British rock band of their generation, Idles offer a sense of resilient belonging, rendering pain fertile and ugliness majestic. They have never sounded better. Talbot’s urgent sincerity, striking each syllable like he’s banging in a nail, is better suited to autobiography than explicit protest. After the humanitarian politics of their first two records, the brute-force sloganeering of 2020’s Ultra Mono landed awkwardly, he has admitted, because it was designed for live performance just before the pandemic rendered gigs impossible. While strength-in-numbers rallying cries such as War and Grounds certainly take off (“two fucking years we’ve waited for this,” Talbot says with unleashed glee), Idles’ latest album, Crawler, digs more fruitfully into personal struggles, specifically the singer’s 18 years of on-off addiction to alcohol and drugs. “This song, and most of our songs, is about drug addiction,” he jokes by way of introduction to Meds, one of several numbers elevated by Colin Webster’s saxophone agonies. Now lean and sober, Talbot has the energy of a preacher who teaches kickboxing to young offenders. When he’s not stepping on a monitor, leaning as far forward as gravity will permit, he’s prowling the stage in front of a barricade of amplifiers or jogging on the spot. When he cries: “Can I get a hallelujah?” in The Wheel, a fraught song about inherited alcoholism, he could be at the pulpit; for Mr Motivator (“You can do it/ Yes you can!”), he’s Henry Rollins reborn as a personal trainer. The frontman’s sharper edge translates to the whole band. Once known for crowdsurfing, semi-nudity, tears and looming chaos, Idles have solidified into a formidable machine. They can execute ramalama anthems such as Danny Nedelko as well as anyone, but Crawler has broadened their horizons, from the bug-eyed, 30-second blurt of Wizz, its lyrics collaged from text messages from Talbot’s former drug dealer, to the nauseous, waltz-time soul of The Beachland Ballroom, and the hip-hop-adjacent stomp of Car Crash. Guitarists Lee Kiernan and Mark Bowen are as interested in noise as they are in riffs, and the best tracks attain an immense industrial clamour: the dank clang of Bowen’s guitar paired with drummer Jon Beavis’s rattling suspense on Colossus, or the climax of Never Fight a Man With a Perm, which roughly approximates the sound of a helicopter lifting off from the roof of a collapsing building. Add a bank of machine-gun strobes, and the impact is physically overwhelming. Idles’ particular brand of solidarity-building requires enemies, so there is indignant Tory-bashing (“there’s no point booing because none of them are here”) and a slightly jarring (but then I would say that) dig at “pseudo-intellectuals masquerading as journalists”. Perhaps the rather tedious class-policing allegations of inauthenticity that came their way a few years ago still rankle, but it’s hard to hear Talbot’s lacerating accounts of addiction and grief and question his bona fides. Then again, he wouldn’t be the first musician to draw strength from a sense of being disdained and misunderstood. A band like Idles needs pricks to kick against. A case in point is I’m Scum, which weaponises derision into defiance. Talbot commands everyone in the venue, band included, to “get low” before springing up in unison for the finale. It’s a thrilling, hilarious moment that sums up Idles’ inspirational appeal to their tribe: you get knocked down, you get back up again. “Do not go gentle,” Talbot says, quoting Dylan Thomas before the final song, as if there were ever any danger of that.Councils across the UK are using radical strategies to cut the number of polluting vehicles on their streets in response to the climate emergency. Leicester city council hopes a new charge on workplace parking will improve air quality, fund public transport and incentivise walking and cycling. The power to raise a “workplace parking levy” (WPL) from local businesses was introduced by Labour more than 20 years ago. But parking is such a controversial issue in local government that Nottingham is the only city in the UK with a scheme. Leicester is now set to become the second: it is consulting on proposals to charge companies with more than 10 parking spaces £550 a year per space from next year. It is up to employers to decide whether to absorb the cost or pass it on to their staff. It could raise £450m in the next decade to invest in a new fleet of electric buses, an expanded cycle network and train station renovations. Adam Clarke, Leicester’s deputy mayor for environment and transport, wants to use the workplace parking levy more broadly to move away from car dominance. Clarke said: “We’re a historic city. The road network has been built on a Roman footprint and it suffered from making way for the motor car in the postwar period, which attracted more cars, which has constrained the city. “We have worked really hard to generate a shift to cycling, walking and the bus. But there needs to be more than a step change, there needs to be a real leap if we’re going to meet our environmental, economic and health challenges.” The plans have been condemned by some businesses, opposition councillors and motoring organisations. Nigel Porter, a Liberal Democrat councillor in Leicester, said: “The current proposals are just stick, there’s no carrot at all. If you were a nurse or a doctor you could be attending shifts at various times of the day or night – there isn’t always going to be a bus service for you. There appears to be an agenda [among] some members of the Labour party… they want to price people off the road.” Several local businesses described the WPL as a stealth tax that would “impose a big cost”, according to the council’s economic impact study, while one employer simply described the plan as “insane”. Clarke said the council wanted to work with employers to come up with specific solutions to gaps in the transport network, including demand-responsive buses and cycle storage. Others have expressed concern about the impact on low-paid workers. A spokesperson for the AA said: “Given that WPL when passed on to employees is a flat-rate local tax, it hurts lower-income workers more and disproportionately.” The council said employers may choose to charge higher earners more than low-paid staff if they passed on the fee. Leicester wants to emulate the “15-minute city” model championed by Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo, where all essential amenities can be reached within a 15-minute walk or cycle. It is a relatively compact city and a quarter of all car journeys are less than 1.25 miles, with the average journey 3 miles. Clarke said: “We know that most journeys in Leicester can be walked or cycled, we know there are huge opportunities to improve the public transport network. If we’re able to do that we’ll be able to provide real alternatives and then those that really need to use a motor car will benefit because there’s less traffic on the road.” A workplace parking levy is an increasingly attractive idea to local authorities which are short of cash and must meet difficult air quality targets in the next few years. Oxfordshire county council is about to launch a charging zone to cover Oxford city centre, while Cambridge and Bristol have also recently expressed interest. Workplace parking has become a contentious political issue in Scotland, where Edinburgh and Glasgow are exploring schemes. Labour and the Conservatives in Scotland have strongly opposed the plans, with Labour transport spokesman Neil Bibby recently branding it a “commuter tax” and a “shameless attack on workers’ pay packets”. Other councils have used clean air zones – where older, more polluting vehicles are subject to charges – to incentivise sustainable transport. London’s ultra-low emission zone has been running since 2019, and last year Birmingham became the second city to introduce a zone that which applied to private cars. However plans for a clean air zone in Greater Manchester have stalled, with mayor Andy Burnham demanding more funding from government to help people switch to greener vehicles. Nottingham’s workplace parking levy has been used to raise £83m directly since 2012, unlocking a further £600m of grants. It has had a small impact on commuters’ travel patterns, according to one academic evaluation, which found 8.6% of commuters had switched away from the car in part due to the levy. Sue Flack, who helped deliver Nottingham’s programme and now works as a consultant to local authorities, said: “As far as we can tell there hasn’t been an economic hit to Nottingham and many employers will say they like Nottingham because of its good transport links, although they won’t say they like the WPL. “They’d prefer to have the transport and not the levy but it doesn’t work like that.”I don’t have many memories of growing up in Somalia – I was so young. I remember coming to the UK, age eight, going to school – even though I couldn’t speak any English – and suddenly having all these friends to play with. I owe a lot to my PE teacher, Mr Watkinson. He saw me running around the playground, he watched me run in a figure of eight around the gym. Then he thought: “That kid is good at running.” He encouraged me to join a local running club. We’re still in touch. I lived with some Kenyan runners in the early 2000s. They didn’t have a social life. All they did was eat, train, sleep. I realised then that I needed to eat, train and sleep like them if I wanted to be the best. Winning the Olympics in front of my home crowd in London was incredible. Everything that led to it – my training, my mindset – it all made sense. People who saw it on telly probably didn’t think about how long it took to get there. What I achieved didn’t happen overnight. It took years. I’m very disorganised at day-to-day things, but I’m getting better. It’s easy as an athlete to train and not worry about anything else. But I’m working hard to become a bit more involved with my kids. I think I can still beat them in a race, but it depends what distance. My son is pretty quick. I’m getting back into running after my injury [Farah suffered a stress fractured ankle in the summer of 2020]. When I get fitter and stronger, I can see how much I can do. I hope to make the marathon. You’ve got to enjoy the moment and enjoy what you do. So I hope to keep competing and keep smiling. Lockdown was tough for all of us, but it made everyone realise what’s important in life – and that’s family. I would have loved to play for Arsenal, but I was never good enough. I played at school and for the local club until I was 14, but I was only good because I could cross the ball and run forward and run back. I didn’t have any other skills. I joined a running club instead. It is nice to see so many people getting out of the house, going for a run, for walks, out on bikes. Running clears the mind. It’s easy to sit at home and feel sorry for yourself. It’s like when you’re driving and feel tired, the best thing to do is open the window and get some fresh air. When you’ve been indoors too long, some fresh air relaxes you. If I run along the Thames or around Richmond Park, usually someone will go “That’s Mo!” and come and race alongside me for 20 or 30 seconds. My wife often says she needs to go for a little jog – and she jogs a little. You’ve got to just keep going at your own pace. How often do I shave my head? Every three days. Mo Farah is the ambassador for the new Huawei Watch GT 3 fitness smartwatchWriter and director Mariama Diallo’s debut feature, Master, explores the challenges faced by two Black women at a prestigious New England university that continues to be haunted by ghosts of the past, figurative and perhaps literal. Gail Bishop (played by Regina Hall) has just been appointed the school’s first Black master, a prestigious faculty position overseeing a residence hall. (A holdover from elite British universities, it’s a glorified, proto-resident adviser.) But the predominantly white (and fictional) Ancaster College, which is almost as old as America itself, has a dark past it can’t seem to shake, as the site of a Salem-era witch trial and hanging. According to campus lore, the witch now haunts the grounds, and as freshman Jasmine Moore (Zoe Renee) learns upon her arrival, her room in particular is said to be inhabited by a malignant force; the school’s first Black student killed herself there in the late 60s, she discovers. The pernicious specter of racism likewise hangs over the campus, rearing its head in places like the library (“Your family must be so proud of you,” a librarian tells Jasmine condescendingly, moments before searching her bag for possibly stolen books) and a house party, where a dancing crowd automatically congregates around Jasmine at the hint of a rap song. But the micro-aggressions eventually escalate from deep unease to downright hate, pushing Jasmine from disorientation to sheer terror. Meanwhile, Gail, once a full-throated advocate for the school, becomes increasingly aware of the impact of the institution’s unresolved past on the present, especially in light of a fellow Black professor’s bid for tenure. The moments of discomfort and careful navigation ring particularly true for anyone who has stood out in an overwhelmingly white (even seemingly well-meaning) space of privilege and had the majority make assumptions about them; in fact, Diallo drew on her own experiences as a student at Yale. (That university did away with the term master in 2016 in response to student protests.) And there are a lot of well-observed, telling details that pass by unremarked, as they would in real life: Jasmine straightens her hair soon after arriving; Ancaster’s custodial staff – silent, always in the background – are all Black; the Black cafeteria worker puts on a jovial, maternal mien for white students eager to gobble up her macaroni-and-cheese but gives Jasmine the cold shoulder. Not to mention some very timely conversations involving critical race theory and diversity efforts versus merit (and one fun diversity video full of token people of color, rattling off buzzwords à la mode). Hall, always a joy to watch, shows yet another, more subdued, side of her prodigious craft. But the film fails to build real suspense, and the scary scenes feel rote and often inelegant, like ticking off a college-horror-movie shot list: the flickering-lights-in-the-shower scene, the running-through-an-empty-campus scene, the slow ascent to the attic door ajar, the mysterious threats carved on to a door, the odd unexpected telephone call. None of the white characters feel remotely real: not the roommate in the Hamptons sweatshirt; not the ignorant British classmate who says smugly, “All that racial-dynamic stuff, we don’t have it back home”; not the professor who is relieved to see Gail at a party because it “could use a little more flavor”. Perhaps that’s intentional, but it all gloms on an inertness to the proceedings. Genre films help audiences engage with difficult real-life issues – they make the medicine go down, and the hope is that wider audiences find much in Master to ponder about how to deal with our painful history in order to move forward. As Gail puts it, “It’s not ghosts, it’s not supernatural, it’s America, and it’s everywhere.” Master is showing at the Sundance film festival and will be released on Amazon on 18 MarchLeading campaign groups that have spent years tackling the growing problem of violence against women and girls are becoming increasingly frustrated with an apparent lack of action from the home secretary six months after the government announced a major strategy designed to tackle the issue. Despite the promise of a “radical programme of change” announced by Priti Patel in late July last year, campaigners say a number of central pledges have disappeared without trace, or have not been implemented, without proper explanation. The strategy was announced against a backdrop of widespread calls for urgent and radical change following the murder of Sarah Everard, who was killed while walking home from a friend’s house in south London several months earlier. These calls were made again this month following the murder of schoolteacher Ashling Murphy in Ireland. The 23-year-old was attacked and strangled while out jogging on a canal path near Tullamore, County Offaly. Last Wednesday, a week after her death, a 31-year-old man was remanded in custody charged with her murder. Georgie Laming, campaigns manager at Plan International UK, whose campaign for public sexual harassment to become a specific offence has 500,000 supporters, said: “It has been six months since the home secretary promised a review into the legal gaps on public sexual harassment, and a decision on a new law to criminalise it. But we are yet to see any movement. Women and girls can’t afford to wait any longer.” Saskia Garner, head of policy and campaigns at the Suzy Lamplugh Trust, said: “We would welcome an update on all commitments made in the violence against women and girls strategy. All these issues urgently need to be addressed to ensure that the voices of women and girls experiencing devastating crimes including stalking and harassment are heard.” Another source said: “There is deep frustration over the apparent progress over elements of the strategy. “The fact is women are still being killed in high-profile murders every few months but there does not seem to be any burning desire to actually deliver key parts.” Chief among their concerns is the outcome of a legal review committed to by the Home Office into gaps in existing law and how a specific offence for public sexual harassment could address those. Sources say there is still no timescale for when the review is complete, or even if it will support calls for a new harassment offence. Campaigners also point out that a much-hyped information campaign targeting perpetrators of violence against women has yet to be launched despite hopes that it would be up and running before Christmas, a period when domestic abuse traditionally rises. In addition, women’s groups argue they do not know what has happened to a £5m “safety of women at night fund” or another £3m to “better understand what works to prevent violence against women and girls.” Questions also surround the StreetSafe app, which allows women to record where they feel unsafe, and which was the focus of a three-month pilot that ended in early December. More than 180,000 people responded to a consultation on the strategy, the vast majority after it reopened following Everard’s murder. A Government spokesperson said: “Since the launch of the strategy we have delivered several of its commitments, helping to tackle this horrific crime. For the first time ever there is a national police lead for violence against women and girls, we’ve implemented the landmark domestic abuse act, launched the safety of women at night fund and given out a further £25m for safer streets projects. We are also carefully considering the Law Commission’s recommendations on a specific public sexual harassment offence.” “We know there is more to do, which is why we continue to work closely with the women’s sector and academics on the national communications campaign, which will launch shortly.”An army of western social media influencers, each with hundreds of thousands of followers on TikTok, Instagram or Twitch, is set to spread positive stories about China throughout next month’s Winter Olympics. Concerned about the international backlash against the Beijing Games amid a wave of diplomatic boycotts, the government has hired western PR professionals to spread an alternative narrative through social media. In November, as Joe Biden contemplated a diplomatic boycott, Vipinder Jaswal, a US-based Newsweek contributor and former Fox News and HSBC executive, signed a $300,000 contract with China’s consulate general in New York to “strategise and execute” an influencer campaign promoting the Beijing Winter Olympics and Paralympics in the US. The contract, which has been registered with the US Department of Justice, lays out a detailed public relations strategy. According to the agreement, between 22 November and 13 March, when the Winter Paralympics end, each influencer will be asked to produce three to five “deliverables”, meaning content that is crafted to fit the targeted audience. Jaswal claims his company has received up to 50 pitches from influencers ranging from former Olympians to entrepreneurs. The contract states that 70% of the content will be culture-related, including Beijing’s history, cultural relics, modem life of people and new trends. Another 20% will highlight “cooperation and any good things in China-US relations”, including high-level bilateral changes and positive outcomes. Jaswal, who was born in the UK, received $210,000 shortly after the contract was sealed with Chinese diplomats, he told the Observer. He promised Beijing that his influencers would bring an estimated 3 million impressions on social media platforms frequently used by young Americans. He said he was well aware of the controversies that surround China’s policies in Xinjiang and Hong Kong, but “what we are trying to do is to simply highlight the integrity and dignity of the Olympics”, he said. “Boycotts don’t help mutual understanding … I don’t support boycotts. They are ineffective, irrelevant and inconsequential.” Jaswal’s Beijing contract comes at a time of precarious bilateral relations between China and the US. He is under heavy scrutiny since his contract with the Chinese consulate. On 3 January, Republican senator Rick Scott urged in a letter to Newsweek’s top brass to “reconsider its relationship with Vipp Jaswal”. Last month, Biden announced his administration would stage a diplomatic boycott of the Winter Olympics, in a show of disagreement with the Chinese government’s treatment of people in the Xinjiang Uyghur region. Several US allies, including the UK and Australia, have since joined calls not to send government officials to China. For more than a decade, China has been ramping up its overseas messaging effort through state-sponsored media outlets. It spent nearly $60m in the US in 2020, according to Open Secrets, an organisation based in Washington DC that tracks money in American politics. The funding included money for the state broadcaster CCTV’s US branch and the China Daily newspaper. American businesses, including Coca-Cola, Procter &amp; Gamble, Airbnb, Intel and Visa, are among the 13 top partners of the forthcoming Games. Other sponsors range from the Japanese carmaker Toyota, to German financial services firm Allianz, and French information technology consultancy Atos. In November, human rights organisations accused western corporate sponsors of “squandering the opportunity” to pressure China to address its “appalling human rights record”. “Businesses need to know that under the UN guiding principles on business and human rights, they have a responsibility to identity and mitigate human rights risks, and that helping [the] Chinese government’s reputation laundering is risking being complicit in those abuses,” said Wang Yaqiu, a senior researcher on China at Human Rights Watch. The Chinese government has consistently denied allegations of human rights abuses within its own territory.Objects thrown at Aston Villa players, prolonged protests against the board after the final whistle and the sight of Steven Gerrard thoroughly enjoying himself at Goodison Park once again. If Everton believed the presence of a popular figure in the dugout and an open letter from Farhad Moshiri could airbrush over fundamental problems at the club, events on and off the pitch told them otherwise. Duncan Ferguson re-energised Everton as expected and received the fiercely committed display he had demanded. His connection with the fanbase even extended to putting money behind the bars of the Winslow hotel and the Brick, two Evertonian boozers near Goodison Park, to buy regulars a drink before kick-off. But the caretaker-manager was unable to deliver what he and the crowd craved most of all. A fifth home defeat of the season left Everton with 19 points from 20 games, their lowest tally at this stage of a season since 1997-98 when the club avoided relegation on the final day under Howard Kendall. Several hundred fans staged a sit-in protest that lasted for more than an hour after the game and called for the departures of the chairman, Bill Kenwright, plus the board. The presence in the directors’ box of Kia Joorabchian, an agent close to Everton’s majority shareholder, suggested an appetite to change how the club are run is not shared by those at the very top. The best player on the pitch, Emiliano Buendía, scored the only goal of a fractious game marred by Villa players being struck by a plastic bottle in the celebrations that followed the Argentina midfielder’s decisive header. A supporter was arrested by Merseyside police and investigations are continuing. Gerrard’s side were the most creative before the break and repelled Everton’s direct siege after it. Ferguson’s team selection reflected his thoughts on the brief and divisive era of Rafael Benítez. Séamus Coleman, Michael Keane and Allan dropped to the bench while new full-backs Vitalii Mykolenko and Nathan Patterson, signed for a combined initial cost of £29m at the start of the window, did not make the match-day squad at all. Yerry Mina was named captain on his first start since 6 December. Given the Scot’s demand for greater aggression and a pumped-up Goodison crowd it was no surprise that a scrap unfolded from the outset. Abdoulaye Doucouré tearing apart Jacob Ramsey’s shirt was a neat metaphor for the early exchanges.It was a contest full of South American needle, not South American flair, although Buendía shone amid the rough throughout. Philippe Coutinho was fairly anonymous on his first Villa start but would play a role in the decisive breakthrough in first-half stoppage time. A Villa breakthrough would have the dual effect of lessening Goodison’s intensity as well as preying on Everton’s vulnerable confidence. Jordan Pickford was proving a stubborn obstacle, however. The Everton keeper saved superbly with his leg to deny Ollie Watkins, even if the Villa striker was offside when heading Buendía’s cross towards the bottom corner, and tipped over a Coutinho header after a Douglas Luiz free-kick. The resulting corner had dire repercussions for Everton on and off the pitch. Lucas Digne, sold to Villa following a falling-out with Benítez just days before his adversary was sacked, was roundly booed on his swift return to Goodison. Had Benítez not been dismissed his reception might have been different. Digne responded with his feet, delivering an inswinging corner to the near post where the completely unmarked Buendía glanced a superb header over Pickford and Andros Townsend into the far corner. While Everton players argued over conceding yet another set-piece goal Villa’s celebrated in front of the Bullens Road stand. A seemingly full bottle of Lucozade was thrown from the Everton crowd, who had already lowered the tone with a desperate old song about Gerrard, and both Digne and Matty Cash were struck on the head. On the pitch, Everton improved in the second half but the visitors showed they are becoming a team of substance under Gerrard. Ferguson wasted little time in making substitutions, introducing Anthony Gordon and Allan, and the former created a glorious chance for Dominic Calvert-Lewin with a first-time cross along the face of the Villa goal. Calvert-Lewin, rusty after four months out injured, turned the ball high over Emiliano Martínez’s goal at full stretch. Tyrone Mings headed off the line from Ben Godfrey, Mina sent a looping header just wide and Demarai Gray fired wildly over, all from Gordon corners as Everton applied concerted pressure in the second half. But to no avail. The two clubs continue to head in opposite directions.Nottingham Forest’s push for a place in the Championship play-offs was boosted by a dominant second-half display illuminated by goals from Lewis Grabban and Brennan Johnson but the only way Derby County will be going down is with a fight. Tom Lawrence’s late penalty gave Wayne Rooney’s team a whiff of yet another comeback before Ravel Morrison’s stoppage-time dismissal for a lunge on Philip Zinckernagel sparked one melee and the final whistle another, for which the former Manchester United player saw fit to come back on to the field to join in. Forest’s third successive win extended the longest unbeaten league run in this fixture in history to nine games and while they aspire to playing their next east Midlands derby against Leicester in the Premier League next season, Derby would at the moment probably settle for knowing they will survive liquidation in order to play Burton in League One. Derby’s hopes of staying in business beyond 1 February were boosted on the eve of the game by news of a firm £28m bid from the US-based investment group Carlisle Capital but while Rooney did not have any fresh information on that, he could applaud his team’s heart. They had gained 13 points from their previous five league games to climb off the foot of the Championship before this defeat. “There was a lot of fight and character from the players,” Rooney said. “I don’t think it was a red card but the game management from the referee was not good. I didn’t know Ravel was back on the pitch [at the end]. It’s an emotional game, players get frustrated. I’m fully with the players and support them. It shows they are fighting and they care.” Derby had to sell academy graduate Dylan Williams to Chelsea on Friday but Rooney, who had already seen Phil Jagielka, Graeme Shinnie and David Marshall leave while the administrators seek new owners, has been assured he does not have to sell anyone else in this transfer window. He revealed he is continuing to line up potential signings, should a takeover be agreed soon enough, and that one, intriguingly, was now at Forest. “The next few days are crucial,” he said. “The administrators have said they are confident someone will come in this week. I take care of the football and they take care of the business. Hopefully there will be some good news next week. “Of course we have players lined up: we have to keep doing our job whether that’s reality or not. We have seen players who would like to play for Derby and there is one here today at Forest. I have to keep doing my work. But the existence of the club is far more important.” Lawrence, who after last week’s match-winning performance against Sheffield United gave Derby late hope here after he was scythed down by Steve Cook in the 87th minute, should have scored early on but slotted wide after a neat one-two with Colin Kazim-Richards. Steve Cooper changed the game by moving Ryan Yates out of a five-man defence into midfield, and after a cautious first half Forest took charge. “They didn’t press us as much as we thought so that’s why we had to change it tactically,” the Forest manager said. “With the [personnel] we field, we can play two formations, basically around Yates’s role, and we looked in complete control from then on. We were worthy winners.” Three minutes into the second half the game caught fire. Scott McKenna headed James Garner’s free-kick back into the middle for Keinan Davis to tee up Cook. His blocked shot fell for Grabban to score for the third successive game. Red flares sparked in the Bridgford End and police had to intervene as rival fans sought to get closer. “Derby are going down with a fiver in the bank,” gloated the Forest fans. Garner helped set up the decisive goal as his nonchalant pass ushered Zinckernagel down the left and from the substitute’s low cross, Johnson slid home his seventh goal of the season. These clubs may be heading in opposite directions, but on this showing there is plenty of life left in both of them.Andy Hunter was at Goodison Park, and his verdict is in. Off you click! Thanks for reading this MBM. Everton have released a statement regarding the bottle-throwing incident. Police have arrested a supporter at Goodison Park for throwing a missile onto the pitch during today’s Premier League match against Aston Villa. Everton security staff and Merseyside Police identified the supporter using CCTV footage. Several objects were thrown towards the pitch following Aston Villa’s goal at the end of the first half, with one missile appearing to strike two opposition players. Investigations in conjunction with the police are ongoing, and the Club will issue bans to any fans identified throwing objects. Steven Gerrard’s turn. “It’s a big win for us. Really important, especially for the players. It was a different style of win, a case of us having to roll our sleeves up, stand up and be counted, really put our bodies on the line. It’s difficult to rehearse what came our way in the second half. It was direct, it was coming regular, and we had to fight and compete. Every single person stood up to it. There’s different ways to win, but one thing’s certain, if you don’t compete, especially away at Goodison, you’ll get found out. We expected Duncan to throw more petrol on the fire ... but we played big today. That was about grit and steel.” Duncan Ferguson talks to BT. “First half we were a wee bit off it, maybe a wee bit of stage-fright. But I thought the second half, the boys gave everything. We just needed that wee but of quality in the final third. The effort was there, I couldn’t fault them in any shape or form. I tried my best, we made a few changes. I don’t think the fans will be complaining about the team’s effort today, the second half particularly we gave it a right good go. I’ll carry on until the new manager comes in. That’s it.” As for the bottle-throwing incident: “The punters shouldn’t be doing that.” The protest against Bill Kenwright and the Everton board continues apace. A few hundred fans have stayed behind to make sure the BT Sport viewers get the message. Other banners include SACK THE BOARD and THE FANS EXPECT THE BEST. That result sends Villa into the top half of the Premier League table, where they’ll stay tonight unless Southampton shock Manchester City this evening. Everton remain five points above the relegation places. Villa fought hard for their win, with Everton vastly improved in the second half. The home fans applauded their team’s efforts, and they’re obviously onside with the caretaker manager, but chairman Bill Kenwright isn’t feeling the love, and plenty of fans stay behind to tell him to do one. They’re away to Newcastle next, to play a match that could shape the rest of their season. Nope. Gordon hits long. Mina heads the ball back across the face of goal, but nobody in blue can meet it. There’s been a foul anyway, and the whistle goes for full time. Emi Buendia’s goal earns Villa all three points, and Everton continue to look over their shoulder towards the relegation zone. Steven Gerrard walks off glowing with contentment. 90 min +5: Gordon sashays down the right and earns a corner. Up comes Pickford. Can Everton save themselves? 90 min +4: Everton can’t get the ball upfield. Can they launch one last Hail Mary? 90 min +3: Ings strolls down the right and takes the ball to the corner. Ings is then booked for fouling Holgate. 90 min +2: On BT Sport, co-commentator Lucy Ward names Matty Cash as her man of the match. 90 min +1: Buendia, four minutes from being anointed the match-winner, is replaced by Hause. 90 min: ... but there’s still plenty of time for Everton. Five more minutes at least. 89 min: Mings is down now, having taken a whack by Calvert-Lewin. A clock-management masterclass from Villa right now. The Dallas Cowboys should take notes. 88 min: Martinez again with the slow goal kick. He’s really testing the Goodison crowd’s patience, but crucially not the referee. A second yellow isn’t beyond the realms if he tries this on again, though. 86 min: Gordon’s low free kick, aimed for the bottom left, takes a deflection on the way through a crowded box, but Martinez snaffles it anyway. 85 min: Mings is the latest player to go into the book, clearing Richarlison with one great leap, having placed both hands on top of the striker’s head. A free kick just to the left of the D. Everton have been severely stress-testing this Villa defence in the second half. Will it finally crack? 83 min: Nothing comes of the free kick when it’s eventually taken. Godfrey then comes sliding in hysterically on Luiz, and is booked as a result. For a second, it looks as though Mary Waltz’s brawl is about to kick off, with a few players going nose to nose, Richarlison naturally in the middle of it all. But the referee calms everyone down quickly enough. 82 min: Allan is booked after trying to take a quick free kick, then giving the referee what for when play is pulled back. 81 min: Martinez takes time over a free kick. He’s treading a fine line between savvy clock management and preposterous dismissal. 79 min: Watkins is replaced by Ings, who as a former Liverpool player arrives to a light smattering of reasoned criticism. 77 min: A long throw into the Villa box forces yet another corner. Villa half clear it. The ball falls to Gray, alone on the edge of the box. He nearly clears the stand behind the goal with his volley. Meanwhile here’s Ian Copestake channelling his inner Irvine Welsh: “Mary Waltz’s 63rd-minute observation prompted an image of Richarlison as Begbie announcing that ‘some wee lassie got hurt’.” 75 min: Cash is booked for cynically clipping Richarlison as the Everton attacker makes off down the left. Gordon takes the resulting free kick, but it’s poorly delivered and easily cleared. 74 min: Coutinho’s race is run. He’s replaced by Chukwuemeka. 73 min: Martinez punches clear from the middle of a crowded box. Everton come back at Villa. Allan curls in from a deep position on the right. Mina rises highest, and should score, eight yards out, but sends his header wide left. Everton are really rapping on the door now. 72 min: The 6ft 5in Onyango wins a header in the Villa box and forces another Everton corner. This one will come in from the left. Gordon to take. 71 min: Digne is crudely checked by his former pal Kenny out on the left. Kenny has the good grace to apologise to his erstwhile team-mate. A free kick. Villa line up on the edge of the box. Luiz’s delivery is no good, and the ball’s soon back at the feet of Martinez, albeit as a result of a haywire backpass by McGinn that nearly catches the wandering keeper out. 69 min: Martinez is booked for taking his sweet time over the restart. The Goodison faithful respond with plenty of pantomime yelling, plus some Ofcom-baiting effing and jeffing. 68 min: Richarlison wins a corner out on the left. The set piece is swung into the mixer. Mina rises on the penalty spot and guides a header inches wide of the top-left corner. Everton are pressing hard for an equaliser. 66 min: Gordon is causing Villa some problems down the right. He whips a sensational low ball in from the wing. Calvert-Lewin should score, six yards out, but slides in and shins wide and high. The presence of the nearby Mings might have put him off. 65 min: The 18-year-old midfielder Tyler Onyango comes on for Doucoure. 63 min: A couple of big challenges get the crowd going even more. Ramsey on Allan. Richarlison on Buendia. Both fully legal, both felt by the recipient. “The crowd vibe at Goodison resembles the feel at a crowded bar before a brawl goes off,” observes Evertonian Mary Waltz. 61 min: The corner from the left is hit long. Calvert-Lewin heads back across goal for Godfrey, who steers a header goalwards. Mings clears off the line. The volume in Goodison is ratcheted up a few notches, the home heroes finally baring their teeth. 60 min: Everton blooter long and open Villa up. That simple. Richarlison strides into the box. He slams a shot from an angle on the left. Cash comes across to block out for a corner. That’s wonderful last-ditch defending. 59 min: Coutinho wedges over the wall, hoping for the ball to drop into the top-let corner. It doesn’t. Over the bar it goes. 58 min: Ramsey makes like Gray up the other end, driving down the inside-left channel and drawing a foul from either Gordon or Mina, who clatter him to the floor in a pincer movement. The referee decides it’s Mina’s fault, and he goes into the book. Free kick, just to the left of the Everton D. Coutinho’s eyes light up. 57 min: Gordon is immediately in the thick of it. Gray dribbles hard down the inside-right channel and into the Villa box. His shot-cum-cross is blocked but pings wide right for Gordon, who curls in dangerously. Richarlison flashes a header over the bar from 12 yards. Much better from Everton. 56 min: Everton make a second change, replacing Townsend with Gordon. Both are popular players; both receive warm applause. 54 min: McGinn very nearly releases Buendia into the Everton box with a sliderule pass down the left channel, but Everton close ranks just in time. 52 min: The first change of the afternoon, and it’s Everton who blink first. Allan comes on for Gomes. 50 min: Calvert-Lewin is booked for levering an elbow into Konsa’s face during an aerial battle. Penny for the thoughts of a certain Duncan Ferguson, who as a member of the old school may have considered the decision somewhat harsh. 49 min: Gray’s free kick is deflected out for a corner, from which Calvert-Lewin heads harmlessly into the stand. Better from Everton, though, who didn’t threaten the Villa goal at all during the first half. 47 min: Mings clatters Calvert-Lewin under a high ball, and this is a free kick in a dangerous position, just to the left of the Villa D. Meanwhile, as the players sort themselves out, a tannoy announcement tells the fans to sort themselves out. Anyone found throwing gear onto the pitch will have their collar felt and receive a stadium ban. 46 min: Watkins dribbles down the right and makes it all the way to the byline. He cuts back in the hope of setting up either Coutinho or Buendia for a tap-in, but manages to find neither. What an opportunity! Everton get the second half underway. No changes. Half-time entertainment. For those who missed it last night, this started slowly but turned out to be quite the event. That’s the last act of the half ... although during the goal celebrations, some bampot in the crowd launched a bottle of a popular energy drink at the cavorting Villa players, hitting both Cash and Digne upside the head. Poor form. The corner’s flashed from the right to the near post. Buendia, on the corner of the six-yard box, rises and eyebrows a header across Pickford and into the top left! Pickford got fingers to it, but that only served to ensure Townsend had no chance whatsoever to clear off the line. 45 min +2: Gomes is booked for hauling back Watkins as he romps down the left. The free kick finds Mings at the far post. He heads back across for Coutinho, whose reaction header is tipped over the bar by the suddenly busy Pickford. Corner. 45 min: Villa should be leading, but they’ve been denied by a stunning Pickford save. Villa triangulate down the left. Buendia dinks into the centre. Watkins, six yards out and clear, heads down towards the bottom left. Pickford, star jumping, sticks his right leg out and kicks clear. What reactions! Turns out Watkins was a mile offside anyway, but Pickford wasn’t to know that, and thoroughly deserves the standing ovation he receives. A sweet smile, a sweet moment. What a save! 43 min: Mings shanks a simple pass out of play for a corner. He’ll deserve a clip around the ear if Everton take the lead here. Thankfully for the Villa defender, Watkins bangs a header clear. 42 min: This match is now being played at 202 miles per hour. Passes aren’t sticking. 40 min: Richarlison gets involved in a touchline tussle with Cash, and earns himself a stern talking-to from the ref. Might be worth keeping an eye on the occasionally steam-powered striker. 38 min: Another long pass down the middle by Villa, and Watkins traps and turns just inside the box. Pickford races out and spreads himself. Watkins prods past him, but wide right of goal. The striker goes over the keeper and claims a penalty - Pickford was certainly rushing out in a manic fashion - but both referee and VAR conclude that Watkins instigated the contact, and it’s just a goal kick. 36 min: Mina deals with a long Villa pass by heading the ball over the out-rushing Pickford. Fortunately he doesn’t get too much on it, and the keeper is able to spin around and claim. Everton toying with farce. 35 min: A cross comes into the Everton box from the left. Buendia wins a header that’s deflected wide of the goal for ... a goal kick, as the referee sees it. Buendia smiles wryly. 34 min: The intensity has dropped a little. Richarlison is the sole, busy exception, and he strips Luiz of possession and makes off towards the Villa box, only to be pulled back correctly for clipping his opponent’s ankle. 32 min: Anyway, the tussle is something and nothing, as is the following corner. 31 min: Richarlison tries to do something about that by forcing a corner down the right. The hosts load the box. Goodison awaits. Before the corner can be taken, the referee pulls up Mina and Buendia for a mismatched wrestle. Mina’s about twice Buendia’s size! 30 min: That was a big opportunity. Everton really should be leading ... but goals are hard to come by when you’re slap bang in the middle of a poor run of form. 28 min: Cash burns down the inside right channel, reaches the box, and slips inside for Buendia, who threatens to make space to shoot, but settles for a corner. The set piece is a non event, and suddenly Everton break upfield, Digne losing possession in the centre circle, giving the hosts a two on one! Doucoure just needs to slip Richarlison in, but last man Ramsey positions himself well, panicking Doucoure into clanking a dreadful pass straight through to Martinez, who hacks clear. What a chance that was. 26 min: Villa have enjoyed the lion’s share of possession so far, but haven’t caused Everton too many problems in the final third. Both managers will be fairly happy with how it’s gone so far, without being totally content. 24 min: McGinn sprays a lovely ball wide right for Watkins, who switches play back to Coutinho down the inside left. Everton are light at the back, and Coutinho makes it into the box. Mina is there, though, and puts a stop to Coutinho’s gallop with a fine block. Mina got Everton out of a world of trouble there. 23 min: Digne is copping a little more flak now. The revenge of the spurned lover. 22 min: Godfrey makes good down the left and earns a corner off Cash. Gomes takes. Mina wins a header by the left-hand edge of the six-yard box but doesn’t get much purchase on it, the ball skimming across the face of goal and away from danger. 21 min: Some head tennis in midfield. This game is being hotly contested, to the point of becoming a little scrappy now. 19 min: Buendia, who had a very good game against Manchester United the other week, looks in the mood again. He escapes from a tight spot in the centre circle and drives down the middle, only to drag a poor shot wide left. 18 min: Ramsey looks to be clipped by Doucoure, just outside the Everton box, but he’s not getting the free kick. Strange decision. Everton break. Gray takes on Cash in a footrace down the left. For a second, it looks as though he’ll burst clear into the box, but a heavy touch does for him, and he runs the ball out of play for a goal kick. 16 min: ... so having said that, a lull. Many apologies. 14 min: Doucoure very nearly frees Calvert-Lewin down the inside-right channel, but the pass is a little bit too strong and the ball flies through to Martinez. This is a really entertaining fast-paced affair. 13 min: Bundeia finds a little pocket of space, 30 yards out, and sends a forensic shot towards the bottom left. Pickford gets down well to parry with a strong hand. 12 min: Ramsey ushers a long ball out for a throw. Doucoure, sliding in, attempting to keep it in play, skids hysterically off the pitch. He grabs Ramsey’s shirt as he flies by, and rips it in two. Ramsey has to take a time out to change his kit. He’s back on soon enough, albeit with no number on his shirt. 10 min: Gomes crosses deep from the left. Calvert-Lewin heads down, hoping to tee up Richarlison. Mings reads the danger and intercepts just in time. This game is being played at 101 miles per hour. 8 min: Villa take their time considering their options. It’s a long way out. Eventually Luiz has a crack ... and he sends a decent curler in the direction of the top left. The ball only just clears the bar, and Pickford was diving across with great concern. 6 min: Buendia bustles down the middle of the park and very nearly fashions room to shoot from distance. He’s dragged back by Richarlison, so this will be a free kick in a central position, 30 yards out. 4 min: Digne takes up possession and receives a few murmurs, but nothing too forceful. A beloved player at Goodison while an Evertonian. 2 min: Mings took a little knock on the shin amid the penalty-box mayhem, but he’s good to go. Villa launch it up the other end. Watkins nearly gets on the end of it, but Pickford gathers on the edge of his area ... then slides out of it, and he’s forced to drop the ball from his hands and hack clear with his feet instead. An early sign that Pickford’s in one of his occasional I’ve-had-17-cups-of-coffee-this-morning moods? 1 min: Richarlison signals Everton’s Ferguson-approved up-and-at-’em approach by immediately racing down the left. McGinn barges him over. Gomes swings the free kick into the mixer, and Martinez claims. A fast start by the hosts. Villa get the ball rolling ... but only after everyone takes the knee. Applause greets the gesture. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! Everton in their royal blue, Villa in their claret. The sirens and tin whistles of Z-Cars ping around the rafters. Overhead, a plane putters by, trailing a banner with the message 22 YEARS OF FAILURE BILL @ TIME2GOBILL. A shot across the bows of erstwhile Coronation Street actor and current Everton chairman Bill Kenwright. As any theatre impresario will already know, everyone’s a critic. Speaking of which, you can’t hear Steven Gerrard receiving his pelters, which he will be, because the atmosphere is already so raucous. We’ll be off in a minute! Steven Gerrard talks to BT Sport. “Philippe Coutinho turned up in a better place than we thought, because he hadn’t played much football before he arrived. We’ve done some testing on him, he’s got ten days in his legs in terms of training volume, he had a strong cameo against United, so his training level and performances are screaming at us to go with him from the start. It’ll be highly unlikely he’ll finish the game, but I’m sure he’ll want to push to the end. Lucas Digne’s pedigree and experience will help him cope with the occasion [of returning to Goodison ten days after leaving] and he’s just got to focus on the job we’re asking him to do. He can thank me later for taking all the heat off him!” Duncan Ferguson gives an interview to BT that registers 11 on the Big Dunc™ometer. “Go for it. Really be aggressive. Show the Everton way. We want the team on the front foot, to press hard. We got really into the players, because the last few months hasn’t been quite good enough, has it. You can make all the changes because the results have not been there. You’ve got to. The form’s not been good enough. I can make the changes, and I don’t think there’s going to be any arguments, is there? It’ll be great to see Steven Gerrard, top player. I’m glad he’s not playing! Carlo Ancelotti called me and wished me all the best.” He also reports that he’s wearing the legendary Howard Kendall’s lucky watch, just as he did during his last brief but successful spell as caretaker manager. All in all, a bravura performance that will have done wonders for the old Goodison feelgood factor. Everton could certainly do with a spirit-restoring victory today. The famous old club have been a top-flight fixture since 1954, indeed they’ve only spent four seasons out of the First Division or Premier League since the Football League was formed in 1888. They haven’t been sucked into the relegation battle quite yet ... but Norwich’s fine victory last night over Watford doesn’t help matters. The Toffees have games in hand, but they’ll need to start winning one or two of them before that points cushion starts to deflate. Everton caretaker Big Dunc™ makes five changes to Rafa’s last starting XI. Out go Seamus Coleman, Vitaliy Mykolenko, Anthony Gordon, Michael Keane and Salomon Rondon; in come Jonjoe Kenny, Mason Holgate, Yerry Mina, Andros Townsend and Richarlison. Villa boss and local celebrity Stevie G™ makes just two changes to the XI named for the Manchester United comeback. Philippe Coutinho makes his first Premier League start since 2017, while John McGinn returns from suspension. Danny Ings and Morgan Sanson make way. Everton: Pickford, Kenny, Mina, Holgate, Godfrey, Townsend, Doucoure, Andre Gomes, Gray, Calvert-Lewin, Richarlison. Subs: Keane, Allan, Begovic, Coleman, Gordon, Gbamin, Rondon, Dobbin, Onyango. Aston Villa: Martinez, Cash, Konsa, Mings, Digne, McGinn, Douglas Luiz, Ramsey, Buendia, Watkins, Coutinho. Subs: Olsen, Targett, Sanson, Young, Ings, Kesler, Hause, Chukwuemeka, Iroegbunam. Referee: Craig Pawson (South Yorkshire). In which Everton stand-in boss Duncan Ferguson will receive the sort of ovation reserved for living legends, while Villa manager Steven Gerrard will cop the kind of abuse specially tailored for arch villains. Kick off is at 12.30pm GMT. It’s on!Singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist Mark Oliver Everett, 58, is the frontman of alternative rock band Eels and is also known by the stage name E. Since 1996, Eels have released 13 studio albums including the acclaimed Beautiful Freak, Electro-Shock Blues and Blinking Lights and Other Revelations. Eels won best international breakthrough act at the 1998 Brit awards, while a 2007 BBC documentary about Everett and his father, physicist Hugh Everett III, won a Royal Television Society award. He lives in Los Angeles. The new Eels album, Extreme Witchcraft, will be released on 28 January and they tour the UK from March. 1. Book Glamour Ghoul: The Passions and Pain of the Real Vampira, Maila Nurmi by Sandra Nurmi I really like biographies, because I’m interested in the possibilities of human life and what people have been through. I stumbled upon this book about the first American TV horror host, Vampira – she was portrayed in the Tim Burton film Ed Wood. It was written by her niece and it’s fascinating and full of jaw-dropping moments. For example, she ends up getting pregnant with Orson Welles’s child, but never tells him and gives the child up for adoption. The child had no idea his father was Welles until Vampira’s niece contacted him as a 50- or 60-year-old. 2. Documentary Get Back (Disney+) I was very sceptical about this, from all the hype around it – I am an extreme Beatles nerd. There is nothing I know more about than the Beatles and I just thought this was going to be a glossing over of history. I’m happy to say that Peter Jackson proved me completely wrong – it’s incredible. I don’t know how no one else thought to do this for 50 years. It was really interesting to me just how sweet and agreeable John Lennon was through the whole thing. And, of course, when Ringo admits to farting, that’s a highlight. 3. Movie Coco (Pixar, 2017) One of the great things about the Get Back documentary was, as a father of a four-year-old, I was excited that there was finally something on Disney+ for Dad to watch. One of the other things I discovered there was the movie Coco, which I was late coming to. I’ve now seen it probably 100 times with my son and I’m still not sick of it. It’s particularly in my wheelhouse because it’s about life and death and manages to connect the two in a beautiful, really moving way. I honestly think it’s one of the best movies ever made. 4. YouTube Brittany Howard NPR Music Tiny Desk Concert I was aware of Brittany Howard’s music and I liked her songs that I’d heard. And then I stumbled upon her Tiny Desk Concert and it’s stunning. It’s as good as music gets, in my book. You’ve got to watch this and listen to the first song, Stay High – it’s an amazing, spine-tingling performance. It’s got that unspeakable magic: it’s gospel-like, super soulful and what it’s saying is a beautiful sentiment, said in a way that no one’s really said before. 5. Graphic novel The Loneliness of the Long-Distance Cartoonist by Adrian Tomine Graphic novels were a huge influence on me in the early days of the Eels. This is a really beautiful autobiographical book and it’s simultaneously really funny and cringeworthy because Tomine depicts a lot of embarrassing stories about himself. He’s very open and honest, and it also has some really moving parts and will probably make you cry at some point. My favourite genre: funny and heartbreaking. He’s really great at being completely honest about being an artist, to having some renown and navigating people knowing who he is or not knowing him. 6. Box set The Girl from Chickasaw County: The Complete Capitol Masters by Bobbie Gentry Bobbie Gentry is an amazing, somewhat unsung artist. This box set has all seven of her albums – the last one was in 1971 – plus tons of unreleased stuff. She is one of the few people who said: “I’m going to go away” and meant it. She really knew what she was doing in every area: singing, songwriting, choreography. She was often producing her music but didn’t get credit for it. I think the reason she quit and disappeared was because she was a woman who wasn’t being taken seriously in the music industry. She probably just got fed up with it and said: “Nah, I don’t need this.”It is too easy to fall down rabbit holes of old festival sets on YouTube. I’ve revisited the ones I first saw on TV – PJ Harvey in a pink catsuit, singing Down by the Water at Glastonbury, broadcast on Channel 4 in 1995 into my childhood front room, changing my tastes forever – and later, the ones where I can try to see if I was in the crowd, while suspecting it’s probably best to not know. There is something that almost every one of the shows that took place before, roughly, the mid-00s, has in common: they are strikingly un-produced. Nirvana at Reading festival in 1992 is music history, but watch it again now: it’s three blokes playing their instruments on a vast, open stage. The razzle-dazzle, arena-show-style spectacles we’ve grown used to, the big screens, light shows, costume changes, fireworks that put New Year’s Eve to shame, are relatively new. I mention all of this because of Bono, who has just admitted to not really liking the name U2, or his own voice on many of his records, or a lot of his lyrics, and to turning “the colour of scarlet” if one of U2’s songs come on the radio when he’s in a car. “I’m just embarrassed,” he told the Hollywood Reporter’s Awards Chatter podcast, in an interview to discuss their new song for the animated children’s film Sing 2. Generally, I lack patience with artists who criticise their most popular work. It seems rude to the people who love it, have cried to it or walked down the aisle to it (although the latter is unlikely to be a problem for Radiohead’s beef with Creep, for example). But Bono went on to explain that being embarrassing is probably part of what makes U2 so successful. “I do think U2 pushes out the boat on embarrassment quite a lot. And maybe that’s the place to be as an artist.” U2 are never knowingly understated, not the kind of act who would turn up for a big show with just their instruments. Not many artists at a certain level would any more. When I did see U2 at Glastonbury, they not only brought the razzle-dazzle of a massive production, despite the rain, but got an astronaut on the International Space Station to beam down to Earth to introduce Beautiful Day. There is a kind of blind sincerity to a gesture as grand as that. They are an all-or-nothing band and thrive on it, on pushing out the boat on embarrassment. And there are far worse band names than U2. Vicky McClure doesn’t need a bra to defuse a bomb During the first lockdown, some began to sound the death knell for the bra. For women who could work at home, an uncomfortable bra seemed increasingly pointless. Who needed the sweet relief of removing one at the end of the day if you didn’t have to put one on in the first place? According to YouGov, around one-third of women reported wearing a bra less often than usual. But bras did not die. They evolved. In the US, sales increased, thanks to a growing appetite for sports bras and bralettes. The only thing on the way out was the underwire. It makes perfect sense, then, for Vicky McClure to opt for no makeup and a crop top when playing her latest character, a bomb disposal expert, in the new series Trigger Point. The trailer has been running since Christmas and it makes a panic attack look like a spa weekend. It’s from the makers of Line of Duty, who know a thing or two about tension, and with the added pressure of regular explosions, I imagine it won’t be laid back. McClure told the Radio Times that her choices were to make the character “human”. “I didn’t want the character to make a big deal about the way she looks,” she said. I tried to imagine the alternative, a woman with a full face of slap and a cleverly enhanced cleavage, rolling around in dust, trying to snip the right wire. It says something that it’s too ridiculous to even conceive of it. The Tomb Raider days of action heroines who look as if they’re more likely to totter over than win a fight are long gone – it’s the Ellen Ripley model that has endured. Zara Rutherford’s glorious trip will inspire girls all over the world Zara Rutherford landed in Belgium and set a world record, becoming the youngest woman to fly around the world solo, at the age of 19. She flew 32,000 miles in 155 days, including a two-month delay, getting stuck in Russia and Alaska as a result of adverse weather and visa issues. It sounds like a wild and at times perilous adventure. She flew through wildfire smoke in California and -20C air over Siberia. The video of her climbing out of the cockpit at the end of her journey and hugging her family (both parents are pilots) is utterly delightful and lovely. My favourite novel of last year was Great Circle, by Maggie Shipstead, which told the story of a fictional early 20th-century aviator and her struggle to complete her own circumnavigation of the globe. It consumed me. Rutherford wants to use her trip to nudge more girls and young women into science, technology, engineering and maths careers. Certainly, aviation could do with the help: only 5.8% of commercial pilots worldwide are female and 4.7% in the UK. Rutherford’s journey, and Shipstead’s imagination, may begin to sow the seeds of possibility in young women’s minds. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistCharities supporting the UK’s most vulnerable patients have pleaded with the public to keep wearing masks even after most Covid restrictions end in England this week. Transplant patients and those with illnesses such as blood cancer and late-stage kidney disease “feel abandoned” by the government, charities said, after Boris Johnson announced that plan B measures will end on Wednesday. People will no longer be required to wear masks on public transport and in shops, or use vaccine certificates, and the government has stopped asking people to work from home. By 24 March, the legal requirement for people with Covid to self-isolate will end, and the prime minister told MPs the date may be brought forward. Although official guidance is to “suggest” that individuals wear masks in crowded and enclosed spaces with people they do not normally meet, Kidney Care UK and Blood Cancer UK said that ministers were not telling the public this. Kidney Care UK’s policy director, Fiona Loud, said: “We want to say thank you to everyone who does recognise that the pandemic still isn’t over for thousands of kidney patients who are still vulnerable to Covid-19. Whether it’s employers considering more flexible working or people continuing to wear masks when they are no longer mandated: thank you.” She said people with kidney disease were “understandably anxious that Covid-19 protections are being phased out”. Many had been shielding since March 2020, Loud said. “Quite simply, they feel abandoned, having already spent two years under Covid-19 stress.” Helen Rowntree, director of research, services and engagement for Blood Cancer UK, said the needs of immunocompromised people “have not been mentioned at all” by ministers who are justifying the decision. “The government should be talking about the fact that immunocompromised people are still vulnerable to Covid and explaining this to the public,” she said. “At the moment, it is falling to charities like us to make the case to the public to continue mask-wearing and respecting people’s distance in public places, because there is no way of knowing if the person behind you in the queue is immunocompromised. “The more people who wear masks and keep their distance in crowded places, the more that immunocompromised people will be able to live normal lives. We welcome the fact in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, people are still being required to wear masks in shops and other indoor public places.” She praised the government’s decision to give many people with blood cancer access to treatments such as sotrovimab, a neutralising monoclonal antibody, and molnupiravir, an antiviral. “But it needs to make sure everyone eligible is able to access these treatments,” she added. Transport for London data shows that on 26 November the number of bus journeys had risen above 5m a day for the first time since the pandemic began – about 80% of pre-pandemic levels. Omicron sent numbers falling over Christmas, but they had returned to 4.5m a day by 14 January. However, research by University College London’s Covid Social Study group showed that after restrictions ended on “Freedom Day” last July, there was not an immediate effect on public compliance with government guidelines, and more than 80% of people say they comply most of the time, with about one in three complying all the time. Professor Stephen Reicher, a behavioural scientist at the University of St Andrews, said that most people wore masks and took precautions out of concern for others. Although most people stick to the guidelines, he said the government’s actions “now send a message that ‘infections don’t matter’ and there is a broad literature showing that if people are told or believe there is no risk, they won’t act to mitigate that risk. “The government talk endlessly about dropping restrictions as if by doing nothing they do us a favour,” he said. “But what they are doing is refusing to protect us, for example by improving ventilation in schools and elsewhere, and refusing to support us to self-isolate. The rhetoric of ‘lockdown’ and of ‘freedom’ is a rhetoric that covers a laissez-faire refusal to do anything – and we shouldn’t buy into it.” Many headteachers have said they intend to continue to ask pupils to wear masks, because soaring levels of absences of staff and students had caused serious disruption to lessons. About 100,000 children are no longer on a school roll since the pandemic began. Some parents who are more at risk of serious illness from Covid have turned to home schooling to protect their health. The Resolution Foundation reported in November that about 600,000 people had opted out of work because of fear of the virus and long Covid. Rosie Weatherley, information content manager at Mind, the mental health charity, said although some people would feel hopeful about the end of restrictions, some would not. “There are a lot of different emotions we could be feeling right now – anxiety around health, future restrictions, crowds and socialising, pressures to return to a busy working environment and changes to daily routines,” she said. “It’s important to remember that there is no ‘normal’ response to changes to restrictions or the pandemic. Feelings can change daily and may be affected by lots of things that are outside of our control. It’s important that everyone – including the UK government and employers – recognises this. Some of us will need longer to adjust to the changes than others, and many of us will continue to need help and support for their mental health beyond lockdown lifting.”Kenneth Branagh’s unabashedly feelgood memoir of growing up in Belfast as the Troubles erupted in the late 1960s suffers from a problem of perspective. Canted camera angles are rendered in flat, too-clean black and white; the film leans hard into its deliberately skewed child’s point of view. Nine-year-old Buddy (newcomer Jude Hill) hops, skips and jumps through rows of chocolate-box terrace houses to a bouncy soundtrack of Van Morrison. His family, which includes Judi Dench and Ciarán Hinds’s cutesy Granny and Pop, find solace at the movies. Buddy’s family are Protestants; their Catholic neighbours will soon be driven out of their homes by sectarian hostility. Jamie Dornan’s Pa is a labourer working in England who returns home to a growing pile of unpaid bills and violence brewing on the streets. The impressionable Buddy is encouraged by a schoolfriend to loot a supermarket; implausibly, Ma (Caitríona Balfe) marches him back into the thick of the violence to return a box of stolen washing powder. The patina of nostalgia is used to avoid contextualising the Troubles, something the family feels separate from. A 30-year conflict that started with civil rights protests is boiled down to a vague problem of “bloody religion”. After all, Buddy’s crush is a Catholic. “She could be a vegetarian antichrist for all I care,” Pa reassures him.Two weeks ago, as 2021 turned into 2022, my inbox was suddenly full of couples requesting counselling. It wasn’t that surprising because every year after Christmas, many couples have a meltdown. It’s the fatal combination of forced Christmas jollity and endless hours spent together that makes people realise they don’t know if they like or get on with each other any more. Throw in the confinement of Covid and you have perfect conditions for relationship breakdown. So couples contact me. The journey starts as we delve beneath the veneer of the couple, going to places that most fear to go. Top of the problem agenda is usually sex, followed by money. But, at the heart of all this, is the desire for true intimacy combined with our deep fear of it. Couples counselling is not easy work. With individual therapy there is one person sitting opposite me, but in couples therapy there are three of us, making the room a much busier place. Emotions fly around, exploding and then landing like small hand grenades. In my years as a couples counsellor, I have encountered pretty much everything – the man who secretly loved dressing up when his wife was out, until she discovered him in her bra and knickers; the woman with two lovers in two different continents; the decades-married husband who turned from an international diplomat to ecowarrior leaving his wife confused and bewildered, and trying to persuade him not to move the family to a yurt. One man even came in brandishing a gun (unloaded) saying he would shoot himself if his girlfriend wouldn’t let him come home. But for most couples, what happens in therapy stays in the room. It remains a mystery to anyone outside the consultation room – and sometimes it’s pretty mysterious even to those inside. But now, we have Couples Therapy, a BBC Two programme that lifts the lid on this difficult and subtle process by showing psychologist Dr Orna Guralnik in session with couples. We see DeSean and Elaine (she shouts, he’s fed up), Mau and Annie (he wants more sex, she doesn’t) – and so on. Everything is here – drama, pathos, anguish, fun, shouting, weeping, making up, falling out. The programme is, of course, compulsive viewing even though it’s obviously staged and the couples are most likely chosen because they are able to be eloquent, controversial, in-your-face and vulnerable. This is not what couples counselling is usually like. Couples come into my room and then there are silences, repetitions, action and inaction. I have sat in on couples sessions when I was training, and at times it was like watching paint dry. The process can be painstakingly slow as couples struggle to articulate their feelings. Yet Couples Therapy showcases couples (in the USA which, I think, makes it a fundamentally different experience) who seem happy to go on camera and open up about their intimate relationships – nothing is off limits. They tell each other off, talk over each other, refuse to speak, get angry. It’s dramatic at times. This is not how I work with my couples – I encourage people to talk from the “I” position and to cut out naming, blaming and shaming. I don’t let my couples take cheap shots at each other. I also try to get them to recognise and change the “you did this” “well you did that” style of relating. Playground communication doesn’t get anyone anywhere. Yet what makes the show so fascinating is that it does give us an insight in to how couples operate. Part of us is probably transfixed at the revelations of sex – or lack of it. Part of us is keen to take away some knowledge from the show. If Guralnik can get couples to open up and then give them some insights and advice on their relationship, maybe we can all take something from that. Most people probably cannot afford the fee of a top therapist such as Guralnik. There’s also a healthy dose of voyeurism. We watch relationships unravel and, inside, many of us might think, “well, at least we’re not as bad as them.” And the cynical part of us is probably aware that those who participate in the show might have some motive for being on TV other than receiving the therapy. But, although this is an American programme, we Britons are now far more open to having therapy than ever before. Every generation is coming to the couch. I have clients in their 70s and those who are teenagers. The ability to communicate is not correlated with age. Some teenagers are highly emotionally intelligent and able to share their feelings, others take a bit more time. But there is a generational divide when it comes to couples. I find the under-40s see me before they have even got near a crisis point. They come, they say, because they value their mental health much in the same way that they value their physical health. They often come because they want to acquire communication tools, to head off conflict before it derails them. They are open to each other and genuinely curious. Older couples seem to find this playful curiosity more difficult. I have met long-term married couples who seem to know very little about each other. When I once asked a man what he thought his wife’s sexual fantasies might be (they were struggling with their intimate connection), he looked utterly affronted. “I’d never dream of asking her that,” he said. “It would be very rude and intrusive.” Yet I find most couples have an “energy” about them. Some say they never row (which, in my book, is not necessarily a good thing) and that their relationship needs “tweaking”. As sessions go on they turn out to be utterly terrified of opening up to each other. Others come in shouting and screaming but end up entwined on the sofa whispering and giggling like teenagers. For me it’s endlessly fascinating. It’s not the work I expected to do – couples counselling is not for the fainthearted. But it’s as compulsive, as difficult, as enjoyable and rewarding as it appears to be on the television. • This article was amended on 23 January 2022 to correct the spelling of Dr Orna Guralnik’s name.The US embassy in Ukraine has requested the evacuation of all non-essential staff amid increasing fears of an imminent Russian invasion and the arrival overnight of arms deliveries promised by President Joe Biden, according to a CNN report. US evacuations are likely to start “as early as next week”, the US cable news network said, citing a source close to the Ukrainian government. It marks the embassy’s shift in focus towards “helping Ukraine bolster its defences in the face of growing Russian aggression”. The embassy in Kyiv also said on Twitter that the first batch of fresh US assistance had arrived in Ukraine, which includes weaponry described as “200,000 pounds of lethal aid, including ammunition for the frontline defenders of Ukraine”. It follows Biden’s assertion on Wednesday in a White House address that he now expected the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, to “move in” and invade Ukraine, in an act that would mean large-scale war returning to continental Europe for the first time in a generation. “My guess is he will move in,” Biden said in response to questions about whether an invasion was coming. “He has to do something.” It was also reported on Saturday that political advisers from Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany would hold “Normandy format” talks on eastern Ukraine in Paris on 25 January. Reuters attributed the development to a source in Putin’s administration. Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Ukraine’s chief negotiator, Andriy Yermak, confirmed that a meeting in Paris was planned but told Reuters a preliminary date had been set for 26 January. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, held talks with Russian diplomats in Switzerland on Friday in an attempt to avert conflict, with Blinken and his Russian counterpart, Sergey Lavrov, striking a conciliatory tone and the diplomatic process ongoing. “We didn’t expect any breakthroughs to happen today,” Blinken said after the meeting. “But I believe we are now on a clearer path in terms of understanding each other’s concerns.” Britain and Russia’s defence ministers will meet after Russia’s Sergei Shoigu accepted an invitation from the UK’s Ben Wallace to discuss mutual security. They will meet in Moscow. “The secretary of state has been clear that he will explore all avenues to achieve stability and a resolution to the Ukraine crisis. We are in communication with the Russian government,” a senior UK defence source told PA Media. It comes after Downing Street warned Russia would be “punished” if the country pushes ahead with any “destabilising action” in Ukraine, as an estimated 100,000 Russian troops sit on the borders of Ukraine. No 10 said if Putin launched an offensive there would be a “package of sweeping measures” launched by western allies against the Kremlin. But Tom Tugendhat, the chair of the foreign affairs committee, demanded advance action, saying the UK should be ready to financially support Ukraine so it is prepared for an invasion. “I’d like to see all of us going further, because one of the things that’s delaying the ability of the Ukrainian people to mobilise their armed forces to meet any such invasion is, that has a huge effect on any country’s economy,” Tugendhat told the BBC. “If you take hundreds of thousands of people out of the workforce in order to stand guard they will have a real impact on jobs and lives in other sectors.” Tobias Ellwood, the chair of the commons defence committee, echoed concerns of a nearing military antagonism and said he believed a Russian invasion of Ukraine could be “imminent”. “Putin is taking full advantage of a weakened west. We are looking risk-averse, somewhat timid,” he told the BBC. “Putin’s ultimatum demanding Nato push back, of course that was dismissed but that’s given him the pretext to say that there is an aggressor and that he must act.” “We see these combat-ready troop formations. He has actually boxed himself into a corner because so much effort has been put into this,” Ellwood added. “He also recognises that he will never again be as strong as this to take advantage of the west’s weakness. I suspect that an invasion is now imminent.”On a freezing day in Bath, Leinster delivered with ice-cool precision to secure a bonus-point victory before half-time. Jimmy O’Brien scored four of their 10 tries as they boosted their hopes of a favourable draw in the knockout stages of the Champions Cup. If there was a positive for the hosts, they displayed no lack of spirit or effort, but were hopelessly outclassed by a team crammed with international quality. The Bath head coach, Neal Hatley, had likened the Leinster fly-half, Jonathan Sexton, to Yoda before kick-off, with England’s new recruit Orlando Bailey in the role of Luke Skywalker: a box office duel between opposing No 10s. It was a catchy line but there could be no question which player had demonstrated true mastery of their art. Sexton was sublime, as he so often is: passing and kicking with relentless accuracy and variation, unleashing Leinster’s glittering array of attacking talent, leaving Bath bereft. “He has a smile on his face in the dressing room,” said Leinster’s head coach, Leo Cullen, of Sexton. “He was gutted missing out on selection for the Lions and we’re definitely the beneficiaries of that. He kept himself in tip-top shape … you can see he’s a little bit rejuvenated.” Before last week’s 13-try demolition of Montpellier, Leinster had not played for five weeks due to Covid-19-related disruption and if Cullen wanted to see his defence properly tested he got his wish in the first 10 minutes. Bath tore into the contest, but the visitors held firm and after an initial spell of pressure it was mostly one-way traffic. Leinster appeared to have taken the lead when O’Brien dotted down after Sexton’s grubber kick. But after a lengthy TMO review, Jordan Larmour was correctly adjudged to have pulled back Bath’s Max Clark. A deafening mixture of laughter and disbelief from the home support, watching replays on the big screen, seemed to prompt a rethink from the Italian referee, Andrea Piardi. It remained scoreless after 15 minutes and things were starting to warm up when Bath’s Sam Underhill took a bang to the head and was taken off. The hosts had also lost their No 8, Josh Bayliss, to injury a minute before, prompting an early restructure in the back row. With Underhill out of action it did not take long for Leinster to cross the tryline. They span the ball left and a clinical pass by Hugo Keenan allowed O’Brien to touch down. Josh van der Flier’s athletic sprint, running a superb line on to a Robbie Henshaw pass, brought the second. Another stunning piece of timing sent Larmour racing over and it was 19-0 in double-quick time. But a fine steal and galloping run by Charlie Ewels, followed by a composed offload to Clark, brought a seven-pointer for Bath. No panic from Leinster. Henshaw was soon speeding into space from the right and another laser-guided grubber by Sexton popped up perfectly for O’Brien. Bonus point sealed. Ciaran Frawley bashed over before the break for the fifth try and a score of 33-7. Bath’s Gabriel Hamer-Webb was sent to the sin-bin five minutes after half-time for a deliberate knock-on and Andrew Porter was soon pushed over. Sexton’s perceptive cross-kick, switching the point of attack, allowed O’Brien the space to score his hat-trick. Another fluent wave of passing prompted by Sexton’s chip kick into space saw Keenan crash over. Max Deegan was then shown a yellow card, for an off-the-ball hit on the Bath scrum-half, Ben Spencer, on a rare foray into the Leinster 22, but at 14-a-side, the hosts could not trouble the scorers. Dan Sheehan romped over the line with 10 minutes left, latching on to Jamison Gibson-Park’s pass, and O’Brien galloped on to a kick from deep to add his fourth, and Leinster’s 10th try, on another sobering afternoon for Bath. “Sometimes, rock bottom is a great foundation,” Hatley said. “We’re not happy with it, we’re not proud of it, we’re disappointed with where we are. “We’ve got to make sure we put things in place at this great club that we never find ourselves in this position again.”Perhaps the most surprising aspect of the crisis surrounding Boris Johnson is just how long it has taken to happen. Almost by definition, any party to which 100 people are invited is not a secret event. And that “almost” can be dispensed with if the invitees work in politics. Yet for more than 18 months, the public was ignorant of the prime minister’s attendance at the infamous No 10 social gathering on 20 May 2020 – and indeed of the gathering itself. The journalist who first wrote about Downing Street parties during lockdown, the Daily Mirror’s political editor, Pippa Crerar, initially heard about them almost a year earlier. She said it took 11 months to stand up the story, though the Mirror may also have been waiting for an opportune moment. With Johnson under pressure after the Owen Paterson fiasco, that moment duly arrived. The key point, however, in the age of social media, is that the story didn’t leak. It’s said in Westminster that a couple of Tory-supporting journalists also attended social gatherings in Downing Street. Rumours circulated. Nevertheless, there were no Instagram photos or revelatory blogposts, no viral internet rumours. New media played little part in uncovering the egregious flouting of government rules and national laws by Johnson and his staff. Rather, what finally brought to public attention that boozy May day and the various other lockdown parties was the work of the often-derided mainstream media. As media academic and commentator Jane Martinson says: “The relationship between Fleet Street and Downing Street is an interesting one, but we wouldn’t have found out about any of these stories without journalists.” It was ITV News that broke the story of the email sent by the PM’s private secretary, Martin Reynolds, to scores of No 10 staff, inviting them to “make the most of the lovely weather” and bring their own booze to the garden party. The Guardian ran the photo of another wine-and-cheese get-together that took place five days earlier in No 10’s garden; the Independent discovered that the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, attended a gathering, which meant he had to recuse himself from the inquiry now being led by Sue Gray; and the Daily Telegraph told us about two parties held by Downing Street staff that took place on 21 April, the night before the Queen attended Prince Philip’s funeral, sitting alone. Aside from placing Johnson’s position under question, “partygate”, as it has inevitably been labelled, has also shown the old-fashioned strengths of the broadcast media and the press when it comes to establishing the facts. We may have to wait for Gray’s report to discover if Johnson knew that a gathering of 40 or so people drinking alcohol was (a) a party and (b) against the rules he’d instructed the rest of the nation to follow, but it’s thanks to TV and press journalists that we know there was a gathering, that Johnson was there, and that so were 40 others. That, ironically, is Johnson’s potential lifeline. The PM, after all, is a former journalist, someone who knows all about news cycles and the various ways of distracting and distracting the press’s attention. If he and his allies can portray partygate as a media confection, as gossip dressed up as news, while focusing on the success of the booster drive, falling Covid numbers, and the relative health of the British economy among G7 members, he may be able to ride out the storm. Veteran broadcaster and journalist Andrew Marr believes that, although the story has entered a lull, it’s far from over, and won’t be until Gray’s report is delivered. “It might be a damp squib and the rebellion against Boris Johnson collapses like an elderly meringue,” he says. “Or it could get everything going. I don’t think anybody knows at the moment.” But if Johnson’s attempt to shift the agenda is to work, he will need the media to disseminate his message. This is where intrigue develops, and news values are weighed against political expediency. A study of two Daily Mail front pages a week apart illustrates the point. On 12 January, it ran with the ominous question: “Is the party over for PM?” The piece was gloomy and spoke of “draining support”, a “ferocious backlash” from aggrieved families, and Johnson being “engulfed” by the crisis. Eight days later, it placed a leader comment on the front page denouncing a “narcissistic rabble of Tory MPs” trying to topple a PM “who’s leading us out of Covid” and ended with the demand: “In the name of God, Grow Up!” There was a visible progression from a recognition that Johnson was a deeply flawed leader to a realisation that he might actually be forced out. With its cloak-and-dagger comings and goings of senior figures, Associated Newspapers has of late resembled the court of the Medicis. But it seems Ted Verity, the editor of the Mail, perhaps with the support of his editor-in-chief, Paul Dacre, has done the moral calculus and decided that an untrustworthy and hypocritical PM is preferable to the alternatives – in particular, a resurgent Keir Starmer, about whom the Mail ran two scolding front pages. Whatever the reason, it’s a significant decision. The Mail prides itself on taking a strong moral line in tune with “middle England”, and here it has gone against its instincts. Presumably, the thinking is that the public will soon tire of the party revelations. That might be an optimistic assumption. Marr believes details of the parties amount to much more than a fanfare of gossip. “It’s a very rare story, which is certainly about events deep inside the Westminster village but goes to the heart of millions of people’s ordinary experiences during the pandemic. That’s why it was so dangerous for Boris Johnson,” he says. The reason it has kept going is not because of any great appetite for knowledge of the social arrangements within No 10, but because it exposes the double standard of “do as you are told, not as I do”. That’s never an attractive look. During the sacrifices of lockdown it could turn out to be fatally ugly. One of the complexities in the media’s reporting of this story is the position of the BBC. With Johnson’s most devoted loyalist, culture secretary Nadine Dorries, preparing to scrap the licence fee, the corporation has never been under greater threat of being dismantled. Martinson says it’s “desperately difficult” for the corporation, and wonders if the hovering axe has had a subconscious effect on its response. Another media observer is adamant that the corporation has been timid in pursuing the story. “They’ve shown little appetite for it,” he says. Marr, who left the BBC last year after 21 years, disagrees. “You’ve got several hundred top-rate journalists competing to break these stories and you can’t turn to any one organisation and say they didn’t get the stories so therefore they’re not trying. I think the BBC has done fine.” The same can be said for most newspapers. Although staunchly Tory and a supporter of Johnson’s, the Telegraph has actively pursued this story. It exposed the parties which arguably did most damage with traditional Conservative supporters: the two boozy events held in Downing Street the night before the Duke of Edinburgh’s funeral. After the veteran MP David Davis’s intervention last week, calling on Johnson to resign, it led with a sober assessment of Johnson’s plight and ran a sympathetic interview with Davis inside. Likewise, the Sunday Times and the Times, less to the right than the Telegraph but still firmly Conservative, have not shied from putting Johnson and his flailing No 10 regime under the spotlight. A conspicuous exception to this robust approach is the Times newspapers’ stablemate, the Sun. When Johnson was avoiding saying whether he attended the No 10 garden party, the paper ran a rather lame front page with the headline “It’s my party and I’ll lie low if I want to”. Inside it suggested he should go if he didn’t sort out the problem, but last week it was back to solid support, with feelgood front pages about dropping Covid restrictions. Instead, its main target has been another character who has also had to apologise to the Queen recently: Prince Andrew. That may well be because royals sell more tabloids than politicians, even one as populist and media-savvy as Johnson. But there could also be another disincentive for the paper to make a fuss. One of the two events that took place on 21 April last year, on the eve of Philip’s funeral, was a leaving do for director of communications James Slack. By all accounts it was a lively affair, with staff sent out to fill a suitcase with alcohol as lockdown measures remained in place. Shortly afterwards, Slack began his new job – as deputy editor of the Sun.Aryna Sabalenka threw her hands into the air, clapped them together and then punched the sky. “I’m really happy,” she said, “and mostly really happy that I made only 10 double-faults.” She was laughing, the crowd was laughing and cheering. Marketa Vondrousova was probably doing neither, having lost the third-round showdown despite starting the stronger. The No 31 seed had taken the opening set, just as Sabalenka’s previous two Australian Open opponents had done. In much the same manner as those matches, the world No 2 had closed out the contest with ease. “It feels like I’m warming up in the first set and then I start playing,” she said. “I really want to win it in two sets and that’s why I’m getting so emotional on the first set and that’s why I’m over-trying and I’m missing a lot. “After the first set when you’re losing, you’re: ‘OK, maybe I don’t have to overhit or panic like [I did] earlier.” At Margaret Court Arena on Saturday she finished almost flawlessly, which will not be lost on the Estonian Kaia Kanepi, who will face her in the last 16 after beating the Australian wildcard Maddison Inglis. Vondrousova broke Sabalenka twice in the opening set. Sabalenka, though, started landing the big first serves for which she is known. Vondrousova found herself on the back foot, forced to take more risks than desired and finding not enough were paying off. The past few months Sabalenka has relied on other areas of her generally imposing game to compensate for her well-documented serving troubles, which peaked in round two when she served 19 double-faults against Wang Xinyu, including six in her opening service game. Ten against Vondrousova bring her tournament tally to 41. She spent much of the off-season working on this and accepted help from Mark Philippoussis this month after 38 double-faults in her opening two losses of the season in Adelaide. “It’s more mental,” she said. “Because I put a lot of pressure on myself about my serve and the last matches I was trying to control everything on my serve; my legs, my arm, the ball toss. “I was overthinking, so I just stopped thinking. Like today, for example, I was focusing only on the good jump and that’s it. Because I have this muscle memory and I just trust myself today, much more than in the first matches.” That trust will be put to the test against Kanepi, who relied on her own resilience to go the distance against Inglis. The Western Australian, who has never progressed past the first round of a grand slam, appeared to be on her way to a stunning upset when she stole the first set in emphatic fashion. But it was short-lived and her failure to hold serve for seven straight games gave Kanepi the ascendancy to win 2-6, 6-2, 6-0. “This week, I really proved to myself and to the people around me that I do have it in me,” Inglis said. “Belief does a lot for your game and how you play.” It followed the day’s trend of comebacks in the women’s singles, with America’s Danielle Collins prevailing 4-6, 6-4, 7-5 after losing the first set to the emerging Dane Clara Tauson and the French veteran Alizé Cornet seeing off Slovenia’s Tamara Zidansek 4-6, 6-4, 6-2 – but not without a tense exchange with the umpire. Cornet, who in round two upset the world No 3, Garbiñe Muguruza, was down a set with the second delicately poised at 4-4 when the umpire took away her first serve for a time violation when she appeared to be checking the sun’s position. “This is insane, I didn’t do anything,” she told the umpire, Katarzyna Radwan-Cho. “I took my towel, I took the ball and I went. I didn’t even wait for one second.” After some back and forth Cornet walked away and then returned, starting with: “Don’t say anything, just listen to me.” Cornet later said she “had to tell her what I had on my heart”. “We’ve been fighting on the court for two hours in the heat, playing such a long game, be a little bit understanding,” she said. “You’re in the shade, you’re seated. I was a little bit, maybe not really nice, but I told her sometimes you have to be a little bit human with the players.” Simona Halep made light work of Montenegro’s Danka Kovinic 6-2, 6-1 and the Romanian will meet Cornet in the fourth round – the seventh time she has made it to the second week in Melbourne. The Polish seventh seed Iga Swiatek set up a fourth-round date with Romanian Sorana Cirstea after a comfortable 6-2, 6-3 win over Daria Kasatkina. Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova also went out, the 10th seed falling to Cirstea 6-3, 2-6, 6-2. Elise Mertens knocked out Zhang Shuai 6-2, 6-2 and will face Collins.The Fox News host Tucker Carlson has compared coronavirus vaccine mandates imposed by Joe Biden’s government to medical experiments conducted by Nazi Germany and imperial Japan. “I thought that we had a kind of consensus,” Carlson said on Friday. “I mean, after watching what the imperial Japanese army and the Nazis did in their medical experiments, I thought that American physicians agreed that compulsory medical care was unethical, it was immoral and it could never be imposed on anyone. When did we forget that?” Carlson’s guest, the virologist and anti-vaxxer Robert Malone, said: “Apparently about a year ago, I think yesterday” – a reference to Biden’s inauguration on 20 January 2021 – “was when we must have forgotten that, although Mr Biden prior to his election made clear statements that he wasn’t going to force vaccination.” On 4 December 2020, after his election victory, Biden told reporters: “No, I don’t think [vaccines] should be mandatory. I wouldn’t demand to be mandatory, but I would do everything in my power.” Carlson is vastly influential, commanding huge audiences in primetime. He has promoted resistance to vaccine mandates and conspiracy theories about the effects of the shots. It is not known if he is vaccinated but Fox News has strict rules for its staff. Carlson’s exchange with Malone came on the day a judge in Texas blocked the Biden administration’s vaccine mandate for federal employees. The White House said 98% of such employees had been vaccinated or were seeking a religious or medical exemption and added that it was confident it had the legal authority to impose the mandate in question. Earlier this month, the supreme court blocked a mandate for large businesses but allowed a requirement for healthcare facilities. A mandate for federal contractors was blocked by a judge in December. More than 864,000 people have died of Covid-19 in the US. Federal authorities say 75.4% of eligible Americans have had at least one vaccine dose, 63.3% are considered fully vaccinated with two doses, and 39.5% have had a booster shot. Carlson’s comparison of mandates to tortures inflicted by totalitarian regimes came not long after a Fox News contributor, Lara Logan, compared Biden’s chief medical adviser, Anthony Fauci, to the Nazi doctor Josef Mengele. Fox News has distanced itself from Logan. She has reportedly lost her agent. On Friday, Malone referred to the process by which Nazi leaders were brought to account, saying: “Thank you for bringing up the Nuremberg trials, Tucker. They are crucial biomedical ethics matter. And this is frankly illegal and I’m so glad that the courts are making it clear. “It’s unfortunate that so many federal workers and so many members of our military had been forced to take these products while they’re still experimental, against their will.” Fox News did not immediately return a request for comment.A British-Iranian man imprisoned in Iran is to start a hunger strike on Sunday in support of a 77-year-old American who is protesting outside nuclear talks in Vienna against Iranian hostage taking. Anoosheh Ashoori, who is being held in Evin prison in Tehran, is staging the strike in an act of solidarity with Barry Rosen, who started his own four days ago. He told the Guardian he was humbled by the support, as well as other messages being sent to him by Iranians in jail. Anoosheh, who was arrested in August 2017, has been sentenced to 10 years in jail for espionage. Rosen is protesting in Vienna outside the talks about the Iran nuclear programme, where discussions resumed earlier this month. The US has said that the longer Iran fails to comply with the 2015 Vienna accord – intended to rein in Tehran’s nuclear programme – the closer it would get to being able to build an atomic weapon. But a European Union spokesperson said on Friday an agreement was possible. Rosen and others have expressed a hope that hostages would be released as part of the deal, or alongside it. Rosen has also been joined on hunger strike by a Lebanese US resident, Nizar Zakka, who was detained by Iran between 2015 and 2019. “I am receiving heart rending messages from Iranians, and I am absolutely humbled that Anoosheh is doing this in support of me. I support him completely in return and I urge him to be careful and look after himself,” he said. Rosen, as the then US press attache to the US embassy in Tehran, was himself held hostage by Iran for 444 days between 1979 and 1981 after hard-line students stormed the embassy. Rosen admitted: “I am starting to feel tired and weak, but I am determined to continue.” He said: “I am here to call on the Americans and the Europeans to make the release of the hostages a condition of any agreement to renew the Iran nuclear deal. This has been going on for 40 years, and people are being thrown in jail with no evidence. There has to be an agreement that this will end.” He added he was struck by how ill coordinated western nations are over the hostage taking issue. “It is like herding cats. Each country seems to deal with its dual national hostages on its own. There is no sense of commonality, so they leave Iran to pick each country off. Something is missing here. The Iranians seem to be dividing and ruling. “I decided to do this two weeks ago. I am just an individual, and thought I might be a lone eagle, but it feels like a movement might be starting.” He said it was possible others would take over the hunger strike when he is unable to continue. Anoosheh’s wife, Sherry, said: “We are extremely concerned for his health as he approaches his 68th birthday, but having failed to see any progress in the Foreign Office’s efforts to secure his release and no sign of the welfare of hostages held by Iran currently being a priority of western governments, he will begin his hunger strike.”Minouche Shafik seemed destined for the top job at the Bank of England when she arrived in 2014, but becoming the first female governor was not to be. She only spent two years inside the Bank’s imposing offices on Threadneedle Street before quitting as deputy governor to head the London School of Economics. Rumours swirled that she had fallen out with her boss, Mark Carney, newly arrived himself and armed with plans to shake up the 300 year-old central bank. Now, sitting in her top-floor office with panoramic views across London near Waterloo Bridge, she smiles and responds with the diplomacy for which she is known. “Oh, come on: the LSE job offer was too good to miss.” If she were in Threadneedle Street now, how would Shafik be voting? The interest-rate-setting committee meets next month and investors expect a rise to 0.5%. With inflation at a 30-year high of 5.4% and heading above 6%, she believes the Bank’s credibility is at stake. “I have heard the argument that somehow central banks have lost their mojo, but I don’t buy it,” she says. “They know how to bring inflation down.” However, she adds: “There is a question over the bank’s willingness to act – and over how rate rises are communicated, because there is an impact on businesses and households. Confidence in the institution is important, though, which is why interest rates should begin rising back towards more normal levels. It’s why I am not worried about going back to the inflation of the 1970s.” * * * CV Age 59 Family Married with two college-age children and three adult stepchildren. Education Too many schools and colleges to mention. Pay Basic salary of £348,000 plus pension and accommodation allowance. Last holiday Venice. Best advice she’s been given “From my dad, that everything can be taken away but your education.” Biggest career mistake “Nothing that could be published.” Word she overuses “A toss-up between ‘community’ and ‘evidence’.” How she relaxes Reading, walking and yoga. * * * Embracing academia has provided a platform for the recently ennobled economist to air her views in a forthcoming book, What We Owe Each Other. Shafik has joined the campaign against a winner-takes-all business culture that offers the spoils of capitalism only to those that rise to the top, putting her in the company of some of the world’s most prominent political thinkers. While she has come a long way from her Egyptian birthplace, her questioning of privilege has remained consistent. “The idea that you are successful because you are smart and hardworking is pernicious and wrong, because it means everyone who is unsuccessful is stupid and lazy,” she says. Referring to her friend Michael Sandel, the Harvard philosopher, she says the next phase of history should be characterised by a shared endeavour, ending the extreme individualism of the last 40 years. “The discussion we need to be having asks: what do we owe each other and what are our expectations of each other?” she says. People who think they have climbed the greasy pole on their own misunderstand how much luck had a part to play and how society, directly or indirectly, also helped them rise. In the mid-1960s, her businessman father fell foul of President Nasser’s programme of land reform and nationalisations, losing his homes and property. The family, shattered by the loss of an idyllic lifestyle, moved from Alexandria to Savannah, Georgia, where a friend of her father’s from his days studying at Imperial College helped him find a job as a scientific researcher. Shafik went to local schools, nine or even 10, she says, often changing institution to satisfy the authority’s need to balance the racial mix. When she was 15, the family returned to Egypt, where she would compare herself with girls destined for arranged marriages and very different economic circumstances. It wasn’t long before the US lured her back, with a place at the University of Massachusetts Amherst to study economics. After an MSc at the LSE, she secured a doctorate from St Antony’s College, Oxford. From there she joined the World Bank in Washington, married economist Mohamed El-Erian, who worked across the road at the IMF, before going on, at 36, to become the bank’s youngest ever vice-president. By the age of 40 she had remarried, had twins and become stepmother to her partner Raffael’s three children. She told Kirsty Young on the BBC’s Desert Island Discs that she stayed at the World Bank because, as a parent of five, she needed a job she could do with her eyes closed. Her former employer attracts stiff criticism for its handling of the pandemic, in particular its refusal to campaign for a wider distribution of vaccines. “The response to Covid has probably been the biggest ever failure of the international system that I have seen in my career,” Shafik says. “It is a textbook crisis that should have been handled globally. And the fact we are dealing with ever-new variants only goes to show what a failure it has been.” Famed for her calm manner, this is the most heated she becomes in the interview, though she is also disparaging about the attitude of the UK government to planning. “We have a long-term strategy for the LSE which we call ‘LSE 2030’. I was recently talking to someone in government about it and they said, ‘Here we think 2030 is half past eight’.” From the World Bank she came to London, in part for her partner to pursue his career as a scientist, turning algae into food, and to join the Department for International Development, which was flush with money following the UK’s commitment to spend 0.7% of GDP on aid. She rose to be its permanent secretary before heading back to Washington to join the IMF as deputy director. An apartment in London Bridge became her home after a switch back to the UK, and the Bank of England, in 2014. Shafik says World Bank officials also need to change the way they tackle the climate crisis, with an overhaul of funding for poor countries. Big carbon emitters and those countries with huge amounts of locked-up carbon should be targeted with more support than the criteria allow at the moment. “It won’t only help them, it will benefit all of us,” she says. Technology and the changing role of women are now the two driving forces of change, she says. “Technology because it has changed jobs and lots of people haven’t benefited. They have been left behind. They don’t have the skills and they are not in the right place, with the result that their prospects are poor. And the way our whole social contract was predicated on women looking after the young and the old for free – now there are more women going to university than men, globally, not just in the UK, and they are employed, and the cost of them not working is really high, so you want them to work. Yet we haven’t found a way to adjust – a way to look after the young and old without women providing free labour.” And Covid made things worse, heaping more care responsibilities on those already on the frontline. Making no apology for her technocratic outlook, she says the government needs to plan for a post-Brexit, post-Covid world. Echoing those fearful that the UK has spent a decade avoiding tough questions about how to grow the economy while lowering carbon emissions, she says detailed policy proposals are the only way to convince the public that cooperation can triumph over individualism. “I am not just a person who wants to raise taxes and share out more. I want everyone to pay their fair share of taxes and invest more in each other.”Katie Ormerod – nicknamed “Katie Oh!” for her crowd-pleasing medley of acrobatic snowboard tricks – is Team GB’s all-action poster-girl for the Beijing Winter Olympics next month, and an authentic hope for the country’s first ever snowsport gold medal. The 24-year-old athlete, an unexpectedly shy Yorkshire woman, became Britain’s first ever World Cup slopestyle champion in 2020. She has somehow overcome Britain’s lack of mountains, and a potentially career-ending shattered heel in 2018 (which required seven operations, the insertion of two metal pins, and a graft of pig skin), to make it this far. “It feels amazing – I’m just really happy that I am able to do this, because I had to work so extremely hard to make it here, and to come back from injury,” Ormerod explains. Ormerod and I are speaking via Zoom from her home in Brighouse, West Yorkshire, during a break between contests in America and Canada. She speaks softly but assuredly in a Yorkshire accent; her lightning-blonde hair, which fans usually see dancing around in a plait as she executes her flamboyant tricks, is tucked casually beneath a cap. Growing up in a country with an average altitude of just 75m was far from ideal for a wannabe snowboard champion. While her rivals were raised in the mountains of America, Japan, New Zealand and Canada, Ormerod learned to board on the moss-covered dry plastic slope in Halifax, five miles from the family home. But her disadvantages only inspired her to train more intensely and intelligently. “I made the most of the local Halifax dry slope. If you have the passion and you work hard, I have shown you can win world titles. We are at a disadvantage in the UK because I grew up riding literally on plastic bristles. A lot of [foreign] riders think we’re crazy. But people respect us, because we have taken the difficult route and we’re competing at the highest level. I’m proud to be British. I am proud of my Yorkshire background. And I hope others will follow in my footsteps.” Thanks to the backing of her sponsors, and the GB Snowsport governing body, she now trains abroad in the resorts of Italy and Switzerland. But such trips still feel like a privilege. “Whenever I get the opportunity to go abroad I make the most of every second I’m on snow,” she insists. “I don’t take it for granted. I am riding until the last lifts, doing everything I can. I have worked a lot harder than people who grew up in the mountains..” Although Britain has won Winter Olympic gold medals in disciplines including skating and skeleton, a traditional snowsport (ski or snowboard) gold has remained elusive. Snowboarder Jenny Jones claimed Britain’s historic first slopestyle bronze in Sochi in 2014, before Billy Morgan and Izzy Atkin won bronze in the snowboard big air and ski slopestyle events in 2018. Next month, in the slopestyle event, Ormerod will perform her repertoire of twists, jumps and flips on a skateboard-style course of ramps and obstacles. In the big air event she will speed down a monstrous 60m-high ramp at 40-50mph and launch off an 18.9m-high ledge before executing her tricks mid-air. Many pundits are quietly confident that Ormerod can go all the way. Ormerod had an inauspicious start to her sports career. Aged four, she flung herself out of a cardboard box at home and broke her nose. “My parents say they knew I would be an athlete as I was bouncing off the walls at home,” she laughs. “That’s why they took me to gymnastics. I then started snowboarding at five. My first memory is going off the big kicker at Halifax dry slope. Today, it seems really small. But when I was five, it was huge. I got a bit of air time and I loved it.” She also enjoyed winter holidays in Europe with her parents, Mark and Claire, who skied for fun, and her brother Harvey. But it was her love of gymnastics that would one day set her apart on the slopes, empowering her to perform the outrageous world-first tricks that have made her a YouTube star. Aged just 16, she became the first woman to perform a “backside double-cork 1080” – an iconic snowboard trick involving two 360-degree front flips and a full 360-degree corkscrew spin. “I was a competitive gymnast until I was 16, but I was also part of a cheer squad at school and we were national champions,” she recalls. “When I was younger, I was Yorkshire [gymnastics] champion and in national finals. The two sports are similar in terms of spatial awareness and muscular strength so I still do tumbling, trampoline work and floor skills as part of my snowboard training.” Her snowboard performances are judged using similar criteria to gymnastics, including technical difficulty, execution, amplitude, landing, variety and progression (originality). But what made her choose snowboarding over gymnastics? “I just loved the lifestyle with snowboarding more,” says Ormerod, who claimed senior snowboard titles at the British Championships at just 14. “I loved the freedom, the creativity and the opportunities.” Hamish McKnight, GB Snowsport’s head snowboard coach, has worked with Ormerod since she was 13. “It was obvious with Katie from a young age that she was extremely talented,” he says. “Not just on a snowboard, but she also had an unusual work ethic. She had a very intense approach to practice and self-determination, which is rare nowadays.” In the brutal world of snowboarding, you also need luck. Injuries are inevitable. Ormerod has fractured her shoulder, broken both arms, snapped her anterior cruciate ligament and broken her back. But her cruellest setback came when she shattered her heel after coming off a rail in training only days before the 2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang. Her face muscles tighten a little when she recalls the searing pain as medics took two hours to cut her boot off. “I’ve had injuries in the past, but none compared to that pain,” she admits. “I was in shock that it was actually possible to feel so much pain.” During her agonising year of rehab she wondered if she would ever walk pain-free again. She was in a wheelchair for months, unable to walk or even wear shoes. When the flesh on her heel began to blacken and die, she had to have a chunk of skin from her hip and a lump of pig skin grafted on to it. She strived to remain positive, but it was tough. “I saw every gym rep and every physio session as one step closer to being back,” she says. “But I love what I do. And the love for that was bigger than the pain I was in. After nine months I was still limping and in pain. I knew if that pain didn’t go away I wouldn’t be able to snowboard. It was a really scary moment. But I was not going to give up. I had another operation to remove the pins, which were sticking into my Achilles and causing the pain. And when I did the rehab for that I knew instantly: I will be OK. I will snowboard again.” When she returned for the 2019-20 season, Ormerod became the first Brit to win a slopestyle World Cup title and a much-coveted FIS Crystal Globe – a prestigious International Ski Federation award for the athlete who earns the most points during the season. Her coach was astonished. “Very simply, most athletes don’t come back from an injury like that,” McKnight admits. “Some injuries are expected. But Katie’s heel injury was a car crash incident.” Backed by £11.1m of UK Sport funding for the Beijing campaign, GB Snowsport is starting to catch up rival nations, thanks to skilled coaches, dedicated training camps and research into everything from wax analysis to aerodynamics. Ormerod can now practise her tricks on airbags, trampolines and foam pits with GB Snowsport’s acrobatics coach Ross Hill at the Graystone Action Sports centre in Manchester before attempting them on snow. And this creative innovation is her secret weapon. “Katie is trying to push the boundaries,” explains McKnight. “What we see in competition today will be bettered tomorrow. So it requires a lot of forward planning and discovery. She is always looking into the unknown.” Ormerod carefully conditions her body and mind for the impossible. Despite her petite 5ft 2in, 55kg frame, she can deadlift 80kg. She also spends hours visualising her new tricks, entering a meditative trance in which she pictures herself smoothly executing each move. “I have to be able to see it really clearly in my mind before I do it on snow,” she says. Studies involving brain scans and muscle analysis have revealed that when winter sports athletes visualise their performances they experience brain impulses and muscle contractions that closely mirror those experienced when actually riding, thereby strengthening the neural pathways which encode their new skills. Following her experiences, mental health has become a new focus for Ormerod and she now keeps a journal. “I write something every day: what went well; if I have an idea; something that I feel inspired about; if something went wrong and what I can learn from it,” she says. Most athletes would have lost confidence after such a bad injury, but Ormerod is performing bigger stunts than ever. “I had a whole year to visualise the kind of tricks I wanted to do,” she laughs. “That’s a lot of practice.” Ormerod is impressively calm and analytical. McKnight insists that the adrenaline junkie stereotype is wrong. “Katie’s not fearless and she does get scared,” he says. “But she has an ability to embrace that fear and use it to analyse the right time to take risks.” Ormerod agrees that fear sharpens her mind. “I get really nervous at the top, but I know that’s fine because it usually pays off,” she explains. “I had good risk-assessment before, but I am extra-cautious now in terms of things like the speed of a jump. I always watch other people first and make sure that I know 100% what the best speed is.” Away from the slopes, Ormerod prefers a mellow lifestyle. Her Instagram feed is full of normal 20-something posts, from cartwheels in the garden to sunbathing in the park. She is diligently studying for a degree in sport coaching and development at Manchester Metropolitan University, and renovating her home, a Victorian property that she bought in 2020. “I got really into all the interior design, learning how to pull plaster off the wall and things like that,” she says. Her secret passion is West End musicals. “I recently went to see Moulin Rouge and Come From Away, but my favourites are Wicked, Phantom of the Opera and Bat out of Hell,” she says. “I have always liked music. I started learning the ukulele when I was 17 and I ordered a keyboard that gets delivered today.” It is strange to imagine Ormerod unleashing death-defying tricks on her snowboard one day, then writing essays and playing her ukulele the next. But this balance between all-action flamboyance and solitary pursuits is part of her success. “The snowboard training is quite intense, so it is nice to totally switch off,” she says. Ormerod’s deep commitment and passion for her sport is what has sustained her through all the setbacks and shattered bones. “I just want to have that Olympic experience at last, land the big tricks, and show people what I can do,” she says. “You can’t really replicate the feeling of it. You get a huge adrenaline rush and sense of freedom. I am in the zone, 100% focused. I don’t know what’s going on around me. It’s just me and the mountain.” Katie Ormerod is a Red Bull athleteThe topic of Covid has proved so divisive at the women’s healthcare business run by Julie Čolan that she has banned all mention of it during team meetings. The pandemic has been a “nightmare” for company owner Čolan, after she saw trade fairs and exhibitions cancelled, leaving her with money tied up in unsold stock. On top of that, she has been worrying about the wellbeing of her staff. Despite differing views about the jab among her three employees at Secret Whispers, based in Market Harborough in Leicestershire, Čolan has decided not to require them to be vaccinated. “They are very respectful but everyone has a different opinion,” Čolan said, adding: “I have asked them to be informed and do their research before they make up their mind. But it is their decision to make.” UK companies large and small are debating the vaccine question, and whether to differentiate between vaccinated and unvaccinated members of their workforce. Even as plan B measures are due to be lifted in England this week, employers are still anticipating some level of disruption to their operations from Covid, including higher levels of staff absence. This comes at a time when many are trying to claw back the costs of keeping business going during the pandemic. Like Čolan, the vast majority of employers have decided not to mandate vaccination for their staff, fearing it could risk resignations or even leave them open to legal claims of unfair dismissal or discrimination. Yet firms are divided over how best to proceed. In recent days, Next, Ikea and Ocado are among the firms to raise their heads above the parapet. The retailers have changed their company sickness policy and will be treating jabbed and unjabbed workers differently. They follow a move by supermarket chain Morrisons, which last September became one of the first businesses to cut company sick pay for periods of self-isolation for unvaccinated staff, as part of a bid to stem rising costs after a slump in profits. Unvaccinated workers at the retailers who have to isolate but do not test positive for the virus will only be eligible for statutory sick pay, now set at £96.35 a week – significantly below what the average worker would earn. Meanwhile, engineering and consultancy group Wood is mandating its staff be vaccinated – unless they have an exemption, including those which are medical or religious. Any of the energy service company’s 6,500 UK workers who choose not to get vaccinated will be expected to discuss this with their manager. They may end up working from home indefinitely, or have to undergo more frequent Covid testing before attending the workplace for meetings with colleagues or clients. Current rules in all UK nations now make a clear distinction in self-isolation requirements for vaccinated and unvaccinated people if they come into contact with someone who has tested positive for Covid. In all four nations, the unjabbed have to isolate for 10 days, even if they do not test positive for the virus. In theory, there is no limit to how many times an unvaccinated person might come into contact with Covid, and be required to spend 10 days in isolation. It is perhaps unsurprising that the impact of isolation requirements is being felt acutely in retail, where workers tend to have customer-facing jobs, which they cannot carry out from home. Employment lawyers believe companies may introduce new sick pay policies as a way to exert subtle pressure on unvaccinated staff to get the jab. While some sick pay schemes are at the company’s discretion, businesses must also consider whether their decision could leave them open to legal claims. “Lots of businesses will be weighing up the pros and cons of this. They’ll be looking at the financial implications, their health and safety obligations to their staff and customers,” said Fudia Smartt, an employment lawyer at law firm Spencer West. “They will be weighing that up against a theoretical risk of, say, 5% [of staff] bringing claims. They may decide the risk is worth it.” Most trade unions have encouraged their members to get vaccinated, but have also warned that cutting company sick pay could backfire, and potentially risk workplace outbreaks, if unvaccinated staff decide that they cannot afford to self-isolate. Companies had already been struggling with a staffing squeeze for several months before the rise in Covid cases, said Matthew Percival, programme director for skills and inclusion at business group the Confederation of Business Industry (CBI). “Higher levels of sickness absence and self-isolation caused by Omicron are adding to the pressure of labour shortages right across the economy,” Percival said. Despite this, the vast majority of UK employers have shown themselves to be reluctant to mandate vaccination among their staff, preferring encouragement over coercion. This is partly due to high levels of vaccine uptake across the population, and also because employment rights are enshrined in UK law. In the UK, employment lawyers and trade unions have warned that businesses requiring staff to be vaccinated – a so-called “no jab, no job” policy – is a moral minefield and also legally contentious. This is a marked contrast with the US, where large employers including Wall Street bank Citigroup and tech giant Google have told their staff they need to be vaccinated or could face losing their job. The government had to pass legislation to compel care homes to make sure all workers in England without medical exemption were fully vaccinated. Health secretary Sajid Javid has also told NHS staff and care-home workers that they are at risk of being sacked if they are not fully jabbed by April. Employers who decide to obtain data on their workers’ vaccination status will have to handle this with caution. Vaccination status is classed as sensitive personal information, known in legal language as “special categories of personal data”, and has to be carefully stored and kept private to avoid breaking GDPR regulations.The Keel, a converted former HMRC office block overlooking Liverpool’s waterfront, is billed as the solution to dull, impersonal renting. Tenants in the block of 240 new flats can fake a sun-kissed glow on video calls by dialling in from its new “Zoom room”. According to its interior designer, Jasper Sanders, the effect created by the tinted windows is a friendly nod to many Liverpudlians’ love of a year-round tan. At the Wembley Park development in north-west London, renters can work from retro camper vans or sheds custom-made for home working. Welcome to the fast-growing world of “build to rent”, an asset class that is shaking up the housing market, luring renters with the promise of more professional management than individual private landlords, and sucking in a flood of money, from banks, pension funds and even retailer John Lewis. Tempted by the prospect of stable returns, these blocks are developed, owned and operated by large companies with deep pockets. Yet there is growing unease over the boom in this new class of rental property, with concern that the poorest in society will be priced out. Rob Wall, a 34-year-old communication coach, moved to Wembley Park, the biggest build-to-rent complex in the UK, lured by the perks. In return for pet-friendly but small apartments that come with communal benefits, such as gym access and a cinema room, tenants part with monthly rent starting at £1,770 (plus utilities of roughly £200 a month). Developer Quintain’s all-inclusive package meant Wall no longer had to sort out his own utilities or arrange repairs. “We don’t have to be too hands-on with it,” he says. “As a drummer and football fan, it’s a real bonus being next to the SSE Arena and stadium.” Institutional landlordism is relatively new to Britain, but the sector has boomed as property prices spiral upwards, pushing the prospect of buying a home further out of reach for many. Build to rent now accounts for 20% of all new housing in England, a figure that rises to 40% for London, according to research consultancy Molior. Research from estate agency Ascend Properties shows that planning permission requests for build-to-rent units across the UK rose 52% during the pandemic. “For a long time, residential property hasn’t been seen as a viable asset class; it’s really messy to manage, with huge operational costs,” said Frances Brill, a University of Cambridge geographer specialising in build to rent. But with interest rates so low, commercial property yielding shaky returns, and Britain facing a chronic housing shortage, it had become an attractive bet. “Investors sense there’s money to be made if you’re able to provide quality housing,” she said. Well-established players such as US developer Greystar – which last month partnered with Abu Dhabi in a £2.2bn deal to build London rental homes – have led the charge. Macquarie, the Australian bank that stripped out huge dividends during its ownership of Thames Water, has set up a rental business, Goodstone Living. US private equity giant KKR is funding 4,000 luxury homes. High-street names such as John Lewis, Lloyds Bank and Legal &amp; General (L&amp;G) are also joining the goldrush. Lloyds plans to own 50,000 homes within a decade, under a strategy developed by new boss Charlie Nunn, the Financial Times reports. Investors ploughed a record £4.1bn into the sector last year, according to property adviser CBRE. The boom is set to continue, as demand for rentals outstrips supply. In Leeds, L&amp;G is turning Tower Works, the city centre’s Grade II listed former factory, into 245 rental apartments. Developers are also eying suburban areas, rolling out pet-friendly, larger homes designed to encourage longer-term contracts. L&amp;G has announced a 117-home scheme in Peterborough for families seeking out-of-town properties with office space and gardens. Experts say while interest from private equity firms comes from experience, the biggest draw for pension funds is they can raise the rent roughly in line with inflation. Dan Batterton, head of build to rent at L&amp;G, said investors took about 4% from annual rent income linked to inflation. “The need for housing makes the rental market less volatile,” said Batterton. For tenants, there’s the promise of well-managed homes for people who cannot afford to buy, and are fed up with rogue landlords. In the UK, there are almost twice as many people looking for rentals as there are spots available – a ratio that rises to 10 to one in Salford, according to research by insurer Admiral. “Especially in such a new market, a big pension fund can’t afford to become known as an awful landlord,” said Brill. “No one wants to kick a granny on to the streets.” She sees Switzerland – where 60% of households rent – as a success story: pension-fund-owned housing there is well kept, with stable rents. “There’s a glimmer of hope of what the UK market could be, if build-to-rent landlords’ actions are sufficiently regulated.” But not all communities can afford to buy into the lifestyle. “While build-to-rent developers are obliged to provide nominally ‘affordable’ homes, this doesn’t mean they are building more social housing,” said Brill. “It doesn’t address the affordability crisis, because it’s so expensive.” Homelessness charity Shelter has warned that build to rent is likely to be aimed at the higher end of the market, making it unaffordable to lower-income households. And while it has boomed during the pandemic, affordable housing starts fell by 16% in England in 2020-21, according to government data. In Elephant and Castle, London’s ‘“Latin American quarter”, a £3bn regeneration project including a big slice of build to rent is driving out the current population of social housing tenants. About 4,000 social housing units have already been demolished in the area, with many residents forced to move to suburbs more than six miles away. Delancey, the developer best known for its partnership with the Qatari royals to buy and develop London’s former Olympic village, will replace the shopping centre with homes to rent. It has permission for 979 build-to-rent homes, of which 116 will be social housing. Its initial proposal, for just 33 affordable homes, was rejected by the council. Corporately branded and just streets away from the demolished Heygate council estate, the block, due to be completed in 2030, is a metaphor for the borough of Southwark’s socioeconomic tensions. With 16,000 households on Southwark’s housing waiting list, families are often pushed into overcrowded properties. Down the road from the Delancey development, Milton, 53, his wife Cecilia, 50, and two children live in a private rented studio flat. They have been waiting on the council register for a three-bedroom flat for three years. “It’s been a very hard time, not only for me, but for my children since they translate for me and help me with the documents I present to the council,” said Milton, who declined to give his full name. His children eat, sleep and do their homework in the same room. “Housing shouldn’t be an asset,” said Elizabeth Wyatt, from campaign group Housing Action Southwark and Lambeth. “Good quality social housing, where communities can thrive and build roots, should be a right.” Southwark council said: “The 35% affordable housing offer, which included 116 social rent homes, was the maximum we could reasonably secure for the Elephant and Castle development. We are committed to providing 2,500 new council homes across the borough by May 2022.” Others think these expensive developments will take more refining. “There is some smoke and mirrors happening with these developers,” said John, a marketing manager and resident of Hurlock Heights, a new tower in Elephant and Castle (he declined to give his full name). The building hosts a mix of properties; build to rent, shared ownership and homes for sale. He feels his flat doesn’t match the leafy, high-spec complex in the brochure, and residents have complained about high service charges. “Our rooftop garden is kept in such a poor state. Because residents are walking their pets there, the grass is all dead,” said John. He said not being a pet owner was even more frustrating because when he originally bought the flat, nothing in the advertisement or contract said animals were allowed. There are lessons for the build-to-rent developers from elsewhere in Europe. In Germany, Berliners last year voted on a controversial property expropriation bill to take 240,000 properties, or 11% of all apartments in Berlin, from corporate landlords.A few years ago, aged 24, Anouar Kaddour Cherif found himself in exile from his native Algeria and living in Switzerland, which he describes as “a refuge for my musical fingers to find expression”. His debut album is a deft blend of jazz and Arab-Andalucian tradition, led by his own mandole – a 10-stringed lute – alongside bass, drums and bass clarinet, the last an unusual instrument skilfully handled by one Clément Meunier. The quartet conjure a variety of moods from that configuration. Opener Sans Pap (a pun on no paper/no pope) is exuberant, led by Cherif’s rippling runs, and there’s a similar joyousness to tracks such as Savage Butterfly and Virgule, with its Indian melody and driving drums. It’s a communal effort, with Meunier’s burbling woodwind (with none of the clarinet’s usual shrillness) offsetting the twang of the lute. The record’s more meditative pieces are just as engaging. The first of two vocal outings, Call of the Night, conjures a humid North African evening, with glimpses of “staggering bodies in the shadows”. Better still is the waltz-time Amiret Erriyam, where Cherif slips between nostalgia, despair and the determination to start anew; like the rest of the album, a piece of musical autobiography.I’ve just been standing for 10 minutes at a moderately quiet junction near where I work in Cambridge. During that time I’ve seen six electric vehicles (EVs) – three VW ID.3s, a Nissan Leaf, a Nissan white van and a Renault Zoe. Three years ago, if I’d been standing at the same spot, I’d have seen precisely zero such vehicles. And what that brought to mind was Ernest Hemingway’s celebrated reply to the question: how does one go bankrupt? “Two ways,” he said. “Gradually, then suddenly.” Something similar is going on in relation to adoption of EVs in Britain. The hockey-stick graph is common in consumer technologies. We saw it in the early years of mobile phones, when text messaging was ignored by adults as an inferior form of email. But when pay-as-you-go tariffs arrived and teenagers could have phones, SMS use suddenly shot skywards. The arrival of kids represented a tipping point – a point in time when a group rapidly changes its behaviour by widely adopting a previously rare practice. Britain hasn’t reached a tipping point with EVs yet, and so the first question is: when is it likely to occur? It needs to be earlier than most people think, because the government has decreed that sales of new petrol and diesel cars must cease by 2030. The second question, then, is: what will persuade – or force – people to change their cars? The best place to look for answers is Norway, the one country that has been through the tipping point. Ten years ago, diesel cars accounted for 75% of new sales there. Today they make up just 2.3%. Two-thirds of all new cars sold there in 2021 were EVs and the predictions are that proportion will reach 80% this year. Ye olde internal combustion engine seems destined for extinction in that particular part of the frozen north. How did Norway do it? Partly through luck: it’s a small country (population 5.5 million) which has abundant supplies of hydroelectric energy and – ironically – massive fossil-fuel reserves, the income from which is placed in a sovereign wealth fund and can be invested in all kinds of better ideas than burning them. The second factor was public opinion: people have been campaigning for EVs in Norway since the 1990s when a celebrated pop star and an environmentalist put an electric motor into a Fiat Panda and continually drove it through motorway tolls without paying until the resulting publicity made electrification a public issue. But the third – and most significant – factor was government action. Norway, like all the Scandinavian democracies, is a high-tax society, and the taxes on imported cars were high – 25% VAT and a hefty registration fee. Both were waived for EVs. Motorway toll charges were removed for electric vehicles in 1997, city parking was made free for EVs in 1999 and access to bus lanes granted in 2005. The country installed 16,000 public charging stations (including 3,300 fast chargers). In the end, if you were a Norwegian contemplating buying a new car, going electric became a no-brainer. And Norway is well on its way to being an EV-only society by 2025. So that’s how to do it. You just need lashings of money, a political system that responds to public opinion and a government that knows what it’s doing. Which is why it would be unwise to bet on the UK meeting its deadline of being an EV-only society by 2030 – a failure that would have pleased Douglas Adams (of blessed memory). “I love deadlines,” he once said, “I love the whooshing noise they make as they go by.” And the great thing about EVs is that they don’t growl, they merely whoosh. What I’ve been reading Keep a cool head Elizabeth M Renieris calls for informed scepticism towards the hype surrounding Web3 in an essay for the Centre for International Governance Innovation, and her insights are a pretty good example. China’s gamble Dimitar Gueorguiev, author of Retrofitting Leninism, has written a terrific essay in Noema magazine on Xi Jinping’s bet that tech will enable him to avoid the fate of past totalitarians. Putin makes his move There’s a remarkable long blogpost by historian Adam Tooze on his Substack about what’s likely to happen in Ukraine.Royal Mail received more than a million complaints from householders last year, the highest level for a decade. An analysis of Royal Mail quality service reports reveals that it investigated 1,135,441 consumer complaints in the year to 28 March 2021. This is an increase of nearly 50% compared with the previous year. The surge in complaints is revealed as the company is under fire for delays in postal districts across the country. The Observer last week revealed that more than 120 postal districts experienced delays over the Christmas and new year period. The regulator Ofcom has said it is closely monitoring the situation and will take action if necessary. In 2020-21, Royal Mail also missed many of its key targets. It delivered about 75% of first-class letters the next working day, compared with its target of 93%. The price of a first-class stamp has risen 21% during the pandemic and is now 85p. Royal Mail has a near-monopoly over letter deliveries to the front door and has faced claims in parliament that it has prioritised parcels over letters because it is in fierce competition with rival operators, including Amazon. Royal Mail said it warned customers that its service was likely to be disrupted by Covid-19 because of an increase in parcel volumes, social distancing requirements and staff absences. Customers have complained of delays of up to an hour when phoning Royal Mail customer service agents to complain about missing post. Lorna Scott Fox, 67, a writer who lives in east London, said her postal deliveries had stopped for about three weeks in December and she had still not taken down her Christmas cards because they only arrived this month. She said that when she phoned Royal Mail to complain, she faced a wait of about 50 minutes to speak to a customer service agent. “The delays are dreadful, but it’s not surprising because there must be hundreds of people ringing up. I still have not had any response to my complaint.” Residents in East Dulwich in south-east London have launched a petition complaining about delays after the closure of a mail depot. It says: “It would be easy to blame all this on Covid but the problems existed long before Covid and they are likely to continue long into the future unless something is done. We demand a plan of action from Royal Mail to solve this.” Citizens Advice said the postal service needed to improve information to customers, including the length of likely delays. Matthew Upton, director of policy at Citizens Advice, said: “Royal Mail must do more to reduce these delays and, if these issues become a long-term trend, the regulator Ofcom must be ready to take action.” The most recent quality-of-service reports for Royal Mail show it is still failing to hit regulated targets, but the company said its performance is improving. An Ofcom spokesperson said: “We know how important a reliable postal service is to customers, and we can take action if Royal Mail fails to meet our annual targets.“We closely monitor its delivery performance throughout the year, and have made it clear to the company that it must improve as the impacts of the pandemic subside. We will assess Royal Mail’s compliance after it has reported on its overall performance for the whole financial year.”Royal Mail bosses said postal workers have done an “extraordinary job” but the service has faced a significant increase in workloads. It says its policy is to treat parcels and letters with “equal importance”. A Royal Mail spokesperson said: “The overwhelming majority of all mail is safely and correctly delivered by our postmen and women, with just one complaint for around every 10,000 items of mail handled by Royal Mail in 2020-21. “Where something goes wrong, our aim is to promptly deal with the problem and rectify it as soon as possible. We are the only UK delivery company that publishes an annual complaints report, as well as a quality of service report which is subject to some of the most rigorous standards of any major European country.”The long-awaited first meeting between Shishkin and Energumene lived up to every expectation here on Saturday, as the champion two-mile chasers in Britain and Ireland duelled around Ascot in the Clarence House Chase, setting up a final battle for the winning post that no one who was here to see it is ever likely to forget. It was Shishkin who finally got to the line a length in front, having apparently been on the back foot for much of the race as Energumene cut out the running. There was a sudden peck from Shishkin early on the second circuit which padded Energumene’s lead and Nicky Henderson’s chaser needed to be ridden by Nico de Boinville to close the gap as Paul Townend turned for home apparently going the better of the two. Energumene had been backed from 13-8 to 5-4 in the hours before the race and traded at 1-9 in running as he powered towards the final fence, still just over a length to the good. Shishkin, though, has an exceptional finishing kick. The question now for backers of the 4-5 favourite was whether he could still find it at the end of such a fiercely run race. He could, and De Boinville rode a wave of noise from the stands as Shishkin closed in on his rival and then swept into the lead a few strides from the line. He crossed it a length in front, with First Flow, last year’s Clarence House winner, 18 lengths further back in third. Fans and professionals alike were looking both forward and back as the two horses returned to unsaddle. Forward to their next encounter, probably in the Queen Mother Champion Chase at Cheltenham on 16 March, and back into racing history, to measure the moment against the great head-to-heads of the last 50 years. “It was built up and it produced,” Henderson said. “A race like that goes back to the Grundy and Bustino days [in the 1975 King George at Ascot] and he [Shishkin] only lives about four boxes from where Grundy did [at Seven Barrows in Lambourn]. “They [De Boinville and Townend] said to each other going down the hill, ‘We’re flat to the boards’. It had to be that, there was no point hiding. “There were moments it looked as if we weren’t going as well, but he stays very well. The great thing is they’ve both come home safe and well … and there’s going to be a rematch.” Willie Mullins, Energumene’s trainer, was also looking forward to the Festival while finding reasons why it could be difficult for his horse to turn the form around. “We have no excuses,” Mullins said. “We ran a cracker, jumped well and did everything right. I was watching my own horse but Shishkin made two mistakes, I think, so that would leave you to think we have a bit to go yet before we beat him.” Shishkin was a shade of odds-against for the Champion Chase before Saturday’s race but is now top-priced at 8-11 with Unibet, while Energumene can be backed at 3-1 for one of the few races at the Festival that Mullins has yet to win. The one-length margin here on Saturday was a result to warm the handicappers’ hearts, as it reflected exactly the 1lb difference in the two horses’ ratings beforehand: 172 to 171. Both are eight-year-olds with – all being well - two or three seasons of top-flight competition still ahead, and even if Shishkin and Energumene never meet again, we will always have Ascot. Cheltenham, though, with six or seven times as many racegoers in the stands, promises to be better yet. Pemberley the pick in Surrey National The Sussex National at Plumpton this month looks like the strongest form before the Surrey National on Sunday, the most attractive race by far from a betting point of view on the final afternoon of the Winter Million meeting at Lingfield. Go Whatever was seven lengths in front of Pemberley (3.35) there, responding well to a first-time visor, but he is 7lb worse off for the rematch and that could make all the difference on the stamina-sapping ground. Lingfield 1.20: Ballygrifincottage fully justified Dan Skelton’s decision to pitch him straight into Grade Two company for his hurdling debut, finishing six lengths behind Blazing Khal at Cheltenham in December. Normal improvement should give him the beating of the more experienced Fameaftertheglory. Lingfield 1.50: War Lord was no match for leading Arkle contender Edwardstone in a Grade One last time but a repeat of his form at Carlisle in November could well be enough here. Lingfield 2.25: Just three runners for a £100,000 race, though all have a serious chance. Marginal preference is for Darver Star, who returned to something like his best form at Punchestown last month, pulling 20 lengths clear of the runner-up in a decent time. Thurles 2.40: Minella Melody was very useful over hurdles last season, finishing seven lengths behind Stormy Ireland in the Mares’ Champion Hurdle at Punchestown in May, and is the type to be as good, if not better, over fences. Lingfield 3.00: Bristol De Mai has his ground but is still a difficult horse to back with confidence after an error-strewn performance before being pulled up in the Betfair Chase in November. The consistent Dashel Drasher, with just 1lb to find on the official ratings, looks the better proposition at around 3-1. Thurles 3.15: All four runners have at least one Grade One win to their name over fences but Allaho, last year’s impressive Ryanair Chase winner, looked as strong as ever on his seasonal reappearance in the John Durkan and progressed from race-to-race last year.Alex de Minaur had not even finished winning his third-round match when the contrasts with Nick Kyrgios were drawn. By the time a photo of his adorable golden retriever, Enzo, was being beamed around Rod Laver Arena during his post-match interview, the dichotomy had written itself. Here was Australia’s quiet achiever, a man of pure intent and earnest endeavour. Kyrgios, that brash entertainer who craves the headlines, had cast a high-profile shadow out of which other locals could only hope to step. Cue the emergence of de Minaur, the last Australian man standing at Melbourne Park – a man for his country rather than for himself. He is the quintessential Davis Cup player, Australia’s 109th representative; we know this because he has the number tattooed on his chest. He is the quiet to Kyrgios’s loud. The humility to his ego. The cute, well-looked-after puppy to his callously smashed racket. But to define de Minaur using such one-dimensional tropes does him – and Kyrgios, who is not the devil incarnate – a disservice as a tennis player. De Minaur’s game has been sharp and implausibly quick in its own right since his breakout as a teenager about five years ago. And though he has not always produced his best at grand slams – his best run was the quarter-finals at the 2020 US Open – he may yet do so at this one. Saturday’s straight-sets defeat of the Spaniard Pablo Andújar was a performance befitting a 22-year-old who, only three weeks ago, also beat the world No 7, Matteo Berrettini, at the ATP Cup. In August last year he was ranked 17th. Since then he has picked and chosen events and duly dropped down to 42, and was handed the 32nd and last seed in Melbourne by virtue of Casper Ruud’s pre-tournament exit through injury. But now he is in the fourth round and, based on his current form, he could well progress deeper into the second week, with the fourth seed, Stefanos Tsitsipas, potentially waiting in the quarter-finals and the second seed, Daniil Medvedev, in the semis. One might not have had cause to ponder this two days ago, when de Minaur impressed when he won his second-round match – his first win on centre court from two attempts – in a couple of short hours before the evening’s headline act of Kyrgios v Medvedev. But there was ample time to do so throughout this 6-4, 6-4, 6-2 victory a composed, assured performance, played out during the primetime evening session in front of Rod Laver himself. De Minaur barely blinked each time he broke Andújar, attacking his serve and backing him into a corner until there was simply no escape. He squeezed into positions one should not squeeze into and found gaps that should not be found against a serve-volleyer who does not offer many openings. Even Andújar – a hitting partner of de Minaur in Spain, where the Australian spends half of his time – applauded an elegant lob which came from beyond the baseline, sailed over his head and kissed the outside his own baseline. “I’m happy with where my level is at, so I’m just taking care of business,” de Minaur said. “I’m very happy I was able to do that in the first week of the slam. “We’re not done, but what I’m most proud of myself was maybe I didn’t play my best level throughout the three matches, but I was solid and I got the win and I didn’t spend eight hours on court. “I went out there, did what I needed to do, great attitude, positive vibes, and got the job done. So that’s also a confidence-booster for sure.” In the last 16 he will play the 20-year-old Italian Jannik Sinner, the 11th seed with a potent backhand and fearless approach. “I hit with Jannik in Sydney,” he said. “I’ve hit with him a lot. I’ve played him. I know what’s coming: immense firepower. I’m going to have to be ready to not get bullied around the court and really take it to him.” When he does, he will not do so as the antidote to Kyrgios, but merely a different type of player with a different personality who can be enjoyed on his own merits.Residents of a Pennsylvania county were warned on Saturday not to approach a monkey still missing after a crash involving a pickup towing a trailer taking about 100 of the animals to a research laboratory. State troopers urged people not to look for or capture the cynomolgus monkey following the Friday afternoon crash on a state highway near an Interstate 80 exit in Montour county. “Anyone who sees or locates the monkey is asked not to approach, attempt to catch, or come in contact with the monkey. Please call 911 immediately,” a tweet said. Several monkeys escaped after the collision between the pickup and a dump truck but as of Saturday morning only one remained unaccounted for, officials said. The Pennsylvania Game Commission and other agencies were searching in frigid weather. The truck had been on its way to a lab, a state trooper, Andrea Pelachick, told the Daily Item newspaper of Sunbury. The location of the lab and the type of research for which the monkeys were destined weren’t clear, but cynomolgus monkeys are often used in medical studies. A paper posted on the website of the National Center for Biotechnology Information refers to them as the most widely used primate in preclinical toxicology studies. Trooper Laura Lesher said state police secured the scene for the Pennsylvania Department of Health and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The condition of the motorists wasn’t clear, nor was it clear if any citations were issued. A witness, Michelle Fallon, told the Press Enterprise newspaper of Bloomsburg she spoke with the pickup driver and a passenger after the crash. The driver appeared to be disoriented, and the passenger thought he might have injured his legs, she said. Crates littered the road as troopers searched for monkeys, rifles in hand. Valley Township firefighters used thermal imaging to locate the animals and a helicopter assisted, the Press Enterprise reported. The pickup was heading west on Interstate 80 when it got off at the Danville exit then immediately tried to get back on, driving across the other lane, the newspaper reported. Fallon told the Press Enterprise she was behind the pickup when it was hit on the passenger side by the dump truck, tearing off the front panel of the trailer and sending more than a dozen crates tumbling out. She and another motorist who stopped to help were standing near the scene when the other driver said he thought he saw a cat run across the road, Fallon said. Fallon peeked into a crate and saw a small monkey looking back at her, she told the newspaper. “They’re monkeys,” she told the other motorist. With Associated PressExactly. With Florence Given (Somethin’ Else) | somethingelse.com Desperately Seeking Wisdom | desperatelyseekingwisdom.com The MLK Tapes (iHeartPodcasts/Tenderfoot TV) | apple.com BBC Sounds Audio Lab | BBC Sounds Florence Given, 23, is an illustrator and the bestselling author of Women Don’t Owe You Pretty. Her drawings have a kitsch 1960s Pucci feel; her writing, like her social media, is punchy, feminist, sexual and funny. She has a 600,000-strong Instagram following of, mostly, other young women. So, a huge, ready-made audience and an acknowledged desire to be seen and heard… she’s the perfect new podcast host. You could be snooty about this, bemoan her lack of broadcasting experience, but some people are born for the public eye, and Given is one. And here is her new podcast, Exactly, in which she promises to discuss “really meaty and broad topics” in “conversations that allow for complexity”. Her topics are: sex, social media, feminism, relationships and body image. Perhaps not as broad as she claims, but this show sits firmly within Given’s world, which is all about promoting other noisy, sexually confident women. Et voilà! Her first interviewee is Erica Storm, who’s a dominatrix and, more interestingly, runs sexual self-empowerment classes. Storm gets her pupils to shout “pussy power” and look at their vulvas in a mirror. None of this is radical, or hasn’t been done before (Vagina Monologues; Our Bodies, Ourselves), but every generation of young women needs guidance to negotiate the slings and arrows of the patriarchy, as well as the shame and fear that can result. Given and Storm together are loud, funny and relentlessly positive; the show is one long “yas kween!”. At one point, Storm informs us that she replied to a work colleague’s question by saying: “I’ll have to ask my pussy and get back to you.” You’d have to be a right curmudgeon not to smile, and Given greets most of Storm’s answers with “Incredible! I love it!” There are tweaks that could improve things: Given’s opening five short questions are pretty lame, while the closing advice-to-listeners section is hit and miss. One answer, about a man not wanting to use condoms, was excellent: “Safe sex is self-care.” Another, for a woman who’d never had an orgasm, could have been more helpful. Still, these are niggles. Exactly is a proper blast, a pie-in-the-face slap of upbeat enthusiasm that will, you hope, help less assertive young women dance through their days into sexually satisfying evenings. Exactly is, despite its “you be you” mantra, a self-improvement show (“do the work!”). Seemingly very different but secretly along the same lines, Desperately Seeking Wisdom is a new podcast from Craig Oliver, who used to be director of communications for David Cameron, when Cameron was PM. Oliver’s old job, plus his other, very impressive stint as a TV news editor, mean that he has a bulging contact book. His first interviewees are George Alagiah, Richard Curtis and Ruth Davidson. All three interviews are definitely worth your time, because all these people are interesting, and of an age and personality where they’re happy to talk. But they’re pulled a little off course (especially Davidson) by Oliver’s desire to make his interviewees delve more deeply into their tough times and tell him how to live “simply”. Welcome, yet again, to midlife crisis man. I don’t want to be mean – I’ve written a book on midlife crises myself – but the MLC of the rich man is always the same: “Oops, I spent the whole of my life working ridiculously hard for corporations, stoking my ego and my pension, and now I find that I don’t know my family and my job doesn’t mean anything, whither me?” Yes, who knew that shilling for the Tories would leave you wondering what to do with your life? Oliver seems like a nice enough guy, and his podcast is good. I just wish it wasn’t called Desperately Seeking Wisdom, when the wisdom he seeks has been staring most people in the face for years. (As an aside, he could try reading some Jung or Tolstoy’s The Death of Ivan Ilyich or anything by Oliver Burkeman, whose series The Death of Nuance series was repeated last week on Radio 4 and was as excellent as the first time round.) Or he could take his mind off his own self – often a good idea – by listening to The MLK Tapes. This podcast started just under a fortnight ago and went straight to the top of the iTunes charts. Martin Luther King Day was on 17 January this year, and it’s more than 50 years since King was shot in Memphis by felon-on-the-run James Earl Ray. Writer and podcaster Bill Klaber has been given taped interviews with various people who were nearby when the assassination occurred. The link is another Bill – Bill Pepper – himself a close acquaintance of the civil rights leader. Pepper came into King’s orbit after Pepper wrote about Vietnam war atrocities. Their friendship led to King making an anti-Vietnam war speech in 1967, and Pepper makes a good case for this being a tipping point for the US federal authorities wanting King to disappear. The first episode drops several interesting truth bombs, including how King’s usual all-black security team was suddenly reassigned before Memphis, and that his room at the Lorraine Motel was changed for one with an outside balcony. It’s fascinating, incendiary, convincing stuff – it reminds me a little of James Ellroy’s books – and another feeder for anyone who likes to lip-smack over American conspiracies. Finally, a small hoorah for the BBC’s Audio Lab, an initiative that invited new podcast-makers to submit their ideas to be made as BBC Sounds podcasts. Last week it announced its winners and their shows, which include the story of black British activist Michael X, a mother-and-daughter project, and tales from the window boxes and community gardens of the UK’s council estates. This is the smaller stuff that the BBC does so well. Who knows how long it can continue?Our ruling class may have been brazenly wheeling suitcases of cheap plonk past the averted gaze of Metropolitan police officers during the last year of lockdowns, but their voters are increasingly finding themselves destitute, hungry, demoralised and priced out of the cheapest bag of apples at the supermarket. It was reported last week that the consumer price index (CPI) measure for inflation rose to 5.4% in December, the highest level for nearly 30 years. The CPI and the retail price index (RPI) are used interchangeably to document the rising price levels of groceries and household goods across the UK. Yet they only tell a fragment of the story of inflation, and grossly underestimate the true cost-of-living crisis. A collection of 700 pre-specified goods that includes a leg of lamb, bedroom furniture, a television and champagne seems a blunt and darkly comical tool for recording the impact of inflated grocery prices in a country where two and a half million citizens were forced by an array of desperate circumstances to use food banks in the last year. The Smart Price, Basics and Value range products offered as lower-cost alternatives are stealthily being extinguished from the shelves, leaving shoppers with no choice but to “level up” to the supermarkets’ own branded goods – usually in smaller quantities at larger prices. I have been monitoring this for the last decade, through writing recipes on my online blog and documenting the prices of ingredients in forensic detail. In 2012, 10 stock cubes from Sainsbury’s Basics range were 10p. In 2022, those same stock cubes are 39p, but only available in chicken or beef. The cheapest vegetable stock cubes are, inexplicably, £1 for 10. Last year the Smart Price pasta in my local Asda was 29p for 500g. Today, it is unavailable, so the cheapest bag is 70p; a 141% price rise for the same product in more colourful packaging. A few years ago, there were more than 400 products in the Smart Price range; today there are 87, and counting down. The managing director of Iceland, Richard Walker, stated on ITV on Friday that his stores were losing customers “to food banks, and to hunger”. Not to other competitors, not to better offers, but to starvation, and charity. Iceland has pledged to keep its £1 lines at the flat rate of £1 until the end of the year, a commitment to customers at the sharp end that is rare in the cut-throat world of supermarket retail. Last Thursday I was contacted on Twitter by an elderly gentleman who confessed he had eaten a teaspoon of toothpaste for his dinner in order to fool himself into thinking he had chewed, swallowed, tasted and digested something. I relayed this, on Good Morning Britain, to the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, who said he was “appalled” that such things happened in Britain today. Appalled but unsurprised, perhaps, considering the eradication of social support has been Conservative policy for 12 long years. People with very little are often the sharpest of economists and mathematicians, holding dozens of prices in our heads so we can remove objects from the shopping basket at the checkout when the total comes to more than the pittance in our bank account. Juggling late and delayed benefit payments, knocking a bit off each bill to keep the wolves from the door, shopping around for the cheapest school uniform that won’t fall apart in the washing machine, and scrutinising the shelf-edge labels for the “price per 100g” of each product, ignoring the brightly coloured offers. I have been writing about these things for 10 years now. I have given evidence to multiple parliamentary inquiries, led numerous petitions, been consulted on the School Food Plan and the National Food Strategy, spoken twice at the Conservative party conference, and still the realities of the worst of our collective experiences are dismissed by haughty money men as not matching their theoretical lamb-and-champagne metrics. So, along with a team of economists, charitable partners, retail price analysts, people working to combat poverty in the UK, ex-staff from the Office for National Statistics and others who have volunteered their time and expertise, I am compiling a new price index – one that will document the disappearance of the budget lines and the insidiously creeping prices of the most basic versions of essential items at the supermarket. At the very least, it will serve as an irrefutable snapshot of the reality experienced by millions of people. At its best, it may be a warning shot to retailers who keep their £7.50 ready meals and £6 bottles of wine at £7.50 and £6 for a decade, while quadrupling the price of basic stock cubes and broken irregular grains of white rice. This issue isn’t going anywhere, and neither am I.A parcel arrives, inside which is a copy of Kay Dick’s dystopian novel of 1977, They: A Sequence of Unease, and a letter informing me that Faber is to reissue it next month. Crikey, but isn’t this amazing? Dick, who died in 2001, is something of a minority interest at this point. She didn’t write much and what she did is either quite peculiar or quite bad, though I’ll always be fond of Ivy and Stevie, a collection of interviews with Ivy Compton-Burnett and Stevie Smith that wears its eccentricity like some crazy hat (“I realised that she had lovely legs because, quite often, she would delve under her skirt for her handkerchief, which she tucked into her knickers,” Dick writes of the former, on whom she first “called” in 1950.) But if this book’s reappearance is surprising, it’s also ironic. In They, Britain is in the grip of a mercilessly cruel group of philistines: a mob that burns books and paintings, punishing all those who resist. Faber hopes, very laudably, to bring it to a “new generation” of readers and to help it do so, its edition comes with praise from Margaret Atwood and an introduction by Carmen Maria Machado. The wicked thought occurs to me, however, that it’s really publishing itself that most needs this book right now. As Machado notes: “Censorious impulses… and soft bigotry are hardly the exclusive property of the right.” Dick’s novel is reborn in a world in which some imprints (not Faber, I hope) are content to excise completely writers they were delighted to publish only five minutes ago; in which social media seems more and more utterly to terrify editors; and in which, at certain moments, the Society of Authors falls oddly silent. Oh, well. The good news is that this scary little novel can now be theirs – or anyone’s – for just £8.99. Preying on our fears Out in the world again, everything is at once the same and subtly different. On the tube, I find myself transfixed by the ads in my carriage, which now speak with one voice of the pandemic. Like a dandelion poking through a crack in a paving stone, capitalism determinedly locates our weaknesses and anxieties, the better that it might brazenly exploit them. Personalised vitamins (“we know you are weary”), a strange concoction for the turbulent gut, mindfulness delivered to your door in a little cardboard box. Be warned: the snake oil merchants are out in force. Come to the Cabaret… By the time you read this, I will finally have seen Rebecca Frecknall’s new production of Cabaret, starring Eddie Redmayne and Jessie Buckley, a night out I had to remortgage the house to afford. (Those ticket prices really do evoke the Weimar, I can tell you.) Will I be as high as a kite or suffering from the mother of all anticlimaxes? I don’t know. But either way, at least my pre-show nerves will at last be gone. The emails from the theatre last week were enough to bring on an attack of the vapours, their anhedonic tone somewhat at odds with the fact they purport to be from the Kit Kat Club, as if the place really exists. “Action required!” they command, after which there follows a long list of instructions involving Covid tests and arrival times. We have been told to appear a full 75 minutes before curtain up, which seems completely mad, especially since I couldn’t get two seats next to one another. Will we both be allowed to go to the same bar? Or will one of us end up – I’m reading the small print now – at the place that only serves schnapps? • Rachel Cooke is an Observer columnistThe home secretary, Priti Patel, faces calls to overhaul gun licensing laws as campaigners warn a “broken” system is needlessly putting lives at risk. Patel agreed last week to meet Plymouth residents about gun controls after Jake Davison, 22, a licensed gun holder, killed his mother and four passersby, including three-year-old Sophie Martyn, in an attack in the city last August. Luke Pollard, the Labour MP for Plymouth, Sutton and Devonport, said: “The gun control system is broken and needs reform. What we’ve experienced has been so horrific and so awful that we do need to take steps to work out how this can be prevented from happening in the future.” Britain has some of the strictest gun control laws in the world as a result of restrictions brought in after the killing of 16 people in Hungerford in August 1987 and the murder of 16 children and their teacher at Dunblane primary school in March 1996. Handguns are now banned in Britain for most purposes. There are, however, concerns about the licensing regime overseen by police forces. Both gun control campaigners and shooting groups agree that the system is badly under-resourced. One expert at the British Association for Shooting and Conservation (BASC) warned the regime was “close to collapse” and it was likely some guns were now being held illegally because of delays in licence renewals after the Plymouth shootings. Gun control campaigners want major reforms to avoid further tragedies. Gill Marshall-Andrews, of the Gun Control Network, a non-profit organisation formed after the Dunblane tragedy, said: “The problem with gun licensing is that it is grotesquely underfunded and systems are not properly integrated to flag up potential problems. “The system has clearly failed. We have a very low level of gun homicide in this country, but if there was a better licensing system and the police were more vigorous, then we wouldn’t have had some of these tragedies.” The network wants an increase in the licence fees to cover the full cost of policing the system; a national gun hotline for those wishing to record concerns about a gun; and mandatory notification to partners and former partners of an individual making an application. Police forces are responsible for issuing shotgun certificates, which cost £79.50, and firearms certificates, which cost £88 and are mostly for rifles. On 31 March last year, there were 1,379,399 certificated shotguns and 617,171 certificated firearms and sound moderators, which reduce the noise or flash of a weapon, in England and Wales. Bill Harriman, the BASC’s director of firearms, agreed more resources were urgently required and said the licensing system was “shambolic”. The association is urging chief constables to “get a grip”. He said: “We are concerned that firearms licensing is close to collapse. There is a lack of trained personnel, a lack of resources and a lack of consistency in how the scheme is administered by different police authorities. “The delays for renewing a firearms certificate can be two or three months and if the certificate expires those weapons are held illegally.” He said he was very concerned that some weapons were now being held illegally because of recent delays. A report by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire &amp; Rescue Services in 2015 entitled Targeting the Risk warned of the danger of tragedies because of “fundamental gaps” in licensing in England and Wales. It recommended a package of reforms including statutory guidance for police forces and independent scrutiny of decisions. The report’s authors were pessimistic that any of the recommendations would be implemented. They warned: “What is highly likely is that, if change is not effected, there will be another tragedy.” Last August, when Davison went on his rampage, the key recommendation of the report for statutory national guidance of firearms licensing was still not in place. It emerged after the fatal shootings that Davison’s shotgun and certificate had been seized by police in December 2020 after he allegedly assaulted two youths in a park in the city. The weapon and certificate were returned to him the month before the killings after he reportedly attended an anger management course. Police also failed to check his social media accounts, which would have revealed his misogynistic and homophobic views and his presence in online forums for “incels” (men describing themselves as “involuntary celibates”). He compared himself in one YouTube video to the cyborg killer played by Arnold Schwarzenegger in the Terminator films. The firearms licensing department at Devon and Cornwall Police, which was responsible for granting the shotgun certificate to Davison, is under investigation by the Independent Office for Police Conduct. Three employees have been served disciplinary notices warning them their conduct is being scrutinised. The inquests into the people killed by Davison were formally opened last August. New statutory guidance for licensing came into force last November, but campaigners want to see a thorough review of practices and more wide-reaching reforms. People in Plymouth also want a review of rules which permit pump-action shotguns, the type of weapon Davison owned, to be kept in residential areas. The Home Office said: “Following the tragic incident in Plymouth, the home secretary asked all police forces to urgently review their firearms licensing practices. The returns provided reassurance that the police have in place robust processes for issuing and reviewing firearms and shotgun licences. We have been clear that we will update the statutory guidance for firearms licensing should there be lessons learned from this case. But the UK has some of the toughest firearms laws in the world and while we are not complacent about these high standards, thankfully such incidents are rare. “Firearms licensing is an operational matter for individual police forces. Some applications for firearm certificates are inevitably being affected by the Covid-19 pandemic, but normal procedures are being maintained as far as possible.” The National Police Chiefs Council said: “Policing takes the matter of firearm licensing incredibly seriously. Individual forces are responsible for issuing firearms certificates, and will only do so after their application has been assessed by a dedicated team of experts, a robust process of background checks is completed, and the individual meets criteria set out in the Home Office’s national legislation.”“We met when we were five. I don’t know how I would have managed without her.” As children, Barbara Kastelein, from Ashford in Kent, and her best friend, nicknamed “Tulip”, both had alcoholic fathers. Their friendship was an escape from unhappy homes. The best friends are now both 55 and their relationship is as solid as ever. Barbara says they are more like sisters – and still there for each other during tough times. When Barbara’s father died, Tulip drove for hours to be at the funeral and to help Barbara empty her father’s flat. “I can’t imagine life without her,” says Barbara. “She is my guardian angel.” But not all best friendships last. Minreet Kaur, 41, from Hayes, met her best friend when she landed her first job after university. “I trusted her instantly, and she did me. We could talk about anything and always had each other’s back. She even supported me through my divorce. I couldn’t see life without her.” As time went by, Minreet immersed herself in her career while her best friend settled down and had a family. “We found we were leading different lives,” she says. “We don’t keep in touch. I’ve never had such a close friendship since. I miss her. Everyone needs a best friend.” Some of us have a single best friendship that spans our lifetime. We call them on a whim, we trust them completely, they are there for us, and us for them, without question. They are more like family. But, for adults, making friends can be hard. Scientists say it can take more than 200 hours to become close enough to someone to share a real emotional connection. But what if we don’t have a best friend? If we flit in and out of friendships or have no close friends at all – should we be worried? The physiology of best friends We gravitate towards people who are similar to ourselves. Homophily is the concept that similarity makes social connection easier. Now, research has shown that close friends resemble each other not just in manner and appearance, but physiologically too. Scientists at the University of California scanned the brains of a group of students as they watched a series of short videos and found that those who were close showed incredibly similar neural responses. The areas of the brain that responded similarly included those associated with motivation, learning, processing, memory, empathy, and generally making sense of things. The findings suggest we choose friends who interpret and react to the world in a similar way to ourselves. Dr Anna Machin, author of Why We Love: The New Science Behind Our Closest Relationships, is an evolutionary anthropologist who specialises in dyadic relationships – the closeness between two people – whether that’s a parent and child, lovers or best friends. “When we’re with someone we love, we experience a thing called biobehavioral synchrony,” she says. She describes how, when two people are tightly bonded, they mirror each other’s behaviour. They use the same gestures. They pick up the same tone of voice or use the same phraseology. Best friends’ physiology comes into synchrony too – the rhythm of their hearts, body temperature and hormonal responses. Look inside the brain and you’d see synchrony, says Machin, in the gamma waves – the higher cognitive functioning parts of the brain. The London commuter problem So, are we hardwired to seek out a best-friend relationship? Robin Dunbar, emeritus professor of evolutionary psychology at Oxford University, studies the connection between behaviour, cognition and neuroendocrinology – the brain’s regulation of hormonal activity in the body. The maximum number of friendships humans are able to maintain, says Dunbar, is 150. “Dunbar’s number” harks back to the size of prehistoric hunter-gatherer communities but is also true of modern society. However, it’s not always plain sailing when you live in a large group. “Group living can be a major problem for mammals, especially primates. The bigger the group, the more stresses you suffer.” Dunbar describes what he calls the “London commuter problem”, the pressure of living in cramped conditions with other people. It is your closest friends, he says, that make social living possible by keeping others at bay. “Friendships vary in quality and make up a series of layers, or circles. You have an inner core of five and, within that, a layer of 1.5. These are your most intimate friends or your romantic partner. Your inner circle – and within that your best friend for ever – provides a hugely important buffer against the stresses of living in social groups.” The reason the number of people in your innermost circle of friends is 1.5, explains Dunbar, is that for men it tends to be their romantic partner, whereas for women it’s their romantic partner plus a close (usually) female friend. The best antidepressant you can get Dunbar describes the physical benefits of friendship – the calming effect you feel as endorphins are released on social interaction with your “bestie”, as well as the positive effects such close bonds have on the immune system. “A connection of this kind is the best antidepressant you can get,” says Dunbar. Close relationships have been shown to result in lifelong physical and mental health benefits. Research shows people with good social bonds are happier, live longer and have better reproductive health. They are less likely to suffer illness and recover more quickly. They can cope better with stress, and there is less risk of developing addictions or psychopathology. A meta-study of 149 studies found that bonds with close friends could even be more important to your health than losing weight or exercising. In fact, according to a US survey of 20,000 people, not having close relationships can be as bad for your health as smoking 15 cigarettes a day. A mechanism for survival “At the basic level, friends are a mechanism for survival,” says Machin, “but what’s really interesting about friendship, particularly female friendship, is how we often underestimate the importance of that friendship in our lives. We usually put romantic relationships at the top, then maybe your mum and dad, then friends are down here somewhere,” Machin gestures towards the floor, “but actually, for many women, the critical relationship in life is their best friend.” Women, she says, are often more emotionally intimate with their best female friend than they are with their romantic partner. They share their deepest, darkest emotional fears and allow themselves to be more vulnerable in front of their best friend than when they are with their partner. “Women get a really important input from their female friends in terms of their mental wellbeing. If we look at a man’s brain when he’s having deep and meaningful conversation with his closest friend, we see his amygdala – the brain’s fear and risk sensor – fire up, so he’s finding it quite uncomfortable. “In a woman’s brain, a similar conversation with a best friend results in reward chemicals, an increase in oxytocin, a real sense of relaxation – it’s all amazing, it’s a really brilliant experience.” Friendships v acquaintanceships So if we don’t have a best friend, are we broken? “Absolutely not!” says Dr Miriam Kirmayer, a clinical psychologist who specialises in friendship. “Each of our relationships help us meet our need to feel that sense of connection and belonging. This is true of our closest friendships, our acquaintanceships – even our moments of connection with strangers.” Kirmayer says it’s not the label that’s important but that our friendships are reciprocal. Research suggests that up to half of our friendships are actually unreciprocated. “When we feel chosen, that is, that the people we choose are choosing us in return, this is paramount. Healthy close friendships are based on balance and reciprocity.” According to the brain opioid theory of social attachment, social interactions trigger positive emotions when endorphins bind to opioid receptors in the brain. This gives us that feelgood factor that we get from seeing our friends. “Lots of people I’ve interviewed say they felt an absolute high after spending time with a best friend, which carried them through the whole of the next day,” says Machin. Thinking about the neurochemistry explains how during lockdown many people were, in effect, suffering from withdrawal. #justhangingwithmybestie Technology has made it easier to connect with friends – and it has become the norm to publicise our friendships. There are currently almost 69m Instagram posts tagged #bestfriends and the hashtag #IBF (internet best friend) recently clocked more than 25m views on TikTok. But how does this modern manifestation of best-friendship interact with life offline? Social media interactions have been shown to increase closeness between friends who also interact offline, yet social media use has been shown to displace time spent on face-to-face interactions. “You can maintain real friendships online. Social media simply provides a medium of communication,” says Dunbar. “However, [communicating online] is not as gratifying as face-to-face. It only slows the rate of decay of relationships. It won’t stop them decaying eventually.” Machin adds: “It is much harder to maintain relationships online because of the reduction – if not complete lack – of neurochemical release. And there is certainly no biobehavioral synchrony.” Absolute profound love When it comes to the complexity of social bonding, nothing compares to human friendship – and your best friend is the most important of all. “Friendship infiltrates every aspect of our lives, every aspect of our physiology,” says Machin. “It’s astonishing how complicated it is.” At its most basic level, says Machin, friendship is biological bribery. It’s a set of neurochemicals that motivate and reward you for forming and maintaining relationships. It’s a mechanism that has evolved to make sure that you invest in the relationships that are critical to your survival and the survival of the species. It’s through biobehavioral synchrony that we feel that profound connection. We see this in romantic relationships, we see it in relationships between parents and children, and we see it in best friends. While we often look for desirable practical qualities in a romantic partner – would they be a good parent to my children? Do we share similar goals in life? – our priorities for a best friend differ. “In best friendships, we know that the parties are more relaxed, more open with each other,” says Machin, “because they are not always having to remain attractive for their partner.” A best friendship is all about shared humour, values and support. You can live on opposite sides of the Earth and still feel that closeness with your one special friend. “It’s as if every sinew in your body is engaged in having a relationship with that person,” says Machin. “That for me sums up how important best friends are. Evolution has seen fit to engage every mechanism in your body – the behavioural, the physiological, the neurological – to make sure that you’re as tightly bonded to this person as you possibly can be. We wouldn’t have evolved this way if those relationships weren’t critical for survival.”Everton have vowed to ban any fan found to have thrown objects on to the pitch at Goodison Park after several Aston Villa players were struck by a plastic bottle during their side’s 1-0 win over Duncan Ferguson’s team. The former Everton player Lucas Digne and his Villa teammate Matty Cash were both struck on the head by what appeared to be a full bottle of Lucozade as they celebrated Emiliano Buendía’s decisive goal in front of the home section of the Bullens Road Stand. A supporter was arrested at Goodison Park. Several objects were thrown at the Villa players in first-half stoppage time and Everton insist everyone responsible for the disgraceful scenes will be banned. In a statement confirming the arrest, the club said: “Everton security staff and Merseyside police identified the supporter using CCTV footage. Several objects were thrown towards the pitch following Aston Villa’s goal at the end of the first half, with one missile appearing to strike two opposition players. Investigations in conjunction with the police are ongoing, and the club will issue bans to any fans identified throwing objects.” Steven Gerrard made light of the incident but the Aston Villa manager said his players’ reaction was key to an impressive away win. “None of the players have mentioned it. We scored at a really important time and so at half-time it was more about resetting the focus. I haven’t seen anything so I don’t want to comment on any incidents that may or may not have happened. The pleasing thing for me is that the players didn’t mention it and just focused on their football.” Ferguson, who was taking charge of his first game in his second spell as Everton’s caretaker manager, condemned the bottle throwing. “I never saw the incident but I have been told about it,” he said. “It is bang out of order. That is not the way to do things. That is totally wrong.” Several hundred Everton fans staged a sit-in protest that lasted for more than an hour after the final whistle and called for Bill Kenwright, the chairman, plus other board members to leave a club that are in serious relegation trouble. Defeat left Everton with 19 points from 20 games, the club’s lowest points tally at this stage of a season in 24 years. “For me, fans can protest and say what they want because it is their club,” Ferguson said. “They have the right to support their club in any way they want. I know how sick they are. I am gutted as much as them. I am on the floor, I am sick for the fans.”An arm-wrestle, a nonevent, a fair share of the spoils: any of these verdicts might have been apt until, deep into added time, Marcus Rashford finished Edinson Cavani’s cross from the left to send himself, Manchester United, and the Old Trafford faithful into ecstasy. Cue Rashford, who has been off-colour, rushing across the Stretford End to knee-slide, joined by his jubilant teammates. If there may be a debate as to whether any part of Cavani’s arm was offside, Ralf Rangnick deserves full credit as the No 21, Rashford and Anthony Martial – who had played in the Uruguayan – were late attacking substitutions. For Rashford this was a second goal in consecutive outings: across this game and Wednesday’s 3-1 win at Brentford, he has doubled his Premier League output for the season. The forward, like United, may be stirring in the business phase of the campaign. Before the showstopping climax this had been a match of mediocre fare that did not augur well for either team’s Champions League qualification hopes. Yet for United, who leapfrogged West Ham and are fourth, at least overnight, the picture changes after a fifth victory in Rangnick’s eight league games as interim manager. Early on Mason Greenwood had a shot that was blocked when he might have passed – a recurring fault. Bruno Fernandes, too, made the wrong decision when hitting a cross-field pass that lacked power: Jarrod Bowen dragged the ball down, surged forward and let fly, though not on target. Vladimir Coufal then dawdled and was mugged by Fernandes, the right-back having to concede a free-kick. Ronaldo hit this into the wall and Greenwood – again – took aim and once more was unable to test Alphonse Areola, on his first league appearance in West Ham’s goal. United’s one change from Brentford was Harry Maguire in place of the excused Victor Lindelöf, whose home had been broken into during the week. The captain was up against Michail Antonio and the centre-forward’s clumsy touch allowed Maguire to win their first duel. Declan Rice emerged a victor when challenging Ronaldo, sitting the No 7 on his backside with a robust challenge, then laying the ball off. Fernandes’s curving delivery from the left had Ronaldo flinging himself toward – and missing – the ball. Next, poor control from Anthony Elanga, again preferred to Rashford, had Rangnick flinching but this hardly surprised as each team took turns to find a way to founder. For West Ham Manuel Lanzini tapped a pass to Pablo Fornals, received the ball back, and hit it straight out. The closest United offered to a goal-threat before the break was a Ronaldo shout for a penalty when going down under Kurt Zouma’s challenge: Jonathan Moss waved this away correctly. The half petered out, ending with zero shots on target. United were in the same position as at Brentford and an initial burst involving Ronaldo, Alex Telles and Elanga was reminiscent of their second half start there, when the last of that trio scored . Fred drew a first save from either keeper with a fierce drive that Areola punched away. Were United awakening? A Ronaldo back-heel towards Greenwood that had West Ham scrambling suggested as much. The visitors’ response took in Fornals dallying near United’s penalty spot, Bowen firing into the side-netting, and Coufal spraying the ball wildly into touch. Then Bowen drew a foul from Maguire and West Ham had a promising position on the right. Ronaldo, though, headed away Cresswell’s delivery and this led to a United attack and corner. When Telles landed it on Raphaël Varane’s head the centre-back’s flick-on was wide but at least caused “oohs” from the Stretford End as did an Elanga swivel-and-volley that, again, missed. This was the young Swede’s last act, Rangnick deciding he should be hooked for Rashford in the first of the German’s substitutions. The latter’s quick feet were involved in two openings but the first was a detour into a cul-de-sac; the second a swapping of passes with Ronaldo before he ran out of space down the left. As the final whistle approached, Tomas Soucek went close for West Ham with a glancing header that veered past David de Gea’s right post. Then, the goalkeeper’s reflexes stopped Varane scoring inadvertently past him. By the end Cavani and Martial had joined Rashford and Ronaldo for United’s dramatic finish – and win. They will now enjoy their winter break before reconvening at home to Middlesbrough in the FA Cup on 4 February.Eddie Howe has said he does not know whether he will meet Mohammed bin Salman in Jeddah next week but any conversation with Saudi Arabia’s de facto ruler is bound to be considerably easier after this win. Newcastle’s manager is taking his players to a warm-weather training camp on the Red Sea coast on Sunday but at the final whistle he resembled a man feeling the sun on his back for the first time after a long, hard winter. An amalgam of Jonjo Shelvey’s second-half free-kick and a rare mistake on Illan Meslier’s part secured Newcastle their second win of the season, lifting them to the heady heights of 18th place. They have a mere 15 points but are one short of Norwich, four shy of Everton and seven behind Leeds; suddenly one of the Premier League’s greatest escapes look feasible. Marcelo Bielsa’s alternately despairing and infuriated body language highlighted the severity of this blow to his team who, not for the first time, failed to turn dominance into goals before coming undone at a set piece. Patrick Bamford’s long-awaited return to the Leeds attack after injury cannot come soon enough. “It was an opportunity we didn’t take advantage of,” said Bielsa, who accused Newcastle of time-wasting tactics. “We had many moments to unbalance the game but we could not convert. We always got to the final third with ease but could not pick the final pass.” Howe, meanwhile, was busy remembering how to smile. “It was a big test and a massive win,” he said. “We hope it’s a turning point.” Initially, such a watershed appeared unlikely. Only a fine point-blank save from Martin Dubravka kept an early Dan James’s shot out after a wonderfully fluid attacking move featuring Rodrigo and Raphinha as Leeds persistently dissected Newcastle with the ease of a knife slicing through butter. Paul Dummett is an underrated, positionally intelligent, left-back but he joined a long line of counterparts who have struggled to contain Raphinha. On the opposite flank Stuart Dallas impressed as an attacking left-back and his dangerous advances prevented Kieran Trippier from acting as an attacking catalyst. The resultant shortage of crosses left the one-time Leeds striker Chris Wood largely isolated, with his side’s principal hope of a goal hingeing on an odd bright counter-attacking moment, which concluded with Meslier doing well to save Shelvey’s volley. Although Newcastle still need a midfield enforcer capable of anchoring the team effectively, Shelvey had one of his better games with most of Newcastle’s attacking manoeuvres stemming from the playmaker’s feet. In Bamford’s enduring absence, Leeds could not make their dominance and dynamism count and had no one to polish off Raphinha’s deliveries. Jack Harrison should probably have given them the lead but allowed Fabian Schär, who made some vital interceptions, to block his shot and for all their slickness and quickness the home side failed to work Dubravka hard enough. If Newcastle invariably looked in trouble whenever Leeds moved the ball wide, Bielsa became agitated every time Allan Saint-Maximin assumed possession. It was far from Saint-Maximin’s finest hour but he still fazed a Leeds side unable to capitalise on Jamaal Lascelles’s vulnerabilities. Newcastle’s captain has not been at his best lately and he forfeited possession too many times for comfort. Indeed, he limped off after apparently pulling a hamstring attempting to retrieve one such concession near the halfway line. By then Newcastle had already lost Joelinton and Dummett to injury but, for once, their luck was not entirely out. When Diego Llorente dragged back the overlapping Javier Manquillo, on for Dummett, Leeds conceded a free-kick in a dangerous position, just outside the area. Shelvey bent the ball low and its subtle curve evaded the previously assured but horribly wrong-footed Meslier who, having fallen for the deception, could only parry the ball into the back of the net. Llorente subsequently cleared off the line from Ryan Fraser, Saint-Maximin, forlornly, demanded a penalty after Robin Koch’s perceived foul and Meslier kept out Joe Willock’s shot. In-between these highlights, Newcastle infuriated Bielsa by slowing the game down at every opportunity.A Virginia mother was charged with making a threat on school property after she told local board members she would bring “every single gun loaded” if the district instituted a mask mandate. Renewed mask fights were touched off this month after the new Republican governor of Virginia, Glenn Youngkin, issued an executive order making masks optional for students, subject to the preference of parents. In Luray, a small town in the Shenandoah Valley, the governor’s move prompted a special board meeting on Covid-19 mitigation strategies. At the Thursday meeting, Amelia Ruffner King, 42, told school board members: “No mask mandates – my child, my children will not come to school on Monday with masks on. That’s not happening.” She continued: “And I will bring every single gun loaded and ready to – I will,” before she was cut off. “That’s three minutes,” a school official said. Initially, police said they had increased security at schools but not made any arrests. Ruffner King’s statement “absolutely caused public alarm”, police said, adding that she “contacted law enforcement to apologize”. “We have been in contact with the parent who made the statement, she is cooperating with law enforcement,” police said. “This incident is still under investigation.” Police later charged Ruffner King and released her, on a $5,000 bond. After the meeting, school superintendent Antonio Fox said in a letter: “Page county public schools does not take these kinds of statements lightly.” Later that evening, board members voted to move from required universal masking to optional masking. The decision was made in spite of warnings from the superintendent that without masks, more students may be forced to quarantine if a student is found to be infected.If you like delays then this match had them all. First there was a serious clash of heads that caused two Brentford players to be substituted with suspected concussions, before play was stopped again during the first half for more than 15 minutes after officials spotted an “unofficial drone” circling overhead. One day after Watford’s game with Norwich was delayed by floodlight problems, a police helicopter patrolled the skies throughout the second half to ensure the drone did not return as Rúben Neves sealed a fourth victory in five league games for a rapidly improving Wolves. There were certainly no such incidents the last time Brentford hosted Wolves in the top flight more than 70 years ago, with that campaign ending in relegation despite their 4-1 victory in 1947 at Griffin Park. Sitting comfortably in mid-table and seemingly within reach of safety in their first experience of the Premier League, Thomas Frank’s side must have seen this as a great opportunity to take another giant step towards their ultimate goal, but they have now suffered four straight defeats. To compound matters, Frank was shown a yellow and then a red card after the final whistle for confronting the referee, Peter Bankes. “It just wasn’t our day,” said Frank, who revealed he is close to agreeing a contract extension until 2025. Wolves, who were without the injured Raúl Jiménez and brought on the potentially Tottenham-bound Adama Traoré for the last 15 minutes, have emerged as surprise contenders for the top six thanks to some impressive performances: they came into this game having conceded only one goal in five matches since losing to Manchester City last month. After a slow start here they made the most of their opportunities following the repeated delays and were deserved winners despite being pegged back after taking the lead through João Moutinho. “It was a very hard situation with all the delays,” said the Wolves manager, Bruno Lage. “But I think we did very well in the second half and we showed personality to play our game.” Brentford had looked the more dangerous team until the wind was somewhat taken out of their sails after 20 minutes, when a nasty clash of heads between Rico Henry and Mathias Jensen led to a long delay. Their replacements had been on the pitch for less than three minutes when play was stopped again, although this time it was due to the drone loitering overhead. The stadium announcer confirmed that the players would have to leave the pitch due to Premier League rules – “don’t blame us, blame the drone” – and it was more than a quarter of an hour before they re-emerged. Yet aside from a couple of half-chances for Wolves there was not much else to raise the temperature on a cold west London afternoon and, a full 71 minutes after it had kicked off, the first half finally came to an end. It seemed like a bad joke when play was once more delayed at the start of the second period while Bankes adjusted his equipment in the tunnel, with Lage and Frank at least able to see the funny side as they waited patiently on the touchline. Play finally resumed at just after 4.30pm and it did not take long for Wolves to find the breakthrough thanks to a masterful strike from Moutinho . The Portugal midfielder play a one-two with Nélson Semedo before curling home with the outside of his boot from inside the area. The hosts thought they could have had a penalty when Ivan Toney was clattered by José Sá after a free-kick, with replays suggesting Fábio Silva may have nudged the Brentford forward. Both sets of fans had reason to feel aggrieved when Bankes initially showed a red card to Toti Gomes for his foul on Vitaly Janelt before being asked to consult VAR and overturning his decision. But the home supporters’ disappointment turned to glee immediately when Toney slammed home Bryan Mbeumo’s free-kick on the volley to equalise. Their joy was shortlived, however, as Wolves kept the ball alive after another attack by the impressive Semedo and Neves was given too much time to pick his spot and seal another crucial victory.Premier League: Three outstanding goals only constituted half the story on an extremely eventful afternoon at the Brentford Community Stadium. Ed Aarons was there to see it all go down ... Premier League: Southampton right-back Kyle Walker-Peters has just scored his first ever top flight goal and it was an absolute beauty. Read all about it with Scott Murray ... Championship: The interrupted game between Coventry City and QPR has finished 2-1 to the side from West London. Premier League: Jonjo Shelvey’s second half free-kick was enough to secure Newcastle’s second win of the Premier League season ahead of their warm-weather break in Saudi Arabia. Louis Taylor reports ... Premier League: Arm-wrestle, tug of war, non-event, a fair share of the spoils: this was precisely where this contest was heading until, deep into added time, Marcus Rashford finished Edinson Cavani’s cross from the left to send himself, Manchester United and the Old Trafford faithful into ecstasy, writes Jamie Jackson. Premier League: We’ve had bloodshed, drones, delays, a malfunctioning referee’s battery pack and three goals during a very eventful afternoon at the Brentford Community Stadium. The game ends with Wolves taking the points and Thomas Frank being shown a red card for dissent as he stormed on to the pitch at the final whistle to protest about something or other. Brentford 1-2 Wolves: Adama Traore looks to have scored Wolves’ third with a cracking shot after latching on to a weighted pass from Ruben Neves but his effort is ruled out for offside after a VAR intervention. My word, that was tight. Premier League: Emi Buendia scored the winner for Villa while an Everton fan was arrested under suspicion of throwing a bottle that hit two different players in the subsequent celebrations. Andy Hunter was there for the Guardian ... Brentford 1-2 Wolves: We’re into at least seven minutes of added time and Wolves goalkeeper Jose Sa has just been booked for time-wasting. He wasn’t happy about it and complained at length to the referee, who must have been tempted to show him a second yellow. Championship: Nottingham Forest’s push for a place in the Championship play-offs was boosted by a dominant second-half display illuminated by goals from Lewis Grabban and Brennan Johnson, writes Peter Lansley from the City Ground. Premier League: THe runaway league leaders are at St Mary’s, where Southampton manager Ralph Hassenhuttl has said his side will sit deep and try to defend but “not hide and try to play brave”. Find out if that approach goes as horribly wrong as I suspect it might with Scott Murray ... Premier League: Wolves restore their lead as Ruben Neves rounds off a fine passing move with a trademark strike from outside the Brentford penalty area. Everton 0-1 Aston Villa Brentford 1-1 Wolves (latest) Leeds United 0-1 Newcastle United Manchester United 1-0 West Ham Southampton 0-0 Manchester City (5.30pm) View the Premier League table Championship results Bristol City 3-2 Cardiff City Nottingham Forest 2-1 Derby County Bournemouth 0-1 Hull City Birmingham City 2-1 Barnsley Blackpool 1-0 Millwall Coventry City 1-2 QPR (latest) Reading 3-4 Huddersfield Town Sheffield United 2-0 Luton Town Stoke City 2-3 Fulham Swansea City 1-0 Preston West Brom 3-0 Peterborough United View the Championship table Premier League: In the delayed game at the Brentford Community Stadium, Ivan Toney drills into the bottom corner after being teed up by Bryan Mbeumo. Premier League: Newcastle hold on to win their second Premier League game in 21 attempts this season. Jonjo Shelvey scored their winner with a free-kick where Leeds goalkeeper Ilan Meslier failed to distinguish himself. Leeds 0-1 Newcastle: Meslier saves brilliantly from Joe Willock to keep Leeds last-ditch hopes alive. Premier League: Manchester leave it late but take all three points with a late smash-and-grab from Marcus Rashford. Premier League: For the second time in as many games, Marcus Rashford comes off the bench to score. It’s a tap-in from two yards but was Edinson Cavani offside in the build-up? No he wasn’t - the goal stands!!! Leeds 0-1 Newcastle: Apologies, it was Allan Saint-Maximin who went down in the Leeds penalty area under a challenge from Robin Koch, who got away with one there. Leeds 0-1 Newcastle: Newcastle have a penalty shout turned down for what looked like a blatant foul on Fabian Schar. Championship: West Brom double their lead against Peterborough courtesy of Karlan Grant. Meanwhile at St Andrews, Victor Adeboyejo has pulled a goal back for Barnlsey, who trail Birmingham City 2-1. Southampton: Forster, Walker-Peters, Bednarek, Salisu, Perraud, Redmond, Ward-Prowse, Romeu, Stuart Armstrong, Adams, Broja. Subs: Lyanco, Stephens, Long, Adam Armstrong, Caballero, Elyounoussi, Diallo, Walcott, Valery. Man City: Ederson, Walker, Dias, Laporte, Joao Cancelo, Bernardo Silva, Rodri, Sterling, De Bruyne, Grealish, Foden. Subs: Stones, Ake, Gundogan, Gabriel Jesus, Fernandinho, Carson, Slicker, McAtee, Wilson-Esbrand. Referee: Simon Hooper (Wiltshire) Championship: That West Brom goal I gave to Darnell Furlong appears to have been credited to Cedric Kipre. WHoever scored it, the Baggies still lead Peterborough 1-0. Championship: Darnell Furlong gives West Brom a 1-0 lead over Peterborough United, while Bournemouth fall behind to Ryan Longman goal for Hull City at the Vitality Stadium. Premier League: Jonjo Shelvey curls a free-kick around what looks like a suspiciously poorly-placed defensive wall and inside the far post. Premier League: The deadlock is broken at the Brentford Community Stadium. Joao Moutinho plays a one-two with Semedo on the edge of the Brentford box and strokes a right-footed effort into the far corner. Leeds 0-0 Newcastle: Ahead of a week in which Newcastle are supposed to be bringing in several new recruits, Eddie Howe loses a third player to injury in one game. Jamaal Lascelles is the latest to limp off and it looks like he’s pulled a hamstring. Martin Dubravka takes the captain’s armband. Brentford 0-0 Wolves: The players of both side come out for their delayed second half, only for referee Peter Banks to trot back to his dressing-room because there’s something wrong with the battery pack on his arm. Championship: Luton’s Reece Burke is sent off for a last-man foul on Rhian Brewster, who he wrestled to the ground. In other news, Coventry’s game against QPR has been delayed for 10 minutes for - I think - a medical emergency of some sort in the crowd. It remains 1-1 at the Coventry Building Society Arena. Leeds 0-0 Newcastle: Newcastle are on the ropes and lose another player to injury. Paul Dummett is the latest casualty although I’m not sure exactly what’s wrong with him. Championship: A Lewis Baker screamer from distance draws Stoke City level with Fulham at the Bet365 Stadium. Manchester United 0-0 West Ham: Marcus Rashford comes on for Anthony Elanga, who got the nod ahead of his more senior Manchester United team-mate today. Championship: Danny Ward scores his third goal of the afternoon to put Huddersfield 4-3 up at Reading. Championship: Blackpool go ahead against Millwall, with Shayne Lavery scoring the only goal of the afternoon so far at Bloomfield Road. Brentford 0-0 Wolves: It’s finally half-time at the Brentford Community Stadium, where play was delayed due to an overhead drone and some unrelated injuries. Championship: Sheffield United score their second in three minutes, with Jack Robinson heading home a free-kick to make it 2-0. Coventry have equalised against QPR, with Jordan Shipley doing the honours. Championship: Nutmegging the goalkeeper, Rhian Brewster scores for Sheffield United to give them a one-goal lead over Luton Town at Bramall Lane. Meanwhile at the Liberty Stadium, Ryan Manning sends a screamer from distance fizzing past Preston goalkeeper Daniel iversen to give his side a 1-0 lead. Birmingham City have doubled their lead against Barnsley, with Scott Hogan doing the honours for the home side, who lead 2-0. Manchester United 0-0 West Ham: Alphonse Areola saves the first shot on target in the game at Old Trafford. Fred pulled the trigger but West Ham’s goalkeeper was able to keep it out. Brentford 0-0 Wolves: We’re 15 minutes of the 19 added on at Brentford in after the break in play but the action on the pitch is far less entertaining than that which preceded it in the sky above. There are no chances of note to report, although I can reveal that Ivan Toney has shorn his dreads and is now sporting what I believe the kids call “a shape-up”. Bristol City 3-1 Cardiff City (result) Nottingham Forest 2-1 Derby County (result) Bournemouth 0-0 Hull City Birmingham City 1-0 Barnsley Blackpool 0-0 Millwall Coventry City 0-1 QPR Reading 3-3 Huddersfield Town Sheffield United 0-0 Luton Town Stoke City 1-2 Fulham Swansea City 0-0 Preston West Brom 0-0 Peterborough United Everton 0-1 Aston Villa (result) Brentford 0-0 Wolves (latest) Leeds United 0-0 Newcastle United Manchester United 0-0 West Ham Southampton v Manchester City (5.30pm) Brentford 0-0 Wolves: The drone has buggered off and the players are back out at the Brentford Community Stadium. Between the injuries to Rico Henry and Mathias Jensen, and the aerial intervention from the drone, half-time is some way away. Newcastle 0-0 Leeds: Ilan Meslier saves brilliantly from Chris Wood, who pounces on a bouncing ball in the penalty area from six yards out after a corner. The flag goes up and it turns out the big Kiwi was offside but Meslier didn’t know that. Championship: Reading equalise against Huddersfield at the Madejski, where it’s now 3-3 between the sides. Michael Morrison chips in with the latest. Leeds 0-0 Newcastle: Bad news for Newcastle, who lose Joelinton to a groin injury. It doesn’t look great as he limps off and you’d have to think it could rule him out for six weeks or more. He’ll have a scan tomorrow and in the meantime is replaced by Sean Longstaff. Brentford 0-0 Wolves: This, from our man at the Brentford Community Stadium. Brentford 0-0 Wolves: The drone continues to fly over the Brentford Community Stadium, where the players have been taken off the field. Located just six miles from Heathrow Airport, it’s a bit of a security risk and now a helicopter has been summoned to ... do something or other? They’re hardly going to blast it out of the sky, are they? Championship: Having fallen behind inside a minute, Fulham have now taken the lead against Stoke City. Munez turns in the box and scores his second of the afternoon off the foot of the post. At St Andrews, where fans were protesting about their owners before today’s game, Birmingham City have gone 1-0 up against Barnsley through Miguel Fernandez. Brentford 0-0 Wolves: Both Mathias Jensen and Rico Henry have had to go off to receive treatment for their respective head injuries after the aforementioned clash. Thomas Frank has sent on a pair of concussion substitutes, which means one or both of the stricken players could return. Now there’s more drama at the Brentford Community Stadium as the referee takes the players off the pitch because somebody is flying a drone overhead. No, really. Leeds 0-0 Newcastle: Newcastle finally get a shot off but Ilan Meslier gets down to his right to save superbly from a low Jonjo Shelvey drive from just outside the penalty area. Championship: Archbishop Desmond has left the Madejski. It’s now 3-2 to Huddersfield against Reading after Danny Ward capitalises on a hideous goalkeeping error from Luke Southwood. Championship: George Puscas equalises for Reading against Huddersfield at the Madejski Stadium, where it’s all square between the sides: Archbishop Desmond 2-2. Leeds 0-0 Newcastle: Raphina has a header blocked after the ball bounced his way when Martin Dubravka had rushed out to narrow the angle and block a shot. Brentford 0-0 Wolves: Ouch. Mathias Jensen and Rico Henry have collided in mid-air, clashing heads in the process. Jensen comes out worst from the collision and has blood pouring from a laceration. Manchester United 0-0 West Ham: Cristiano Ronaldo fails to convert a wonderful Bruno Fernandes cross. Manchester United are on top against West Ham but have yet to score. Championship: Huddersfield have come from behind to take a 2-1 lead against Reading. Danny Ward pounces on a rebound to shoot them ahead in Berkshire. Leeds 0-0 Newcastle: Leeds continue to dominate against Newcastle. Dan James brings a very smart save out of Martin Dubravka from close range when he should have scored. Fabian Schar was injured as he slid in with a late lunge in an attempt to block James’s shot and is currently flat on his back receiving treatment. Championship: Reading’s lead against Huddersfield didn’t last long. Daniel Sinani, on loan from Norwich City, equalises for the Terriers. Manchester United 0-0 West Ham: Manchester United win a corner and Bruno Fernandes ... fails to clear the first man. Declan Rice heads clear at the near post for the visitors. Championship: Lucas Joao fires home from close range to give Reading an early lead against Huddersfield. Meanwhile at the Coventry Building Society Stadium, QPR have gone ahead against Coventry City through Andre Gray. Leeds 0-0 Newcastle: Dan James shoots wide from a very tight angle after more good work down the right from Leeds. Championship: Rodrigo Muniz equalises for Fulham against Stoke just one minute and 13 seconds after his side had conceded. Championship: Less than a minute into their game against Fulham, Stoke have taken the lead through D’Margio Wright-Phillips. And Leeds are immediately on the attack in their match against Newcastle at Elland Road, with Raphina galloping down the right flank but unable to get a cross into the opposition box after cutting inside. Premier League: Emi Buendia headed home to only goal of the game to consign Everton to defeat, but Everton fans can take heart from a second half performance in which their team had 15 attempts on goal. Andy Hunter reports ... Bristol City 3-2 Cardiff City Nottingham Forest 2-1 Derby County View the Championship table Premier League: It’s all over at Goodison Park, where Everton have lost to Aston Villa but went down swinging haymakers in a second half they dominated, creating several good chances they were unable to convert. Emi Buendia scored the winner for Villa, getting a flick to a Lucas Digne corner to send the ball looping over Jordan Pickford and into the far corner. Championship: Andreas Weimann has added to Chris Martin’s brace to put Bristol City 3-1 ahead against Cardiff City, while Nottingham Forest’s young star Brennan Johnson has doubled his side’s lead against Derby County. It’s 2-0 at the City Ground and both matches are entering their knockings. Brentford: Lossl, Ajer, Jansson, Pinnock, Canos, Jensen, Norgaard, Janelt, Henry, Mbeumo, Toney. Subs: Forss, Wissa, Ghoddos, Baptiste, Bidstrup, Sorensen, Roerslev, Stevens, Fernandez. Wolves: Jose Sa, Kilman, Coady, Gomes, Nelson Semedo, Dendoncker, Neves, Joao Moutinho, Ait Nouri, Daniel Podence, Silva. Subs: Chiquinho, Hoever, Marcal, Bruno Jordao, Trincao, Ruddy, Giles, Traore, Cundle. Referee: Peter Banks (Norwich) Man Utd: De Gea, Dalot, Maguire, Varane, Alex Telles, Fred, McTominay, Bruno Fernandes, Greenwood, Ronaldo, Elanga. Subs: Jones, Mata, Martial, Rashford, Lingard, Cavani, Henderson, Matic, van de Beek. West Ham: Areola, Coufal, Dawson, Zouma, Cresswell, Rice, Soucek, Bowen, Lanzini, Fornals, Antonio. Subs: Yarmolenko, Vlasic, Noble, Diop, Fredericks, Masuaku, Johnson, Kral, Randolph. Referee: Jon Moss (W Yorkshire) Leeds: Meslier, Ayling, Llorente, Struijk, Dallas, Koch, Raphinha, Klich, Rodrigo, Harrison, James. Subs: Roberts, Klaesson, Bate, Gelhardt, Hjelde, McKinstry, McCarron, Moore, Kenneh. Newcastle: Dubravka, Trippier, Lascelles, Schar, Dummett, Willock, Shelvey, Joelinton, Fraser, Wood, Saint-Maximin. Subs: Clark, Lewis, Hendrick, Manquillo, Murphy, Almiron, Darlow, Gayle, Sean Longstaff. Referee: Chris Kavanagh (Lancashire) Premier League: Aston Villa continue to lead by the only goal of the game, but Everton are hammering on the door. Richarlison, Ben Godfrey and Yerry Mina have all gone close in the second half, while Dominic Calvert-Lewin missed a sitter, somehow firing over after connecting with a wonderful cross from the right touchline from the substitute Anthony Gordon. There are 17 minutes left at Goodison Park and Scott Murray has the latest ... Championship: Chris Martin has put Bristol City 2-1 up against Cardiff City at Ashton Gate, firing past Alex Smithies into the bottom corner in the 68th minute. Championship: Lewis Grabban has put Nottingham Forest a goal up in their game asgainst Derby County at the City Ground. The striker was on hand to score from close range, converting a James Garner free-kick into the penalty area. Everton’s hunt for a manager: He is in no way qualified but bringing Rooney back to Goodison Park would deliver the rush of authentic emotion we all crave, writes Barney Ronay. Everton 0-1 Aston Villa (HT) Brentford v Wolves Leeds United v Newcastle United Manchester United v West Ham Southampton v Manchester City (5.30pm) View the Premier League table And the Championship ... Bristol City 1-1 Cardiff City (HT) Nottingham Forest 0-0 Derby County (HT) Bournemouth v Hull City Birmingham City v Barnsley Blackpool v Millwall Coventry City v QPR Reading v Huddersfield Town Sheffield United v Luton Town Stoke City v Fulham Swansea City v Preston West Brom v Peterborough United View the Championship table Watford and Norwich got the weekend’s top flight action under way last night, with Norwich prevailing courtesy of three unanswered goals which may spell the end of Claudio Ranieri’s short Vicarage Road reign. Today’s early kick-off was at Goodison Park, where it’s currently half-time. Everton trail Aston Villa after Emi Buendia rose to flick the ball home from a Lucas Digne corner seconds before the half-time whistle. In the subsequent celebrations down by the corner flag, both Digne and Matty Cash were hit by one of several bottles thrown by some idiots in the crowd. Yes, the same bottle, which ricocheted from one man’s head on to the other. We have a trio of three o’clock kick-offs ahead of this evening’s set-to between Southampton and Manchester City at St Mary’s: Brentford host Wolves, Newcastle travel to Leeds and Manchester United take on West Ham. We’ll keep you posted on all the goals as they go in, flag up any major talking points and keep an eye on proceedings further down the pyramid on another busy afternoon of football action.Gardaí have launched an investigation after two men carried a dead body into an Irish post office in an apparent attempt to claim his pension. The deceased pensioner was described in reports as being “propped up” by the men as they walked into the building in County Carlow on Friday morning. The outlandish series of events began when one of the men entered the post office at about 11.30am on Friday, asking to collect a pension payment for an older man, the Irish Times reported. He was refused, with staff informing him that the pensioner would have to be present in order for the money to be handed over. The man returned soon after with two other men, one of whom was in his 60s and appeared to be being supported by the two others. The younger men asked to be given his pension payment. No cash was handed over and the two men fled the scene, abandoning the man’s body after a woman who had become suspicious raised the alarm with a staff member. The deceased man is reported to have been well known to the men who had been carrying his body. Gardaí said they were investigating “all the circumstances surrounding the unexplained death of an elderly male in the Carlow area”. A postmortem will be conducted. A woman living beside the post office said her daughter saw the two men carrying the deceased man into the building. “She was leaving my house at the time and said the man looked unwell as his feet were dragging [along] the ground,” the woman, who did not want to be named, told the Irish Independent. The mayor of Carlow, Fianna Fáil councillor Ken Murnane, said he was “absolutely shocked” to hear the news. “I heard there was a commotion in the post office,” he told the newspaper. “I go by there all the time and it’s a very busy post office – normally there’d be a queue out the door there. “I was absolutely shocked to hear about what happened. I cannot believe anyone would do something like that. It beggars belief, I’m just shocked.” The local Fine Gael councillor Fergal Byrne echoed Murnane’s words, saying: “The whole town is in shock.” He described the deceased as “a nice man by all accounts and someone who caused no offence to anyone”. Byrne said: “The staff in the shop are very shook up from it. I’d like to offer my sympathies to the man’s family also. It’s a bizarre and upsetting situation.”Rebecca Watson’s first novel, little scratch, now published in paperback, is narrated over the course of a single day by an unnamed office junior living in the wake of a sexual assault. The New Yorker called it an “extraordinary debut [that] conveys the shapes and the rhythms of thought” by “arranging text in unconventional ways”. Shortlisted for last year’s Goldsmiths prize, it was recently staged in a production directed by Katie Mitchell. Watson, 26, grew up in the South Downs and spoke to me from London, where she works part-time as an assistant editor on the arts desk of the Financial Times. What led you to the book’s unusual form? It came from a very clear moment. A colleague walked past me and asked what I’d been reading recently. And for 10 seconds I couldn’t come up with an answer, then I did, and he left. I was just really struck by that encounter, which was nothing, but for a moment had stakes that were kind of far too high. It made me very aware of the layers and channels of present tense. I remember saying to myself, how would you write it? And I just instantly wrote that moment on a [notebook] page to show the way in which things [and thoughts] happen simultaneously. It was only a few hundred words, but in it was the answer to how to present immediate present-tense experience. What did it look like written down? It was very much that as you went down the page you passed through time, and that the page also really seemed like the mind: the left- and right-hand side had different feelings to them and there were different kinds of tonal spaces across the page. It flipped a switch: I had the insinuation of the book’s formal system. The book explores the aftermath of rape, yet a recurring word is “joy”. It’s a reaction against the often really messy way we talk about rape and sex. I wanted my protagonist to be able to differentiate them; separating the two is part of her ambition right across the day [over which the book unfolds]. I didn’t want rape to corrupt her sex life or sense of desire. It was an empowering position for her to take, and for me to take, to ensure that joy and desire remain, even though there’s not necessarily any resolution in the novel. Did you feel obliged to point out in the acknowledgments that the protagonist is fictional? Some people do think it’s me; it was inevitable. It’s about rape, and I have said before [in a 2019 piece in the TLS] that I was raped, but the narrator’s experience is very different to mine; there’s multiple ways that someone can be assaulted, and multiple ways someone can react. I sometimes regret that piece, only because it acts as a springboard in interviews. It always comes up, and I really don’t believe there’s a correlation between it and little scratch, but people try to map the piece onto the novel and interpret it as confessional. This novel was never an act of catharsis. It was a joyful act of creation. Do readers ever get in touch about the book? I’ve had some really moving responses from readers who have experienced sexual assault or rape, thanking me for representing how they feel or what they went through, or a process that they found difficult to verbalise or hadn’t seen written before. I’ve also had responses from male readers saying it made them think about their own past behaviour. Both sides of that are pretty powerful and it makes me feel very proud, but it’s a strange thing to get those reactions. What was it like working with Katie Mitchell? Really cool. She’s a hero [of mine] and it was the easiest decision ever to say: “Yes, please take it and put it on.” She bought the novel off the back of the Guardian review; she tells me, or at least claims, that she knew it was obviously her [kind of] theatre from about the first page, and that she read it almost like a score. I went to see the show about five times across six weeks. It was amazing. What are you working on now? I’m on my fourth draft of my second novel. I was so instinctively in the little scratch voice that there was a lot of necessary time spent learning how to detach myself from it. I’m aware [that] everyone’s perception of me as a writer is actually of a book, rather than of me. This next thing is actually more ambitious: it’s across five days, flipping between present and past tense, which for me is something new. It’s [also] formally experimental and looks strange on the page. It’s about a woman who learns about the death of her brother, who she hasn’t seen for nearly a decade. What have you been reading recently? I read Mayflies by Andrew O’Hagan over Christmas. It’s really moving. The way he captures the romance of friendship is quite a rare thing. It’s also a beautiful celebration of spontaneous life, which feels really brutal to read during a pandemic. Did you always want to be a writer? I’ve always had that propulsion [to create things in words]. I’ve always been interested in voice, rather than narrative necessarily, and I was always writing poetry, or passages, from since I was a teenager. I was an early reader and I would max out my library card every week and just read and read and read. As long as it was fiction, I wasn’t fussed what my finger landed on. I ended up reading Daphne Du Maurier’s Rebecca when I was a kid just because I saw my name on the shelf. I was reading The Princess Diaries alongside The Thorn Birds; it was a pretty improvised selection process. I just had to keep reading anything I could pick up; it didn’t really matter what: it was like I’d discover some kind of secret that I might lose at any moment. • little scratch is published in paperback by Faber (£8.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIt felt like an end, not a beginning. Internazionale had just gone 2-0 down at home to Torino with half an hour to play and, as the camera panned to the touchline, Antonio Conte bore the expression of a man who had accepted an invitation to dinner only to discover that the menu would be entirely vegan. His side had won three of their opening seven games of the 2020-21 season and were eighth in Serie A. The prospect of mounting any sort of challenge for the scudetto seemed laughably remote. At which point, something stirring and strange happened. Alexis Sánchez pulled one back after a goalmouth scramble. Romelu Lukaku bundled in a scruffy equaliser and then converted a contentious penalty with six minutes remaining. Inter ended up winning 4-2 and with the benefit of hindsight – because who can really know these things at the time? – it was the point when all the pieces began to fall into place. Powered by the raw fumes of that comeback Inter went on a run of seven more straight wins that would set them on course for their first title in 11 years. This is one of the hallmarks of Conte’s most successful teams: the moment when they seem at their weakest is the moment from which they draw their greatest strength. At some indeterminate point, whether through circumstance or epiphany, everything just clicks. The origins of Conte’s 2016-17 title win with Chelsea came in a famous half-time tactical switch during a 3-0 defeat to Arsenal. It was a 4-1 mauling against Germany that convinced Conte to try the 3-5-2 system that ended up taking Italy to the quarter-finals of Euro 2016. As Conte’s Tottenham pulled off a remarkable 3-2 victory at Leicester on Wednesday, it was tempting to wonder whether we were witnessing another such moment. Trailing 2-1 five minutes into stoppage time, Tottenham improbably stole all three points with two Steven Bergwijn goals, igniting uncontrolled celebrations in the away end, on the pitch and on the touchline. For a club that has spent much of the past three years in a sort of waking sleep, this felt new and bracing. Would we look back on those two wild minutes as the point the Conte revolution finally began to take flight? The first thing to say is that Tottenham have been playing decent football for a while now. It may be hard to unpick all the various narrative strands: the Covid interruptions, the humiliation at NS Mura, the elimination from Europe, twice being outclassed by Chelsea in the Carabao Cup, Conte grumbling about transfers, the slow egress of the club’s record signing, Tanguy Ndombele. But in a parallel universe, Tottenham are yet to lose in the Premier League under Conte. Only Manchester City have won more points a game since his arrival. Even before the Miracle of the King Power, the foundations of a resurgence were being built. But all good uprisings need an origin story, a moment of growth, and this is where Conte comes in. For all his reputation as a quick-fix, shock-therapy coach, his methods rarely bear immediate fruit. Indeed, the early days of a Conte stewardship are often rich in conflict and reluctance, the sound of an expert Italian bullshit-detector sniffing around the place and deciding who needs to stay, who needs to go and who needs a double dose of yo-yo tests and a strict keto diet. “Better to create a deep wound that will lead to an even deeper healing,” Conte’s fitness coach, Giampiero Ventrone, told FourFourTwo in 2017. “The bigger the disruption, the better the results. At first the impact is severe: the players react badly. But after two or three months the situation changes. While the player is complaining, there’s a change in him that will ultimately lead to improvement. The results arrive.” The sight of Ventrone screaming at Tottenham’s fringe players as he put them through a series of gruelling post-match sprints early in the Conte reign offers just a hint of the confrontational leadership to which the squad has already been subjected. But the remoulding process goes beyond simple physical coercion and is much more dialectic than is often assumed. Tactically and psychologically, Conte tries to drill a win-at-all-costs habit into his players. But only when that improvement is borne out in the shape of tangible results does it really begin to make sense. Until then, it’s just a very angry middle-aged man shouting about spaces and desire. This is why the Leicester game felt like such a watershed. From front to back – and with the caveat that they still look defensively brittle – Tottenham demonstrated a vigour and purpose that was painfully absent during Nuno Espírito Santo’s miserable tenure. The sight of Harry Kane getting off 10 shots – many of them admittedly stupid efforts from distance – was nevertheless a sign the England captain may just have begun to back himself again. Tottenham visit Stamford Bridge on Sunday. It is the third time these teams have met in the space of three weeks and on the first two occasions the gulf between them was sharply evident. By the same token these are two clubs on very different trajectories: one doubting themselves, one believing. Are Tottenham still imprisoned by their flaws or have they really turned the corner? Sunday afternoon seems as good a time as any to find out.Pressure is building on the Metropolitan police from Tory MPs who want the force to investigate Downing Street’s lockdown parties regardless of the findings of the Sue Gray report this week. Although many MPs have said that they are withholding judgment until the outcome of the Gray inquiry, some believe that the details of what is already publicly known are sufficient to merit police action. The Met’s stance, reiterated again on Saturday, is that it is content to wait for the result of the inquiry from the senior civil servant before deciding whether to investigate if potential criminal offences are unearthed. Since news of the first party emerged, opposition MPs have been calling for the Met to investigate, but backbench Tory MPs are now also urging the force to step in. Martin Vickers, Conservative MP for Cleethorpes since 2010, last week told constituents that “disciplinary actions, and possibly prosecutions, should follow”. “The truth is that none of this should have happened. I despair at the management structure in Downing Street that this could happen,” Vickers told the Observer on Saturday night. He added that Boris Johnson – whose political career rests on the contents of Gray’s report – should have left the notorious party held in the Downing Street garden on 20 May 2020 soon after he arrived. “Those of us who know how these things work can see how it happened. The staff were gathering [in the garden] and somebody said: ‘Nip upstairs and see if the boss can come down and give us a pep talk.’ When the senior person got there they should have said: ‘Drink up and go home.’” Other Tories have also called for police intervention, with Andrew Selous, MP for South West Bedfordshire, backing a Met investigation into the party allegations. “I want every one of these allegations to be fully and independently investigated, if necessary, by the police and I want all of those, however senior, who have broken the law or government guidance to be appropriately punished,” he told constituents. His fellow Conservative MP Stephen Crabb has also called for Cressida Dick’s Met to “investigate these gatherings”. Crabb, MP for Preseli Pembrokeshire, told constituents last week: “It makes me feel extremely disappointed and genuinely let down.” The Met’s explanation that they rarely investigate breaches of Covid law retrospectively has prompted disquiet among some, with claims it has allowed police to shy away from a contentious episode. The force, though, may yet be dragged into the broader fallout of “partygate” after a Conservative backbencher who accused Downing Street of attempting to “blackmail” MPs seeking to oust Johnson confirmed on Saturday that he is to meet police to discuss the allegations. William Wragg said he would be speaking to a Met detective in the House of Commons this week and had requested a meeting with the force. However, many believe that Gray’s report will fall short of pulling in the police to investigate the prime minister over parties at Downing Street. “I suspect the report will use words like ‘inappropriate’ and ‘bad judgment’, and Boris can cope with that. The only possibility of him falling is that it says it was against the law. It all depends on the phraseology to a great extent,” said Vickers. He added that public fury has fallen short of the anger caused by the trip made by Dominic Cummings to Barnard Castle during the first 2020 lockdown, saying that incident had led to 900 emails from constituents compared with 250 over partygate. Ironically, Cummings, Johnson’s former top aide, has driven much of the negative headlines about the prime minister, claiming that his former boss lied about lockdown parties and was also warned about the 20 May event.The well-heeled shoppers strolling through the grand promenade and pleasure gardens of Cheltenham’s prosperous centre might be expected to offer Boris Johnson’s bruised government some desperately needed respite. But the mere mention of the prime minister’s name provokes a reception as frosty as the chill air sweeping the Cotswolds spa town. Outside the House of Fraser department store, Chris Carter, 74, is fed up with the man he helped put into No 10. “I don’t like the bloke – I’m not happy,” says Carter, clutching some bags. “He is hiding lots of things. He’s only saying sorry when he’s caught out [over the parties in Downing Street], but there is more to come out. It’s not just parties – what else is he lying about?” Carter, who has voted Conservative all his life, also worries about the other more devastating crisis that threatens the Tories’ electoral fortunes: the rising cost of living. The potential for the average household gas and electric bill to jump by £700 a year when the price cap changes in April is on his mind. “It won’t affect rich people. Poorer people will be desperate. And people [like us] in the middle won’t get any help at all,” he says. “I couldn’t vote Labour; I would probably vote Liberal [if there was an election tomorrow].” This will worry local and national Conservatives. Cheltenham is finely balanced between the Tories and the Lib Dems. The town was staunchly Liberal Democrat for 23 years until the Tories captured it in 2015. The current Conservative MP, Alex Chalk, whom Johnson appointed solicitor general, has a small majority of 981 votes. It would take a swing of less than 1% to turn it from blue to yellow. Rising prices are not only eating away at people’s stagnating wages – they are eroding Tory support in the south, just as much as in former “red wall” seats in the Midlands and north. In an upmarket salon on the corner of two Regency terraces, one of the hairdressers, James Wellings, 41, is feeling the squeeze and tiring of the party he voted for in 2019. “I’m a single dad. You really feel the pinch,” he explains as a customer waits patiently. “On the weeks I don’t have my son I go through the dregs of what’s in the freezer so at least I can get him some nice stuff when he stays with me. [My son] doesn’t ask to have things any more – he asks if we can afford things. He’s learned from me.” Wellings is not sure who he would vote for now, but is leaning towards Labour. “I voted Conservative [in 2019] because I thought they were the best of a bad bunch. But am I impressed with the government? No. Am I happy with how they have dealt with things? No,” he says. “It’s frustrating when you have a prime minister who describes his salary [for writing a newspaper column when he was mayor of London] as ‘chicken feed’. They are out of touch.” Even those planning to vote Conservative again struggle to find anything positive to say about the PM. William Mortimer Moore, an author and landlord, remarks: “I never liked Boris. He’s a bit seat of the pants, he wouldn’t necessarily tell the truth, takes liberties, messy personal life.” Away from the tourists and moneyed shoppers, there is another, poorer side of Cheltenham. Here low wages, inadequate benefits and rising costs are pushing many into debt and drastic cutbacks to make ends meet. Anne Crockard, 62, who earns the minimum wage as a healthcare assistant, fears she will not be able to retire. “They need to put wages up. I’m working more hours than I have ever worked. I do 48-50 hours a week,” she says. “It’s hard work. It’s not good for me any more – hoisting up old people. I’ve got a bad back. But I have to do the hours to pay the rent and the bills. It’s horrendous.” Crockard, who voted for Johnson’s Conservatives in the last election, is not convinced by any of the leaders yet. “[Johnson’s] let the side down. But who are we going to choose next?” Jade Brock, 25, who cares for her two children and works part-time as a shop assistant, has ended up in rent arrears. “My food shop used to be £60 – now it’s £100. My weekly energy costs have gone from £20 to £40,” she adds, after listening to Crockard. “I’m in arrears. I want to get out of it but I can’t do more hours because I’ve got two kids.” Gregory Orchard, 29, cannot move out of home even though he is working full time in a DIY store. “It’s depressing – I just try to struggle on through,” he says. His family often can’t afford to turn the heating on and fear the coming increase in energy bills. “We’ve never got the heating on. We can’t afford to. We sit there with three of four layers on,” he says. His friend, Jemma Ward, 29, who gets a carer’s allowance, puts her four children first, which increasingly means she goes without. “The first priority is them,” she says. “It does get you down because you are hungry and you’ve got no energy to look after them, but you have to keep going.”The UK detected 76,807 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, a 54% drop on the 176,191 cases detected two weeks ago as the record-breaking Omicron wave appears to have spiked. The UK reported a further 297 people died within 28 days of a positive Covid test on Saturday, 3% up on the 287 deaths reported last Saturday. Over 177,000 people in the UK have Covid on their death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics, the seventh highest tally in the world. It comes after the health secretary, Sajid Javid, reiterated his message the UK is “learning to live with” Covid. Javid confirmed steps on Wednesday to axe virtually all Covid restrictions in England despite warnings from senior NHS figures it could provoke a resurgent wave. Javid said: “Our exceptional vaccine rollout means the number of people severely affected by Covid-19 is low, and the UK’s innovation and research has discovered life-saving treatments for those most at risk.” Ahead of the deadline for England’s NHS workers to be vaccinated or lose their jobs on 1 April, Dr Nikki Kanani, deputy lead for the NHS Covid vaccination programme, said it’s the “duty” of staff to protect patients. Kanani’s comments were made amid protests against mandatory vaccines in London on Saturday. Meanwhile, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has designated the Omicron offshoot known as BA.2, which has a potentially higher growth rate, a “variant under investigation” – but virologists have said there’s no immediate cause for concern. The UKHSA’s decision comes as cases of BA.2 climb internationally. Infections from the BA.2 offshoot remain low in the UK but now make up almost half of Omicron cases in Denmark. The UK has sequenced 426 cases of Omicron BA.2, the UKHSA said on Friday, with the agency investigating the significance of its viral mutations. Early indications suggest an “increased growth rate” than the already highly mutated Omicron BA.1 variant but there’s a “low level of certainty” without further analysis. UKHSA did not designate BA.2 a “variant of concern,” the highest rank of risk. The UK’s first confirmed case was confirmed by genome sequencing on 6 December. “So far, there is insufficient evidence to determine whether BA.2 causes more severe illness than Omicron BA.1, but data is limited and UKHSA continues to investigate,” Meera Chand, Covid-19 incident director at UKHSA, said in a statement on Friday. Chand said it’s natural for viruses to evolve and mutate and the pandemic will continue to see new variants emerge, adding: “Case rates remain high throughout the UK and we must remain vigilant and take up vaccinations. We should all continue to test regularly with LFDs and take a PCR test if symptoms develop.” London has detected 146 BA.2 cases and south-east England has confirmed 97. In total, 8,040 sequences of the Omicron offshoot have been uploaded to the international GISAID database from 40 countries. “Initial analysis shows no differences in hospitalisations for BA.2 compared to BA.1,” Denmark’s Statens Serum Institut said on Thursday. The institute added tests on vaccine efficacy are ongoing but “it is expected that vaccines also have an effect against severe illness upon BA.2 infection”. Tom Peacock, a virologist at Imperial College, said in a Twitter thread, as countries near or pass their Omicron BA.1 peaks: “I would be very surprised if BA.2 caused a second wave at this point.” Other countries to confirm more than 100 BA.2 samples include India (530), Singapore (127) and Sweden (181). Addressing BA.2, Javid said: “Thanks to our world-leading surveillance system we can rapidly detect and carefully monitor any genetic changes to Covid-19.”When customers walk through the doors of V’s Punjabi Grill, a family-run restaurant in Gravesend in Kent, the sign above their heads says in gold-letters: cocktails, grills, events. Now, the family may need to paint a fourth bullet point: vaccinations. After their father, Jagtar Chopra, was hospitalised with Covid in December 2020, brothers Rav and Raj Chopra were inspired to immunise the local community from their Punjabi grill. The brothers’ kebab shop is one of hundreds of little walk-in vaccine centres, alongside sports stadiums and shopping centres and nightclubs, that form part of the NHS’s wider vaccination programme. It opened on 10 January in a marquee attached to the restaurant and has already immunised dozens of people. “Come down, get your jabs” to “protect everyone in society”, said Rav Chopra, who along with his brother is also a pharmacist. Raj, 43, told the PA news agency he was inspired by the experience of his 74-year-old father, who has since fully recovered, in battling the virus. “From a personal point of view, it was very debilitating to see Dad like that,” said Raj. “It got everyone’s emotions in play. “To see it hit home so close to our hearts, it was a very tough pill – pardon the pun – to take. However, every cloud has a silver lining and it’s inspired us to really emphasise the job that we do, help the community and help out the fellow citizens in our home town and really try and protect as many people as we can.” His father, Jagtar, believed he would succumb to the virus. “I thought I wasn’t going to make it, it was so bad,” he said. “I was in hospital for about six nights and I was really, really ill, but thanks to all the doctors, all the staff, I pulled through.” V’s Punjabi Grill vaccination hub has attracted the attention of politicians. The Conservative MP for Gravesham, Adam Holloway, praised the “fabulous” initiative to boost the rollout. “Here, the provision has been quite patchy,” Holloway told PA. “What’s great about this is that these guys are prepared to ramp up” the booster campaign. “We must remember that while we’re coming out, God willing, of the pandemic, and into an endemic phase, this current variant is not the last one we’re going to have,” he added. “So these guys are showing real health entrepreneurialism operating out of the back of a restaurant in the middle of Gravesend. It’s a fabulous thing.”Australian adults who are being bullied online will be able to report incidents to the eSafety commissioner from Sunday. New powers were given to the eSafety commissioner, Julie Inman Grant, as part of the wide-ranging Online Safety Act, which passed in 2021. Under the new laws, social media companies and other websites will be compelled to remove content deemed to be bullying within 24 hours or face fines of up to 500 penalty units (up to $111,000 for individuals and up to $555,000 for companies). The laws also modify a scheme already in place for reporting the online bullying of children, broadening who they apply to beyond social media platforms, and shortening the removal timeframe to 24 hours from 48 hours. Here’s what we know about how the system will work. If I am being bullied online where do I go first? Under the scheme, you first need to ask for the bullying content to be removed by the company that is hosting it, such as Facebook or Twitter. You should also report it to the police. It remains a crime to harass people online, and the eSafety commissioner’s powers only extend to the removal of content, not legal action. What if they refuse or don’t respond? If the platform or website fails to remove the content, you can report it to the commissioner, who can launch an investigation and issue notices for the content to be removed within 24 hours, or the host risks a fine. What sort of content counts as bullying? The government has sought to downplay concerns the scheme would amount to censorship of speech by setting the bar “deliberately high”, Inman Grant said. Content is considered adult cyber abuse if it is intended to cause serious harm and is menacing, harassing or offensive, and targeted at an individual. You cannot report offensive comments said about minority groups for example. “Serious harm could include material which sets out realistic threats, places people in real danger, is excessively malicious or is unrelenting,” Inman Grant said. Something people find offensive or disagreeable on its own would not be enough. “The scheme is not intended to regulate hurt feelings, purely reputational damage, bad online reviews, strong opinions or banter,” she said. It won’t cover defamatory comments, either. In a submission to the parliamentary inquiry into social media and online safety, Inman Grant said examples of what would reach the threshold would be publishing private or identifying information about someone with malicious intent, encouraging violence against an Australian adult based on their religion, race or sexuality, and threats of violence. Is there a review process? If a notice is issued to remove content, the legislation requires there be a process for a decision to be reviewed by the office of the eSafety commissioner. The decision can also be appealed to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. Is this different to the anti-trolling legislation? At the end of last year, Scott Morrison announced draft anti-trolling legislation, which is separate from the Online Safety Act. The anti-trolling legislation is largely focused on making it easier for people to unmask anonymous online commenters who they want to sue for defamation. Under the draft legislation, social media companies can be fined and potentially held liable for defamatory comments posted online by commenters if they do not assist in unmasking the anonymous commenter. The government is still seeking comment on the legislation and it is not entirely clear whether it will be introduced or passed in parliament before the federal election. What about the other parts of the Online Safety Act? The Online Safety Act also gives the commissioner significant powers over the regulation of other content online – including adult content. The commissioner is currently working with industry on developing codes to enforce the new rules around adult content, with a view to developing a roadmap to require age verification for adult content online by the end of this year.The man convicted of the cold case murder of US mathematician Scott Johnson has lodged an appeal, only days after he stunned his lawyers by pleading guilty. Lawyers for Scott White, 50, lodged an appeal this week in the New South Wales court of criminal appeal against his conviction, Guardian Australia has confirmed. The appeal marks another significant development in a death that was initially dismissed as a suicide by NSW police and had been subject to three coronial inquests, before being investigated by detectives as a gay hate crime with a $2m reward for information. Johnson, 27, was found dead at the base of a cliff near Manly’s North Head in 1988. The area was a popular meeting spot for gay men. In 2017, coroner Michael Barnes found Johnson fell from the cliff “as a result of actual or threatened violence” by people who attacked him over his sexuality. Barnes criticised the initial police investigation as inadequate and found it likely more than one person ambushed Johnson. Police launched a new investigation and announced the reward in 2018. White was arrested in May, 2020. During a supreme court hearing on 10 January, White made the remarkable admission that he was guilty of murdering Johnson. White’s publicly-funded lawyers immediately appealed his decision to plead guilty, arguing the plea should be vacated because of White’s cognitive impairment, his previous insistence he was innocent, his failure to tell lawyers he planned to change his plea, and his extreme agitation on the day of the hearing. The integrity of the plea was so undermined that to hold White to it would constitute a miscarriage of justice, his lawyers argued. As part of their submissions, his lawyers included the notes of a conversation they had in the cells with White immediately after he made the plea. “I’m really sorry to all of you, I appreciate all your work, but I can’t handle it,” White said, according to notes taken of the meeting and the recollection of his legal aid lawyer, Louise Sutherland. “If I get out she’ll just come after me again, I can’t do it, I just can’t, I’m sorry. I am better off in here. I’m safe in here. This is too much stress.” The reference to “she” was clarified to be a reference to his former wife, who had been expected to give evidence against White. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “You told us before court you were going to say not guilty and you have told us consistently that you didn’t do it,” Belinda Rigg SC, White’s senior counsel and the NSW senior public defender, replied. “I didn’t. I didn’t do it, but I’m saying I did it, you know what I mean. I’m saying that. 10 years, I’ll take that,” White said. Rigg and White continued to speak, according to the file note, with Rigg telling White he would not receive a sentence as low as 10 years, and reiterating that a guilty plea meant he was “telling the whole world” he killed Johnson. Rigg also reiterated that she was confident they would be able to prove that White’s former wife was not a reliable witness as she had been vindictive towards him, with White later saying she “took his kids” from him. White was asked what he would say if he was again asked to plead. “Not guilty,” he confirms. White later signed legal instructions which read in part: “Today I was confused … I was stressed. I’ve had no food, no sleep, no shower. I saw the brother of the deceased in court. I saw police point at me … I maintain that I didn’t cause Scott Johnson’s death.” In a decision handed down on 13 January, NSW supreme court judge Helen Wilson rejected the application to vacate the guilty plea. The application had been opposed by the prosecution. In her decision, it was made clear that part of the evidence against White included recorded conversations he had with two undercover police operatives. Wilson listed 12 matters she had considered as part of her decision, including that White had not raised his innocence in the conversation under the cells until it was mentioned by his lawyers, and that he had given considered reasons for his plea which had “a flavour to them of remorse for and acceptance of responsibility for Dr Johnson’s death”. White had been found by multiple experts to be mentally fit to plead, and while Wilson agreed that he was cognitively impaired, either because of intellectual disability, alcohol-related brain damage, or a combination of the two, that was “immaterial for present purposes”. “I accept that he functions socially and intellectually at a level well below that of most people in the community and he is thereby disadvantaged,” she found. A spokesperson for the NSW public defenders confirmed submissions regarding the appeal were yet to lodged. White was expected to be sentenced in May.The debate about potential school closures or delays has initiated discussions about children’s mental health once again. Kids are very resilient, but the impacts of Covid-19 have been big – and continuing. Childhood mental health is important because it lays the foundations for social and emotional wellbeing in later life. The good news is parents and carers can positively influence their children’s wellbeing, and “good enough” parenting can have a meaningful impact. How are kids doing? At the population level, there were increasing rates of psychological distress in children prior to the pandemic and this has further increased during the pandemic. Lockdowns and having parents or carers who are also experiencing psychological distress are associated with poor mental health in children and adolescents. Fortunately, in Australia Covid has not to date been associated with a rise in suspected deaths by suicide. And a 2022 Canadian study found no increases in self-harm presentations in teens. Though a NSW study found an increase in mental health presentations to emergency departments through Covid times. And in Australia, more people of all ages have been seeking mental healthcare through 2020 and 2021. For instance, the Australian Kids Helpline has experienced a 17% increase in calls compared with pre-pandemic. The prevalence of depression and anxiety symptoms during Covid has doubled for children. The pandemic is now a chronic stressor Initially we found creative ways to address Covid stress – remember all those dance parties on TikTok? Adults and children are now weary. Chronic stressors are known to be particularly challenging. As the pandemic enters its third year, evidence is showing that lasting mental health challenges are unevenly affecting those with financial issues, those who have had Covid or lost someone to Covid and those whose mental health was poor before the pandemic. Some have faced enormous challenges; others feel “blah”, lacking motivation and focus. An Australian study showed though that some older children (12-18yrs) have had positive experiences during Covid. Some have benefited from more family time, a slower pace of life and more control over one’s day. Do school closures cause poor mental health? We have only a handful of studies regarding the singular effect of school closures (or delays, or online learning) on children’s mental health – it is not easy to tease out impacts of the pandemic itself compared with school closures. Existing studies typically ask the parents’ view, and study teens. A 2021 analysis in JAMA Pediatrics showed school closures may only modestly reduce pandemic spread. Disruptions, change in teachers can in themselves cause distress in children … but kids need socialisation and quality education. What about masks? Emerging research shows that masks have not adversely affected children’s emotional development. You might remember the famous study by Tronick back in 1975, called the Still Face experiment. In the study, when parents were instructed to keep a straight face, their kids withdrew and got upset. Some people have worried masks would have the same effect. But initial studies into adult mask wearing and primary school kids’ reactions have shown children continue to interact and perceive emotions as they did before. Simple, evidence-based ways to promote children’s mental health Parents are stressed by decision-making and risk assessments. Parental stress has a significant impact upon child mental health. So it’s worth keeping in mind the suggestions below can boost mental health for adults and kids. Prioritise your own mental wellbeing. Give yourself permission to do the things that might give you a lift, even if only temporary, and take a break from what drains you. Seek social connections that feel safe, and keep the basics – enough sleep, eating well and keeping physically active. Allow space and time for enjoying your child. Positive relationships and play, silliness and sharing in fun activities protect our mental wellbeing and that of our children. In you, your child has their best resource. Consider the opportunities for teaching your child mental wellbeing skills, like accepting feelings. Accepting the full range of feelings helps children with emotion regulation. There is no need to hurry your children out of “negative feelings” – listening, comforting, being there and riding it out is enough. Breakdowns in relationships between parents and kids happen. Repair matters. Parents can role-model repair by expressing warmth, talking about what happened, and apologising. Remember that perfect parenting is not required to raise psychologically healthy children. Good quality information can reduce fear and uncertainty for all. Giving your child manageable amounts of accurate, age-appropriate information can help alleviate concerns. Follow your child’s questions and resist the urge to provide too much reassurance (paradoxically, this sometimes makes fears stronger). Prevent Covid infection, if you can. A Lancet article reports that adults who have been infected with Covid-19 are at an increased risk for anxiety and mood disorders after the infection compared with other infections (we don’t know if the risk is similar for children). Give time for unstructured play (like making a fort) – it is key to the development of self-esteem, self-determination and the ability to self-regulate, all vital parts of emotional development that help prevent mental health challenges. Positive event scheduling (that is, doing things you enjoy) prevents and treats depression, done together it can also strengthen relationships. This could be as simple as a card game together. Worries about Covid and other worries should not usually be thought of as a mental illness. Courage challenges can help children overcome their worries and build confidence in themselves (for example, learning to jump into water). Given exposure to a chronic stressor, most people will have engaged in some negative parenting. Be kind to yourself. Humans are amazingly resilient. We have surprisingly useful abilities to make the best of a bad situation. Good-enough parenting is all it takes. You are your child’s best resource. Stabilising emotional wellbeing through connection, fun and play can recharge the whole family’s battery. Professor Alexandra Martiniuk is an epidemiologist at the University of Sydney. She is a member of the Technical Advisory Group on Youth, convened by the National Mental Health Commission Linda Rosewell is a clinical psychologist who works with children, adolescents and their families Professor Jennie Hudson is the director of research at the Black Dog Institute and professor of clinical psychology at the University of New South Wales. She is the chair of the Technical Advisory Group on Youth Several other clinical colleagues have contributed to this article anonymously Seeking help Seek help for your child if you perceive a problem. Signs of mental health issues in children may include: being more withdrawn, not enjoying things, refusing to return to school, irritability, lots of worries; changes in sleep, appetite or energy; hurting themselves or wanting to die. Online tools can be useful if you need to wait for professional supports. There are several excellent resources online, including: Kids Helpline section for 5-12 year olds, Head to Health,, Macquarie University’s on preventing anxiety and depression in children, Black Dog’s COVID-19 resources for parents, This Way Up, Reach Out. Parents can also discuss concerns with a GP or call Mental Health Telephone Access Line (1800 011 511) or the Beyond Blue Coronavirus Mental Wellbeing Support Service anytime via telephone at 1800 512 348 or online at coronavirus.beyondblue.org.au.Last week, a prominent member of the Liberals’ right faction, Tim James, snared the safe New South Wales state seat of Willoughby replacing the former Liberal premier Gladys Berejiklian, a leading moderate, in the lower north shore Sydney seat. No one saw it coming. The lower north shore is a moderate stronghold within the party and the popular former Willoughby council mayor Gail Giles-Gidney, a moderate with a high local profile, was seen as the frontrunner. Giles-Gidney had the endorsement of the people who count in those parts: Berejiklian and the moderate powerbroker Trent Zimmerman, the federal MP for North Sydney. But by the end of a three-hour preselection meeting attended by more than 100 members of the local branch and state executive, moderates were left shellshocked. The new “Warringah rules” for choosing the candidate via a plebiscite of local members, with a 25% voting component from the state executive, had delivered an unexpected result. James, an acolyte of the former prime minister Tony Abbott with a record of pushing development of gas and opposing higher carbon emissions reduction targets, was on his way to becoming the member for Willoughby. Just a suburban soap opera? Or a sign of something deeper happening in the NSW Liberal party? Peace and prosperity In other states, notably Western Australia and South Australia, there has been an influx into the party of conservative members recruited from Pentecostal churches and other religious groups. It has fundamentally changed the Liberal party in WA and caused tensions in SA. In Queensland there were similar concerns in 2020 about the growing influence of climate-denying Christian conservatives. In Victoria, there have been highly publicised reports of organised attempts at branch stacking by the conservative right, including recruitment drives run out of MPs’ offices. But in NSW, at least on the surface, there appeared to be peace within the warring factions, of which there are three: the moderates, the hard right and the smaller centre right. The hard right is dominated by conservative Catholics with the premier, Dominic Perrottet, its poster boy. The centre right, controlled by the federal immigration minister, Alex Hawke, is more closely aligned with Pentecostal and Protestant churches and boasts Scott Morrison as its high-profile member. The moderates are led by the NSW treasurer, Matt Kean, and Zimmerman. The animus between the factions a decade ago, when John Brogden was the state opposition leader, is legendary: brawls in local branches, fierce branch stacking and chronic destabilisation of the parliamentary leader. During this time the right also split, mainly on sectarian lines. But after a decade in the wilderness a desperate Barry O’Farrell convinced the factions they should declare a detente in the interests of winning government. The peace was cemented under Berejiklian. Hard-right leaders like Perrottet, who has been a central player in the factions since he was in the Young Liberals, and Damien Tudehope, who commands influence in the north-west of Sydney, prospered, becoming treasurer and finance minister. David Elliott, a leading figure of the centre right, has risen too. So did the leading moderates such as Kean. At least in cabinet, the factions had checked their weapons at the door. But there was always the question of who would succeed Berejiklian. The new deal About three years ago, Kean is said to have struck a further deal with Perrottet to make Perrottet premier, even though he came from the right, while Kean would become treasurer. Until that point the moderates, the biggest faction, had laid claim to the premier’s job. Kean and Perrotett have never confirmed the deal, but subsequent events appear to confirm it. Despite a senior moderate, Rob Stokes, nominating for premier after Berejiklian resigned, Perrottet won with support from Kean’s bloc of moderates. Both men have now risen to the top before turning 40: Perrottet as premier and Kean his treasurer. But has the deal emboldened the right and diminished the moderates? “It’s been the best infiltration I have seen in my life,” says one disillusioned moderate. “Rather than beat us up, they got us to do what they want.” How much Perrottet’s rise has strengthened the right is debated within the party – there have so far been no attempts to push a conservative social agenda. “Perrottet is not offensive to most moderates – he mainly sticks to economic issues and he’s endorsed net zero by 2050,” says a senior moderate. “I don’t think he’s sitting watching Sky after Dark night after night. He’s probably reading Margaret Thatcher’s biography – and we can live with that.” But the new rules for preselecting candidates have provided an avenue for increased influence and there are signs right operatives are active. “The right are taking the car out for a spin to see what’s possible,” says one factional player who asked not to be named. Abbott’s original Warringah rules establishing branch member plebiscites to choose candidates were substantially modified before being adopted. Safeguards against branch stacking, such as being a member for two years and monthly limits on new members signing up, were included. A quarter of the vote was allocated to the state executive council in the broader party interest. James’s preselection, only the second under the new rules, raises questions about whether the moderates have underestimated the right. Grassroots action James, a long-time participant in the faction, had hoped to succeed Abbott in the federal northern beaches seat of Warringah until the independent Zali Steggall made it unwinnable for a person with a track record of support for fossil fuels. James has also made two unsuccessful tilts at the state seat of North Shore, also regarded as moderate territory. So Willoughby was a real surprise. There were about 110 selectors assembled for the preselection on 12 January. James came second to Giles-Gidney in the first round of voting but edged her out in the second round. “He was just hungrier for it,” said one attendee. By all accounts he gave a strong speech and demonstrated his policy depth as a former director of the Menzies Research Centre. Some say Covid-19 played a role, with older members who supported Giles-Gidney reluctant to attend in person. The NSW Liberal party said: “There were three outstanding candidates contesting the preselection, with Tim James selected by members to represent the party at the upcoming election, based on his vision for the community.” James had a bloc of 11 Young Liberals from the right who were eligible to vote under party rules that allow Young Liberals to attend branches where they live or adjoining branches. They included Thomas Ryan, who is married to Francesca Perrottet , the premier’s sister; Anthony Swales, an electorate staffer for state minister Anthony Roberts; Pierre Okosdinossian, a graduate of Redfield College, the conservative Catholic school attended by Perrottet; and Benedict Kang, In 2018 Kang wrote in the conservative Spectator: “At the heart of the political process is grassroots action … Something is astir in the air, and the winds of change, of reform, are blowing. This article may very well be prophetic, and I sincerely hope that it is. Join a party, be the conservative voice, change the tide of battle. Believe me, there has never been a better time to be young, restless, and right-wing.” There is clear evidence elsewhere that conservatives have heeded the call and signed up to branches in anticipation of the Warringah rules. Branches that had just five or 10 members have seen numbers swell to the 30s in the past two and half years. The MP most under threat is the federal environment minister, Sussan Ley, in the seat of Farrer in southern NSW. She is facing a challenge from conservative Christian Ellis, a member of the right faction, who moved to Deniliquin from Sydney. He previously worked for Perrottet and the former federal resources minister Matt Canavan. He also ran as a candidate for Family First against the Liberal Philip Ruddock, earning him a suspension from the party. Ellis was one of the organisers of a right group known as the NSW Reformers, which gained publicity in 2019 over a plan to recruit 5,000 members to the Liberal party through conservative churches. In Farrer, Ellis has been running on water issues and several members of the local group “Speak up for Water” have joined local branches. Unless there is an intervention by the state executive or by the prime minister, Ley will lose, local Liberals say. Escalating competition Since the Willoughby upset there are also concerns about what could occur in preselection for the federal seat of North Sydney, held by Zimmerman, which overlaps Willoughby. Until now, moderates have brushed off a preselection challenge from the right’s Hamish Stitt and the centre right’s Jessica Collins as a distraction with no chance. Now no one is so sure. Zimmerman declined to comment. And in the north-west of Sydney there are also renewed concerns about the seat of Mitchell, currently held by the centre right’s organiser, Hawke, but under challenge from the right. In a sign of the escalating competition between the factions, the Hills shire mayor, Michelle Byrne – backed by the centre right – found herself without a position on the Liberal ticket for the local government elections. “I don’t agree with the process that has taken place within the Liberal party or how we got here,” Byrne said in her resignation statement. So has there been a recruitment drive since in anticipation of greater democracy under the Warringah rules? A spokesman for the NSW Liberal party said numbers had steadily increased over the last five years but declined to give details. “The party welcomes new members from across the community, and we have had members continue to join us from a diverse range of geographic, socio-economic and cultural backgrounds,” he said. With a federal election due to be held by May, the NSW Liberals appears to have adopted a strategy of delaying remaining preselections rather than risking the uncertainties of the Warringah rules. There is constant talk of a peace deal to carve up the seats using urgency powers. “Whoever holds the parliamentary seats ends up being reflected in the culture and control of the party,” says one long-time factional player. “So what happens in this election will determine how much influence the right has in NSW. If North Sydney and Wentworth were to go [to independents], they are two very important seats held by the moderates,” he says. “While Morrison remains prime minister, then the centre right is a force, but they are the smallest group and query what happens if he is no longer the leader,” he says. And if the right claim more seats as well as the premiership, their influence will increase. “After the Willoughby result,” says a senior party member, “no one is at all confident about what’s happening.”Three years ago in the town of Moree, a small general store shut down, just eight years short of what would’ve been its hundredth anniversary. The name didn’t really strike me as one that would seem odd to those outside the north-west. Not until years later: Hong Yuens. Not until I spent some time in Brisbane, and saw that people seemed amazed that, yes, there were Chinese people outside Sunnybank – sometimes way outside. The name never struck me as odd, growing up in Bingara. But not out of some innate Asian-Australian familiarity with Chinese names. To me, Hong Yuens was just the name of the shop at Moree. It had been there since I’d been born. It had been there for 30 years before my father was born. Hong Yuens had just always been there. The popular history of Chinese people in Australia seems limited to pre-federation, pre-White Australia policy goldrush miners, their skill and diligence raising the ire and envy of the Europeans. Only taking, never contributing. Or some sort of 1980s-era boomer-approved refugees, fleeing from Tiananmen and Type 59 tanks. Either a villain or a victim, but always the other, interlopers in the Aussie milieu. The White Australia policy was the first thing the new commonwealth passed into law in 1901. It didn’t just halt the influx of Chinese migrants; it also had the effect of freezing the narrative of Chinese people in Australia as simply a people excluded. The popular narrative is that there are roughly two eras of Chinese immigration in Australia: 19th-century miners, those ponytailed ghosts of the goldfields; and then the post-White Australia influx of immigrants, starting with those fleeing Tiananmen tanks in the 1980s. But this ignores a hundred years of history of the Chinese people who managed to stay after federation, like my grandfather, or those diaspora from the outposts of collapsing empires – Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Timor-Leste – some of whom emigrated to live and work in Australia during the height of the White Australia policy. The concept of Chinese people as foreigners in Australia was always a foreign concept to me, mostly because I never really felt Chinese – at least, not in the way that I was supposed to be. Hell, I’m allergic to shellfish. It’s never really been my identity. Instead, I was always just … Australian. Small country town, hunting, fishing, raising the odd cow or two, nearly getting murdered by horses. OK, yes, there was some occasional gold panning, but the return on that isn’t really worth the effort these days. The reality is that the Chinese diaspora in Australia stretches beyond these boundaries, and, well, some of us slipped past the net and forged a life. Diana Giese, in her 1995 book Beyond Chinatown, called it “the often hidden history”. Chinese-Australians: Chinese people who were, and are, Australian. Not separate, not others, not dwelling on the fringe. Not on the outside looking in. My grandfather – Goong-Goong, or Charles See-Kee, gave a lecture in 1987, published as an occasional paper for the Northern Territory library called Chinese Contribution To Early Darwin. He notes that four previous attempts to settle the Northern Territory all failed, until Chinese labourers, used to the heat and humidity, were brought in from Singapore on the fifth attempt in the 1860s. Only then did Darwin take root. And only once Chinese workers had laid the foundations and gotten things going were the doors shut to them, with tariffs placed on their entry to Australia. A string of alarmist tariffs and rates on their travel beyond the new northern settlement were also imposed. Without Chinese labour, it’s unlikely Darwin would even exist at all. But many stuck around, building businesses and a thriving Chinatown. These people slipped through the net of the White Australia policy by dint of already being here. They were part of the foundation of the new country; after all, they helped build it. I’ve never been exactly clear on how Goong-Goong ended up in Australia, at least from a legal standpoint. I know he fled the New Territories after a mock execution (where he debated with his captors about whether to be shot or beheaded). Goong-Goong had been working for EWO Brewery in Shanghai, and in the chaos of the second world war, no one seemed to mind him being in Australia. I’m not even sure he had citizenship, even when working as the secretary to the NT administrator on 19 February 1942, on censorship, or joining the RAAF. The See-Kee family owned a pearling company, See Yick, on Thursday Island, and Goong-Goong attended Nudgee College in his 20s. His mum had an Aussie passport, and he had Hong Kong residences, but none of that was a guarantee of acceptance and citizenship. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter After the war, he raised a properly Catholic number of kids, and between work he found time to help found the Chung Wah society, coach sports teams, throw my mother into a cupboard on Christmas Eve of 1974 to shelter her from Cyclone Tracy and feed and settle boat people at the request of the Hawke government in the 80s. There was an OAM, and when he died, Charles Darwin University named a scholarship after him. None of this was the life of an outsider. This was not a function of being peripheral to the community. Somehow, it seems, Goong-Goong became a fixture, then an institution. In regional Australia, there’s almost always some echo of the Chinese presence, remembered fondly as a general store, a market garden, a shoe shop, or the omnipresent Chinese restaurant. In places like Darwin and Broome, the Chinese presence runs deep, not as the story of outsiders, but of founding members. This sort of engagement and integration of Chinese people with Australian communities over the years, and especially for most of the 20th century during the dark days of the White Australia policy, seems to have been forgotten. Or, at least, unnoticed. I’ve never really thought of myself as anything other than Australian, but still that Chinese family history is there. But that’s the point, isn’t it? These Chinese people grew to become … Australia. So much so that they’re not really noticed as anything new or different or special. We’ve always been here.A few years ago Dr Krati Garg, an oral surgeon in Melbourne, was in theatre about to commence work on a patient when she told the anaesthetist she could smell sevoflurane. Sevoflurane is the anaesthetic gas used to put – and keep – patients asleep during surgery. Ingested via a tube that is placed down the throat, in large quantities its bitter smell can be noticeable, but trace amounts are largely indiscernible. No one else in the room could smell it through their masks, but the anaesthetist, who’d worked with Garg before and knew of her sensitive nose, checked the fit of the tube, discovering a small leak and a need to adjust the seal. It’s not unusual for Garg to smell things that others can’t. She notices the smell of earth before it’s about to rain and at home with her husband, she’s overly prone to discarding food she thinks smells off, often saying to him: “It’s probably better that you taste and tell me if it’s off or not, because I might throw it out even without it going off.” Growing up in India, she was known in her family as having a super-sensitive nose, just like her grandmother. She’d astonish her mother by coming home from school and being able to describe the precise foods and spices used in the curries cooked in her absence. Certain smells gave her a strong aversion – even trace amounts of a particular rose-fragranced syrup, commonly used in milkshakes in India, made her recoil. The body odour of a private tutor her family had hired to help her with physics was so disconcerting, “I couldn’t focus at all … I would just try to stop, start my breathing. And then I would look at the clock. After a few months, I said to my mum: ‘Look, I can’t sit.’ And we had to let him go.” While understanding that she has a heightened sense of smell has been a “continuous process” throughout Garg’s life, this year she started becoming more curious about this skill. Working in healthcare in Melbourne, she was being regularly tested for Covid-19, but noticed she was also “subconsciously” running her own early-warning testing system, by constantly checking in on her sense of smell. (Loss of smell is a symptom of Covid infection.) After reading up on the topic, Garg came to the conclusion that she was possibly a “super-smeller” – a rare condition, medically known as hyperosmia. Dr Leah Beauchamp, a neuroscientist at the Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health in Melbourne, says individual “olfactory acuity” – our ability to smell – is highly variable and altered by genetics, age, gender (women have a stronger sense of smell) and even mood. Our sense of smell occurs via a complex process, where an odour molecule enters the nose and hits a patch of tissue – “basically at the place where you get your Covid test” – from where electrical impulses travel to various regions within the brain for interpretation. Not a lot is known about those on the outer edges of smelling ability – it’s rare, and subjective, which makes it difficult to measure. According to Beauchamp, it is theorised that hyperosmia could be biological – it’s known that changes in hormones and electrolytes associated with medical differences, such has pregnancy or Lyme diseases, heighten smell sensitivity – and also that is can be learned; a sommelier, for example. One of the most extreme cases of a super-smeller to emerge in recent years – now being studied in the UK – is a Scottish woman who noticed a certain “musty smell” on her husband in the years preceding his diagnosis with Parkinson’s disease. It was only once she walked into a support group for people living with Parkinson’s that she realised the scent was common among them. “Someone with that kind of acuity is basically off the charts,” says Beauchamp. “But you do get variability in humans. That’s how biology works.” For Beauchamp, it is the absence of a sense of smell that offers the most intriguing grounds for research. “Smell is great opportunity for us to access the brain … People think that sense of smell is all about the nose, and the nose is important obviously, but it really gives us an indication of brain health.” The Florey institute has a number of projects investigating smell deficits, including one examining why a cohort of people in Melbourne still have no sense of smell up to 12 months after recovering from Covid. It’s unlikely that someone like Garg would ever get – or need – an official diagnosis of hyperosmia. Beauchamp says that unless it is “disturbing day-to-day function … they wouldn’t need to get it treated”. Garg says that simply being aware of her ability is enough for her. “I almost feel empowered in some ways that I’ve got this little extra strength or tool.” Being a super-smeller means she occasionally having to take evasive action, like “staying away from a particular group of people because someone’s wearing a very strong perfume in a party”. It also means navigating intense memories. Unlike other senses, the area of the brain that processes smell directly receives information from the part of the brain associated with memory, the hippocampus. For Garg, a certain “damp” smell takes her back to the stressful experience of having her house flooded as a child; conversely, the smell of petrol, which she “quite likes”, overwhelms her with nostalgia for her childhood in India. “There are people who actually come and fill it for you and you just sit in the car with your windows down, or you’re on your two-wheeler and you can smell it with the dust and everything.”The domination of the chicken processing industry by a few large players has contributed to the shortages in supermarkets across Australia, farmers and industry representatives say. But that claim is rejected by chicken processors, who say the current supply chain crisis is “unprecedented” and not related to the number of processors or the structure of the industry. Chicken farmers are contracted to provide the land, sheds, equipment, utilities and labour necessary to grow the chickens for large processing companies such as Inghams and Baiada, who own the birds. James Jackson, the president of NSW Farmers, says chicken meat production in Australia is dominated by a small number of vertically integrated businesses where the ownership up the supply chain is controlled by a single operator, from the hatcheries through to the processing plants and distribution. Jackson says in 2020 Inghams Enterprises and Baiada Poultry supplied 70% of Australia’s chicken meat while 90% is supplied by just six processors. He says while the supermarket shortages were a result of the impact of Covid-19 on the workforce, the concentration of ownership in chicken processing has also played a part in reducing supply options. “Chicken processors, red meat processors, truckies and warehouse workers – no one has been spared from Covid,” Jackson says. “More broadly we have raised the importance of having options in our supply chain so that when one or two big companies have issues – as we have seen recently – our dinner plates aren’t left empty.” NSW Farmers has described the chicken meat industry as a “regional monopsony environment”. A monopsony is a market dominated by a single buyer with the power to influence prices. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter John Courtney, a former chicken farmer, says the conditions in the chicken meat market make it particularly vulnerable to supply chain disruptions. “With very few suppliers, it’s all concentrated in the hands of the two big players, so when you have a hiccup, it’s major,” he says. “Whereas before, being spread out among half a dozen smaller operators, there wouldn’t be a problem of keeping up supply.” Courtney and Jeremy Cruickshank were two of the 13 farmers in the New South Wales northern rivers who were contracted to Sunnybrand Chickens, a family-owned processing company with a plant in Byron Bay. The company was bought by Inghams, which shut down the Byron Bay plant and made the farmers send their chickens to Brisbane. Courtney and Cruikshank were both told their costs were too expensive and their contracts were not renewed. “Whiz kids with degrees in economics started calling the shots and didn’t know a chook from a chihuahua … and they said you fellows are too dear, we’ve got too much freight to Brisbane,” Courtney says. “I had to go get a job at 65 just to pay the bills.” Courtney and Cruikshank say the expensive infrastructure their contracts had required them to invest in became valueless without contracts to grow chickens. Cruikshank says more processing areas would reduce the risk of Covid-19 affecting the workforce, and believes the industry’s lack of diversity could produce further shortages in future in the event of avian disease. “The biggest problem with the industry is the only way they can save money in growing chicken is by putting 100 sheds in one row – makes it a lot cheaper to transport out of that spot. “But what will happen is if we get avian influenza or Newcastle disease? It’s going to wipe out not just three farms that are separated by kilometres like it usually does, it’s going to take the whole operation out.” Inghams was contacted for comment and referred the inquiry on to the Australian Chicken Meat Federation (ACMF). A spokesperson for the ACMF, which represents chicken processors, said there were multiple chicken suppliers in Australia of various sizes and across several states. “The chicken industry is extremely robust and stable,” the spokesperson said. “What we are currently experiencing is unprecedented, and has affected nearly every industry in the country. “The current supply issues experienced by industry have nothing to do with the size and/or number of processing plants, nor the structure of the industry. “All processing plants – big and small and across all suppliers – are experiencing the same difficulties, which are resulting from staff shortages due to COVID-related absenteeism, and all have impacted supply in the same way.” The ACMF spokesperson said the staff shortages were not just at processing plants but right across the supply chain, including transport. “Over the past few weeks there have been times when we haven’t had enough staff to collect birds from farms, but at other times plants have been able to produce the product but had to cancel orders because of transport industry issues – there were not enough truck drivers to deliver product to stores.” The perishable agricultural goods inquiry report released by the ACCC in 2020 acknowledged the power imbalance in the chicken meat industry. Michael Moore, the executive officer of the Australian Chicken Growers Council, said since the turn of the century smaller processors have been absorbed by larger ones, leading to decreasing levels of competition at the processing level and as a result monopsony conditions. “Processors are more able to put in place pricing that may be pushing growers to the edge of unprofitability. If they are the only person out there offering a contract, it’s take it or leave it, that is the price.” Moore said processors used to be prepared to issue contracts for up to 10 years, which would cover the cost of building new farm infrastructure, but contract terms have fallen steadily over the years with many growers on yearly contracts. Cruikshank says Inghams gave his farm and 12 months notice that it would not be renewing its contract and left him “to go broke”. “That’s what we’ve got from chicken farming.” The contract had required the investment of millions of dollars in modern feeding, lighting, ventilation and water systems. “Because these sheds are so specifically designed for growing chickens in, you’re left with no real options for what to do with your sheds,” Cruikshank says. Peta Easey, poultry meat manager at NSW Farmers, says chicken growers are forced to compete in a pool system and the final buying price can vary significantly from batch to batch. A decade ago, in NSW there were nine significant chicken meat processing plants owned by six different companies, but now there are only four processing plants in the state owned by just two companies, according to Easey. Staff shortages have been worst in processing plants, where chickens are cut into pieces such as thigh and breast fillets, resulting in more whole chickens shipped to supermarkets and other retailers. Moore says that meat processing plants are vulnerable to the spread of viruses as people need to work in close proximity. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communitySeveral years ago a friend packed a batch of premixed cosmopolitans on his first multiday hike. It took until the first night to realise that the warm, syrupy liquid wasn’t quite as refreshing as he’d hoped in the tropical heat of north Queensland, but if he’d been on the Grampians Peaks Trail (GPT) in western Victoria, it might have been a different story. The second night of the brand new 13-day trail is spent at a campsite named Gar, which hugs the lip of an escarpment above a thickly forested bowl, ringed in tiers by jagged mountains that rise up like the walls of a colosseum. Tent platforms are democratically arranged along the cliff edge so that everyone has a view to the west, while the vegetation between the tents and the sheer rock wall behind provides a welcome sense of privacy. Nearby sits an elegant shelter of steel clad in blackened timber with west-facing floor-to-ceiling windows and a solar-powered USB charging station, while the wooden deckchairs bolted into the rock are a nice extra touch (even without a cocktail in hand). Sitting in one as the sun turns into a giant fireball and a golden haze hovers over the valley below, it’s impossible to deny that Gar is one of Australia’s most picturesque campsites, though over the next week and a half I’ll find a few other contenders further down the track. Opened in November 2021 after several years of construction, the 160km GPT passes through open forest and flower-studded grassland, ascends quartz-capped mountain peaks and skirts shimmering lakes as it crosses the Grampians (Gariwerd) national park from north to south. The trail is divided into three sections of four to five days each, and because it connects existing tracks with 100km of newly built trail, it opens up parts of the park that have previously been all but inaccessible to walkers. Within metres of taking my first step on day one, I’ve worked up a sweat as I climb the steep, exposed slope of cruelly named Flat Rock. It’s hot work, especially in the full sun, but the payoff arrives quickly. From the open space at the top of this initial ascent, I can see the pancake-flat plains of the Wimmera stretching out into oblivion – neatly arrayed olive groves and viciously straight fence lines contrasting markedly with the gnarled formations that still tower over me in the other direction. Nobody could accuse this hike of hiding its true nature; whether you tackle a few hours or the full 160km, you’ll encounter plenty of steep climbs and spectacular lookouts. Rugged peaks of cracked rubble rise above a wall of vivid orange sandstone and throughout the northern section of the walk there are unexpected echoes of Purnululu’s beehive domes. As I progress farther, views to the south reveal a sharp spine of peaks thrusting up from the surrounding plains, each looking like a wave arrested on the point of breaking. Days of between eight and 16km might sound like a breeze for seasoned multiday hikers, but ungroomed paths and significant elevation changes conspire to make walking times significantly longer than expected. By the time I walk into Halls Gap at the end of day four (the only night not spent at a campsite) I feel like I’ve thoroughly earned a warm shower and a cold drink. In the days on either side of the town, I encounter several walkers tackling short sections of the GPT but they thin out significantly as I continue south. It means I have the entire landscape to myself for days at a time as I scale rocky ridges, climbing up innumerable stone steps and across broad slabs that absorb and radiate the sun’s heat. The hike’s exposed nature means the GPT is definitely not a summer walk – autumn and spring are the best times to tackle it, with the latter bringing an abundance of wildflowers. A third of Victoria’s plant species – almost 1,000 in all – are found within the region, and when I reach the Duwul campsite at the end of day seven, my tent platform is surrounded by yellow and maroon native peas, shy curls of flame grevillea and delicate lilac orchids blooming beneath rough barked gums, wreathed in a halo of crimson flowers. For days afterwards the way ahead is fringed by splashes of red, white and pink as the trail skirts the easternmost edge of the Grampians, through sections of grade 5 track suitable only for experienced and well-equipped bushwalkers. It means walking the entirety of the trail is a serious undertaking and of the first 2,000 campsite bookings, only eight hikers planned to tackle the full 13 days. On some of the tougher sections I wonder whether I’m being foolhardy by joining their ranks but the joys of hiking in this quintessentially Australian landscape come regularly to the fore. By the final night of the hike I can see the southernmost slopes of the Grampians and the small town of Dunkeld reflected in the window of the Mud-Dadjug shelter. Over a makeshift dinner of leftovers, I enjoy a front-row seat as the setting sun adds a honeyed glow to everything it touches, while the town lights flicker on beneath a lilac and apricot sky. Above them looms the dark blue mass of Mt Sturgeon, a reminder that even on the final stretch, I can expect some challenging climbs and spectacular lookouts. Shorter Options If a 13-day hike is a step too far, there are many more approachable alternatives, especially in the park’s northern section. Day hike: From Halls Gap, ascend past burbling cascades and waterfalls, through bushland rich in wildlife to a deep cleft in the rock before emerging at The Pinnacle for fabulous views of the town and surrounding landscape. Overnight: The first day of the GPT follows the rich orange rock of Taipan Wall past seasonal creeks and waterfalls to the Barigar campsite, which sits in a sheltered valley and looks east towards a striking escarpment. In the morning, it’s a 4km walk to the Gar trailhead. Multiday: Take in some of the highlights of the trail on the four-day northern section, which includes two of the most striking campsites at Gar and Werdug, before walking into Halls Gap. Guided walks also tackle this stage. The writer was a guest of Visit Victoria and the Grampians Peaks Walking CompanyMetiria Turei, the former Green party co-leader, left parliament more than four years ago, resigning from the co-leadership and the party list after right wing lobby groups, with an able assist in the form of the parliamentary press gallery, led a ruthless campaign against the former lawyer for admitting that she once had to commit benefit fraud to feed her young family. The admission came in a landmark speech condemning New Zealand’s miserly welfare system. Struggling families were paid far too little to survive, something policymakers had known for decades, with examples ranging from Turei’s own to anonymous sole parents who were coming forward to describe how they spent $380 of the $480 in assistance from the State on rent alone. Turei and the Greens were promising to lift the rate of sole parent support, remove sanctions, and make other necessary and progressive reforms to the welfare system in order for people to meet their basic needs. Four years after that speech the assertion that families are entitled to enough to meet their basic needs seems uncontroversial. This year the Labour government is lifting benefits between $32 and $55 a week, indexing future increases to wage growth, and lifting what are called abatement thresholds, so that beneficiaries can keep more of what they earn in part-time and other forms of work. In short, Turei was vindicated. Those right wing lobby groups, the press gallery, and even a number of her own Green Party colleagues who drove Turei to resign for her “dishonesty” appear now, not even half a decade later, out of step with the facts and the times. This is the kind of political and personal bravery that is unimaginable in the current Green party. Turei’s stand saw the Green’s bleed off more of Labour’s vote. Andrew Little, the then Labour leader, lost confidence in his own ability to lead Labour and a last-minute plea was made to the then Labour deputy leader Jacinda Ardern. The rest is, as the cliche goes, history. Today the Greens struggle to break the 10% ceiling Turei and her co-leader Russel Norman were so regularly breaking in the 2010s. Part of this is because, according to a good number of former members, the party’s timidity in government. The Greens provide the Labour majority with confidence and supply – meaning they’re obliged to vote for the budget and in confidence motions – and in exchange co-leaders James Shaw and Marama Davidson occupy ministerial roles outside cabinet. In one sense, it’s a sweet deal. The Labour government doesn’t need the Greens, but the party still receives something anyway. However the deal is proving toxic within the party. Under the inter-party agreement, the Greens are free to criticise Labour outside their portfolio areas. In practice this is rarely the case. Shaw and Davidson are smart enough to know that progress in their portfolios relies as much on good relationships with the minister of finance and his closest advisers as it does on simply “being right” on the issues or having the public on side. That means the Green co-leaders are, for the sake of making progress, often hostage to the whims and wishes of their far larger partner. In most cases this is probably fine. The two parties agree on more than they disagree. But in the policy area that cuts right to the Greens’ identity – climate change – it is a disaster with the minister of climate change, James Shaw, defending and enacting the government’s line. Not the Green party’s line. This means balancing regressive farming interests with progressive environmental interests. It means taking account of the vocal business community that Labour seems so often to fear as well as taking account of the “just transition” arm of the union movement. This is, of course, what a good minister does. Balances competing interests. But an effective minister does so and then takes a position that aligns with their politics. Shaw and many Green party members find this increasingly difficult as Labour, to pick one example, insists on “voluntary” inclusion of agriculture in the Emissions Trading Scheme. It becomes more farcical as Shaw, whose party’s political identity is staked on lowering emissions, meekly defends New Zealand’s increasing emissions because, well, he’s the minister of climate change. This is the price a party of government pays for the limited decision-making power it gets. As the Māori party found out between 2008 and 2017, policy is made primarily in cabinet – the decision-making body where they exercise no sway outside limited committees. The Māori party example is instructive. The party went from five seats in 2008, their first year in government, to three seats in 2011, and then two seats in 2014. Come 2017 they were gone. But at the last election, after a good deal of rebuilding networks and changing strategy, the party came roaring back with two MPs who won their seats against Labour’s incoming tide. Why? Because the party rejected the idea of joining government and embraced opposition politics. Labour was at the height of its powers and, for Māori, a party was needed to hold the major left wing force to account on issues from Ihumātao to housing prices. This is where the Greens can take their inspiration from Metiria Turei again. In 2016 the former Green party co-leader said that house prices must drop. Almost six years later, as every suburb in the country records a median house price increase, where is the opposition party brave enough to say the same again? Morgan Godfery (Te Pahipoto, Sāmoa) is a senior lecturer at the University of Otago and a columnist at MetroCharlotte Leslie has been hit with threats that would have broken a lesser woman. The former Conservative MP for Bristol North West crossed a Tory donor, Mohamed Amersi. Now she has learned what journalists and whistleblowers already know: when you challenge the moneyed elite, oligarchical Britain’s legal system will throw you into “a world of pain”. “We both know you’re in a great deal of trouble,” Carl Hunter OBE, a party fixer and adviser to Tory ministers told her in February 2020. “I think you need to consider your position, as in being able to walk the dog at night, being able to sleep well at night.” In the unlikely event she had missed his meaning, the recordings Leslie made to protect herself show Hunter telling her: “Mohamed feels somebody has written an anonymous letter. “You’re looking into a world of pain on this… If you are not careful this will keep you up at night, monopolise your life, for as long as it lasts.” Amersi denies that he was aware of what Hunter was saying or that Hunter was operating on his instructions. He met Leslie in her capacity as the director of the Conservative Middle East Council, an influential group that promotes better relationships with a region that is both strategically sensitive and, of course, awash with oil wealth. Amersi and Leslie discussed in March 2020 the possibility of Amersi becoming its chair. After Leslie and the council’s president, Nicholas Soames, decided not to work with him, Amersi set up a rival organisation. Leslie and Soames sent a private due diligence note setting out their concerns to Ben Elliot, the Tories’ co-chair, and to a handful of political and intelligence sources: this is apparently the “anonymous letter” Hunter referred to in his threatening phone calls. Although we do not know its contents, Leslie said she compiled it from publicly available sources. Amersi said its claims were “defamatory and inaccurate” and Leslie was “damaging his reputation” in the eyes of the people who mattered most to him. In a Commons debate on Thursday about the ability of the extremely wealthy to abuse the law, David Davis noticed Amersi had announced that he was “driven by a desire to create a world that’s better for everybody. Let’s test that against public domain facts, shall we?” In 2002, while Amersi was a solicitor, Mr Justice Peter Smith described Amersi’s conduct as “lamentable” and his evidence as “unreliable”, “unconvincing” and “unsatisfactory”. In 2005, Amersi made £4m helping a Luxembourg company buy a Russian telecoms business. The following year, a Swiss judge concluded the company was secretly owned by what Davis described as a “top crony” of Vladimir Putin. As the Guardian and the BBC reported, the Pandora papers showed Amersi was involved in the structure of a deal for the Swedish firm Telia that was later found to include a $220m (£162m) bribe for the daughter of the then president of Uzbekistan. (At the time, Amersi’s lawyers said he had “no reason” to believe it might be a bribe and that the underlying arrangements for the deal had been put in place before his involvement.) Despite all this information being publicly available, Davis concluded, “Amersi has used his wealth and influence to try to bully Charlotte Leslie into silence”. The taped calls from Hunter, revealed last week by Simon Walters of the Mail, are horrible to hear. Leslie is desperate to escape from the “world of pain”. At one stage, she offers to apologise if that will get Amersi off her back, but her contrition does not satisfy Amersi or his lawyers. Amersi told the Observer he condemned “any language that was threatening”. As far as he was concerned, Hunter was an honest broker trying to settle a dispute. He told the Mail that Leslie was “trying to portray herself as the victim when the reverse is true” and that MPs had “hidden behind parliamentary privilege to recycle false allegations”. Meanwhile, Hunter told the Mail “he did not recollect” suggesting it would not be safe for Leslie to go out at night. He said he was trying to help her. The Metropolitan police are examining allegations of malicious communications and harassment. No one, however, can deny the scale of the legal pressure rich men can apply in the UK. Charlotte Leslie has had scores of threatening legal letters from Amersi’s solicitors, Carter Ruck. In a pattern familiar to Carole Cadwalladr, my colleague who investigated the Leave campaign, Catherine Belton, the exposer of Putin’s cronies, and Tom Burgis of the Financial Times, who examined the power of a Kazakh mining conglomerate, Amersi is suing Leslie personally, along with her employer. First, he alleged that Leslie had breached his rights under the Data Protection Act. As David Davis said: “Usually, the information commissioner deals with such disagreements, but when a rich man wants to silence and destroy someone, they go to the courts.” Mrs Justice Tipples threw out his case, saying that Amersi and his lawyers had not “taken the trouble to follow the correct procedures”. Undeterred, Amersi is bringing another data protection case and is threatening a libel action, not only against Leslie but against colleagues on the council who have stood by her. During the Commons debate, the Conservative MP Julian Lewis told a hapless government minister that Leslie was threatened with financial ruin for checking whether someone who “wanted to take over a political organisation within the Conservative party was clean or dirty”. If the minister could not understand why Leslie and people like her needed protection, “then he needs to… restudy his brief”. The minister said the government would respond. But I don’t see how it can. The Conservative party is the beneficiary of a system Amersi himself described as “access capitalism”. He paid money to Ben Elliot whose Quintessentially “concierge” company provides the super-rich with any luxury they desire. Elliot is Prince Charles’s nephew and Amersi went on to become a trustee of the Prince’s Trust. Like hedge fund managers and Russian oligarchs, Amersi and his Russian-born partner, Nadezhda Rodicheva, have donated lavishly to the Tory party. Wealth, monarchy, government and law mix so thoroughly that the boundaries disintegrate into a foaming broth. Do not in these circumstances be surprised by the Conservative attacks on rights to vote and demonstrate and threats to destroy the BBC. Oligarchical money is of a piece with oligarchical politic and Charlotte Leslie won’t be the last person it sends into a world of pain. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistAfter spending three decades murdering every plant I touched, I was astonished to find myself in lockdown with a functioning edible garden. Perhaps isolation taught me patience. Perhaps the pandemic made me more careful. It certainly helped that there were already veggies growing in raised garden beds when we moved in: from them I learned that part of gardening is watching plants die (some died! it was OK!), and from that I gained the confidence to plant more. My first tip is to start simple. Basil, dill, parsley, chilli, snow peas, lemon thyme, strawberries and mint are all hardy if you have good soil (did you know you can simply go out and buy an entire bag of worms? And then just chuck them in?), enough sun and remember to water each day. I keep my herbs and small vegetables in balcony boxes that hang above the garden beds, which grow zucchini, beans and tomatoes I can take little credit for; the beds were already irrigated. My second tip is to keep it simple by way of cheap accoutrements that remove both guesswork and legwork. I have a big rubber tub ($4, Bunnings) collecting rain (free, La Niña). I have a soil meter ($17) that measures moisture, pH and light (a magical tool that tells you when to water and has kept my indoor plants alive as well). I plant seeds in a seedling box ($12) first, which keeps the weather off until they’re big enough to be moved. Once set up in their balcony boxes ($11), I scatter a smorgasbord of year-round flowers around them to lure bees that will pollinate the plants. Bees: also free! It is obscene how much joy this all brings me – and it takes around five minutes each day to tend. I run out every morning now with my dumb cute watering can ($20) to water everyone, trim off the dead leaves (it helps the plant focus on the living ones) and see if anything has happened. A new strawberry! A different flower! A bee! Look at this BEE! I yell all the developments at my bored partner and show him the tiny yield I have gathered in a tiny basket (so it looks bigger). Sometimes I wear a hat while I’m doing it, like some lady in a boring BBC show. It’s so much easier than I thought! And incredibly dull. I love it.Tennis Australia appears to have dumped Santos one year into a “multiyear” partnership deal after a campaign targeting the fossil fuel company for “sportswashing”. Circumstances surrounding the termination of the agreement are unclear as neither party are commenting but the decision to part ways took place before 5 November 2021. The deal was announced in February 2021, with Tennis Australia saying at the time that Santos had “joined the Australian Open and ATP Cup family as Official Natural Gas Partner”. “The Summer of Tennis events will provide a platform for Santos to showcase how natural gas is used in everyday life. Connecting with tennis at a grassroots level is also a priority,” it said. The company’s branding was widespread during the 2021 Australian Open, with the Santos logo appearing courtside and advertisements promoting the jobs provided by the gas industry playing during broadcasts. In another instance, a “fuelled by Santos” slogan appeared on the score count during an epic rallies video. Tennis Australia confirmed to Guardian Australia that Santos had been dropped as a partner. A spokesperson for Tennis Australia did not respond to detailed questions regarding the circumstances of the decision except to confirm that the partnership agreement had ended. “Santos was a partner of AO2021, however they are no longer a partner now,” they said. Tennis Australia is a signatory to the UN Sports For Climate Action framework, which seeks to use the “soft power” of sport to encourage meaningful action on the climate crisis. Tennis is among those sports considered to be uniquely affected by climate change. The 2014 Australian Open – where play was stopped and 1,000 spectators were treated for heat exhaustion when temperatures rose above 40C – is considered an example of how climate change affects sport. The 2021 partnership deal faced strong community backlash, with 7,600 people signing a petition addressed to the Australian Open chief executive, Craig Tiley, as part of a campaign on social media. Sports organisations have also come under internal pressures, with 300 professional athletes signing up to a campaign urging more action on climate change. The chief executive of 350 Australia, Lucy Manne, whose organisation coordinated the campaign, welcomed the end of the arrangement, saying Tennis Australia “should be congratulated for ending their association with Santos”. “It’s really important we start to see our biggest, most loved sporting events move away from partnerships like those with Santos,” Manne said. “Tennis Australia hasn’t told us why this has occurred and they may not, but regardless, this is a huge public benefit in terms of not having a big fossil fuel company’s brand splashed all over a major event. “There was a big effort to make it unacceptable for cigarette companies to sponsor events … now it’s the time to do the same for fossil fuel companies.” Santos – which is seeking to develop new gas projects in the Beetaloo Basin, Barossa, and Narrabri – still sponsors several major sporting events, including the Tour Down Under, which begins on Monday. Last year the International Energy Agency said limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop in 2021. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Manne said it was “perverse” that during the 2020 Tour Down Under sections of the route passed through areas hit by the Black Summer bushfires, while the company was promoting its business through its sponsorship. “There’s a big opportunity for sports like those overseen by Tennis Australia and the Tour Down Under to educate the public about what the effects of climate change look like,” Manne said. “And it’s easier to do that without fossil fuel sponsorship.”A lot of people predicted Ash Barty would play Naomi Osaka in the Australian Open’s last 16. Barty was not one of them. “That was your expectation,” she told press after Osaka fell to Amanda Anisimova. “My expectation was whoever it would be.” Barty’s expectation is in close alignment with her memory, and her memory is of being one set and three games down against a 17-year-old Anisimova the semi-final at Roland Garros in 2019. “I remember the biggest moment of that match was coming out of the chair at 3-0 down the second set,” she recalled. “I remember, to this very day, what I was saying to myself at that change of ends. From then on it’s held me in pretty good stead, sticking to those values and continuing to try and grow each and every time on court, and problem-solve and work my way through.” On Sunday Barty will renew her rivalry with the American, who has not made it past the third round of a grand slam since but continues to demonstrate that she very much remains a danger to the Australian’s chances at Melbourne Park. “I try to forget, but also I remember that I learned a lot from that moment,” she said. “That was a turning point in my career, and you have to be able to take learnings from those moments, as hard as they are sometimes. I was able to navigate and find a way through. Which at that point in my life, in my career, it was a massive turning point.” Most immediately, that turning point yielded a three-set win and the French Open trophy after she overcame Markéta Vondroušová in the final to secure her first grand slam title. Since then the 25-year-old, who added last year’s Wimbledon title to her major collection, has been the untouchable world No 1 with no sign of slipping off the summit. “It feels like it’s a lifetime ago, but some of those memories are still really vivid,” she said. “Without a doubt we will take that and use that experience, use those feelings and those emotions as best we can. “I would have loved to have had the opportunity to play Naomi. I love to test myself against the very best. In the position we’re in, Amanda has played a fantastic tournament. She deserves her spot in the round of 16. I think the match we will play will be exciting. It will be good for both of us to get out there and test ourselves against each other.” The encounter has the potential to swing both ways. Anisimova, now 20, has brought an aggression to Melbourne Park that Belinda Bencic also failed to contain, and a wide, discombobulating serve. Barty, however, has won 57 consecutive service games stretching back to her first match of the year at the Adelaide International against Coco Gauff. At this tournament she is yet to be broken in 23 service games, even during a couple of tough moments against Italian third-round opponent Camila Giorgi. “It’s been really solid over the last couple of weeks,” she said. “Particularly in Adelaide I felt like I found a really good rhythm with it. Here so far in my matches I’ve been able to squeeze out of a few really tough games.” The match will open the evening session on Rod Laver Arena, despite Barty making no secret of her preference to play during the day. “I think I love to play in the daytime, that’s no secret,” she said. “I’ve always been a morning person, always been up early, and have grown up playing in the Australian sun. I love it. I love the extra bounce and the heat in the court. “But night sessions here at the Australian Open are really special. The experience and the atmosphere that’s created in a night session is absolutely brilliant. “So, I mean, everyone has preferences, but I don’t argue either way. I’m happy to play at any given time and get the opportunity to go out there and try and do what I can do, enjoy it, and take it for what it is.” Anisimova, whose good form over the past few months has coincided with the presence in her camp of Australian coach Darren Cahill, is well aware of the threat the twice-grand slam winner poses. “She’s an amazing player, I look up to her a lot,” Anisimova said. “I love her game. She’s very consistent. She’s a champion. “So it’s just going to be exciting to go up against her, another amazing opportunity for me. I’m going to get back on the practice court tomorrow and work on my game and just try to give myself the best chance.”Ralf Rangnick hailed the dressing room atmosphere after Marcus Rashford’s winner 27 seconds from the end meant Manchester United overtook West Ham to claim fourth place. It meant the interim manager had claimed back-to-back wins for the first time, 10 games into his tenure, and given the reported unrest surrounding the club due to unconvincing form and inconsistent results Rangnick was content. “The atmosphere [in the dressing room] is amazing,” he said. “Quite rightly, the boys were celebrating. They know what a massive win this was. This was an extremely emotional game and an extremely emotional moment. “If you score in the last seconds of the game and there is no time for the other team to reply: knowing this was extremely emotional. “Thank you to the [fans] – the way they supported the team all through the game, they pushed us and carried us through the game. It was amazing. Since I arrived, it was by far the best atmosphere in the stadium.” Given how late the winner came, Rangnick was asked if there might now be “Ralfy Time” as there was once “Fergie Time”. “I don’t know how long Fergie Time was. Was that the last five minutes? I wouldn’t mind if that happened,” he said. “But we would also like to have more games like Brentford when we were 3-0 up [United won 3-1]. But if you score in the last seconds the big advantage is there is no time for the team to reply.” The winning goal was Rashford’s second in consecutive games and Rangnick praised the England striker. He said: “He’s one of the top strikers in England – we know the qualities he has. He has almost everything a modern striker needs: pace, skill, the size and physicality. “In the end it’s all about confidence for strikers and I’m pretty sure those two goals will have raised the level of confidence with Marcus and now it’s about taking steps, it’s about continuity. I think he can play a very important role for the rest of the season for us.” Rashford said: “It is an important goal and [to score so] late on is an amazing feeling. We have to use that winning feeling.” Next up are Middlesbrough in the FA Cup fourth round. “We have high ambitions in the Cup,” said Rangnick. “We know in all of these games we have to perform on a high level.” David Moyes was unhappy at how his team conceded. “I’m pissed off with that result for sure,” West Ham’s manager said. “We completely switched off.”It must have felt peculiar at full time for Manchester City, as they left the pitch without the full complement of points in a Premier League game for the first time since October. They failed to extend their winning run to 13 matches but they avoided defeat after Aymeric Laporte headed in a second-half equaliser to open up a 12-point advantage over second-placed Liverpool, who have two games in hand. Pep Guardiola bristles at suggestions that City have a fourth title in five seasons all but secured and Southampton, who proved challenging opponents, provided the perfect evidence that it may not be a stroll to the finish line after all. Southampton, who also held City to a draw earlier in the season, were aggressive and their bravery was typified by the heroic performance of Mohammed Salisu, who took a Phil Foden volley square in the face as City tried to turn the screw. Kevin De Bruyne curled a shot against the woodwork and Gabriel Jesus headed against a post as City searched for a winner but if anything illustrated their frustrations it was the sight of Jack Grealish, who operated as a false nine, waiting in the tunnel after the game for Oriol Romeu, who spent the majority of a lively contest nullifying City’s most recent marquee signing. “They had a conversation and everything is good,” said the Southampton manager, Ralph Hasenhüttl. Just as City were stamping their authority, they trailed to a game Southampton side that seemed intent on taking the honour of halting a streak in which City had won their previous 12 matches by an aggregate score of 34-7. It was a fine goal, too. Kyle Walker-Peters motored forward from right-back and played a neat one-two with Nathan Redmond, controlling the return pass with his left foot before, with his next touch, stroking the ball into the far corner with the outside of his right boot. City passed up an opportunity seconds earlier. They shifted the ball from left to right but Raheem Sterling undercooked his pass after spying Kyle Walker on the overlap. Sterling blasted over after cutting inside Che Adams and later he failed to beat Fraser Forster when it seemed inevitable that the Southampton net would bulge. The Southampton fans behind the goal sighed in unison as they watched the ball drop to Sterling at the back post after Romain Perraud missed a clearance, but a sprawling Forster saved with his legs. Southampton would have doubled their lead on 23 minutes had Armando Broja been onside when the commanding Romeu, who was given his Barcelona debut by Guardiola, played the striker in on goal. Broja crept behind Walker but had strayed a shade offside. The home support were on their feet again five minutes later in anticipation of a penalty when the referee, Simon Hooper, put his whistle to his mouth after Ederson brushed with Broja as the striker surged into the box and on to Adams’s dinked pass, only to award City a free-kick for an offside. Southampton had no desire to sit on their lead and within a couple of minutes of the restart Ederson pushed a Jan Bednarek header from a James Ward-Prowse corner to safety. Another Ward-Prowse corner soon after caused havoc in the City box and Broja headed against a post from a yard out. Rodri curled a shot on to the roof of the Southampton goal but Guardiola craved more and sent on Gabriel Jesus in place of Sterling. Forster repelled a Foden volley and then came the equaliser that swung momentum in City’s favour. De Bruyne flighted a free-kick towards the back post, where there was a scattering of dark blue shirts and, unmarked, Laporte powered in a header. “You know they have more gears than we have and when they switch to the next gear we cannot follow,” Hasenhüttl said, his voice a little hoarse. “It is super tough against them. They find solutions for everything. They push you back on the edge of your box. They never let you breathe. They come again and come again. We get tired and make a few mistakes. In the end you need everything: luck, a super goalkeeper, and a super goal [that] we scored.” From there, City hogged the ball and probed in search of a winner. De Bruyne dropped a shot wide and could only bite his lip in frustration after rattling the woodwork, and Guardiola rested his hands on his head when Jesus headed against a post with the goal gaping. The fourth official, Andre Marriner, indicated six minutes of stoppage time and Hasenhüttl turned to the fans behind him in the Itchen Stand to ask them to turn up the volume. City would not go quietly – at least five away supporters invaded the pitch after the final whistle as City fans clashed with stewards – but the Saints stood firm. “Even if we won the game the title would not be over,” Guardiola said. “We played to play good and defend our badge and our people as best as possible and the title will always be a consequence of what we have done. We are the reigning champions and we won a lot in the past and it is difficult to win again and win again; you do not get a lot of sympathy from the others.”Before he got sick, Thich Nhat Hanh urged his followers not to put his ashes in a vase, lock him inside and “limit who I am”. Instead, the Vietnamese Zen Buddhist monk, poet and peace activist apparently told them: “If I am anywhere, it is in your mindful breathing and in your peaceful steps.” And after the 95-year-old’s death on Saturday, the breadth of the legacy of his extraordinary life was laid bare as news of his death reverberated around the world, drawing tributes from leading figures from across psychology, religion and social justice. The Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhism, said he lived “a truly meaningful life”, adding: “I have no doubt the best way we can pay tribute to him is to continue his work to promote peace in the world.” Hanh, known as the “father of mindfulness” and a leading advocate of “engaged Buddhism”, rose to prominence and was exiled from his home country over his opposition to the Vietnam war. After persuading Martin Luther King to speak out against it, the civil rights leader nominated him for the Nobel peace prize in 1967, writing that he did not know of anyone more worthy “than this gentle Buddhist monk from Vietnam”. Hanh’s influence even reached the tech world. In 2013 he spoke at Google’s headquarters in Silicon Valley, telling workers: “We have the feeling that we are overwhelmed by information. We don’t need that much information.” His influence also spanned clinical psychology, with his 1975 book The Miracle of Mindfulness laying the foundations for what would later be used to treat depression and described as mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. “He was there at the very start of bringing mindfulness from east to west,” said Mark Williams, emeritus professor of clinical psychology at Oxford University and founding director of the Oxford Mindfulness Centre. Williams first heard about mindfulness from Marsha Linehan, a professor of clinical psychology at the University of Washington, who he said kept Hanh’s book in her pocket and referred to it as her “bible”. He said: “I first met her in the late 80s but this was published in 1975 so she had been using that book to influence her, and it was her work and her advice that influenced us in seeking to incorporate mindfulness into our approach to preventing depression, which then became known as mindfulness-based cognitive therapy.” Today, mindfulness is a ubiquitous term of modern life, but without Hanh’s influence western mindfulness would not, he believes, be what it is today. Williams said: “What he was able to do was to communicate the essentials of Buddhist wisdom and make it accessible to people all over the world, and build that bridge between the modern world of psychological science and the modern healthcare system and these ancient wisdom practices – and then he continued to do that in his teaching.” Those who met Hanh said his presence was unlike anything else they had encountered. Anabel Temple, a member of Heart of London Sangha, part of Hanh’s monastery network, first came across his teachings in his book Being Peace 30 years ago. She travelled with him in China and Vietnam in 2005, when he returned after four decades of exile, and has been to his Plum Village monastery in France many times. Scrolling through her phone, she shows dozens of photos of Hanh – also known as “Thay”, or teacher – travelling. “He had that sort of way. You go into a room and there were hundreds of people there in a Dharma talk, but he had that ability to feel he was singling you out personally in that room, speaking directly to you,” she said. The last time Temple saw him was at Plum Village before a stroke, which left him unable to speak, in 2014. Four years later he returned to Vietnam and because of his ill health was permitted by the authorities to spend his final days at the Tu Hieu temple. It is not yet clear how the government of one-party Vietnam, which is wary of organised religion, will react to his funeral, which began yesterday and will last five days. “Thay was such humility, such dignity, such presence,” said Temple. “He was funny, angry, sad. He took childlike delight in things and also a profound peace and calmness and an extraordinary humanity.” Suryagupta, chair of the London Buddhist Centre, first encountered him at a retreat in England about 25 years ago. “He is definitely a giant of a man and I had the good fortune to be on retreat with him in my early days of exploring Buddhism,” she said. “What was so striking was, whenever he walked into a space, sometimes there would be hundreds of people there, without saying a word literally as soon as he walked in his presence would instil this sort of stillness and quietness in the crowd… and a softness, you felt yourself relax and be alert somehow in his presence.” Suryagupta said his inclusivity was a central feature of his teaching. “He showed that Buddhism was really available for everybody and as a Black woman that was really important to me.” He died peacefully surrounded by his followers in Tu Hieu temple – the same temple that his spiritual journey started – where they will hold a week-long funeral. Marianne Williamson, author and former US presidential candidate, said: “He was a great spiritual teacher obviously who brought millions of people around the world into a deeper understanding of the tenets of Buddhism and how to apply them in our daily lives.” But she is certain that his legacy will live on. “His gift to the planet was so significant I don’t think it will in any way lessen with his death. With some people, and certainly there are those we all know of today, their negativity permeates the consciousness of the planet,” she said. “With Thich Nhat Hanh, his love and compassion permeated the consciousnesses of the planet and now it’s our responsibility to carry it forward from here.”What’s eating Marcus Rashford? Here’s a thought: maybe nothing. Rashford was once again on the bench against West Ham. He stayed there for 62 minutes as United produced a performance that was energetically blank, frantically vague, noisily blunt. Football loves its bold strokes howsoever, and Rashford did the most important thing in this game, scoring with almost the final kick, four yards out in front of an open goal, after a kind of three-man cavalry sprint from close to halfway ended with Edinson Cavani squaring the ball across the box for Rashford to tap it home and spark a kind of rolling delirium around the stands. It looked offside in real time. It might have been offside with the benefit of split-frame, tiny margins the usual forensic dissection. But the goal stood and on such tiny margins do entire hastily typed narratives swing. No doubt the music will shift around Rashford. He scored against Brentford in midweek after coming on as a sub. Is he cured? Is this how it works? Man scores goal: man is now OK? Certainly, the wider reaction to Rashford’s poor run of form over the past few months has been extraordinary. According to Paul Ince, he’s not happy. Steve McClaren thinks he has an attitude problem. Dion Dublin says he’s “disheartened”. Alan Shearer has, we hear, been offering hints and tips, phone calls, text messages. We heard talk of Rashford training too hard, going to the gym too much, being too obsessed at being good at football. The melancholia always seemed overblown. Footballers are people too. They have lows and blunt periods. Most of us get to have our blank moments, a lost January, those days where you feel like hiding in the toilet for half an hour reading a catalogue about strimmers, without Alan Shearer hammering on the door asking if you’re feeling OK, peering in through the gap in the door jamb, saying look, we really need to talk, then going to the newspapers and saying you seemed fine but you were reading a catalogue about strimmers. But then Rashford’s existence is an extraordinary thing at an extraordinary time, when every act, every closeup, every twitch is spun out, pored over, given meaning, processed across every platform. When Marcus Rashford feeling low, playing with an injury, losing his scoring touch must be transformed into a mini-industry of its own, dissected by that unblinking compound eye. This is not really how humans are supposed to exist. What will it do to us? Rashford has always been streaky, even in his good times. Last season he had the best scoring spell of his career, but ended with three in 18. He played with an injury for a while. He’s a good player with excellent movement, with some wonderful skills, but not, as yet, a killer. Perhaps his problem is performing at a level not quite on the same scale as his wider celebrity. On the other hand maybe the real issue for Rashford is that he plays for Manchester United, or at least the version of the past four years. Victory took them into fourth place, but this was not a good performance. United looked for long periods like a team that seemed to have no content, no centre, and certainly nothing in midfield to match Declan Rice, who was the best player on the pitch by some distance. Rice has the kind of running style sports writers get very excited about. He glides, he whispers, he trots and frolics. The urge is there to use terms like “Rolls Royce”. The main thing is how relaxed he seems, a player who sees the game as a series of spatial puzzles to be solved. Is he a “holding midfielder”? Is he “box to box”? He doesn’t really seem to follow any of these standard forms. He’s a gliding run-pass funnel. He’s a defensive superconductor. He’s a strolling ball-magnet. He’s a level up on anything United have had since Michael Carrick retired. Do you need a philosophy? A multilevel synchronised 74-part plan? Maybe you just need Declan Rice. Harry Maguire was back, albeit only because Victor Lindelöf was absent. Maguire is another conundrum. He had a mixed game, occasionally smooth and reassuring, occasionally messy, often lacking in mobility. Watching Maguire trundle around the Old Trafford pitch is like seeing a mahogany wardrobe being slid along a polished parquet floor on a wool weave rug: upright, square, impressive, but likely to topple over if turned too quickly. Rashford came on with the game still waiting to be broken open. Ralf Rangnick is his fourth United manager. He wants him to be more direct, to attack defenders. And he did this twice just after he came on, the second drawing a booking for Rice. As the final whistle blew Rashford walked around hugging his teammates and was grabbed by David de Gea, who hoisted him into the air and wheeled him around with genuine affection. No doubt he will be fine from here. Attention will shift. For United, fourth place and a second win in four days look like riches indeed.The Arizona Democratic party has formally censured Kyrsten Sinema, the US senator whose opposition to filibuster reform helped sink attempts to protect voting rights. In a statement on Saturday the Arizona party chair, Raquel Terán, said: “While we take no pleasure in this announcement, the ADP executive board has decided to formally censure Senator Sinema as a result of her failure to do whatever it takes to ensure the health of our democracy.” The attempt to pass voting rights legislation died in the Senate this week, a huge blow to Joe Biden and his party in a year which finishes with midterm elections in which Republicans are expected to prosper. Sinema supported two bills but they were blocked by Republicans after hours of emotional and at times deeply personal debate over voting rights, racism and the fragility of American democracy. Republicans were able to block the bills because Sinema and another moderate Democrat, Joe Manchin of West Virginia, opposed a move to carve voting rights issues out of the filibuster, the Senate rule by which most legislation requires 60 votes to progress. Saying she opposed reform because the filibuster protected the rights of the minority, Sinema said in a floor speech she was “committed to doing my part to avoid toxic political rhetoric, to build bridges, to forge common ground, and to achieve lasting results for Arizona and this country”. Critics pointed out that no only do Republicans in the 50-50 Senate represent millions fewer Americans than Democrats, but the GOP itself was recently happy to change filibuster rules to require only a simple majority to confirm supreme court justices. Donald Trump was therefore able to nominate three hardline conservatives to a court which had already gutted federal voting rights protections. Since that supreme court decision, in 2013, and at a growing pace since Trump refused to concede defeat in 2020, Republican state governments have passed laws which critics say are meant to make it harder for communities which lean Democratic, particularly Black voters, to cast their ballots. Mitch McConnell, the Senate Republican leader, stoked uproar this week when, after the failure of the Democratic voting rights push, he said: “The concern is misplaced, because if you look at the statistics, African American voters are voting in just as high a percentage as Americans.” Diana DeGette, a Democratic representative from Colorado, said: “African American voters ARE AMERICANS and to suggest otherwise is about as racist as it gets.” Other Republican measures, critics say, will make it easier for the GOP to overturn results. In her statement on Saturday, Terán said: “The Arizona Democratic party is a diverse coalition with plenty of room for policy disagreements. “However, on the matter of the filibuster and the urgency to protect voting rights, we have been crystal clear in the choice between an archaic legislative norm and protecting Arizonans rights to vote. We choose the latter and we always will.” Terán praised Sinema’s role in passing Covid relief and a bipartisan infrastructure bill, key parts of Biden’s agenda. But she also highlighted Republican attempts to audit and overturn Trump’s defeat in Arizona and election laws being passed nationwide. “The ramifications of failing to pass federal legislation that protects [the] right to vote are too large and far reaching,” she said. A spokeswoman for Sinema said: “During three terms in the US House, and now in the Senate, Kyrsten has always promised Arizonans she would be an independent voice for the state – not for either political party. She’s delivered for Arizonans and has always been honest about where she stands.” Nonetheless, the senator has suffered significant blowback. Bernie Sanders, the Vermont senator and leading progressive, said this week he could back primary challengers to Manchin and Sinema in 2024. Sinema also saw Emily’s List, a powerful abortion rights group, withhold its endorsement. In a statement, Emily’s List president Laphonza Butler said: “We believe the decision by Senator Sinema is not only a blow to voting rights and our electoral system but also to the work of all the partners who supported her victory and her constituents who tried to communicate the importance of this bill.” A Democratic fundraising juggernaut, Emily’s List was Sinema’s top political donor in her 2018 Senate race, according to opensecrets.org. Another abortion rights group, Naral Pro-Choice America, said it would only endorse senators “who support changing the Senate rules to pass the critical legislation that will protect voting rights”. Arizona’s other Democratic senator, Mark Kelly, was on Saturday fundraising off his decision to support filibuster reform on voting rights matters, which he said was “a tough one – but [the] right one for Arizona and our country”. The effects of censure by a state party are debatable. In Arizona, the Republican John McCain was censured in 2014 for what his state party deemed too liberal a voting record. The senator and 2008 presidential nominee took it in his stride, as part of his public image as a political maverick. Sinema won the Arizona Senate seat vacated by Jeff Flake, an anti-Trump conservative, and also presents herself as unbound by traditional political codes. Last year, Chuck Coughlin, a former Republican operative in the state, told the Guardian Sinema was a “pragmatist” who “understands that if she is to succeed in Arizona, she must succeed in this lane”. However, Saundra Cole, a Democrat who once campaigned for Sinema, said: “She’s not John McCain. She’s not a maverick. I didn’t agree with him on many things but at least we knew where he stood.”Adele has personally apologised to fans after cancelling a series of highly anticipated shows in Las Vegas because of Covid production issues. The singer addressed disappointed concert-goers, some of who had travelled in from around the world, via FaceTime after her residency was postponed at the last minute. Several fans were reduced to tears as an assistant from Adele’s team carried the iPhone around a pop-up merchandise store to allow the singer to speak directly to them. In one video call to a pair of fans, the Grammy winner said: “I love you too, I’m so sorry and I can’t wait to meet you, alright. Get your free bag – and you’re not old enough to drink, are you, so you can’t have that free drink token. “Get your freebies and chat to anyone. Ask any of my team anything about the show, ask them anything about me, about the show.” She told the fan she had “bled and fucking sweated and cried” into preparing for the show. “So just have fun to all the fans and I’m really sorry and it’s really nice to meet you both.” In a direct Instagram message to a fan, Adele apologised for the disappointment and urged them to visit her Vegas gift store, where Adele-branded T-shirts and hoodies were on sale for between $45 and $90 (£33 and £66) each. She later took to Twitter to say that she had the “best fans in the world” and thanked them for their “graciousness and love”. Adele’s three-month Las Vegas residency, titled Weekends with Adele, was due to begin on 21 January at the Colosseum in the Caesars Palace casino, celebrating her highly lauded album 30. In a tearful Instagram post published on Friday, she said she was “gutted” to have to reschedule all of the dates. “I’m so sorry, but my show isn’t ready,” she said. “We’ve been absolutely destroyed by delivery delays and Covid. Half my crew … are down with Covid – they still are – and it’s been impossible to finish the show.” After news of the postponement broke, social media was filled with stories of fans who had spent a lot of money and travelled thousands of miles only to find the performances had been cancelled. Tickets to the show cost between $85 and more than $5,000 for platinum packages – before travel and accommodation in Nevada. Tickets in premium seating areas were selling for tens of thousands on resale websites.The middle continues to rise. In Europe at least, the question about African football is why it has not kicked on the past two decades from the time when, in the space of 12 years between 1990 and 2002, Cameroon and Senegal reached World Cup quarter-finals and Cameroon and Nigeria won Olympic golds. One quarter-final since does not look much like progress. And yet for all that issues of infrastructure and administration continue to blight the highest level of the African game, where there has been clear progress has been lower down the pyramid. There is a healthy and growing middle class. It’s not so long ago that expanding the Cup of Nations from 16 to 24 teams would have seen a marked dilution of quality, but not now. Comoros and the Gambia, both traditional minnows and at their first Cup of Nations, have reached the last 16. Comoros have perhaps been a touch fortunate but the Gambia have played with an impressive level of calm organisation and deservedly beat Tunisia to go through. Malawi, in their second tournament, beat Zimbabwe and, but for VAR controversially overturning a penalty, might have beaten Senegal. Only Mauritania have really looked out of their depth – which, given what a terrible format six groups of four is, might be an argument for expanding to 32 teams. Logistics may make that difficult but, given Zambia, South Africa and DR Congo all failed to qualify, it’s hard to argue against the move on grounds of quality. The format – with four third-placed sides making the last 16 – is awful. There is too great a risk of dead rubbers, advantaging the teams in the later groups who know what they need to do, and there is the fundamental unfairness of comparing between groups that have their own dynamics – most obviously a team resting players for the final game if they’re already through – and should be discrete. But the tournament has developed a recent habit of producing remarkable drama. The final round of group games at the Euros – Viktor Claesson’s injury-time winner for Sweden to put Poland out, Germany saved by Leon Goretzka’s late equaliser against Hungary – may have been more thrilling but those at the Cup of Nations felt more consequential, with the reigning champions, Algeria, and the four-time champions Ghana both eliminated. Algeria were the big surprise. Ghana were in obvious chaos before the tournament, with Charles Akonnor sacked in November to make way for the return as coach of Milovan Rajevac. The Serb led Ghana to the final in 2010 but his cautious, possession-based approach, which got the best out of a young side including André Ayew, has led only to sterile football this time. Goals conceded in the final 10 minutes cost them a draw against Morocco and a win against Gabon, a match that ended in a brawl that highlighted the frustration in the camp, Benjamin Tetteh being sent off for a left hook. Still a win against Comoros would have taken them through, but having been undone on the break, they lost Ayew to a harsh red card for a challenge on the goalkeeper. A second goal on the break followed, and although Ghana fought back to level, Comoros picked them off again in the 85th minute, the culmination of 10 days of rolling ill-discipline that saw Ghana fail to make the knockout stages for the first time since 2006. The president of the Ghana Football Association, Kurt Okraku, defended Rajevac, pointing out how little time he has had to work with his squad – but that prompts the question of why the GFA sacked Akonnor when they did. The dismissal of the Serb, at a reported cost of $275,000, was confirmed morning. There was no such sense of foreboding about Algeria, though. Rather they came into the tournament on a run of 34 games unbeaten as, by general consent, the best team in the continent. The only real doubt about them was the habitual struggles of north African sides outside north Africa; Egypt in 2008 and 2010 remain the only north African country to win a Cup of Nations south of the Sahara. To an extent Algeria were unfortunate in Cameroon – a sense only exacerbated when their federation released a statement denying it was bringing in a faith healer to help. They had more touches in the final third than any other side in the group stage while only Nigeria and Mali had more shots, and there’s no doubt that the poor quality of the pitch in Douala hampered their passing. Djamel Belmadi proved two years ago in Egypt what a capable coach he is, his side playing a modern pressing game that looked ideal for international football. He had suffered only one defeat in 44 games in charge before last Sunday, since when he has suffered two in a week – to Equatorial Guinea and Ivory Coast. Both were similar in the way the midfield, at key stages, disintegrated and allowed their opponents to counterattack. The final 10 minutes against Equatorial Guinea were extraordinary in the way the structure that had been such a strength in 2019 fell apart: essentially four forwards standing on the halfway line and waiting for the ball to be delivered to them as Equatorial Guinea frolicked in the space in the Algerian half. Similarly the 15 minutes after half-time against Ivory Coast were shambolic: the Ivorians scored a decisive third but missed three other decent chances. Perhaps it was just one of those things. Bad things can happen to good sides at tournaments. But equally it feels significant that the two finalists from 2019, Algeria and Senegal, both of whom play very structured football, managed just two goals between them in six group games. The lack of preparation time before this tournament, exacerbated by Covid complications, has probably cost them fluency – and it has been notable how much better the football has become generally as the group stage went on – and in the present environment, in which there are a wealth of decent if not brilliant teams, can be enough to cause the continent’s giants real problems.The senior civil servant investigating allegations of at least nine lockdown-breaking parties at Downing Street has been given access to a detailed log of staff movements in and out of the building from security data including swipecards. Whitehall figures say the inquiry by Sue Gray – who is expected to publish a report of about 25 pages this week – has been “forensic”, looking in “granular detail” at who was in the building for social gatherings, some of which went on into the early hours, and the precise timings of their arrivals and departures. Johnson and his staff, as well as civil servants and others who attended the events under investigation, are anxiously awaiting Gray’s conclusions this weekend. She has been assisted by six civil servants with HR experience. Many Tory MPs say they are holding off from deciding whether to call for the prime minister to resign until they see its conclusions, and hear the reactions of their constituents. Rumours have also been circulating in government in recent days that Gray may have details of yet another gathering in Downing Street, possibly in the PM’s flat and involving close friends of his wife, that has not yet come to light. Discovery of a 10th get-together when Covid restrictions were in place would seriously undermine Johnson’s attempts to survive the crisis. But senior Whitehall sources also say the information from data logs that record movements for security reasons could be decisive, as they will have given Gray conclusive proof of who was where and when, and how many people remained after normal working hours – details that she would otherwise have lacked. “This information is conclusive,” said a source who knows Gray. “This is not someone saying ‘I saw him or her at a party’. This is the proof of who was where, how many people were inside the building at any one time. “She will have been looking at all that information, which is far more valuable than people’s say so. It is the evidence.” The source added that the security logs would also have allowed Gray to draw conclusions about the culture at No 10, which appears to have allowed parties to have become regular events. “If you get the data and you find a large group all swiped out at 1am in the morning, then it looks very much like it was a party and if that was going on regularly you can judge from that.” Friends of Gray who have worked with her say she will be scrupulously fair but also “ruthless” in pursuit of the truth. One former colleague and friend said she was in no mood to allow civil servants alone to take the flak. “She has shown before in previous inquiries that she will hold civil servants to account because she is very strong on civil service behaviour, but if she thinks politicians or others should take responsibility she will make that very clear,” the source said. While it is possible that Gray will name some very senior civil servants and high-up figures in government in her main 25-page report, she is expected to follow precedent and not make public the identities of junior civil servants or special advisers. Their names are expected to be listed in another document that will remain confidential and be sent to human resources teams in their respective departments, who would then be responsible for determining what sanctions, if any, should be imposed. After another torrid week for Johnson, which saw the defection of the Tory MP Christian Wakeford to Labour, the prime minister has been spending the weekend calling backbenchers to try to shore up his position. Fewer than a dozen Tory MPs are believed to have written to the chair of the 1922 Committee to demand a vote of confidence, but many more say they will do so if the Gray report concludes that the PM broke lockdown rules, and more incriminating information emerges. If 54 or more write in, a vote of confidence must be held. If Johnson loses that, he has to resign. A meeting of the 1922 Committee on Wednesday will be a key judge of the Tory mood. Wakeford told the Observer that Johnson was doomed. “If Boris Johnson is hoping Sue Gray’s report will save his skin then he’s in for a shock. The rot has already set in and many of my former colleagues have already reached the conclusion that he’s unfit to lead the Conservative party. Not just because he’s an electoral liability but because he’s actually unfit to run the country. “Are there enough of them to trigger a leadership election? I’m sure there are. Will they go through with it? That’s a matter for them. What I do know is that in seats like Bury South the voters have made up their minds about him. So it’s just a question of whether MPs choose to listen to their constituents or the party whips.” Ruth Davidson, the former Scottish Tory leader, said the PM was not fit for office. “I think one of the reasons he is in such a perilous situation is not just because of the apparent rule-breaking, although that is a big part of it, but because there is a fatigue even within the party and certainly by my MP colleagues for the drama that has been emanating from No 10,” she said.Two first half goals earned Celtic a narrow 2-1 over Alloa Athletic and a place in the Scottish Cup fifth-round. The visitors opened the scoring after 14 minutes when a Liam Scales cross was met by Giorgos Giakoumakis with a volley at the front post. Liel Abada then scored with a cultured finish before half-time. Celtic could have extended their lead but substitute Alan Trouten’s introduction added energy to the home side in the second half and fellow substitute Stefan Scougall’s crossed to the back post for Connor Sammon to head home with 12 minutes remaining. Kallum Higginbotham’s breakaway goal in extra time gave League Two side Kelty Hearts a sensational 1-0 win at home over cup holders St Johnstone in the biggest shock of the day. It is another blow to hapless St Johnstone who sit at the foot of the Premiership table having lost their last 10 matches after winning the cup double last season. Liam Boyce scored two goals on his return from injury as Heart of Midlothian defeated West of Scotland league side Auchinleck Talbot 5-0 at Beechwood. Andy Halliday, Peter Haring and Alex Cochrane were also on target. First-half goals from Kyle McAllister and Greg Kiltie secured the win for Jim Goodwin’s side. Ayo Oblieye’s 16th-minute penalty narrowly won Livingston the all Premiership tie at home to Ross County. Fellow top-flight team St Mirren sealed their place in the fifth round with a 2-0 victory at Ayr United. Aberdeen eased their way into the fifth round after a dominant 3-0 win over Edinburgh City of League Two. The Dons were never troubled by their lower-league opponents and first-half strikes from Ryan Hedges and Christian Ramirez had the match won, before Lewis Ferguson added a third after 90 minutes with a looping header. Dylan Levitt scored in extra-time as Dundee United edged through 2-1 against Kilmarnock at Rugby Park. United started in the right vein with Marc McNulty’s strike but Killie levelled the scoring 16 minutes later through Rory McKenzie. Championship high-fliers Arbroath beat Darvel 3-0 with three goals from Jack Hamilton at Gayfield Park while an extra-time strike from Liam Donnelly won Motherwell a hard-fought tie with Morton 2-1 at Fir Park.That’s your lot, then. Ben Fisher’s report is here. Thanks for reading this MBM. Stay safe and warm. Nighty night! Pep talks. “It was an outstanding game. We conceded a goal, but made one of the best performances of the season. By far. If you analyse the result, it was 1-1. But how we played, how we behaved, it was excellent. We played better than the Arsenal game, which we won, but we draw. Sometimes you deserve it, sometimes you don’t. We played really, really well. Southampton are a really good team. We were brilliant in many things today. I said before, we are going to drop points. But the way we behaved was good. Now the positive thing is that people will say the title race is not over, and that is good for our side. It was not over two weeks ago, now, or in three weeks. Many tough games ahead of us. I would like to be 40 points ahead of Liverpool and Chelsea, that would be a dream, but that is not possible in January.” He also straight bats questions about the possible transfer of River Plate forward Julián Álvarez. No scoop here! Ralph Hasenhuttl talks to Sky Sports. “It was a super fight. They are so good, he is such an unbelievable manager, they play such good football, if you want to keep them away from your goal, it is so tough because they play passes no other team plays. You could see it meant a lot for them not to fail to win twice against us this season. But we had chances to score a second goal, the belief was there, our attitude was unbelievable, and the passion was exceptional. Everybody is super proud of this team.” He’s also delighted upon being told his team had 36 percent possession tonight; he had demanded 35 percent to have any chance of any sort of result. Some hot manager chat to come ... but in the meantime, Ben Fisher’s report from St Mary’s has landed. Kyle Walker-Peters, who stylish strike was his first Premier League goal, talks to Sky. “It wasn’t a bad finish, was it? I practice as much as I can, and finally I’ve got my first Premier League goal, and I’m happy. I’m almost stretching as I finish. I used the outside of my foot, because that’s where the ball bounced, and luckily I hit it sweetly. You can’t describe it. A great feeling, and really nice for it to be at home against the fans. It was against one of the top teams in the world, and I think we competed against them today. I’m really happy to get the goal.” Ralph Hasenhuttl celebrates with great passion. Kyle Walker-Peters, who scored a simply fantastic goal in the first half, smiles broadly. Southampton couldn’t hang on for the win, and it’s only a draw ... but then a draw against this relentless Manchester City side isn’t only a draw. A fine performance by Southampton, who have now held the champions twice this season. They move up to 12th, while a small jolt of life has been given to the title race as City drop a couple of points for the first time in 13 matches. They’re still miles in front, but Liverpool have been given some encouragement ahead of their trip to Crystal Palace tomorrow. Nothing’s quite over yet, as Pep insisted before the game. It’s almost as though he knows exactly what he’s talking about. BREAKING NEWS: Manchester City have failed to win a Premier League match! 90 min +7: ... but De Bruyne can’t beat the first man, and ... 90 min +6: Ederson lumps long. De Bruyne gets on the end and slams a speculative shot goalwards from a tight angle. Forster parries round the post for a corner. One last chance for City! 90 min +5: Dias flays a dismal pass out of play on the right. Saints so close now to halting City’s amazing winning run. 90 min +4: Play is stopped as Perraud takes an accidental whack on the ankle from Walker. 90 min +3: De Bruyne hoicks the free kick into the box. Salisu gets yet another block in. He’s also named man of the match by Sky co-commentator Alan Smith. Fully deserved, as he’s number one tonight in clearances, interceptions and tackles. 90 min +2: Elyounoussi brings down De Bruyne, out on the right. He’s booked, and this is exactly the same spot City’s first goal came from. 90 min +1: As the board went up for the added time, Salisu executed a perfectly timed tackle on De Bruyne, whipping the ball off the City star’s boot. He’s now getting his name sung to the rafters by the home fans. 90 min: There will be six added minutes. 88 min: Silva loops from the right. Grealish takes the ball down on the edge of the six-yard box. His shot is blocked out for a corner by Salisu. The corner’s worked back to De Bruyne, who aims a forensic low heatseeker towards the bottom right from distance. The ball flies inches wide. Had that been on target, Forster was beaten all ends up. The keeper was rooted to the spot. 87 min: Elyounoussi has the opportunity to release Adams down the right, but opts to go on a clock-eating wander down the left instead. A strange decision, but there we have it. 86 min: Saints go about upping that possession stat by a rare period of sustained passing. The ball eventually ends up at the feet of Diallo, just to the right of the D. A chance for a shot. He takes it, but scuffs lamely into the hands of Ederson. 84 min: Hasenhuttl wanted his team to secure at least 35 percent of the possession this evening. They’ve only managed 24 percent. Will it be enough to hold on for a draw against the champions, who are searching for the goal that would give them their 13th consecutive win? 83 min: Foden strides down the left and curls infield, hoping to find Jesus. A defender deflects the ball towards Forster, who gathers gratefully. 82 min: That Armstrong challenge on Laporte was the sort made by a tired player, and he’s replaced by Diallo. 81 min: Cancelo whistles a low cross through the Saints six-yard box. Jesus stretches to connect at the far stick, but Perraud shepherds the ball away from danger. 80 min: Common sense prevails again. Armstrong stays on the pitch. 79 min: Nothing clear and obvious, and play goes on. That’s the correct decision, though other interpretations will be available on the internet. Then just after the restart, Armstrong hangs out a leg and connects with Laporte, his studs glancing off the defender’s thigh. It looks accidental, mistimed rather than malicious. He’s shown yellow, but VAR will check for serious foul play. 78 min: VAR is taking a long look, though. Salisu may have caught De Bruyne on the line. If this is given, it’ll be a light brush and a pretty soft penalty. But a touch is a touch is a touch. Tension crackles around St Mary’s. 76 min: ... but they’re still pressing Saints back in their final third. De Bruyne goes over as he forces his way into the Saints box down the right, and wants a penalty, but yet again the referee shows little interest. 75 min: A welcome lull for Saints as City take it down a notch and go back to their earlier patient selves. 73 min: Ward-Prowse is lucky to get away with a kick on Foden’s knee, just outside the Saints box. No foul. Hm. Then some welcome relief for Saints as Broja breaks and is hauled down by Cancelo. No yellow for that. Hm. Sixty seconds of laissez-faire refereeing from Simon Hooper. 72 min: Cancelo curls from the left to Jesus at the far post. Jesus powers a header towards the bottom right from close range. Forster closes the gap and Ward-Prowse helps him wallop clear. 71 min: Lyanco comes on for Bednarek. 70 min: ... De Bruyne nearly replicates his wonder goal against Chelsea. He sends a power curler slamming off the right-hand post, Forster beaten all ends up. What a goal that would have been. 69 min: Cancelo romps down the left and wins a corner. From which ... 68 min: A corner for City out on the right. It’s played back to Cancelo, whose shot from the edge of the box is blocked. Then some pinball in the Saints area. The ball smacks Salisu in the face. Oof. Foden smacked that flush on his nose. City claim a penalty, but they don’t get one. Southampton are suddenly all over the shop, though. 66 min: Saints fail to clear their heads. Foden takes advantage by powering into acres of space down the left. He crosses towards Jesus, who is inches away from connecting, eight yards out. So close to a rapid Tottenham-v-Leicesteresque turnaround. Adams yanks the shoulder of Jesus out on the right. Free kick. De Bruyne swings in. Saints push up fatally. Rodri is caught offside, but Laporte, who meets the cross, has timed his run powerfully from deep, and bashes a header past Forster from close range! 64 min: Armstrong is good to continue, for now at least. 63 min: Armstrong is down getting treatment for his troublesome calf. It’d be a huge shame for the seriously underrated midfielder if he has to go off; he’s made some fine lung-busting runs this evening in his usual dynamic style. 62 min: Cancelo, quarterbacking from deep, nearly finds Jesus in the Saints box with a rake down the inside-right channel. Jesus extends a leg in the hope of trapping and whipping a shot goalwards, but can’t quite reach it. Goal kick. 60 min: City make their first change, replacing Sterling, who missed that golden opportunity in the first half, with Jesus. 59 min: A bit of space for Rodri, 25 yards out. He takes a touch and aims for the top right. Forster isn’t getting there if it’s on target, but it scrapes the top of the bar and bounces off the top of the net. 58 min: Silva drifts in from the right and loops a cross towards Foden, coming in from the other flank. He meets the dropping ball first time, and creams a volley towards the bottom right. Forster parries well. Great football all round. 56 min: Now it’s the Southampton fans’ turn to belt out the classics. Oh when the Saints, etc. A great atmosphere at St Mary’s this evening. 54 min: What a chance pt.II. Armstrong curls the corner in from the right. At the near stick, Broja overpowers Ederson and heads onto the post. The rebound falls to Bednarek, who slices horribly wide when presented with an unguarded goal. Saints will wonder how they’ve not just doubled their lead. 53 min: Armstrong powers through the middle and slips a ball down the inside-right channel for Broja, who strides purposefully into the box, cocks his leg back to shoot when one on one with Ederson, and ... is slide-tackled by Laporte at the expense of a corner. What a chance! 52 min: This is getting very hectic. The ball is being pinged around at a daft velocity. It’s a state of affairs that will surely benefit City more than the hosts. The away fans, sensing a wind behind, belt out a loud rendition of Blue Moon. 50 min: Adams has half a chance to break upfield, but loses confidence and checks back. Soon enough City force Armstrong into the concession of yet another corner. Some head tennis. Finally the ball ends up in Forster’s arms, but Southampton are being seriously stress-tested here. City have cranked it up a notch. 48 min: The corner’s worked back to De Bruyne, who curls in from the right. Broja, surrounded by dangerously positioned peacoat-shirted folk, flicks diligently behind for a corner. Nothing comes of this one. 47 min: ... and City come close to wiping it out! First Grealish sends a ball through a crowded box from the left. Then Rodri sends a shot from the edge of the box towards the bottom right. Forster turns it around the post for a corner. 46 min: Perraud wins a Southampton corner within 25 seconds of the restart. The hosts load the City box. Ward-Prowse swings it in. Bednarek glances goalwards at the near stick. Ederson parries. So close to doubling Southampton’s lead! Saints get the second half underway. They’ve made a change at the break, swapping out Redmond for Elyounoussi. “Manchester City’s kit colour today is ‘peacoat’, according to the official Premier League Handbook,” reports Andrew Goudie. “This nonsense has to stop. I was only searching its 671 pages to see if they have a policy on drones. Turns out they don’t.” Half-time entertainment. Jonathan Liew considers Tottenham’s astonishing smash and grab at Leicester last Wednesday, and wonders whether it could be the start of something special. ... as does the second, and the champions and current runaway Premier League leaders are in the rare position of trailing. Big second half coming up! 45 min +1: The first of two added minutes passes without incident. 45 min: Sterling can’t sort his feet out, just inside the Saints box. The chance of a shot passes him by as the home defence steal away with the ball. 44 min: A little space and time for Walker down the right. His low driven cross is smothered by Forster. It’s not as though City aren’t relentlessly attacking as usual. 42 min: Rodri bobbles a shot harmlessly wide left from the edge of the box. 41 min: De Bruyne shapes to lash a shot goalwards, only for Redmond to extend his big toe and prod it away from the City star’s boot, just in time. 40 min: Adams rakes a pass down the right, hoping that Broja can beat Laporte in a footrace. He can’t, not this time. But he looks dangerous every time he gets involved. City’s defence have a job on tonight. 38 min: Foden and Grealish combine down the left. The ball’s fizzed through the six-yard box. It somehow evades all dark blue shirts and is cleared by Redmond. But the champions come again, Foden crossing from the left and finding Sterling six yards out. He’s only got Forster to beat, and the keeper is falling backwards ... but his shot is straight at the keeper, who kicks away sensationally! City should be level. What a huge chance that was ... though hats off for the save. 36 min: Redmond has the chance of releasing Armstrong down the middle, a huge hole having opened in the centre of the City defence. He overcooks the pass, though, and Armstrong can’t reach it before Dias and Ederson combine to snuff out the danger. 34 min: A City corner out on the right. It’s taken quickly. Grealish hoicks into the middle. It’s half cleared. Sterling comes back at Southampton and dribbles into the box down the right. He opens his body and looks for the curler into the top left. The ball flies inches over the bar. Had that been on target, Forster was getting nowhere near. 32 min: Bednarek rakes his boot down Grealish’s shin and is quite rightly booked for it. That could easily have been a red card. Grealish’s ire is doubled when Romeu accuses him of play-acting. He springs up and attempts to instigate fisticuffs. It all calms down before anyone does anything regrettable. 30 min: City waste another corner, playing it short, Cancelo sending the ball out of play, once again shaking his head sadly. 28 min: Broja is flagged offside again. It’s good news for City, and especially Ederson, because before the decision was made, the striker beat Ederson to the ball down the inside-left channel and was brought down by the keeper. Had he been on, it may well have been a penalty. 27 min: Not that City are panicking exactly, and here they come again. Grealish sashays smoothly down the left and earns another corner. The ball’s worked back to Cancelo, who sends his shot flying over the Solent. 25 min: City show the first signs of frustration, Perraud battling with Sterling out on the Saints left, winning the tussle, then drawing a free kick. Sterling’s demeanour betrays a little irritability. A bit early for it, you’d have thought, so it’s all good news for Southampton. 23 min: They’d have been really happy had this stood. Romeu threads a pass down the inside-left channel to release Broja behind a strangely flat-footed City back line. He races clear and enters the box. He pauses, and briefly looks to have wasted the chance, but it’s all part of the grift, and he calmly slots into the bottom left, having completely confused Ederson. But the flag goes up - correctly - for offside. 22 min: Armstrong busies himself down the left and briefly threatens to break clear, but he’s ushered off the ball by Walker and Silva. Saints will be very happy with the way this is going. 20 min: De Bruyne, deep on the left, tries to find Silva at the far stick with a raking diagonal ball. It sails out of play for a goal kick. City have already made 210 passes to Southampton’s 40. But look at the scoreline. 19 min: A lovely on-a-sixpence turn by Grealish in the middle of the park. He tears off down the left, and attempts to release Foden into the box, but Bednarek slides in to clear. City are beginning to ask some questions. 17 min: De Bruyne slips a clever pass down the left channel to release Cancelo into the box. He reaches the byline and whips a cross into the centre, but it’s an easy claim for Forster at his near post. Cancelo should have done better. Saints were opened up there. 16 min: Sterling swings one in from the right. Forster, making his 200th appearance in English football, plucks easily from the sky. 15 min: Broja powers his way down the right but can’t find Redmond or Adams in the middle with his cross. Another promising move by Saints down this flank, though. On the touchline, Ralph Hasenhuttl puffs his cheeks out then blows hard. He knows it’s going to be a long, hard evening’s work, one way or another. 13 min: City respond to falling behind by passing it around patiently. It’s what they do. 11 min: Bednarek mades his presence felt by Grealish, clattering him to the ground in the no-nonsense style. Hard and not totally fair, though it’s nothing more than a free kick. Grealish stays down awhile holding his foot, but he’s up again soon enough. Saints, if it wasn’t made obvious already by the scoreline, appear to be in the mood to take the fight to City. 9 min: Walker-Peters and pals celebrate with stunned looks on their faces. That’s the right-back’s first Premier League goal, and only the third conceded in a first half by City all season. It was a sumptuous finish. What a finish this is! Walker-Peters strides down the right. He slips the ball further down the wing for Redmond, who reaches the byline and returns the ball with a cutback. Walker-Peters takes a touch as he enters the box and, with the outside of his boot, sends an unstoppable shot across Ederson and into the top left! Wow! 7 min: Foden and Grealish exchange passes crisply as City shuttle the ball left to right. Sterling should release Walker into the box down the right channel, but undercooks the pass. Bad move, because Saints go up the other end, and ... 5 min: Ward-Prowse floats it into the City mixer. Salisu rises highest, but can only send a weak header wide left of the City goal. Still, that little period of play will give Saints encouragement after City’s ball-hogging start. 4 min: City keep on with the keep ball. But then Rodri miscontrols, Ward-Prowse snaffles, and Dias bowls Adams to the ground. A free kick just outside the centre circle. 2 min: Foden swings it in. Armstrong heads behind, and it’s the first corner of the evening. City play it short. De Bruyne eventually swings it in. Salisu heads it out. Saints have hardly had a touch yet. 1 min: Grealish storms down the left and earns the first free kick of the evening, knocked over by Romeu. Everyone lines up on the edge of the Saints box. City get the ball rolling ... but only after everyone takes the knee to warm applause. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! They’re played onto the park by the chaps below, who perform a version of When The Saints Go Marching In. Saints wear their trademark red and white stripes, while City sport third-choice dark blue. We’ll be off in a few semiquavers. Of course, Pep Guardiola will have made one or two demands of his team, too. “We know we are going to drop points, to lose games. It is how you are going to react in that moment. When you make 12 victories in a row, people start to think ‘they are invincible’, but this is not true. We are going to drop points. Hopefully not today, but it is going to happen. We are in the middle of January, and nobody will be champions. From our experience it is always tough against Southampton and it will be no different today.” Ralph Hasenhuttl, who has set his team a minimum target of 35 percent possession, explains this to Sky. “City are very used to playing against deep defending teams. They always find solutions. So we do not hide, we try to play brave, this is what we are known for and what we will try to do.” Southampton make three changes in the wake of their 3-1 defeat at Wolverhampton Wanderers. Kyle Walker-Peters, Stuart Armstrong and Che Adams take the places of Lyanco, Nathan Tella and Ibrahima Diallo. Manchester City make just one change to the XI named for the 1-0 victory over Chelsea last weekend. Ruben Dias is preferred to John Stones. Southampton: Forster, Walker-Peters, Bednarek, Salisu, Perraud, Redmond, Ward-Prowse, Romeu, Stuart Armstrong, Adams, Broja. Subs: Lyanco, Stephens, Long, Adam Armstrong, Caballero, Elyounoussi, Diallo, Walcott, Valery. Manchester City: Ederson, Walker, Dias, Laporte, Joao Cancelo, Bernardo Silva, Rodri, Sterling, De Bruyne, Grealish, Foden. Subs: Stones, Ake, Gundogan, Gabriel Jesus, Fernandinho, Carson, Slicker, McAtee, Wilson-Esbrand. Referee: Simon Hooper (Wiltshire). In which champions and league leaders Manchester City try to make it 13 wins in a row, while hosts Southampton try to replicate their performance last September at the Etihad, where they were well worth a draw and could easily have ended up with all three points. Kick off is at 5.30pm GMT. It’s on!It’s remarkable how infrequently modern-day domestic workers are portrayed as fully formed characters in TV and film, given their ubiquity and necessity in the lives of so many. Perhaps part of that is because “the help” isn’t meant to be noticed (the flamboyant Fran Fine notwithstanding) or that the lives of low-wage people of color, many of whom are immigrants, haven’t traditionally piqued the interest of privileged Hollywood. When domestic workers do see screen time, it’s often through the gaze of the privileged. Enter film-maker Nikyatu Jusu, whose mother, an immigrant from Sierra Leone, had been a domestic worker. Raised in Atlanta, the young Jusu watched her parent “put her dreams to the side to be a peripheral mother in other mothers’ narratives”. That experience deeply informs Jusu’s feature film debut, Nanny, a supernatural thriller that tells the story of Aisha (Anna Diop), a Senegalese immigrant nanny in New York City who works for an upper-middle-class white family while saving up to bring her own young son to the United States. As she is drawn deeper into the family’s lives, however, she contends with forces both otherworldly and real that threaten her American dream. Jusu infuses the film with rich details that give fresh insight into the immigrant-nanny experience: the glances exchanged with the pregnant housecleaner, the jokes on a park bench shared with fellow immigrant nannies, a tight smile from the parents’ privileged Black friend, the Tupperware meals of jollof rice, which becomes a pivotal plot point when the young daughter takes a liking to the west African staple to the chagrin of her mother, who would prefer that her child eat sterile, pre-prepped bland foods. That’s one of many micro-aggressions, given that Aisha’s employers are Well-Meaning White Liberals: the stressy mother and aspiring girlboss (Michelle Monaghan) awkwardly attempts to bond with Aisha over being a woman in a boys-club workplace (“you know what that’s like”), while the father, a third-world/conflict photojournalist with a roving eye (Morgan Spector), claims to be doing what he can to make up for Aisha’s weeks of backpay but ends up deflecting nearly all domestic responsibility. But these aren’t mere one-dimensional caricatures, and ultimately they’re not the only malignant forces at work in the film. The African folk figures of Mami Wata, a seductive yet dangerous water spirit, and the wise trickster spider Anansi factor in as symbols of survival and resistance for oppressed people, and their eerie depictions help Nanny stand out from the genre’s typical fare. All this results in a film that teems with tremendously promising parts that manage to hold your attention for much of the film’s 97 minutes – but Nanny, as a whole, packs a rather toothless punch. It feels loosely assembled – chock-full of original ideas, intriguing imagery and plot devices, many of which either oddly wind up as loose ends or get resolved in a hurry. Meanwhile, despite frequent references to the many menaces that surround Aisha’s existence in her new country – the HAL 9000-like red-lit nanny cam; the surveillance-camera-style footage that shows her entering the luxury-apartment elevator; the exploitation of developing-world violence by developed-world news media; a relative’s joke voicemail greeting that becomes less funny and more ominous with each encounter; her employers’ constant denial of her agency, through their inconsiderate, half-baked demands and odd inability to come up with enough cash – the film stumbles in building tension and constructing suspense. There’s certainly a lot going on, and it contributes to the slide from confusion to terror. At the same time, it’s perhaps a missed opportunity to explore some of the very real exploitation and abuse that domestic workers in the United States regularly face. Jusu brings a novel perspective, especially as a film-maker interested in translating the all-too-real injustices of American history and society into genre films (her 2019 short, Suicide by Sunlight, featured a Black vampire trying to regain custody of her daughters). Fortunately for her, there’s no shortage of horror stories here to mine. Nanny is showing at the Sundance film festival with a release date to be announcedAny sense of joy felt by Tyrrell Hatton on account of the new golf season failed to last long. The Englishman, perhaps already irked that the Abu Dhabi Championship moved from the golf club bearing the same name after he won there 12 months ago, fired a quite epic volley towards the 18th hole at Yas Links after delivering a quadruple bogey nine there on Saturday. “It must be one of the worst par fives that I’ve ever seen in my life and, over the last two days, I’ve clearly played it about as well as it was designed,” said Hatton, who took seven there on Friday. “It’s just really frustrating. I thought I played pretty good yesterday and was not sure how I managed to shoot 77. I really wanted to go out today and make amends and I played so good. I’m six under for 13 holes, I’ve got all the shots back and more and then we get to the 18th.” Indeed, at six under par before his final hole woes, Hatton was at least in contention to successfully defend his title. The 54-hole lead, held by Scott Jamieson, is 11 under. Pressed on what precisely is wrong with the 18th, Hatton was not of a mind to back down. “What’s wrong with it? Where do you start?” he asked. “It shouldn’t have a bunker in the middle of the fairway and it shouldn’t be over 600 yards from a forward tee. If you hit a good drive as a pro you should have at least a chance to go for the green in two, otherwise the hole becomes a par three [after the first two shots] and that’s if you play it well. Hardly anyone will get there in two today. “I can’t remember the last time I got a nine, I certainly haven’t had one that I can recall as a pro. I was probably about 14 the last time it happened.” Hatton had found the bunker in question from the tee but from a bad lie subsequently had to play on to the 10th fairway. He then hit into water, had to take a drop into cabbage from where he regarded the ball as “basically unplayable”. He ended up in a greenside bunker, took two to get out and the same number of putts. On matters more positive, Jamieson’s advantage is by one from Shane Lowry and Thomas Pieters. “It would be massive, a game changer to win a tournament of this stature,” said Jamieson, the world No 336. “There’s definitely been some great champions here but there’s an awful long way to go.” Lowry is seeking a first win since the 2019 Open. He had troubles of his own at the last after confusion between he and his caddie about where an approach shot should be aimed. Lowry at least saved par. “We were aiming at the HSBC sign but his one was 30 yards right of the one I was looking at,” Lowry explained. “New course, I thought I hit a perfect shot. I couldn’t believe it came down where it did. It was a bad mistake to make because we shouldn’t be doing it in that situation. I got very lucky, it could have been a different story. I’m not sure I’d be standing here if so, I might be sitting in the locker room sulking.”Thomas Tuchel has said he is “awfully impatient” and does not want to be given time to turn Chelsea into title contenders. Their hopes of catching Manchester City this season are all but over and they are in danger of being dragged into another top-four battle before hosting Tottenham on Sunday. Chelsea have won four of their past 13 league games and Spurs, who have four in hand on their London rivals, will close the gap to five points if they win at Stamford Bridge. The pressure on Tuchel has increased, though history shows that Chelsea’s problems are not solely down to him. They have not challenged for the title since winning it under Antonio Conte in 2017 and have become more effective in cup competitions. They face Liverpool in the final of the Carabao Cup next month and Tuchel, who has been in the job for a year, won the Champions League four months after replacing Frank Lampard last season. That success seemed to suggest that Chelsea were ready to overtake City, the beaten Champions League finalists, but it is interesting to note that Lampard said Chelsea were not ready to challenge for the title this time last year. Little has changed since then. The European champions lack continuity because of their cycle of hiring and firing managers, although Tuchel does not want to use that as an excuse. The German struck a defiant tone when he was asked if it is going to be a slow process for Chelsea, who have not built their squad as smoothly as City and Liverpool. “Maybe, but we will never accept it,” Tuchel said. “Even myself, I will always fight against it. I never said it and even if I can see the reason behind it, that we need time, time, time, we don’t have time and I don’t want to wait. “I am awfully impatient and this is part of what drives me and part of what brings me to a great opportunity – to be part of a club like Chelsea. “I think we are competitive. I think we know what it takes and we have what it takes to challenge for the title.” Tuchel, who was in an irritable mood when Chelsea drew 1-1 at Brighton on Tuesday, suggested injuries, a draining fixture list and Covid absentees have been key to his side’s slump. “We could not influence the circumstances and we struggled there. I could feel on Tuesday the disappointment from the players, also from me, that we are in the stage where we are right at this moment. “But it does not help. We still are obliged and it is our duty to have full commitment – by full I mean 100% – to what we do and to what we believe and to how we do things. The rest will take care of itself. “I love the team, I love all the players and I love the club. It’s on us to bring out the very best in ourselves. Where this is over the last weeks, it depends on the circumstances. But we will always try.” He was not surprised Harry Kane’s form is returning. Kane was excellent at Leicester on Wednesday, scoring once before setting up Steven Bergwijn’s last-minute winner and the striker will be eager to impress after struggling when Spurs lost their Carabao Cup semi-final to Chelsea this month. “I remember when there were a lot of critics for Harry Kane at the beginning of the season,” Tuchel said. “But in the end, he is what he is. He’s a goalscorer. I assume he did this for his whole life and all his career. If you are a scorer at this level you must have been scoring goals from six years old.”Liverpool’s January always promised to revolve around African attackers. Just not Daniel Udoh, perhaps. And yet, should they keep a fourth consecutive clean sheet against Crystal Palace on Sunday, Shrewsbury’s Nigerian target man will retain his distinction as the only player to score against them while Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané were at the Africa Cup of Nations. Liverpool could get through what threatened to be the most problematic period of their season unscathed. While Diogo Jota’s double against Arsenal booked their place in the Carabao Cup final and suggested the Portuguese had found a way of compensating for his fellow forwards’ absence, Jürgen Klopp argues that Salah and Mané have been replaced in part by stoppers, not scorers. Udoh struck for Shrewsbury in the FA Cup but Liverpool allowed Arsenal and Brentford four shots on target in 270 minutes of football. Their defence has provided sturdy foundations that have assumed still greater significance. “It’s the only way you can do it,” Klopp says. “When you lose key players for injuries or tournaments or whatever, then the solution is not that you will be flying in the next game. It’s not that you say: ‘OK, now we will score five or six and create chances like hell.’” Liverpool’s reputation as adventurers precedes them, burnished by winning 7-0 on their last trip to Selhurst Park. Klopp believes his side are more cautious than kamikaze. “It was 100% clear that we need to be rock solid,” he says. “Maybe you don’t see it all the time but we are defending first. “We have to be organised: that’s the basis for everything we do. And in this moment, I can see outstanding commitment to our defending. Everybody is 100% involved in everything because they understand it’s now more important than ever. That’s helpful that we didn’t concede then. “It’s not that you fly through every period of a season with 3-0, 4-0 or 5-0 results; you have to win football games 1-0.” The cornerstone of that defence has been the constant. Two years ago, it was unsurprising that Virgil van Dijk was ever-present. His campaign last season was curtailed by a cruciate ligament injury in October 2020 and Klopp spoke of the need to ease him back into action slowly. But while he has rested the Dutchman in the Champions League and the centre-back missed two league games because of Covid, he has played every minute of the other 19 matches. Only one man has been on the pitch throughout all of Liverpool’s games since Christmas in all competitions: Van Dijk. Klopp believes his season has been a triumph of Van Dijk’s intelligence and adaptability. “Virg had to learn a lot of things,” he says. “Some physical things are just not available like they were before; they came back but not from the first day. You have to adapt. “I’ve had injuries myself and you cannot ignore that. When you are an intelligent person like Virg you can’t ignore everything or say: ‘Who cares?’ The way back to your best is a bumpy one and he did exceptionally well.” His forward line have also had to adjust. Liverpool were forewarned they would lose two of their front three. Yet that did not make it easier to prepare. “While they are still here, do we train like they are not here?” Klopp says. “That makes no sense. So when they are gone we have three days until the next game: it makes it really tricky. “Players of their quality, you don’t replace like this,” he says, clicking his fingers. “I look forward to when they are back but I like as well the response of the squad I was never in doubt that it was possible. I know we can do it without him. Do I want to always do it without them? No.” A game Klopp has termed a final has a finality: the last without Salah and Mané. Even with them, Liverpool will be outsiders in a title race that has runaway favourites in the shape of Manchester City. “We cannot influence a slip from City,” Klopp says. “If I sat here and said: ‘I can smell it, we’ll get them,’ that would be really crazy. If I sit here and say: ‘We don’t even try,’ that would be crazy as well.” If some of Klopp’s most famous deeds have contained a hint of the illogical and the implausible, the master of chaos has embraced order and organisation as he emphasises the pragmatic formula of clean sheets and solidity.The Foreign Office has said that it had exposed evidence of a plot to install a pro-Moscow government in Ukraine, and Boris Johnson promised to “ramp up pressure on Russia”, as his own domestic political troubles deepened. Saturday’s rare reference to intelligence-gathering went into almost no detail about a conspiracy that, if accurate, could mean a serious escalation in the threat to Ukraine. Politicians there were sceptical that the government could be replaced without a full-blown invasion of the capital, Kyiv. The Foreign Office also said it had information on former Ukrainian politicians who had links with Russian intelligence services, and listed five men. “Some of these have contact with Russian intelligence officers currently involved in the planning for an attack,” the statement added. However four of the five men live in exile in Moscow, making their ties to Russia’s leadership less a matter of subterfuge than public record. The Foreign Office’s claims were thrown into further confusion when the man it named as a “potential candidate” as Moscow’s presidential pick told the Observer he would make an unlikely candidate to head a puppet government for Moscow. “You’ve made my evening. The British Foreign Office seems confused,” said former Ukrainian MP Yevhen Murayev, laughing. “It isn’t very logical. I’m banned from Russia. Not only that but money from my father’s firm there has been confiscated.” The Foreign Office statement was followed by an intervention from No 10 that Johnson “has pushed for a gear change on the Ukraine situation”, after a period when his government appeared to take a back seat on international diplomacy around this issue, while battling heavy political challenges over lockdown-busting parties. While US president Joe Biden and a host of European leaders have made a series of interventions on Ukraine over the past week, the prime minster has largely avoided the recent flurry of diplomacy aimed at averting war. Last week, as high-level talks took place across Europe, the UK’s defence and foreign secretaries, Ben Wallace and Liz Truss, were both in Australia. “It’s been striking that in this week of acute tension in Europe, the prime minister seems to have been absent from top-level Ukraine diplomacy, and the foreign secretary has managed to be in the wrong hemisphere,” said Peter Ricketts, former national security adviser and former permanent secretary at the Foreign Office. In Ukraine, Vasyl Filipchuk, a former spokesperson for Ukraine’s foreign ministry, who now runs a thinktank, described the British allegations of a plot as “ridiculous”. Even a rigged election would not bring the pro-Russian actors power, and trying to install them by force would mean a very long and very bloody fight, he claimed. “This scenario would only work with a fully fledged invasion taking over Kyiv,” he said. “The city would be decimated, its land burned and a million people would flee. We have 100,000 people in the capital with arms, who will fight … There may be a plan but it’s bullshit.” The prominent TV journalist Yevgeny Kiselyov, who moved to Ukraine in 2008, said that mainstream opposition figures who opposed Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, would never talk to Russian spy agencies, however unhappy they were with the present government in Kyiv. Russian intelligence had a history of telling the Kremlin what it wanted to hear, rather than objective reality, he added. The Foreign Office statement seemed plausible but did not contain any obvious new intelligence, analysts and regional experts in the UK said, given that Moscow has been massing troops near the border and makes no secret of its unhappiness with the country’s current government. A Foreign Office spokesperson declined to respond to questions about whether the British government had any details of timing or the method that Russia intended to use to change the leadership in Kyiv. The scarcity of details about the plot, and the sudden diplomatic push after a period on the international sidelines, risked leaving Johnson open to charges that he is exploiting a volatile international crisis to shore up his own position at home. “It is bad we’ve got ourselves into a situation now where our ability to respond to what Putin is doing is damaged by wounds inflicted on ourselves politically over a period of years going back to 2003,” said David Clark, a former special adviser to the Foreign Office. “This is not a government that’s well placed to take a lead on this issue, either in terms of domestic opinion, or frankly, in terms of wider western unity given the context of Brexit,” he added. “The current immediate domestic context is of a government in trouble, a government with a track record, frankly, of engineering sensational news interventions in order to distract and deflect from their own difficulties.”Interpreting services have faced increasing challenges in New South Wales during the Omicron wave, with patients struggling to access the service and long hold times on phone lines increasing the pressure. Health workers and community advocates have described a system strained by the demands of the pandemic, especially when visitations are limited or restricted, leaving many elderly patients in the dark. Amy*, an interpreter for NSW Health who asked to remain anonymous, said the system has long been under strain and the pandemic has only exacerbated long-term issues. “It’s been grossly underfunded,” she said. “There’s just way too much demand for the amount of staff actually employed. Fifteen people are doing the job of 50 people.” “There’s not enough interpreters hired to fulfil the requirements and demands that come through, not because of a lack of interpreters, but because of budgeting issues.” Amy said her department worked out of demountables attached to a hospital, with little support or appreciation for their work. She said she had had days where she had to attend to 40 phone calls, and the pressure being placed on interpreters was too great. “The patients actually miss out when you have so many calls to attend to; it’s extremely difficult to get a professional on the line at the moment.” “They suffer because of this, especially if it’s an emergency and they don’t have access to language support. It can be catastrophic for them.” Under the current system in NSW, it is the responsibility of healthcare practitioners to book an interpreter for patients, with some local health districts having emergency priority lines. If healthcare workers cannot get an interpreter in time, circumstances mean they are being forced to move on to meet the demands of the pandemic. Sarah*, a healthcare worker who also chose to remain anonymous, said interpreting services have “completely broken down” under the strain of demand and absentees. She said waits of up to an hour on the phone for interpreters were common, disrupting patients and their treatment plans. “Interpretive services (are) based on its availability, and the way it is resourced at the moment, it is almost built to be fully inaccessible. You need to have stamina and just general patience to be able to sit on hold for extended periods just to get through to your interpreter. “We’ve had patients walk into operating theatres who don’t understand where they’re going and why. And no one can speak to them, they just suddenly find themselves being moved. “Sometimes we’d have family members interpreting from the car over the phone, having to deliver news through tears to their parents,” she said. But a NSW Health spokesperson said the Western Sydney local health district, which covers some of the most linguistically diverse areas in NSW, was not under strain at all. “WSLHD Health Care Interpreter Services provide free access to nearly 350 professional interpreters 24 hours a day, seven days a week in over 120 languages including Auslan.” A spokesperson for the Department of Home Affairs, which runs the national translating and interpreting service, said there had been “unprecedented” demand for the service. “The Covid pandemic has increased the number of people accessing interpreter services. Unmet demand across languages is constantly monitored, with new interpreter appointments made to the panel to ensure supply.” But Dr Archana Voola, policy officer at Western Sydney Migrant Resource Centre, said there was some confusion surrounding the service. Voola said families were unsure how and when to access interpreters. “There is confusion around who should be requesting the interpreting/translation service – the doctor or the patient? There is [also] lack of clarity on who should pay for this service once it is employed.” An ongoing issue was the time it took to access interpretive services, affecting diagnosis and instructions. “There might not be Swahili or Farsi interpreters on call to attend to immediate needs. One thing we have seen over time in the Australian health care services is the lack of/limited usage of the available translation services. “The consequences of the lack of access could be misdiagnosis, possibly infecting family members and others within their orbit.” NSW Health said they had also upgraded the system in 2020 and had moved to improve telehealth access, with most interpreter sessions now occurring over the phone or via video conference. But Costa Vasili, chief executive at Ethnolink, a translation company, said research has shown that a majority of people in healthcare settings preferred face-to-face interpreting. “The absence of visual cues limits the interpreters’ understanding of the emotional content. There can be technical issues and limits of bandwidth in certain hospitals and clinics. Staff are not appropriately trained to deal with technical issues that can arise.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Vasili said the service had been “underappreciated” by many, and long-term underfunding had led many interpreters leaving the industry. “Interpreting services are underappreciated by many Australians and are chronically underfunded, leading to systemic issues in the interpreting sector such as low pay and poor working conditions. “This leads to professional interpreters leaving the sector to seek out alternative careers that are less stressful and that offer better remuneration and conditions. “Fair and equitable access to health services in a patient’s preferred language is essential in a multicultural country such as Australia.” *Names have been changed.If this had been a football match, it would have been Southampton 4, Man City 1. England never recovered from a start so bad that it could have come straight from Australia, like Sam Billings. Another continent, another collapse. West Indies, tenth in the T20 table, were terrific in all three departments. “Tough times don’t last,” says the winning captain Kieron Pollard, “tough people do.” That’s it from me. Thanks for your company and your correspondence, sorry not to get through it all. Simon Burnton’s match report will be along shortly and Tanya Aldred will be here tomorrow, from 7pm GMT, to talk us through the second episode of a series that has just got more interesting. Eoin Morgan is measured in defeat. “Not at all [the start we were after],” he says. “The opposite conditions to the practice match and we didn’t adapt well. Gotta come back tomorrow, fresh game plan, execute it better. It’s the nature of international cricket, you get tested, exposed to different challenges.” The player of the match, quite rightly, is one of Bridgetown’s favourite sons: Jason Holder. “I was happy to see the ball go through,” he says. “The challenge is repeating it tomorrow. We’ve got a hectic schedule but I’m up for it.” West Indies, who normally get ’em in sixes, cleared the boundary only once today. They won by treating T20 like a Test match, taking early wickets, posting slips and holding their catches. England’s top order were so bad, they could have been playing Test cricket too. A cut for two from King, and that’s that. West Indies have pulled off a resounding victory and a delightful upset. 17th over: West Indies 103-1 (King 51, Pooran 27) Sweet Caroline suddenly rings out, continuing its bid to take over the world and lighting up the crowd. Pooran, facing Mahmood, rises to the “oh-oh-OHs” with a classy cut for four. King sees it and thinks he’ll have a bit of that too. That brings up the West Indies hundred. A wristy push for a single brings up King’s fifty off 47 balls. A pull from Pooran for a single brings up the fifty partnership, off 46 balls. Yet another single from King levels the scores. 16th over: West Indies 91-1 (King 45, Pooran 21) Mills continues, varying his pace and his length, demanding respect, but somehow not taking the double hat-trick that England need. 15th over: West Indies 85-1 (King 41, Pooran 19) This turns out to be the moment Eoin Morgan was saving Adil Rashid up for. He smacks Pooran on the boot but it’s outside leg, and Rash finishes with one for 21. “I’m hugely biased,” says Nick Butler, “but the ECB might as well just send Nottinghamshire to play white ball games for them instead of this lot. Hales, Slater, Clarke, Duckett, Patel, Mullaney, Harrison, Moores, Carter, Fletcher, Ball would surely do a better job than this team. That would never happen of course but in terms of the individual players – I know Hales has been blackballed but surely Joe Clarke must be off the naughty step by now. And Duckett. Cheers for the coverage.” Pleasure! 14th over: West Indies 81-1 (King 40, Pooran 16) Mills returns too, so after all that spin, it’s suddenly seam at both ends. King likes the sound of that, cutting the first ball for four, “with a touch of class” as Mark Butcher says. King has made the highest score of the day at almost a run a ball and has, I reckon, no chance at all of being the man of the match. 13th over: West Indies 75-1 (King 35, Pooran 15) Jordan returns and Pooran deals with him brusquely, slapping his first ball down the ground. When Jordan produces a sharp yorker, King is good enough to dig it out. The required rate is four an over – derisory stuff. 12th over: West Indies 66-1 (King 32, Pooran 9) Morgan takes Rashid off, saving his last over for I’m not sure when. On comes Moeen, whose off-breaks were rather under-used in the World Cup. The miscues continue, with the ball three times going in the air but not to hand. West Indies need 37 from 48 balls. 11th over: West Indies 60-1 (King 30, Pooran 5) Dawson bowls his last over and he’s still giving a fruitless masterclass, all mistimed drives and strangled appeals. “Bowled Daws,” says Billings. He finishes with figures of 4-0-12-0 and the fates owing him one. 10th over: West Indies 57-1 (King 29, Pooran 3) So West Indies finally lose a wicket after knocking off half the runs. Morgan rewards Rashid with a slip, his mate Moeen. But Nicholas Pooran is off the mark in style, lapping for two, and the runs keep coming from King. West Indies’ chances of a win, on CricViz, are now 100 per cent. The breakthrough! Rashid’s leg-break bamboozles Hope, and Billings whips off the bails before you can say “How’s the old body clock, Sam?” 9th over: West Indies 52-0 (King 27, Hope 20) Dawson again causes problems, and again a miscue falls just short of a fielder as King top-edges a cut. This could be the best none-for you’ll never see. 8th over: West Indies 48-0 (King 28, Hope 18) It’s Tymal time! The man England badly missed at the end of the World Cup is back in business, or at least in harness. He cuts Hope in half, but gets chipped by King, who picks up four as Jordan, for once, fluffs it on the rope. West Indies are 48 for none; England were 49 for seven. Here’s Andrew Benton, armed with a theory. “The common denominators linking doing badly at red ball cricket and doing badly at white ball cricket are clearly ‘ball’ and ‘cricket’, so I suggest doing away with the ball to give us a sporting chance.” 7th over: West Indies 41-0 (King 19, Hope 17) Dawson is getting both turn and bounce, inducing one false shot after another, but the ball keeps refusing to take the edge. “Is there any chance of a technical fault,” asks Charles Shedrick, “or could you just switch to the good old fashioned test card? Please stop keeping up the good work, it is starting to hurt.” Ha. We love to hate it, don’t we? 6th over: West Indies 37-0 (King 16, Hope 17) Rashid can threaten both edges, with his excellent googly, but Morgan doesn’t feel able to give him any men round the bat. King steps out and slog-sweeps him for six, the first of the innings. Here endeth the PowerPlay, without a wicket. 5th over: West Indies 28-0 (King 9, Hope 15) It’s spin at both ends, in the PowerPlay, as Liam Dawson gets the call. He bustles in and persuades King to flat-bat in the air, but the ball drops a few yards short of James Vince at long-off. A good over, only two off it, but West Indies can just about afford that. 4th over: West Indies 26-0 (King 8, Hope 14) On CricViz, West Indies’ chances of a win are 94 per cent. What can Morgan do? Send for Rash. His leg-break deceives Brandon King, only to flick the pad and elude poor old Sam Billings, so that’s four leg byes. The cameras find Sir Garfield Sobers, looking frail but cracking a smile. 3rd over: West Indies 19-0 (King 6, Hope 13) Mahmood finds some lift and Hope, flicking to leg, skies over square leg for a couple. A better flick zips away for four, and England’s total is already looking very small. 2nd over: West Indies 13-0 (King 6, Hope 7) The new ball goes to Chris Jordan, top scorer in England’s so-called innings. He’s greeted with a dismissive pull by Shai Hope, who sees it so early that that ball goes rasping past mid-on. Jason Roy makes a good stop at backward point in the middle of giving an interview. Who says men can’t multi-task? 1st over: West Indies 6-0 (King 5, Hope 1) As the lights come on it’s Saqib Mahmood, so impressive last summer, to open the bowling. With fine leg up, he strays onto the hip and Brandon King tucks him away for four. Mahmood strikes back with a lifter that beats King outside off. The pitch is decidedly springy – half beach, half biscuit. The lowest score England have successfully defended in a T20 is 130. This feels like a miracle too far, even for Morgan. West Indies used seven bowlers. It’s not clear how many batters England used. Two in two! Rashid makes room outside off and gets bowled in the manner of Rory Burns. Holder finishes with four for seven, but hats off too to Rashid. With Jordan, he may just have made a game of it. See you shortly. Jason Holder is back and he resumes here he left off, fooling Mahmood with his slower ball. 19th over: England 102-8 (Rashid 21, Mahmood 5) Rashid mows Allen over midwicket, is dropped by Holder in the deep, and gets four from the fumble. Up comes the hundred, greeted by rueful cheers from the England fans. Since Rashid came in, they’ve doubled the score. 18th over: England 95-8 (Rashid 15, Mahmood 4) Saqib Mahmood, facing Pollard, shows the top order how it’s done with a wristy on-drive. And then Adil Rashid plays a gorgeous dab, taking the bat away from the ball, just brushing it through the vacant first slip for four. Pollard strikes back with a warning to Mahmood as he backs up too far, but the over belongs to the batters. 17th over: England 87-8 (Rashid 10, Mahmood 1) That was an inspired change from Pollard and a fine first over from Allen, with his slow left-am. The only crumb of comfort for England, with their three spinners, is that there’s plenty of turn. There it is! A change of bowling and a spot of flight do the trick as Fabian Allen lures Jordan into a chip to deep mid-off. It was fun while it lasted. 16th over: England 84-7 (Jordan 28, Rashid 8) As the partnership has raced to 32 off 20 balls, Kieron Pollard decides it’s time to bring on his big gun: himself. He does well, conceding only three singles, but these two old stagers are still there and the one born in Barbados is having a ball. 15th over: England 81-7 (Jordan 27, Rashid 6) Sheldon Cottrell is back for his last over. He keeps Jordan honest with a couple of dots, then goes for a couple of singles and a two, and finally condos a six as Jordan slaps him over cover. “Magnificent strike that is,” says Mark Butcher. On the artificial beach, a topless man takes a fine falling catch. 14th over: England 71-7 (Jordan 18, Rashid 5) And another one! Jordan spots a friendly bouncer from Shepherd and pulls it for a regal six. And then he’s dropped, but it’s a very hard chance to Shepherd himself – no blame attached. Jordan takes over as top scorer for England, with 18 off 13 balls, replacing Morgan, whose 17 occupied 29 balls. And Adil Rashid joins in with a pull for four, so that’s 12 off the over. For the past ten minutes, it’s been back to Twenty20 as we know it. 13th over: England 59-7 (Jordan 9, Rashid 0) Another six! Swung straight by Jordan off a half-volley from Hosein. Will it be six-and-out again? No! Jordan goes back and pulls for two. He adds another two, to backward point, to make 10 from the over. It’s going to be all right. “I started work at pretty much the same time as this match commenced,” says Phil Withall. “It’s probably fair to say I’ve put in more of a shift than the England players have.” 12th over: England 49-7 (Jordan 1, Rashid 0) Last time these teams met, West Indies made 55 all out. Can England do any better here? You know what a six means – impending doom. Morgan chips the next ball straight to his opposite number at extra cover. Mid-12th over: England 49-6 (Morgan 17, Jordan 1) Morgan plays his best shot yet, which isn’t saying much – a caress of an off drive, And then he goes inside-out for six. “Pressure on the bowler!” says a commentator. Are you sure? 11th over: England 41-6 (Morgan 9, Jordan 1) Dawson pushed Hosein into the covers, said yes-no-wait, and was run out by yards. The commentators reckon he was bamboozled by Hosein’s turn and bounce, but he may just as well have been befuddled by the match situation. “England’s players,” says Gary Naylor, “play too much red ball cricket.” What could make things worse? A suicidal run, first ball after the drinks break. “You thought it was an OBO,” says Steve Rackett, “but got a comedy gig instead.” You’re not joking. 10th over: England 39-5 (Morgan 8, Dawson 2) Ladies and gentlemen, we have a two! Cut away by Morgan, off Odean Smith, so Morgan now has eight off 24 balls. Four off the over, and at the halfway stage (they hope) England are still in deep trouble. 9th over: England 35-5 (Morgan 5, Dawson 1) Hosein beats Dawson with a near-bouncer. “Dawson’s a scrapper,” says Mark Butcher. All he has to do is scrap his way to a hundred partnership in the next 11 overs, and England will have a chance. 8th over: England 34-5 (Morgan 4, Dawson 1) A breather for Jason Holder (3-1-6-2), who gives way to Romario Shepherd’s medium pace. He takes pity on England and starts with a couple of wides, before they suddenly remember that you are allowed to score singles. “Great to see what we’ve sacrificed all that red ball cricket for,” says Brian Withington. “James Vince out Vinces himself as the ultimate tribute act. Cap’n Morgan doing a passable imitation of a blind man with a cane for a bat – will presumably go on and bludgeon a century now.” Ha. I wouldn’t bet on it. 7th over: England 29-5 (Morgan 2, Dawson 0) Kieron Pollard had made his first bowling change, replacing Cottrell (3-1-20-2) with the slow left-arm of Akeal Hosein. Morgan tried an early reverse sweep but found the man at backward point. And then Billings charged, missed and booked his place in a future pub quiz. Which batter took part in two England collapses in the same week and took four flights to get from one to the other? Billings gives the spinner the charge and runs into some turbulence. This is so bad, it’s quite funny. 6th over: England 26-4 (Morgan 1, Billings 1) Morgan finally gets off the mark – with a nick! Close to the slip cordon (yes, there is one). And Sam Billings gets off the mark too, first ball, with a chop past gully. Good on him. That’s the end of the PowerPlay, or in this case the BitOfAShowerPlay. ... at 24-4, after five overs. Owing to previous passenger selection, he has to make a fifty here. A slap to extra cover! The very next ball after the six, as with Roy. Mid-5th over: England 24-3 (Vince 14, Morgan 0) There may be a case for a counter-attack here. James Vince, facing Cottrell, sees it and hits a four! Off his pads. And another, next ball – chopped away past backward point. And then a six! With a top-edged hook, but it was quite safe as fine leg was up. And then... 4th over: England 10-3 (Vince 0, Morgan 0) Morgan may still be there, but that doesn’t mean he can get bat on ball. He plays and misses for the fifth time in a row. Another maiden! And somewhere among the misses there was an on-pitch interview with Nicholas Pooran, who said “I was lucky, it hit my wrist and bounced up” before the connection failed. It’s all not happening. So it could be worse for England: they’re not 10-4! Mid-4th over: England 10-3 (Vince 0, Morgan 0) Morgan’s turn to play and miss. And then he’s given out! Caught behind, flailing – but he reviews right away... 3rd over: England 10-3 (Vince 0, Morgan 0) On the plus side, James Vince has time to play himself in, and Eopin Morgan has time to play himself into form. Vince, facing Cottrell, wafts outside off. And that’s a maiden! I don’t believe it. 2nd over: England 10-3 (Vince 0, Morgan 0) APOLOGY. We may have given the impression that this occasion would be quite different from the Ashes. Turns out, it’s just as bad! You know those Moeen strokes that look as if he’s taking catching practice? This is one of them, caressed to the man at backward point. That’s a golden duck, and West Indies are running through England. Banton takes his cue from Roy: one fine shot, and out. Jason Holder bowls him a Test-match outswinger, he plays a Test-match poke, and Nicholas Pooran, at slip, takes a Test-match catch. 1st over: England 6-1 (Banton 0, Vince 0) So Jason Roy gets a hundred in the dress rehearsal and one scoring shot on the first night. ... then Roy swats him for six – and Cottrell swings one back in to send the stumps cartwheeling. First blood to West Indies! You can guess the celebration. Mid-1st over: England 0-0 (Roy 0, Banton 0) It’s Sheldon Cottrell to Jason Roy. Is this a salute waiting to happen? Cottrell reels off four dots... Both sides take the knee. “All they’re doing,” says Ian Bishop, “is reminding the world that we need equal treatment for everyone, particularly people of colour.” Amen to that. Time for the anthems: not two of them, oh no, but three. The first is the anthem of Barbados, ringing out proudly now that it has just become a republic. The Queen needn’t worry too much as she gets a mention in anthem number two. And top of the bill is Rally Round The West Indies. An email! Thank you, Andrew Benton. “Nice to see Moeen Ali back in a team that’ll suit him,” he observes. “And I love the Art Deco pavilion. Proper quality all round for this game.” Let’s hope so. Mark Butcher, whose Air Miles must be as impressive as Sam Billings’s, is having a feel of the pitch. He reckons it has plenty of runs in it. “It’s biscuit-coloured,” he says. Yes, and quite old-school – Rich Tea. Both teams have gone with a radical mixture. Yes, it’s our old friends youth and experience. Sam Billings steps off the plane onto the pitch, and there’s a rare outing for Liam Dawson’s reliable slow left-arm. West Indies 1 Shai Hope, 2 Brandon King, 3 Nicholas Pooran (wkt), 4 Darren Bravo, 5 Kieron Pollard (capt), 6 Jason Holder, 7 Fabian Allen, 8 Odean Smith, 9 Romario Shepherd, 10 Akeal Hosein, 11 Sheldon Cottrell. England 1 Jason Roy, 2 Tom Banton, 3 James Vince, 4 Moeen Ali, 5 Eoin Morgan (capt), 6 Sam Billings (wkt), 7 Chris Jordan, 8 Liam Dawson, 9 Adil Rashid, 10 Saqib Mahmood, 11 Tymal Mills. “We were going to bat first anyway,” says Eoin Morgan. He’s changed his tune. Eoin Morgan calls heads, it’s tails and Kieron Pollard fancies a chase. And there’s another country, I’ve heard of long ago. It’s called England, and it is actually quite good at cricket – perhaps because it’s in the capable hands of an Irishman. Hello, good evening and welcome to a new chapter in the history of English cricket. The ball is white, the game is short, the sea is green, the hosts are West Indies, the captains are Kieron Pollard and Eoin Morgan and there’s a completely different cast from the Ashes – with the possible exception of Sam Billings, who has taken four flights to make his way from Hobart to Bridgetown. If he is picked tonight, his challenge will be to Partey like he has some idea what time of day it is. While England are still top of the ICC rankings despite not making the T20 World Cup final, West Indies have gone from world-beaters in 2016 to tenth in the table, below Afghanistan, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh. Over the past year they’ve played 22 completed T20 internationals and won only nine, whereas England have won 11 out of 17. That said, West Indies are still pretty good at home, where eight of those nine victories have come – four of them in a triumphant series against Australia six months ago. And Morgan is without several of his regulars, from Jos Buttler and Jonny Bairstow to Jofra Archer. So my considered opinion is that this match could end in a win for either side. Play starts at 4pm local time, 8pm GMT, and the forecast is fine – the Met Office app is promising both the sun and the moon, to make up for the missing stars. Do join me around 7.35pm GMT for news of the toss and the teams.Different format, different opponents, same old story for England, who started their Twenty20 series against West Indies in Barbados with very different personnel but in precisely the same style with which they ended the Ashes in Tasmania, soundtracked by an embarrassing clatter of wickets. The tourists lost first the toss and then their composure as they slumped to 49 for seven before mounting something of a recovery but West Indies, powered by a suitably regal half-century from Brandon King, made their total of 103 appear suitably trifling and won by nine wickets with 17 balls remaining. For the hosts, who had lost eight of their last nine Twenty20 internationals, an emphatic victory over the world’s top-ranked side was an occasion to savour. “Tough times don’t last, tough people do,” said their captain, Kieron Pollard. None of England’s batters did. A quarter of the way through England’s innings 30 balls had been bowled, just five scoring shots played, and four wickets lost. By the end of the powerplay they were 26 for four and Eoin Morgan had faced 11 deliveries for the score of one. When Sam Billings was stumped at the end of the seventh over England had lost 15 wickets for 95 runs in two formats and two continents – with Billings personally contributing two wickets and three runs to the long-distance collapse. Morgan complained afterwards that his side had faced “the opposite conditions to what we played” in their single warm-up fixture on the same ground and that they would “have to come back tomorrow with a fresh gameplan”. “I think we knew it wasn’t going to be a belter,” said Liam Dawson of the wicket on which he played his first T20i for nearly four years and his first international of any kind for three and a half. “Looking back if we’d got 130 or 140 it would have been potentially a very different game. Tomorrow we’ll have to learn, hopefully take our time a little bit more and put a score on the board.” West Indies, bowled out for 55 when the teams met in Dubai at the Twenty20 World Cup last October and in the doldrums ever since, were never likely to feel any sympathy for England’s plight, their only disappointment being that a flurry of boundaries from Chris Jordan and Adil Rashid took the tourists from the brink of humiliation to the sunlit uplands of triple figures. The first over of the game ended with Sheldon Cottrell executing his familiar march-and-salute celebration after Jason Roy completely missed a full toss, lost his middle stump and set the tone. Tom Banton edged Jason Holder to slip, where Nicholas Pooran took a fine low catch, in the following over and after Moeen Ali hit his first ball straight to backward point England were 10 for three after 12 balls. Morgan and James Vince seemed to have brought some semblance of normality to proceedings as the latter hit two fours and a top-edged six off Cottrell. But just as England’s fans, who made up the overwhelming majority of the crowd in Bridgetown, might have felt the sense of crisis dissipating, Vince cracked the last ball of the same Cottrell over straight to the fielder at cover and the collapse continued. There were many reasons for England’s failure: some early swing, some uneven bounce, some disciplined bowling and fine, error-free fielding. Holder returned career-best figures of four for seven and was superb. But totals this low normally involve a little self-destruction and Dawson provided the clearest case, pushing an Akeal Hosein delivery to Pollard, standing close at cover, and setting off for a single before slipping when inevitably told to turn around. Pollard returned the ball underarm for Shai Hope to complete the run-out. England needed early wickets to have any hope of conjuring an unlikely victory, and got none. In no great hurry, Brandon King and Shai Hope guided West Indies to 50 without loss in the ninth over, precisely four overs quicker than England, who had of course been seven down at the time. They had a little luck along the way – Hope deflected a Saqib Mahmood delivery into the ground and just past his stumps and Dawson threatened both batters and thought that “on another night I could have got a few wickets” – but with little scoreboard pressure they were able to relax and showed real quality. King in particular hit some splendid shots – a huge slog sweep off Rashid and a crisp cut off Tymal Mills stood out – as he powered his side to victory. With just 24 hours separating the first two games of the series England have little time to brood on this performance, and would anyway have been planning some squad rotation. Sadly memories of their batting out of hell won’t be gone when the morning comes.