Failure to vaccinate the world against coronavirus created the perfect breeding ground for the emergence of the Omicron variant and should serve as a wake-up call to wealthy nations, campaigners have said. Scientists and global health experts have called for action since the summer to tackle the crisis of vaccine inequality between rich and poor countries. The longer large parts of the world remained unvaccinated, they said, the more likely the virus was to mutate significantly. The emergence of such a variant threatens to derail efforts to end the pandemic. The World Health Organization says the heavily mutated Omicron variant is likely to spread internationally and poses a very high risk of infection surges that may have severe consequences in some places. “Omicron is with us because we have failed to vaccinate the world,” said Winnie Byanyima, executive director of UNAids and co-chair of the People’s Vaccine Alliance, a campaign group. “This should be a wake-up call. “Business as usual has led to huge profits for pharmaceutical firms, but many people left unvaccinated means that this virus continues to mutate. It is the definition of madness to keep doing the same thing and expect a different outcome. We need to press reset.” The warning comes as new figures released by the People’s Vaccine Alliance show that the number of booster or third jabs administered in the UK is about the same as the total number of fully vaccinated people across all of the world’s poorest countries. The UK has reached the milestone of 20m booster vaccines or third doses administered days after ministers announced a significant expansion of the programme to every adult in the country. At the same time, according to Our World In Data figures cited by the People’s Vaccine Alliance, only 20 million people across all the 27 countries classified as low-income nations by the World Bank had been fully vaccinated. “With the new threat of the Omicron variant, it is clear that we cannot just booster our way out of the pandemic while leaving much of the developing world behind,” said Anna Marriott, health policy manager at Oxfam, which is one of about 80 organisations in the People’s Vaccine Alliance. “Unless all countries are vaccinated as soon as possible we could see wave after wave of variants. “We cannot correct the mistakes of the past 21 months but we need rich countries to chart a new path forward in which they step up and insist the pharmaceutical companies start sharing their science and technology with qualified manufacturers around the world, so we can vaccinate people in all countries and finally end the pandemic.” Tony Blair said the “failure to organise mass vaccination globally has been a huge problem right throughout this crisis”. The former UK prime minister told BBC Radio 4’s The World This Weekend: “Well it’s always been very obvious that if you don’t vaccinate the world, this is a virus that can mutate. If you’ve got large populations that are unvaccinated, it’s likely to mutate faster and further.”Middle-class drug users are to be targeted as part of a 10-year strategy to be announced by Boris Johnson’s government with a heavy focus on war-on-drugs-era punishment. So-called “lifestyle” users of class A drugs face losing their passports or driving licences under proposals designed to target wealthy professionals who the government will argue are driving exploitative practices with their demand. Police officers will be handed powers to go through drug dealers’ phones and contact their clients with warnings about drug use in a bid to spook them into changing their behaviour. The government’s 10-year drugs strategy will be published on Monday with a heavy focus on targeting users and suppliers, including gangs behind the so-called county lines phenomenon, which often sees young, vulnerable people turned into cross-country mules. But drug reform campaigners have criticised the UK government for going “backwards” by embracing a criminal sanction-led approach while other countries and federal states are adopting more progressive approaches, such as legalisation of cannabis in Canada. Some of the measures to be presented in the drugs strategy include: Contacting clients based on drug dealers’ seized phones with a range of messages to discourage their drug use and direct them to getting support. A commitment to dismantling more than 2,000 county lines and making thousands more arrests. Investing up to £145m in the county lines programme, targeting the road and rail networks and protecting those exploited and supporting them to rebuild their lives. Expanding drug testing on arrest – supporting police forces to test more individuals. Developing out-of-court disposal projects to ensure those who misuse drugs face tougher consequences. The largest ever single increase in investment in treatment and recovery, which is understood to be made available to 50 local authorities. The announcement comes as drug poisoning deaths are at a record high, having increased by almost 80% since 2012. Niamh Eastwood, executive director of thinktank Release, said: “While increased funding for drug treatment is welcomed, the focus on more punitive sentences for people who supply drugs is a continuation of a tired tough-on-drugs narrative, one that we have had in the UK for decades. “This failed policy will do little to address the high rates of drug-related deaths, which over the last decade have increased year on year, with some of the highest rates in Europe. “While New York announces the opening of drug consumption rooms, Germany moves to legalise cannabis, as many US states and Canada have already done, and over 30 countries have ended criminal sanctions for possession of drugs – Britain is going backwards, embracing a Nixon-style ‘war on drugs’ approach.” Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said: “Too often the government makes grand promises, but then fails to deliver or does the opposite. Drug use is up, serious violence is up, antisocial behaviour is up. More and more offenders are getting away with their crimes as overall prosecutions have plummeted. Any action from the government must be substantial enough to undo the damage they have caused.” The government said it will publish a white paper in due course which will look at new measures to reduce demand and deter people from illegal drug use through “more meaningful consequences”. “We need to look at new ways of penalising them. Things that will actually interfere with their lives,” the prime minister told the Sun on Sunday. “So we will look at taking away their passports and driving licences.” He added: “What I want to see is a world in which we have penalties for lifestyle drug users that will seriously interfere with their enjoyment of their own lifestyles.” The civil penalties will be modelled on sanctions already used against parents who fail to pay child maintenance and banning orders for football hooligans, the Sun said. The government announced in July it would establish a new unit to help end illegal drug-related illness and deaths, as the second part of Dame Carol Black’s independent review of drugs was released. The first phase of the review, which was published in February, estimated there were 300,000 opiate or crack cocaine users in England, and about 1 million people had used cocaine in the past year. Black’s review estimated that the illicit drug market in the UK was worth £9.4bn a year, but cost society more than double that figure in terms of health, crime and societal impacts.Strike action at Tesco could lead to empty shelves in the run-up to Christmas, the Unite trade union has said, after its members voted to walk out unless they are offered a pay deal that keeps pace with inflation. The supermarket chain has offered staff a pay rise of 4%, which Unite has said is “offensive” given that the retail price index rate of inflation stands at 6%. The offer is also below the more commonly used consumer price index, which is at a 10-year high of 4.2%. Discussions are understood to be taking place in an effort to avert action that would add to the countrywide supply chain disruption that has already triggered warnings of shortages of food and drink at Christmas. If the company does not improve its offer, Unite said warehouse workers and HGV drivers at depots in Doncaster, Didcot, Belfast and Antrim would start a series of rolling strikes from 16 December. A further nine warehouses could be affected, depending on the outcome of a separate vote on industrial action by the Usdaw shop workers’ union, which closes on Monday. Any industrial action is likely to cause disruption to deliveries to Tesco stores around the country in the run-up to Christmas. “Our members have gone above and beyond the call of duty to keep Tesco’s shelves filled throughout the pandemic,” said Unite’s general secretary, Sharon Graham. “At the very least the UK’s largest and wealthiest retailer should be making our members a decent pay offer.” The trade union said its members were particularly angry at the below-inflation pay offer – a “real-terms pay cut” – because the supermarket has said it is on course to report an annual operating profit of as much as £2.6bn. The union said it was taking strike action as a last resort, having exhausted all other options, and warned of severe disruption without an improved offer. If one is not forthcoming, Unite said the supermarket’s Didcot and Doncaster sites would stage a 48-hour stoppage from 6am on 16 December, followed by a five-day stoppage beginning on 20 December. There would be another 48-hour stoppage starting on 30 December and a three-day stoppage beginning on 5 January. Unite members at the Antrim and Belfast Tesco distribution centres would begin an all-out continuous strike from 7am on 16 December. The union is also balloting members for strike action at the Livingston distribution centre, via a vote that closes on Monday, which could trigger another pre-Christmas strike. Tesco said its pay offer was a fair reflection of the tireless work done by staff during the pandemic and one of the highest awards made within its distribution business in 25 years. The company said some staff had voted against strike action, and that it had contingency plans to mitigate any impact. “We have worked hard to deliver Christmas for our customers and are confident we will be able to fulfil our plans,” it said.Government policies have made almost no difference to the gender pay gap for the last 25 years, according to a report by the Institute for Fiscal Studies. On average, working-age women in the UK earned 40% less a week and £3.10 less an hour than men in 2019. Comparing official earnings data for more than 2 million 20 to 55-year-olds between 1995 and 2019, the report, published on Monday, found that women were less likely to be in paid work at all (83.5% of women and 93% of men), worked eight fewer hours a week if they were employed, and were paid 19% less an hour on average (£13.20 rather than £16.30). Although the 40% earnings gap is about 13 percentage points lower than in the mid-1990s, the report calculates that more than three-quarters of the reduction in the earnings gap over the past quarter-century can be explained by the rapid increase in women’s educational attainment. Women of working age have gone from being 5 percentage points less likely, to 5 percentage points more likely, to have a university degree than men. “If you account for education attainment, there has been very little progress in reducing the gender earnings gap since 1995,” said Alison Andrew, co-author of the report and senior research economist at the Institute for Fiscal Studies. “The highest female earners take home just 67p for every £1 that the best-paid men do, while fewer than one-quarter of men earn the same or less than the median woman.” The additional combined effect on the gender earnings gap of other changes in the economy, society and government policies, such as improvements in parental leave and funding for childcare, has been close to zero. The differential in hourly pay is now widest for graduates. The report, part of the IFS Deaton Review of Inequalities, funded by the Nuffield Foundation, calculates that whereas minimum wage rates have reduced the hourly pay gap – men who left school at 16 or earlier were paid 17% more an hour than their female counterparts – male graduates earned 23% more an hour than female graduates. “There’s been no progress in reducing the pay gap for graduates, whether that’s the number in paid employment, the number of hours worked or hourly pay,” said Andrew. When it comes to gender gaps in overall earnings, these remain largest when comparing men and women with the fewest qualifications. Women who left school at age 16 or earlier are paid less than men, because those who have jobs typically work nearly 11 fewer hours [10.8] a week. And among working-age adults with GSCEs or less, 26.5% of women do not have a job, compared with 9.5% of men. Part of the reason for the lack of progress in closing the pay gap is the detrimental impact having children has on women’s earnings, the findings show. Women still take the bulk of parental leave and are more likely to reduce their hours, find a more family-friendly but lower-paying job, or stop work altogether after having children. They also typically do just under two hours more unpaid work each day than men. Going part-time has a serious impact on women’s earnings and pay progression over time. The report calculated that the average 50-year-old female graduate spent 3.7 years working part-time, causing their hourly wage at age 50 to be 7.7% lower than had they worked full-time for those years. Although non-graduates are also penalised for going part-time, it is less marked. The report calls for more targeted policies to close the gap and argues that even expensive policies, such as much more widely available free childcare, could eventually pay for themselves if they successfully ensure that the talents of both men and women are put to their most productive uses. Responding to the findings, Jemima Olchawski, chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said: “This report shows what many women already know, that modern workplaces simply aren’t fit for modern life. From a lack of quality flexible jobs that allow women to progress alongside caring roles, to a culture that funnels them into lower-paid roles and undervalues the work they do – women are getting a raw deal. And it shows in their pay packet. “But this is hurting men too. We know many men want to spend more time with their families … We have an incredible opportunity to rebuild in a way that works for the 21st century. Let’s see real investment in creating good-quality, flexible childcare, jobs advertised as flexible by default, a parental leave system that genuinely supports dads and second parents to spend time and bond with their children.” A government spokesperson said: “The national gender pay gap has fallen significantly under this government – and by approximately a quarter in the last decade, with 1.9 million more women in work than in 2010. This is a result of this government enacting legislation for the right to flexible working, shared parental leave and pay – including a new online tool to check eligibility – and doubling free childcare for eligible working parents. “We will shortly put forward a range of measures to advance equality for women at work, increasing opportunity, and tackling the issues that are holding women back. We are committed to building back fairer, and making workplaces more equal so everyone can reach their full potential.”The coronavirus pandemic that has so far killed more than 5 million people worldwide is far from over and the next one could be even more lethal, the creator of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine has said. As fears grow over the threat posed by the highly mutated Omicron variant, detected in more than 30 countries, Prof Dame Sarah Gilbert cautioned that while it was increasingly obvious that “this pandemic is not done with us”, the next one could be worse. The message came as ministers were told by one of their scientific advisers that the new variant was spreading pretty rapidly in the UK, and travel rules starting on Tuesday would be too late to prevent a potential wave of infections. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) on Sunday night reported 86 new Omicron cases, taking the total identified so far to 246. Delivering the 44th Richard Dimbleby lecture, due to be broadcast on the BBC on Monday, Gilbert said that despite the destructive nature of a two-year pandemic that had already infected more than 265 million people, the next one might be more contagious and claim even more lives. “This will not be the last time a virus threatens our lives and our livelihoods,” she said. “The truth is, the next one could be worse. It could be more contagious, or more lethal, or both.” Gilbert, a professor of vaccinology at the University of Oxford whose team developed the Covid vaccine now used in 170 countries, said the scientific advances made and knowledge gained in research fighting against the coronavirus must not be lost. “We cannot allow a situation where we have gone through all we have gone through, and then find that the enormous economic losses we have sustained mean that there is still no funding for pandemic preparedness,” she said. “Just as we invest in armed forces and intelligence and diplomacy to defend against wars, we must invest in people, research, manufacturing and institutions to defend against pandemics.” Gilbert said the new variant contained mutations already known to increase transmissibility of the virus and that antibodies induced by vaccination or previous infections might be less effective at preventing infection with Omicron. But she also said reduced protection against infection “does not necessarily mean reduced protection against severe disease and death”. Gilbert added: “Until we know more, we should be cautious, and take steps to slow down the spread of this new variant.” From Tuesday, all passengers arriving in the UK will be required to show proof of a negative PCR or lateral flow test taken no earlier than 48 hours before departure. Nigeria will also be added to the travel red list on Monday. But Prof Mark Woolhouse, of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (Spi-M), said the new travel rules were too late to make a material difference. He told BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show: “I think that may be a case of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted. “If Omicron is here in the UK, and it certainly is, if there’s community transmission in the UK, and it certainly looks that way, then it’s that community transmission that will drive a next wave. The cases that are being imported are important, we want to detect those and isolate any positive cases we find, as we would for any case anywhere. But I think it’s too late to make a material difference to the course of the Omicron wave if we’re going to have one.” Though the emergence of the new variant has caused alarm worldwide, Dr Anthony Fauci, the top US infectious disease official, told CNN “thus far it does not look like there’s a great degree of severity to it” but he added that it was too early to draw definitive conclusions and more study was needed. As of 9am on Sunday there were another 43,992 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases in the UK. A further 54 people died within 28 days of testing positive for coronavirus. The president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine said the NHS would be in a difficult position if the Omicron variant were to trigger a surge in hospital admissions. Dr Katherine Henderson said hospitals were already struggling to cope. “It is pretty spectacularly bad now, it will get worse – and if the new variant becomes a thing in terms of numbers and translates into hospitals admissions we are going to be in a very, very difficult position.” The government is expected to announce the chair of its long-awaited Covid public inquiry within the next fortnight, having pledged to bereaved families that a chair would be in place by Christmas. MPs have called for the inquiry to investigate the effect that rule-breaking by public figures had on public compliance. Meanwhile, Keir Starmer has made his strongest intervention to date to criticise those resisting taking the vaccine, after the Guardian reported that unvaccinated patients are dominating ICU beds. The Labour leader, who will receive his booster jab on Monday, said those who are unvaccinated should “consider the impact of their decision, think again, and get vaccinated”. “It is frustrating and worrying that medics are seeing too many hospital beds and NHS resources are taken by those that have chosen not to get the vaccine,” he said. He also said the government needed to radically boost efforts to get third jabs into arms. New analysis by Labour reveals the total number of booster vaccinations currently being administered remains significantly below the number of jabs that were being delivered at the same point in the first vaccine rollout earlier this year. During the initial vaccine rollout, the number of vaccinations peaked at 602,265 a day on average. In contrast, the current total number of vaccines now being delivered a day on average is 435,542, over a quarter less than in March. Separately, millions of people are being urged to get a flu jab by Friday to maximise protection over Christmas, as figures reveal more than half of all those who are pregnant or have underlying health conditions have still not been vaccinated. The UKHSA is encouraging eligible people to have the vaccine by 10 December to allow it take full effect before the festive season.Click here to access the print version Each down clue contains a superfluous word to be ignored in producing the solution to be entered in the grid. Each across entry in the grid may be deduced from its clue, combined in the same way with one of the superfluous down clue words. Deadline for entries is 23:59 GMT on Saturday 1 January. You need to register once and then sign in to theguardian.com to enter our online competition for a £100 monthly prize. Click here to register.* Eight across solutions are one letter too long for their allotted space; these letters should be dropped to produce another word for entry in the grid. * Eight down solutions are one letter too short and one of the above eight dropped letters must be added to produce a word for entry in the grid. Each of the remaining 16 clues contains a superfluous word (or words); these provide definitions for one of the new across or down solutions in the grid. Across 1* pasties [-t] P  EST 5 October O  R [‘bargain’/STEAL] 9* loped [-s] SL  ED 10* isolation [-n] INSOLATION/TAN OIL IS ON (anag) 11 earmarked ARM/ARK in DEE (rev) [‘dark’/LIGHTLESS] 12 Parsi IS/RAP (rev) [‘colourful clothes’/TRAPPINGS] 13 scena CEN in S(ex)/A(ppeal) [‘assessing’/RANKING] 15 impending IMP + ENDING [‘steals’/PILFERS] 18 apothegms MOUTHS GAPE less U(niversity) (anag) [‘particularly’/SPECIALLY] 19* steak [-r] ST  AK(e) 21* salmi [-a} SA  I(d) 23* specially [-e} ESPECIALLY/PIECES(anag)+ALLY 25* lightness [-f} FLIGHT + LESS(on) 26* bight [-r] BRIG/H(ome)/T(oday) 27 musical SUM(rev)/I/CAL(l) [‘ran’/LOPED] 28 dudgeon DUD/GE  N [‘pagan’/ATHEISTIC] Down 1* pilfers [+f} PI  ERS 2 superhero OUR SPHERE (anag) [‘quarantine’/ISOLATION’] 3 India IN + AID (rev) [‘being scrupulous’/STICKLING] 4* stickling [+s] TICK  ING 5 ovoid O(ffset)VOID [‘ragout’/SALMI] 6* trappings [+r} T 
<a>INGS 7* brier [+r] I(d)/E(st) in B(ritish)/R(ailways) 8* ranking [+n] RA  G 14* atheistic [+a] T  IC 16 possessed PO&lt;(di)SSE(nt)/(di)SSE(nt)&gt;D [‘cut’/STEAK] 17 ideologue IDÉ  E [‘goes downhill’/LUGES] 18 Absalom AB (able seaman) + ALMOS(t) (anag) [‘bay’/BIGHT] 20 Krypton T(i)NY PORK (anag) [‘pies’/PASTIES] 22* luges [+e] (s)LUGS 23* steal [+t] nurSE ALone (hidden) 24 imbed 1/M  ED [‘pipe’/BRIER]    </a>A serving member of the Royal Navy, who took legal action against the Ministry of Defence after her rape case collapsed, has backed calls for serious offences to be investigated and tried through the civilian courts rather than the military system. The woman, known as Servicewoman A, has called on the government to accept an amendment to the Armed Forces Bill, which she says will “encourage more women to come forward” and protect them from the “appalling consequences” of reporting rape within their unit. The House of Lords amended the Armed Forces Bill to ensure that the most serious crimes – murder, manslaughter, domestic violence, child abuse and rape – are tried in the civilian courts when committed in the UK unless the attorney general has specifically consented for such crimes to be tried under courts martial. The government is expected to reject these proposals. Servicewoman A said a military prosecutor committed a series of failings during her rape case, including failing to inform her she could give evidence via video link, delaying the submission of crucial documents until the day of the trial, and providing incorrect legal advice. She has raised concerns about the quality of military policing in the case, an absence of survivor care, and the response from the navy when she raised complaints. She said: “The value of this amendment for women like me cannot be overstated. There were extremely serious failings in the handling of my case at court martial which ultimately meant it collapsed. “This amendment will make the process independent. It will encourage more service personnel to report crimes. It will mean we have some protection from the appalling consequences we suffer when we report rape within our units. “I am urging the government to accept this amendment. As service personnel we are citizens of this country and we deserve justice just like everyone else.” A critical review of the service justice system was published in 2020 by retired senior crown court judge Shaun Lyons with the help of Sir Jon Murphy, the former chief constable of Merseyside. Its first recommendation was that “the court martial jurisdiction should no longer include murder, manslaughter and rape when these offences are committed in the UK, except when the consent of the attorney general is given”. Last year, Servicewoman A was one of three women who sought a judicial review of the defence secretary’s decision to ignore the key recommendation of the Lyons review. The case was settled out of court. The latest Ministry of Defence figures show that between 2015 and 2020, the conviction rate for rape cases tried under courts martial was just 9%. The latest data available suggests the conviction rate was 59% for cases that reached civilian courts, with considerably more cases being tried each year. Almost three-quarters (74%) of sexual offences in the armed forces in 2020 took place in the UK, and more than three-quarters (76%) of the victims were women. Labour tabled a similar amendment to the Armed Forces Bill at report stage in July, which the government, including the Conservative defence select committee chair, Tobias Ellwood, and fellow committee member Sarah Atherton, did not support. The shadow armed forces minister, Stephen Morgan, said: “Trying the most serious offences in civilian courts would help improve investigations and conviction rates, but ministers seem content with a fudge that will leave personnel vulnerable.” An MoD spokesperson said: “The government will not be supporting amendments to the Armed Forces Bill.” The spokesperson added: “We are strengthening the prosecutor protocols to provide some much-needed clarity and transparency on how decisions on jurisdiction are made.”Economic forecasters have slashed expectations for Britain’s recovery and said further pain could follow, depending on the severity of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 and government action to avoid a “cliff edge” for business investment. The Confederation of British Industry, the UK’s leading business lobby group, said in June that it expected the economy to expand by 8.2%. But on Monday it cut that prediction to 6.9% and revised down its 2022 forecast from 6.9% to 5.1%. It put the more pessimistic outlook down to weaker-than-expected output since its last forecast, with supply chain disruption among the factors that has placed a drag on the economy. The accounting firm KPMG issued an even gloomier prediction, saying it expects growth to reach 4.2% next year at best, even if the Omicron variant turns out to be a “false alarm”. It said any increased restrictions imposed by government to stop the spread of the variant will further hamper the recovery. Growth would slow to 2.6% if moderate measures such as social distancing are required, KPMG predicted, while output could fall to 1.8% if vaccines prove ineffective against Omicron and lockdowns are imposed during January and February. Both KPMG and the CBI also raised concerns about a lack of business investment, which they cited as obstacle to a sustained recovery in the longer term. Fresh government action will be needed to avoid a steep fall in business investment in 2023, when temporary measures to help business are withdrawn, the CBI said. “The UK’s new year resolution must be to give firms the confidence to go for growth,” said the CBI’s director general, Tony Danker. “We should be raising our sights on the economy’s potential and seizing the moment. I know from speaking with firms of all sizes that they have an ambitious investment mindset and are anxious to implement growth plans. “But while intentions have thawed, we’re coming up to a cliff edge in 2023.” The CBI cited the Treasury’s plans to remove the “super deduction”, a £25bn tax break allowing them to claim 25p in relief for every £1 they spend on plant and machinery, as well as a planned rise in corporation tax, from 19% to 25%. “As a result, business investment will continue to lag [behind] other advanced economies,” the employers’ lobby group said. Jon Holt, the chief executive of KMPG UK, echoed the concerns. “Long-term economic growth remains reliant on the UK’s ability to increase productivity, decrease uncertainty and give businesses the confidence they need to invest,” he said. “We need to create the conditions to accelerate companies’ investment in technology and power the UK’s recovery.” The CBI also said the recovery in exports is likely to be lacklustre following what it described as disappointing growth over this year so far. Household spending would remain the key driver of the economy, the employers’ organisation said, generating 90% of growth in 2022, and two-thirds of gross domestic product in 2023. Consumer spending would be supported by households running down excess savings accumulated during the pandemic. It predicted unemployment would rise only slightly as a result of the winding-up of the government’s furlough scheme and the jobless rate would return to its pre-crisis level of 3.8% by the end of 2023. Rain Newton-Smith, the CBI chief economist, said: “We expect a pretty firm economic recovery ahead, though understandably the emergence of Omicron poses another downside risk to our forecast. Ultimately this underscores the need for equitable distribution of vaccines across the world – supporting lives, livelihoods and freeing our international travel sector, boosting trade too.” The CBI expects current supply-side constraints to ease by the middle of next year, with inflation peaking at just over 5% in April. Despite the risks from inflation, KPMG said uncertainty about Omicron meant that the Bank of England was unlikely to raise interest rates this December. However, it said rates are likely to rise to 1-1.25% by the end of 2023 to prevent a ratcheting up of wage growth as the recovery gathers renewed momentum.Schools and parents should do more to support students who are being sexually harassed through platforms such as Snapchat and Instagram, while the tech companies need to clamp down on non-consensual sexual images being sent to young people, according to new research released on Monday. The study by academics at University College London and the University of Kent found that just over 50% of teenagers who had been sent unsolicited sexually explicit images via social media apps say they have not reported the offences to either their parents, authorities or the companies involved. The report highlights the technological functions and lack of accountability and identity-checking on platforms such as Instagram, and criticises app reporting functions as “useless,” meaning that young people are more likely to just block offenders rather than report the abuse. Children’s safety groups have warned that the UK data watchdog must introduce age verification for commercial pornography sites or face a high court challenge over any failure to act. Asked why they didn’t report incidents involving sexual images, about a third of the young people surveyed by the researchers answered: “I don’t think reporting works.” Just 17% of those who received unwanted sexual content reported it to the platforms involved. Prof Jessica Ringrose of the UCL Institute of Education, one of the report’s authors, said: “Young people in the UK are facing a crisis of online sexual violence. Despite these young people, in particular girls, saying they felt disgusted, embarrassed and confused about the sending and receiving of non-consensual images, they rarely want to talk about their online experiences for fear of victim-blaming and worry that reporting will make matters worse. “We hope this report allows all of us to better identify when and how image-sharing becomes digital sexual harassment and abuse and spread the message that, although the non-consensual sending and sharing of sexual images may be common and feel normal, it is extremely harmful.” The study surveyed 480 young people aged 12 to 18 from across the UK, including 144 who participated in focus groups. Over half of those who had received unwanted sexual content or had their image shared without their consent reported doing nothing. Just 25% told a friend, but only 5% told their parents and 2% told their schools. Of the 88 girls who took part in the focus groups, three-quarters said they had received images of male genitals. They said that close to half of the harassment had come from what appeared to be adult men, including adults who had created false identities. They also received online harassment and abuse from boys in their age range and peer groups. A spokesperson for Meta, the holding company formerly known as Facebook which operates Instagram, said the safety of young people using its apps was its “top priority”. “If anyone is sent an unsolicited explicit image, we strongly encourage them to report it to us and the police,” the spokesperson said. A spokesperson for Snapchat said: “There will always be people who try to evade our systems, but we provide easy in-app reporting tools and have teams dedicated to building more features, including new parental tools, to keep our community safe.”Gambian opposition candidates have rejected the results of Saturday’s historic vote in the West African nation that suggest the incumbent president, Adama Barrow, had easily won re-election. According to official results announced by the electoral commission, Barrow received about 53% of Saturday’s vote, far outstripping his nearest rival, political veteran Ousainou Darboe, who won about 28%. In 2016 Barrow unseated the former president Yahya Jammeh, who is accused of human rights abuses and corruption. Saturday’s vote is being seen as a key test of stability as it was the first since Jammeh was forced into exile after refusing to concede defeat, and was the first vote in more than 27 years without him as a candidate. The commission reported the final results on Sunday: Barrow’s main opponent, the United Democratic party (UDP) leader, Darboe, won 238, 253 votes, compared with the incumbent’s 457,519. The total number of votes cast came in at 859,567 – fewer than the more than 962,000 who had registered to vote. Once cowed by Jammeh’s omnipresent secret police, crowds of people hit the streets of Banjul on Sunday night to celebrate, or drove around in their cars, honking horns. Hundreds gathered in a park opposite the presidential palace to listen to Barrow speak. “Democracy has taken its course,” Barrow told the cheering crowd after the results were announced. “I have been the lucky person to be chosen by you. I’ll use all the resources to make Gambia a better place for all.” Lamela Jallow, a National People’s party (NPP) supporter who works at a fish market, said he voted for Barrow because the incumbent had built roads and infrastructure projects in rural areas during his first term. “I’m feeling excited and happy,” the 19-year-old said. Darboe and two other opposition candidates – Mama Kandeh of the Gambia Democratic Congress, and the independent candidate Essa Faal – told reporters on Sunday evening they were concerned with the “inordinate delay” in the announcement of final results. They also said their agents and representatives had raised “a number of issues” at polling stations and had not endorsed some results. Large crowds gathered outside Darboe’s home in Banjul’s Pipeline neighbourhood on Sunday night. “Barrow is a thief,” said 19-year-old Fatou Matta Fofana. “I like UDP because they can do the job.” Addressing the crowd, Darboe encouraged supporters to remain peaceful and promised to pursue legal options to challenge the results, before breaking into song along with his supporters. Almami Fanding Taal, a UDP spokesman, said the party was investigating the registered number of voters in areas including the Upper River region, where it was working with the chairman of the Basse area council. He said discrepancies were discovered in some areas “in terms of the registered number of voters and the high voter turnout”. Based on their findings, they would decide whether or not to go to the courts. Darboe, who was once Barrow’s mentor, ran against Jammeh in three previous elections but was arrested in 2016 and prevented from contesting. Barrow, who had not previously held office, stood in Darboe’s place and later appointed him to his cabinet, only to form a breakaway party in 2019. Also that year, Barrow reneged on a campaign promise to only serve as a short-term transitional leader for three years, leading to large-scale protests. In September, he was criticised for forming a political alliance with Jammeh’s former party, the Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation and Construction. More recently, Barrow has come under fire for failing to make public the final report of a truth, reconciliation and reparations commission investigating human rights abuses under Jammeh’s regime. Critics say that was a calculated move to save him from having to take action on the report’s recommendations, potentially alienating the Jammeh supporters he was courting ahead of the election. Seedy Njie, a deputy spokesperson for Barrow’s NPP, could not be reached for comment. Nana-Jo N’dow, the founder of an NGO campaigning against enforced disappearances and summary executions, whose own father was disappeared under Jammeh’s regime in 2013, said the alliance showed “where Barrow’s priorities lie”. She also said his refusal to step down early was an indication that he “was not going to deliver on everything he promised”. Jammeh himself rejected the alliance with Barrow’s party and instead threw his support behind a coalition led by opposition candidate Kandeh, who finished in third place, according to official figures. Jammeh had spoken by telephone at some of Kandeh’s rallies, dialling in from exile in Equatorial Guinea. Gambians voted by dropping marbles into coloured drums. Counting began shortly after polls closed at 5pm GMT on Saturday. Other candidates included Halifa Sallah of the People’s Democratic Organisation for Independence and Socialism, who was in fourth place, and Abdoulie Jammeh, the former director general of the Gambia Civil Aviation Authority, in sixth place. With ReutersIn mid-October, Ange Postecoglou was asked how it felt to have reignited the Scottish Premiership title race. His Celtic had just beaten Motherwell away – their second straight win on the road – and Rangers had dropped points at Ibrox, cutting the gap at the top from six points to four. That was round nine of 33. Three weeks earlier – in round seven – the media had already effectively awarded the trophy to Rangers following the Hoops’ home draw with Dundee United. So when a journalist at Fir Park posited that the table must now look more attractive, Postecoglou was sharp. “I thought the premiership race was over, mate, so I’m not looking at the table anymore,” he said. “We are just kind of doing our own thing and it’s of zero significance for us.” His truculence aside, Postecoglou taps into one of the most irrelevant but also satisfying phenomena in domestic football: the premature prediction. And it is playing out right now in his old stomping ground, the A-League Men. Sydney FC are on the slide, Western Sydney are a shoo-in for finals and Melbourne Victory, who were “back” by virtue of having not conceded a goal all season (two rounds), are no longer after a 3-0 defeat on Sunday to Perth Glory, who are now themselves “back”. It is true that this may all ultimately come to pass. Steve Corica’s Sky Blues dynasty might be shaking under the ageing legs of a dad’s army who finally rediscovered their attacking spark against Newcastle but still chucked a two-goal lead onto the street outside Jubilee Stadium (suspect VAR cameo aside). The Wanderers, currently sitting fourth after Friday’s 2-0 win over Wellington, could yet bounce around the table before settling for eighth as they did last season. Carl Robinson could be gone by Christmas, or he could experience “redemption”. The only way for Victory is up after last year’s unprecedented self-immolation and wooden spoon, but Tony Popovic is known for slow starts and gradual improvement. “It hasn’t been the best start, but it’s two games,” Corica said after last week’s surprise loss to Macarthur (who, incidentally, are top despite their seemingly inherent volatility). “We got a draw and a loss. It’s a long way from the end of the season yet.” Should we all take note and calm the farm? Or is this a bit too much fun? To have it all sorted in your head and then be grossly mistaken. To not have catered for injuries or refereeing calls or Daniel Sturridge’s sullen face in the stands watching a small-time journeyman do his job for him. No one expected Antonee Burke-Gilroy – with his expected goals probability of 0.02 – to score a belter off his weaker left foot and then add an assist. Likewise, we did not anticipate the indefatigable Melbourne City would be swallowed up by the mid-table. Never mind that that is exactly where Patrick Kisnorbo’s side were at this time last year before sinking to ninth and then charging back to claim the premiership-championship double. And how about those Newcastle Jets? They’re down in 10th but we do rate Arthur Papas and also that Valentino Yuel is quite good isn’t he (the league’s top-scorer – after three rounds)? Does this sound skittish yet? The fact is that early season predictions are about as dependable as toilet paper on a supermarket shelf. After the 2015-16 Premier League season, won by 5,000-1 rank outsiders Leicester, Arsène Wenger foreshadowed an end to the days of the traditional top four. “Let’s go to the start of this season,” said the former Arsenal manager, “the predictions were, one: Chelsea will win it again. Two: Man City. In the end, any pundit who would have predicted Leicester would have lost their job. But what happened with Leicester can happen again because every English team can buy players.” Chelsea won the following season, and City three of the four after that. The top four has changed a bit – Liverpool have risen inexorably, Arsenal have fallen ignominiously and Manchester United have flipped and flopped. Does this make his prediction sound or not? The A-League, with its salary cap and lack of promotion and relegation, is a fundamentally incomparable beast. Still, it was that same 2015-16 season that Guillermo Amor’s Adelaide United were bottom on three points and without a single win. By November the punters were calling for his head. By the end of April United had won 13 of their next 18 games to finish top and then win the grand final. What does this all mean? Should we pretend football is like the Melbourne Cup and blindly back the horse with the cool name? Or should we pore over the form guide and claim we have all the answers? Really none of us do – not even the coaches – but that is half the pleasure.Thanks for following along – this blog is now closed. You can catch up with the latest coronavirus coverage here. Or follow all the latest Covid news on our new blog here. Failure to vaccinate the world against coronavirus created the perfect breeding ground for the emergence of the Omicron variant and should serve as a wake-up call to wealthy nations, campaigners have said. Scientists and global health experts have called for action since the summer to tackle the crisis of vaccine inequality between rich and poor countries. The longer large parts of the world remained unvaccinated, they said, the more likely the virus was to mutate significantly. The emergence of such a variant threatens to derail efforts to end the pandemic. The World Health Organization says the heavily mutated Omicron variant is likely to spread internationally and poses a very high risk of infection surges that may have severe consequences in some places. “Omicron is with us because we have failed to vaccinate the world,” said Winnie Byanyima, executive director of UNAids and co-chair of the People’s Vaccine Alliance, a campaign group. “This should be a wake-up call. Read the full story from our reporter Andrew Gregory here. US health officials said early indications suggest the Omicron variant may be less dangerous than Delta, which continues to drive a surge of hospitalisations. US president Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, told CNN that scientists need more information before drawing conclusions about Omicron’s severity. Reports from South Africa, where it emerged and is becoming the dominant strain, suggest that hospitalisation rates have not increased alarmingly. Fauci said: “Thus far, it does not look like there’s a great degree of severity to it. But we have really got to be careful before we make any determinations that it is less severe or it really doesn’t cause any severe illness, comparable to Delta.” A Norwegian Cruise Line ship with at least 10 passengers and crew members infected with Covid-19 docked on Sunday in New Orleans, where health officials said they were trying to disembark people without worsening the spread of the coronavirus illness, the Associated Press reports. Local news outlets in New Orleans confirmed the Norwegian Breakaway had arrived in the city. The ship departed New Orleans on 28 November. The Louisiana Department of Health said in a late Saturday news release that over the past week, the ship made stops in Belize, Honduras and Mexico. Norwegian Cruise Line issued a statement that confirmed a “handful of Covid-19 cases among guests and crew.” The company said all of the identified cases involved people without symptoms of the illness. “We are testing all individuals on Norwegian Breakaway prior to disembarkation, as well as providing post-exposure and quarantine public health guidance by the (U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention),” the company’s statement said. “Any guests who have tested positive for Covid-19 will travel by personal vehicle to their personal residence or self-isolate in accommodations provided by the company.” Hello I’m Samantha Lock reporting from Sydney, Australia, as we begin our new week. As usual, let’s start off with some Covid numbers out of Australia. The state of NSW has recorded 208 new Covid-19 cases overnight and no deaths. Victoria’s daily case numbers are once again above 1,000, with 1,073 new infections recorded in the last reporting period. Sadly, six people infected with the virus have died. Here’s a rundown of Sunday’s international developments with Covid and Omicron. Protests against Covid restictions in Brussels, Belgium bubbled over into violent clashes between demonstrators and police for the second time in two weeks. Police fired tear gas and water cannon while protestors threw cobblestones. Denmark reported a “concerning” jump to 183 total Omicron strain cases. The country has a highly developed sequencing regime but the surge is still worrying for its speed. The UK reported a total 246 Omicron cases, alongside 43,992 infections and 54 deaths, as ministers were told by one government scientific advisor it’s already too late to suppress Omicron with restrictions. States in India updated Covid death statistics, inflating the daily death tally to its highest rate since 21 July. Bihar state added 2,426 unrecorded deaths and Kerala added 263 deaths. The country confirmed a total 12 Omicron cases. The first Omicron case was detected in Tunisia. The World Health Organization continues to reject travel bans against southern African countries, with Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus tweeting it is “disappointing” and “dismaying” to see bans on flights. The Omicron variant is now present in at least 15 US states, CDC director Rochelle Walensky said on Sunday. Italy reported 15,021 new Covid cases, 16% up from 12,927 on the same day last week. Poland detected 22,389 positive Covid infections in the past 24 hours, rising 9% on the 20,574 new cases on Sunday last week. The country recorded its worst death tally, at 570, since April on Wednesday. Russia confirmed October was its deadliest month in decades after spiking cases. The wave has since reduced but remains high, with a further 1,206 people dying from Covid-related causes on Sunday alongside another 32,602 infections. France recorded 42,252 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said, a percentage change of 188% from the 14,646 cases recorded on Sunday three weeks ago. Ministers continue to see vaccination, not lockdowns, as the route out the current wave. Germany will introduce mandatory Covid vaccines for healthcare workers by 16 March, according to draft legislation seen by Reuters, as the new government led by incoming chancellor Olaf Scholz seeks to suppress Germany’s surging cases with jabs, not lockdowns. The UK’s justice secretary Dominic Raab stoked the fire of the 2020 Christmas party row, saying a “formal party” would have been “wrong” and broken the rules at the time, piling pressure on prime minister Boris Johnson. This is me, Jem Bartholomew in London, signing off from today’s international Covid blog and handing over to my colleague Samantha Lock in Australia. At least 300,000 housebound people in the UK unable to travel for vaccination, many of them clinically vulnerable to Covid, are yet to receive their boosters, the Telegraph reports. That means nearly two-thirds of housebound people are yet to get the booster shot, after GPs opted out of home visits citing not enough time or staff. Ministers were accused of ignoring the most vulnerable. Health secretary Sajid Javid said GPs would be paid a £30 incentive and be freed from over-75s health checks to speed up the rollout. The Telegraph has further details: Deborah Hughes, 61, from Rochester in Kent, has been trying to secure a booster vaccine for her 90-year-old mother, Mel, since the end of October. “At the end of October, Mum became eligible for her booster jab,” she said. “Due to her housebound status, I had to ignore the text links to book a slot and contacted the surgery for guidance. I was told it was nothing to do with them and to ring the community nurses, who also told me that they hadn’t been commissioned for the programme. “That left me with no option other than to contact Mum’s MP, who has taken up her case. Recently, it was said the time to gain immunity by Christmas was running out. If this is the case, how many elderly and vulnerable will be infected as a result of medical commissioners’ disregard and incompetence? Serious questions need to be asked regarding this failure.” Organisers of the World Petroleum Congress in US-oil powerhouse state Texas were left scrambling to fill gaps in the agenda on Sunday, after a series of high profile speakers and attendees pulled out amid the Omicron variant’s spread. Chief executives at BP, Sonatrach and Qatar Energy withdrew from the conference, as did the energy ministers of eight countries including Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Kazakhstan and Turkey. The four-day event brings the oil industry’s main players together every three years and was rescheduled from its cancellation in 2020. A spokesperson told Reuters replacement speakers are being sought. Disparities in the vaccine rollout see some children in England three times more likely to be vaccinated than others, House of Commons library figures revealed. London lags behind, with just under 20% of 12- to 15-year-olds in the borough of Hackney having received at least one shot. South-east England is the only region where over half of this cohort have been inoculated. Labour has attacked Boris Johnson’s administration over the figures as the Omicron variant circulates, with Bridget Phillipson, Labour’s new shadow education secretary, saying “the government’s lacklustre approach is putting children’s education at risk of further disruption.” “The Conservatives have been complacent and children are paying the price. The government must get a grip and stop neglecting children’s education,” Phillipson said. “Labour has been urging ministers to use every measure from pop-up and walk-in clinics to bringing back volunteers and retired clinicians to ramp-up vaccine rollout. This must come alongside finally introducing the ventilation in schools that Sage recommended well over a year ago.” My colleague Richard Adams, the Guardian’s education editor, has the full story here. In the UK, Labour’s leader of the opposition Keir Starmer called for a “renewed national effort” to deliver Covid vaccine booster shots and told prime minister Boris Johnson to “get a grip” to reignite maximum vaccination speed. Labour warned on Sunday the programme had slowed, as an average of 435,542 jabs a day are being administered compared with a peak of 602,265 a day in March. “With the number of vaccinations down a quarter from the peak earlier this year, we simply cannot afford for the government to take its eye off the ball in speeding up the rollout of the booster programme,” Starmer said. “The prime minister needs to break the habit of his tenure by stepping up and getting a grip.” Stamer urged the unvaccinated to get inoculated and said it was “frustrating and worrying” medical workers are reporting hospital beds filling up with people without the shot. About 11% of people in the UK over 12 have not yet been vaccinated, according to government data. Almost 65% of people over 12 have not yet had third or booster shots. Johnson says all adults will be offered a booster by the end of January. Interesting New York Times report here, about what might be “patient zero” of the Omicron variant in the US – a man who tested positive on 23 November. The variant was only later reported to the World Health Organization by South Africa on 24 November. But 30-year-old health care analyst Peter McGinn from Minneapolis already had it, sequencing released on 2 December showed. It’s impossible to know how McGinn picked it up. But he did attend the 53,000-strong Anime NYC convention last month. What we do know is that community transmission was taking place before the highly mutated strain even had its name. The variant, throught to be highly infectious, has outpaced public health officials and is now present in at least 15 US states. Germany’s new government wants to make Covid vaccination mandatory for workers of hospitals, nursing homes and other medical staff by 16 March, according to draft legislation seen by Reuters. As German infections have climbed, hesitations about losing medical staff have subsided and support for vaccine mandates has grown. New cases in Germany have more than quadrupled in seven weeks, from 8,420 on Saturday 16 October to 43,500 on Saturday 4 December. The new coalition – Social Democrats, Greens and Free Democrats, with Olaf Scholz becoming chancellor – will take office on Wednesday and introduce the legislation to parliament in the coming week. Scholz, who takes over from Angela Merkel after her 16 years as chancellor, has so far ruled out lockdowns to suppress the new wave and looks set to bank on vaccination. The legislation would also grant permission for dentists, vets and pharmacists to administer vaccines. Germany seeks to vaccinate or offer boosters to 30 million people by Christmas. Brazil’s health ministry said a further 4,844 Covid infections were detected on Sunday, taking the seven-day average to 8,884 new cases a day. Another 66 people did from Covid-related causes, down from 221 on Friday. (Reported figures are lower at weekends.) That means the seven-day average for daily deaths is 194 people a day. Brazil has the second-highest death toll in the world behind the US. Over 615,000 people have died from the virus. A congressional panel recommended president Jair Bolsonaro be charged with “crimes against humanity” in October, in a major report based on a six-month inquiry into his handling of the pandemic. Bolsonaro has consistently opposed measures to suppress the virus. Lawmakers wrote he was responsible for the deaths of more than 300,000 Brazilians and urged authorities to imprison him. “Many of these deaths were preventable,” Renan Calheiros, centrist Brazilian senator and the report’s lead author, told the New York Times in October. “I am personally convinced that he is responsible for escalating the slaughter.” After experiencing cases that topped 70,000 and 80,000 a day in June, Brazil’s infections over the past few months have remained low relative to its previous waves. About 64% of the population is double-vaccinated, according to Our World In Data. Interesting analysis piece from my colleague Jessica Elgot here. She writes that, coming up to the UK government’s 18 December deadline for outlining Christmas holiday guidance, changes to cabinet and public mood from last year make further restrictions less likely. One government advisor has warned prime minister Boris Johnson has “all the eggs in one basket.” And today Mark Woolhouse, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (Spi-M), said ministers have already left it too late to make a substantial difference to a potential wave of Omicron cases – measures now would be like “shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted,” he said. There is a difference in the personnel around the table making the call this year: Steve Barclay and Sajid Javid have replaced Michael Gove and Matt Hancock, who were the key voices for caution last December. Gove was a particular champion of vaccination certification and more sceptical of calls for returns to the office, while Hancock spoke forcefully about the pressures the NHS could experience. All of those contributions appear absent from the debate now. Johnson and Javid are firm believers that a pact was made with the public that the vaccine was the way out of the pandemic – so the government has directed its firepower into turbocharging the booster vaccine campaign. Javid will also direct the NHS to offer new antiviral treatment to the most vulnerable to take at home if they have a positive diagnosis, rather than wait to be admitted to hospital with the virus. One adviser for the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) described that tactic this week as “all the eggs in one basket”, with hopes pinned almost entirely on scientific intervention to halt the spread of the variant rather than human behaviour. Director-General of the World Health Organization Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus has reasserted that it is “disappointing” and “dismaying” that countries around the globe continue to block flights from southern African countries over the Omicron varant, which was first sequenced in South Africa last month, even with negative tests. The WHO has echoed comments from Cyril Ramaphosa, president of South Africa, opposing travel bans. Here’s the latest UK infections in context throughout the pandemic, largely above 40,000 a day in recent weeks – sometimes nudging over 50,000. But here’s a look at why ministers are less hawkish on lockdowns and restrictions than last year. The vaccine rollout has broken the link between infections and hospitalisations, reducing the risk the National Health Service will be overwhelmed. The Omicron variant however – with its more than 30 mutations to the spike protein suggesting increased transmissiveness – could alter that picture. We are still too early to confidently tell how Omicron’s severity differs from the Delta variant, and whether it will escape existing vaccines. The UK government has given the date of 18 December to decide final guidance over the Christmas period. In the meantime the prime minister Boris Johnson hopes, like in France, an acceleration of the vaccine booster drive can stave off potential lockdowns. France recorded 42,252 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said, a percentage change of 188% from the 14,646 cases recorded on Sunday three weeks ago. A further 29 people died from Covid-related illness, down from 127 on Friday. (Reported figures tend to be lower at weekends.) The seven-day average of deaths from the virus is 92 people a day. France has experienced a dramatic climb in new cases since early November. Saturday saw new cases jump by above 50,000. So far ministers have not opted for the return of lockdown to beat back infections, but Jean-Francois Delfraissy, who heads the scientific council advising the government, said on Thursday they could be “a tool” if the situation worsens drastically. Instead, health minister Olivier Veran said last week vaccine booster shots would open to all adults – not just over-65s, health workers and immunocompromised people – to counter the new wave of infections. Singapore detected 552 Covid infections on Sunday, taking the seven-day average to 971 cases a day. The city state confirmed another 13 people had died from Covid-related causes in the past 24 hours, compared with 11 the same day last week. The country’s virus death toll is now 759. After ending its zero Covid strategy of eliminating the virus in autumn, Singapore saw surging infections in September, with daily cases peaking in late October at above 4,000. Infections have since fallen to an average of about 1,000 a day. Five senior health officers in Jordan were sentenced to three years in prison on Sunday, for causing the deaths of ten Covid patients in March following an oxygen outage. A court found the director of a state hospital and four senior aides – in the city of Salt – were responsible for the deaths, according to state media, after they failed to act for nearly an hour after Covid ward oxygen ran out. The event sparked anti-government protests across the country and provoked the resignation of health minister Nathir Obeida. Prime minister Bisher al Khasawneh said his government bore full responsibility for the incident. Reuters has further details: Shortly after the deaths, King Abdullah visited the hospital and publicly scolded health officials in the corridor of the hospital, where police were deployed to hold back hundreds of angry relatives and protesters who were encircling the compound. The royal visit was intended to defuse tensions in a country where anger with the authorities has in the past triggered widespread civil unrest. Since the incident, the authorities have dismissed scores of officials in state hospitals in a campaign to curb mismanagement and perceived corruption. It has poured tens of millions of dollars to train and recruit health workers in goverment hospitals that face shortages of qualified staff. A man travelling from Turkey to Tunisia has tested positive for the Omicron strain, in Tunisia’s first case of the highly mutated variant. The man, from the Democratic Republic of Congo, arrived at Tunis International airport from Istanbul on Friday and tested positive for Covid, AP reports. The sample was confirmed as Omicron on Sunday by health authorities after screening at the Pasteur Institute for Public Health. The man’s brother is quarantining and has so far tested negative for Covid. Other travellers have also been instructed to quarantine. Tunisia restricted travel after the strain emerged, for instance requiring travellers aged over six from 1 December to submit a negative test result less than 48 hours before flying. Mandatory quarantine for the unvaccinated was extended from seven to ten days. Russia confirmed 32,602 new Covid infections on Sunday, largely flat on the 32,786 new cases reported on Sunday last week. Another 1,206 people died from Covid-related causes, the Moscow Times reported, compared to 1,190 deaths this time last week. Russia recorded its deadliest month in decades in October. Russia’s total excess deaths since the start of the pandemic are now over 810,000. Russia experienced soaring cases over autumn, regularly breaking its record case tally. Daily cases peaked above 40,000 in early November before sliding down, but recent numbers remain above 30,000 a day. Poland detected 22,389 positive Covid infections in the past 24 hours, local media Polskie Radio reported, rising 9% on the 20,574 new cases on Sunday last week. A further 45 people died from Covid-related causes, down from 504 on Saturday – as reported figures tend to be lower at weekends. On Wednesday Poland recorded 570 Covid deaths, the highest reported daily figure since April. Poland has seen surging cases since October. Mazowieckie province, home to the capital Warsaw, continues to be the engine driving cases with 3,469 on Sunday. The government imposed a flight ban on seven African countries after the emergence of the Omicron variant, and introduced mandates that public venues including hotels, churches and restaurants could only be half-full from 1-17 December. Protests in Brussels, Belgium against government restrictions to suppress Covid turned violent on Sunday, with police firing teargas and water cannon at demonstrators who threw cobblestones and fireworks. The “Liberty Walk Act 2” protest opposed restrictions imposed in October requiring a Covid pass for people to enter public venues like bars and restaraunts – as the government tries to put a lid on the country’s surging Covid cases. Violence also erupted two weeks ago in a similar protest that drew 35,000 people. Sunday’s numbers were closer to a few thousand, Reuters reported. Belgium’s seven-day average of new Covid cases was 17,976 a day on Saturday, with a seven-day average of 47 deaths a day. The number of Omicron strain cases in India rose to 12 on Sunday, after seven new cases of the mutated Covid variant were recorded in the state of Maharashtra and one more case in New Delhi. But scientists expect India’s potential Omicron wave to be less severe than that from Delta – which saw a devastating wave in March and April – after a wall of immunity was built as 70% of the population are believed to have been infected with previous variants. About 50% of India’s adult population are fully vaccinated, the federal health ministry said. Italy reported 15,021 new Covid cases on Sunday, 16% up from 12,927 on the same day last week. The health ministry said a further 43 Covid-related deaths were recorded, down from 103 on Wednesday. (Reported figures are often lower at weekends.) Italy announced new restrictions for unvaccinated people last week. People require a Green Pass – vaccination, proof of a negative test or recent recovery from the virus – to eat in restaraunts, visit gyms, museums, theatres and other public venues. The UK detected 43,992 positive Covid infections in the past 24 hours, up 21% from 36,507 cases on Sunday last week. A further 54 deaths were reported on Sunday, down from 171 recorded on Wednesday. (Reported figures are often lower at weekends.) The figures came after Northern Ireland announced on Sunday that, similar to travel advice announced for England on Saturday, anyone arriving into the country will need to take a pre-departure Covid test from 4am on Tuesday – including the double-vaccinated. This is Jem Bartholomew taking charge of the blog from here. Here’s a summary of the day’s events so far: The UK’s political leaders have already left it too late to make a substantial difference to a potential wave of Omicron cases, a government scientific adviser said. Professor Mark Woolhouse, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (Spi-M), said the variant is now spreading spreading pretty rapidly in the country and described measures being introduced by the government as “shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted”. The country’s deputy prime minister piled more pressure on Boris Johnson over claims No 10 hosted Christmas parties while forcing the rest of the country into lockdown a year ago. Dominic Raab admitted such parties would have been a breach of Covid restrictions if they occurred. The prime minister does not deny that they did. The UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid called on the public to get the booster vaccine before spending time with their loved ones at Christmas. Javid said it was “absolutely crucial” the public “top-up” their immunity before the holidays. I’m now handing over to my colleague Jem Bartholomew. There has been a “concerning” jump to 183 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant in Denmark, local health authorities said. Agence France-Presse (AFP) reports that the number represents a tripling of confirmed cases in 48 hours, from 18 confirmed and 42 suspected cases on Friday, according to data from the SSI public health institute. The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) had previously tallied just 182 cases across all of the European Union, plus Norway and Iceland, AFP reports. Denmark is one of Europe’s most advanced countries in sequencing of coronavirus variants. It often detects more cases more quickly than its neighbours, which does not necessarily indicate higher rates of infection. SSI chief said the increase in Omicron cases was nevertheless ‘concerning’, adding that ‘there are now chains of infection where the variant is found in people who have not travelled abroad or been in contact with travellers’. Also on Sunday, the ECDC said Omicron had been reported in 17 countries in its region. ‘The majority of confirmed cases have a history of travel to countries in Africa, with some having taken connecting flights at other locations between Africa and Europe,’ the ECDC said on its website before the Danish announcement. Nevertheless, ‘several EU/EEA countries (Belgium, Germany, Spain) detected cases without an epidemiological link to areas where community transmission of the Omicron variant is documented or presumed,’ it added. ‘This indicates that undetected community transmission could be ongoing in these countries.’ Here’s a little more on those comments from Walensky, who has told ABC News: We know we have several dozen cases and we’re following them closely. And we are every day hearing about more and more probable cases so that number is likely to rise. The minimum of 15 states with reported Omicron cases include: California, Colorado and Connecticut, as well as Hawaii, Maryland and Massachusetts. Also among their number are Minnesota, Missouri and Nebraska, as well as New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania. Te remainder, according to a Reuters tally, are Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. The news agency says Louisiana has also reported a probable case, while the person reported in New Jersey had also previously traveled to Georgia, which also reported the positive test. Anthony Fauci, the top US infectious disease official, has said he hopes the ban on travellers from southern African countries can be lifted in a “reasonable period of time” as more information is gathered on the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. Fauci said on CNN’s “State of the Union” program that US authorities are mindful of the hardship the travel ban is causing in those countries and are constantly re-evaluating the policy. The variant had been found in about 15 US states as of Saturday night but the Delta variant remains the majority cases nationwide, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s director Rochelle Walensky told ABC News. Staying in the UK, the former prime minister Tony Blair has blamed the continuation of the pandemic on a failure to coordinate vaccination campaigns on a global scale, rather than on a national one. He told BBC Radio 4: It’s always been very obvious that, if you don’t vaccinate the world, this is a virus that can mutate. If you’ve got large populations that are unvaccinated, it’s likely to mutate faster and further. The failure to organise mass vaccination globally has been a huge problem right throughout this crisis. There really have been three things obvious from the beginning: one we’re going to live with this virus, we’re not going to get rid of it; two vaccinations are the only way out of it and three that virus anywhere is virus everywhere. So I think, even at this stage, it’s possible to change course. But we need to have it organised and so now it’s not just going to be about the supply of vaccines. I think over the coming weeks and months, we’ll have a large supply of vaccine flowing even to Africa. But we will have to organise the distribution, the logistics and [it’s] absolutely vitally we’ve got to organise global genomic sequencing so that we know what’s happening in countries. The UK’s NHS will be in a “very, very difficult position” if the Omicron variant were to lead to a surge in hospital admissions in the UK, the president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine has warned. Dr Katherine Henderson said hospitals were already struggling to cope as they enter winter. It is pretty spectacularly bad now, it will get worse - and if the new variant becomes a thing in terms of numbers and translates into hospitals admissions we are going to be in a very, very difficult position. We will always still be there. We still want patients to come but we do have to help people to understand that really at the moment the service is so stretched that an extra push could be very very difficult. Hundreds of people have marched through central Brussels to protest tightened restrictions imposed by the Belgian government to counter the latest spike in cases. The Associated Press (AP) reports that marchers came to protest the measures that were announced on Friday – the third week in a row the government has tightened its rules as the latest surge in cases strains the country’s health services, depriving people with other life-threatening diseases like cancer of treatment. Shouting “freedom” and carrying banners that said: “United for our freedom, rights and our children,” people marched to the European Union headquarters. Some also carried signs critical of vaccines and against making the coronavirus shots mandatary, the AP said. On Friday, the Belgian prime minister Alexander De Croo announced that kindergartens and primary schools will close for the holiday season a week early, and that children must now wear masks from the age of six. Indoor events will only be allowed with a maximum of 200 people. The AP reports that, previously, the government closed nightclubs and ordered bars and restaurants to shut at 11pm for three weeks. Speculation had been rife that closing times would be brought forward to 8pm but the cabinet decided against it, for now. According to the latest coronavirus figures, the nation of 11 million people appears to have reached a plateau. On a weekly average, 17,862 new daily cases were reported, a rise of 6% over the previous week. Hospital admissions rose 4%. More than 3,700 people are in hospital with the virus, 821 of them in intensive care. More than 27,000 people have died since the outbreak began last year. The Children’s Commissioner for England, Dame Rachel de Souza, has urged the Prime Minister “not to close schools” following the emergence of the Omicron variant. Speaking about how lockdown had weakened the system of support for children, she said: “It’s also why I think we must not close schools again, we must not… I would urge him (Prime Minister) not to close schools.” She said: “They (children) want things back to normal, they took a huge hit for us. “We must not close schools again and my headteacher colleagues across the country are incredibly good at managing this situation, I watched them rush in to support the most vulnerable and I would definitely advise not to do this, if there is any other option.” Saudi Arabia has granted approval for people vaccinated with Russia’s Sputnik jab to enter the country in a move that will enable Muslims to take part in religious pilgrimages, Agence France-Presse (AFP) reports, citing the vaccine’s developers. It quotes a representative of the Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF), which financed the development of Sputnik V, as saying: “The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has granted approval for entry of individuals vaccinated with the Russian Sputnik V vaccine starting from January 1, 2022.” AFP reports: The decision, said the fund, ‘will enable Muslims from all over the world vaccinated with Sputnik V to participate in the Hajj and the Umrah pilgrimages to Islam’s holiest sites in the cities of Mecca and Medina’. Foreign tourists vaccinated with Sputnik will still be required to quarantine for 48 hours and take a PCR test. Saudi Arabia has joined more than 100 countries accepting visitors vaccinated with Sputnik, the RDIF said, adding that only 15 countries including the United States currently require travellers to be jabbed with vaccines other than Sputnik. The hajj – a must for able-bodied Muslims at least once in their lives – typically packs millions of pilgrims into congested religious sites and could be a major source of contagion during the pandemic. The outbreak has, for a second year, forced Saudi authorities to dramatically downsize the hajj, and just 60,000 fully vaccinated citizens and residents of the kingdom have taken part this year. The virus has killed more than five million people since emerging in China in December 2019. Russia registered Sputnik V in August 2020 ahead of large-scale clinical trials, prompting concern among experts over the fast-tracked process. But it was since declared safe and more than 90% effective in a report published by leading medical journal the Lancet. But the Russian vaccine has not so far been approved by the World Health Organization or by the medical authorities of the European Union and the United States. Senegal has recorded its first case of the Omicron variant in a tourist who attended a demonstration in the capital Dakar last month with about 300 people of varying nationalities, the testing lab IRESSEF has said. Reuters reports that the 58-year-old man was visiting from another West African country and tested positive when leaving Senegal on Friday. He is under quarantine and has no symptoms, the lab said. The lack of clear evidence led the statistician Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter to conclude that is “better to be safe than sorry” for the time-being. He told Sky News: It’s a very difficult situation because we haven’t got a lot of data yet at all – almost nothing from this country – about what the risks are. In South Africa, there’s data coming out showing pretty strong evidence that the increased risk of transmission and some evidence about people going to hospital. But it may actually be milder. But we haven’t got enough data yet to be able to say. It doesn’t look as if it’s really severe if you get it, I think that’s about all we can say at the moment. Asked if UK measures to combat the spread of Omicron have gone far enough, Spiegelhalter added: It’s best to be precautionary, when there’s so much we don’t know ... and, when we don’t know, it’s better to be safe than sorry. The Omicron variant is highly transmissible, but has a less than 1% chance of re-infection and typically results in “milder” disease, a South African researcher as said. Speaking to the BBC, the director of the Africa Health Research Institute Prof Willem Hanekom said: We know three things that we didn’t know last week: the first thing is that the virus is spreading extraordinarily fast in South Africa, the increase in cases is much steeper than it’s been in the past three waves so it seems that Omicron is able to spread very easily and virtually all the cases that we see in South Africa right now are Omicron. The second thing we have data on is re-infections ... after you’ve had Covid, you have about a 1% chance, or perhaps even less than a 1% chance, of getting re-infected and even getting disease again by this virus. The third little bit of data we have already relates to clinical cases and how severe the disease is. The only data suggests the disease may occur more in younger people and mostly younger people who are unvaccinated and, overall so far, the disease has appeared to be milder. But, again, I want to say we have to be cautious – these are very early days. Nevertheless, Woolhouse said vaccinations will still be “very, very good” against the variant. He told the BBC: Vaccinologists and immunologists think that this variant won’t evade the vaccines entirely. It’s important to remember that against the Delta variant, which is a different variant, the booster vaccinations have turned out to be very effective, well into the 90% protection against infection but also against disease and putting people in hospital. So, even if the vaccines were slightly less effective against Omicron, they would still be very very good. In the UK, government ministers have already left it too late to make a material difference to a potential wave of new cases linked to the Omicron variant, a scientific adviser has said, adding that it is now spreading spreading pretty rapidly in the country. Professor Mark Woolhouse, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (Spi-M), described measures being introduced by the government as “shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted”. He told the BBC: If Omicron is here in the UK, and it certainly is, if there’s community transmission in the UK, and it certainly looks that way, then it’s that community transmission that will drive a next wave. The cases that are being imported are important, we want to detect those and isolate any positive cases we find, as we would for any case anywhere. But I think it’s too late to make a material difference to the course of the Omicron wave if we’re going to have one. He added that, while the number of cases remains relatively small, “the important point is that they’re growing and they’re growing quite fast”. The Omicron variant is highly transmissible, it appears to be spreading very rapidly in South Africa and the early signs are that it’s spreading pretty rapidly in the UK too. If those trends continue then over the course of the coming weeks and months, Omicron could even come to replace Delta entirely right around the world. The Health Security Agency reported as of Friday over 100 confirmed cases of Omicron in the UK, right across the country but with concentrations likely in London and in Scotland. Raab has admitted it would have been a breach of Covid restrictions if a Christmas party was held in the UK’S No 10 Downing Street in the run up to last Christmas; a party the prime minister does not deny took place. That follows reports Boris Johnson’s staff held the gathering on 18 December last year, when London was under Tier 3 restrictions. Despite the prime minister’s deliberate and public refusal to deny those reports, Raab has described them as “unsubstantiated claims all on the basis of anonymous sources”. Nevertheless, the justice secretary admitted, if true, they would describe a breach of the rules the rest of the country was being expected to follow. He told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show: Until there is something substantiated, until it is more than anonymous sources, I think we are chasing shadows. If there is a breach of the rules there is a breach of the rules. But I don’t know the full facts because I wasn’t there. Of course, if there was a formal party held, of course that it something that is clearly contrary to the guidance. If anyone held a party that it is contrary to the rules, of course that is the wrong thing to do. If something unsubstantiated from anonymous sources actually materialised then of course it would be wrong. So far, a Downing Street spokesperson has refused to go further than a generic insistence that “all Covid rules have been followed”. They have repeatedly declined to describe how any Christmas party could have conformed to the rules prohibiting them that were in place at the time. McMahon warned that people in the UK will be left confused by that muddled official messaging, telling Sky News: After all that sacrifice that we’ve made, we want to look forward to this Christmas and the only way to do that is for the government to have a very clear plan for them to get on with the booster vaccination rollout and to make sure that, throughout the course of that, the messaging is really clear. Because the worst thing in the world is that the government say one thing but then do another. And people look at the actions of the government and they get a confused message. Raab has said he will not be holding a Christmas party at the UK’s Ministry of Justice, where he also serves as a minister, even though it would be permitted under the coronavirus rules in place in England. He said he would be having “appropriate drinks at a smaller scale” as he urged employers to show “common sense” when organising Christmas celebrations. He told Sky News: The rules are very clear. People can go in and have Christmas parties – of course employers will want to think common sense about how they do that. We won’t be having a Ministry of Justice-wide Christmas party this year. We will be having appropriate drinks at a smaller scale. The government wants people to be able to enjoy Christmas this year. People should feel free to go and enjoy those celebrations and every employer will think about the right way to do it and I’m the same as everybody else. In fact, government ministers have been scrambling to clarify the rules around socialising in the run-up to Christmas, with mixed messages emanating from Whitehall in recent days. The UK’s deputy prime minister Dominic Raab has defended the government’s decision to reintroduce pre-departure tests. He has told Sky News: I know that is a burden for the travel industry but we have made huge, huge strides in this country. We have got to take the measures targeted forensically to stop the new variant seeding in this country to create a bigger problem. We have taken a balanced approach but we are always alert to extra risk that takes us back not forward. The shadow environment secretary Jim McMahon accused ministers of being “very late in making the calls that are required to keep our borders safe”. He told Sky News: Well of course it was the Labour party who were calling for pre-testing to take place because we’re very concerned that the government consistently throughout the pandemic have been very late in making the calls that are required to keep our borders safe, very late in terms of trying to ... control the spread of that virus. And what we want to do is to make sure that we don’t jeopardise the vaccination rollout. The worst thing in the world after all the sacrifices that we’ve made is that a new variant comes in and completely takes the rug from under that programme. And so it’s very important the government get a grip, it’s very important the government takes swift action and frankly it shouldn’t be for the opposition to keep continually one step ahead of the government. The government needs to take control themselves. The opposition Labour party have also demanded a cap on the cost of PCR tests in the UK, saying it is “leaving many travellers forced to pay eye-watering sums to private providers”. The party said some providers listed on the official government website were charging as much as £399 ($528, €466), while a review by the Competition and Markets Authority found the industry was setting “extremely high mark-ups” that “could not be explained by costs”. And Labour pointed out France and Belgium already have such price caps. The shadow transport secretary Louise Haigh said: Many flying home for their first Christmas since the pandemic began will be hit with scandalous testing costs. Unscrupulous private providers are pocketing millions, and leaving many families forced to shell out huge sums. Ministers are sitting on their hands while people who want to do the right thing are paying the price for this broken market. The government must act ahead of the Christmas travel period, implement the recommendation of the regulator, and urgently consider bringing in a price cap to tackle the extortionate prices. The new measures for England, which come into force at 4am GMT on Tuesday, were announced late on Saturday by the UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid and were immediately followed by the Scottish and Welsh governments. It means passengers travelling to the UK will have to take either a PCR or a lateral flow test up to a maximum of 48 hours before they depart regardless of their vaccination status. Javid said: We have always said we would act swiftly if we need to if the changing data requires it. These are temporary measures we want to remove them as soon as we possibly can. But, before we learn more about Omicron, it is right that we have these measures in place. The shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper welcomed the U-turn after ministers previously resisted calls to reintroduce pre-departure tests, but said they should have moved sooner. We badly need them to learn the lessons on the importance of acting quickly on Covid border measures rather than each time having to be put under huge pressure to finally act. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said it had acted in part because said new analysis by the UK Health and Security Agency (HSA) suggested the window between infection and infectiousness may be shorter for the Omicron variant. It said this increased the efficacy of pre-departure testing, making it more likely it would to identify positive cases before travel. The government also said Nigeria was being added to the travel red list after 21 cases of the Omicron variant in England were linked to travel from the west African nation. From 4am GMT on Monday, only British and Irish nationals and residents travelling from Nigeria will be allowed into the country and must isolate in a government-managed quarantine hotel. Tim Alderslade, the chief executive of the industry body Airlines UK, said the rapidly changing measures meant planning was becoming impossible. It is premature to hit millions of passengers and industry before we see the full data. We don’t have the clinical evidence. These measures must be removed as quickly as possible in line with the speed of the booster programme. The Airport Operators Association chief executive Karen Dee said pre-departure tests were a major deterrent to travel. Most of the limited remaining demand following the reintroduction of self-isolation will now fall away, just as airports were hoping for a small uplift over the Christmas holiday. The UK’s travel industry has reacted with fury after it was announced all passengers arriving in the UK will have to take a pre-departure test amid fears about the spread of the Omicron variant. Ministers said it was intended to be a temporary measure following new data showing an increase in the number of cases of the new strain linked to foreign travel. The move, which will be introduced on Tuesday, was welcomed by Labour which has been pressing for the return of pre-departure tests since the variant was first identified in South Africa. But the party criticised the government for not acting sooner. It came as the latest figures from the UK Health Security Agency (HSA) showed that, as of Saturday, a further 26 cases of the Omicron variant had been reported across the UK – taking the total so far to 160. The travel sector said the return of pre-departure tests was another “hammer blow” for an industry which was just beginning to pick up again after the devastation wrought by the pandemic. Clive Wratten, the chief executive of the Business Travel Association, said it directly contradicted assurances given by the transport secretary Grant Shapps and he called on the government to step in and support the sector. The introduction of pre-departure testing with little warning is a hammer blow to the business travel industry. Public safety is a priority but businesses will fail, travellers will be stranded and livelihoods devastated by the lack of coherent plans from government. The efficacy of vaccines against the new Omicron variant, which is spreading in Australia, remains unknown. The most populous state, New South Wales, reported two more cases on Sunday, bringing the total to 15, and the Australian Capital Territory confirmed its second. Parliament House was closed over the weekend to the public until further notice after a staffer to a member of parliament tested positive following the legislature’s final sitting week of the year on Friday. The variant of that infection case has not been disclosed, but health authorities said the staff was fully vaccinated. While nationwide vaccinations are voluntary, states and territories have mandated shots for many occupations, and some require full vaccination to access most hospitality services and non-essential retail. Australia’s overall childhood immunisation coverage is also one of the highest in the world, with 95% of five-year-olds inoculated with vaccines recommended for their age, health data show. The Pfizer vaccine for those children still needs the approval of the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation. Once approved, it will be available to about 2.3 million children aged from five to 11 years. Despite battling many outbreaks this year, leading to months of lockdown in Sydney and Melbourne - Australia’s largest cities - the country has had only about 834 confirmed cases and 7.9 deaths per 100,000 people, according to the World Health Organisation; a fraction of the toll in many other developed nations. Australia has had just under 217,000 cases in total and 2,042 deaths. Australia’s medicine regulator has provisionally approved the Pfizer vaccine for children between the ages of five and 11 years, with the health minister saying the rollout could begin from 10 January. The Therapeutics Goods Administration “have made a careful, thorough assessment, determined that it is safe and effective and that it is in the interests of children and Australians for children 5 to 11 to be vaccinated,” said Greg Hunt. After initial delays with its general inoculation programme, Australia has swiftly become one of the world’s most-vaccinated countries, with nearly 88% of Australians over the age of 16 having received two doses. The high vaccination rate has helped slow the spread of the virus and promote a speedy economic recovery, with the government planning to raise its 2022 growth forecast within weeks, Reuters reports. Oxfam Scotland welcomed Blackford’s letter. Its boss Jamie Livingstone said: It’s hugely significant that the SNP’s Westminster leader has answered our call by adding his voice to the growing chorus of those who are demanding urgent action to stop pharmaceutical companies from artificially rationing global vaccine supply by holding lifesaving vaccine recipes and technologies hostage. Vaccine inequality is both morally wrong and places people across Scotland at additional risk from the emergence of dangerous new variants, like Omicron, with epidemiologists warning all along that no one is safe until we all are. The UK government is looking more and more isolated as it continues to stubbornly stand on the wrong side of history by choosing to put protecting patents and big-pharma’s profits above saving people’s lives. The prime minister must now act. A failure to do so would be short-sighted, self-defeating and shameful. A No 10 spokesperson has said: The prime minister has been clear that no one is safe until we are all safe. The UK has been a world leader in ensuring developing countries can access vaccines, through our early support to the Covax scheme and commitment to donate surplus vaccines. We are on track to meet our goal of donating 30m doses by the end of this year, and more next year. We have donated 23m doses already, of which 18.5m have gone to Covax to distribute to developing countries. The UK is engaging constructively in the Trips waiver debate at the World Trade Organisation and we continue to be open to all ideas that have a positive impact on vaccine production and distribution. The UK’s prime minister Boris Johnson is being challenged to “do the right thing” and help ensure the world’s poorest nations can produce vaccines. The SNP’s Westminster leader Ian Blackford demanded the UK prime minister “stop blocking” the vaccine intellectual property waiver – even if only on a temporary basis – so that developing nations can manufacture vaccines themselves. He raised the issue in a letter to the Conservative leader, stressing that there needs to be a “truly effective global vaccine strategy” if coronavirus is to be defeated. While the UK is rolling out booster vaccines to the population, the proportion of those in the developing world who have been jabbed is much lower. At the end of November, it was reported some 54.2% of the global population had had at least one dose of a vaccine. But, in low-income countries, this falls to just 5.8%. Blackford said: We will not defeat this virus if developing nations are left to rely on vaccine donations alone – especially considering the UK has only donated six million out of a pledged 100 million to the Covax initiative. All countries must have the tools to allow them to produce Covid vaccines on home soil and ramp up production if we are to have a truly effective global vaccine strategy. That means ensuring they have access to the vaccine patents. So I am urging Boris Johnson to do the right thing and stop blocking the vaccine intellectual property waiver – at least temporarily – to allow developing nations to manufacture the vaccines themselves. This is a matter of global leadership. And, with over 100 states – including the USA –supporting the proposal, it is clear the UK is becoming increasingly isolated in blocking the waiver to support access to vaccines around the world. Indeed, it is the least the UK government can do after it brutally slashed aid and hindered humanitarian projects around the world. The emergence of the new Omicron variant has shown us that, until we achieve vaccine equality, new variants could continue to appear. Therefore, it is in everybody’s interests that we share vaccine patents – it will be an essential step in beating Covid-19. The UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid has called on the public to get the booster vaccine before spending time with their loved ones at Christmas. Javid said it was “absolutely crucial” the public “top-up” their immunity before the holidays. A total of 19.8 million people had received their third jab by 4 December, while more than 51 million have had their first dose and almost 46.5 million their second. The Department of Health and Social Care estimates that 20 million will have had the booster by 5 December. Javid has said: Christmas is around the corner and it’s absolutely crucial that everybody who is eligible gets their booster jab to top-up their immunity before spending time with loved ones. While our brilliant scientists learn more about the new Omicron variant, we need to do everything we can to strengthen our defences and vaccines are the best way to do that. This is a national mission and we all have a role to play - so roll up your sleeves and get protected as soon as you can. At the same time, India has reported a heavy single-day death toll; based in part on revisions to earlier figures. The eastern state of Bihar added 2,426 unrecorded deaths, while the southern state of Kerala added 263 deaths to their tallies on Sunday, a federal health ministry spokesperson has told the Reuters news agency. The revised figures took single-day deaths to 2,796, the highest since 21 July, according to a Reuters tally. A devastating second wave in March and April this year saw thousands of deaths and millions affected. Indian states have continued to add unreported deaths in recent months; lending weight to some medical experts’ opinions that such deaths are much higher than the reported number of 473,326. The practise also means the latest figures may not necessarily be a reflection of the actual daily death toll.On Sunday, Australian broadcaster and ardent gardener Peter Cundall died aged 94. Best known for his 18 years as host of the ABC program Gardening Australia from 1990 until 2008, Cundall’s passion for plants stretched back to his childhood vegetable patch in Manchester. After immigrating to Australia he spent close to five decades fielding gardening questions on talkback radio, from 1967 until 2018; as well as writing extensively on gardening. A passionate environmentalist, Cundall spent time as the chairman of the Tasmania Wilderness Society and fought against the construction of the Bell Bay pulp mill in his home state of Tasmania. An early convert to organic gardening, he helped establish the Organic Gardening and Farming Society of Tasmania in the 1970s. From his love of blood and bone to his sign-off “that’s your bloomin’ lot”, Cundall’s earthy approach earned him a special place in the heart of Australian gardeners. We want to hear your memories and favourite moments from his near five-decade career. Did his suggestions help resurrect your rose bush? Did he teach you the value of mulch? Or was it his work as an activist that most resonated? Share your fondest memories and favourite gardening tips from Peter Cundall in the comments.Scott Morrison and senior Coalition ministers have doubled down on appeals for the former New South Wales premier, Gladys Berejiklian, to run for the federal seat of Warringah. On Monday, Morrison told reporters in Sydney that Berejiklian would be “very welcome” in his team and would be a “great” candidate for the independent-held seat, comments backed earlier by the finance minister, Simon Birmingham, and the environment minister, Sussan Ley. Berejiklian faced a grilling at the NSW Independent Commission Against Corruption in November over whether she failed to report “a reasonable suspicion of corruption” by her secret boyfriend, the former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. Nominations for the Liberal candidacy in Warringah have been extended to 14 January, a timeline that will allow Berejiklian to consider any recommendations for findings made in submissions by counsel assisting Icac by 20 December. The submissions will not be public. Despite the ongoing Icac controversy, Berejiklian would walk into the Liberal nomination if she decided to put her hand up. Morrison is particularly keen to recruit Berejiklian as the best possible chance to recapture blue-ribbon Warringah from independent MP Zali Steggall at the 2022 election in a bid to retain majority government. Berejiklian’s position is understood to have shifted from a hard no to a maybe. A senior federal Liberal sourcesaid that Berejiklian’s appeal was crossfactional and she had “150% support” across the party, which is “keen to keep the door ajar” for her. “I don’t think the issue is linked to Icac because it won’t have reported by then which is part of the problem [with Icac],” the Liberal said. If Berejiklian decides not to run the next best contender is understood to be Jane Buncle, a Sydney barrister and Manly resident. After announcing a recycling advertising initiative in Wentworth, Morrison told reporters the way Berejiklian had been treated was “shameful” and described her running in Warringah as a “great opportunity, if Gladys wishes to run”. “If she wished to join our team, she would be very welcome. I have no doubt that whatever Gladys sets her mind to, she will be a great success.” Asked about the fact Berejiklian is being investigated for whether she turned a blind eye to suspected corruption and breached her own ministerial standards, Morrison replied: “I don’t agree.” “There is no suggestion of criminal conduct by Gladys Berejiklian – none whatsoever,” he said. “We have seen … recordings of private conversations detailed intimate things that were paraded around in the media. What was that about? “Was that about shaming Gladys Berejiklian? I thought that was awful.” Recordings of phone calls between Berejiklian and Maguire were played at the NSW Icac hearing to test her assertion that she did not have a “reasonable suspicion” he was engaged in corrupt conduct, which would have required her to report the matter to Icac. Berejiklian says she has always acted with integrity and denies any claims she failed to report suspected corrupt behaviour by Maguire. “Gladys was put in a position of actually having to stand down and there was no findings of anything,” Morrison said, in advance of any possible findings by Icac. Berejiklian resigned voluntarily in September. “I don’t call that justice. What I saw was a pile on,” Morrison said. “[Berejiklian] is a person of great integrity.” Steggall told ABC TV it was “extraordinary and wrong” for Morrison and senior ministers to question the NSW Icac’s work and its motivation. “This is really important work that is being done on behalf of the public to hold government to account, to pull back the curtain and make sure there is no corruption that public funds are used for public good and ensuring integrity in government,” she said. Steggall said that “integrity and trust in government” was a key issue in Warringah and she was “quite confident” her electorate had “had enough of this idea that trust and truth don’t matter, that anything to win the day is OK”. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said he was “not going to comment on the outcomes” of Icac but the public hearings were “there for all to see”. “I think people should allow those processes to take their course,” he said, labelling the speculation about the Liberal candidacy “absurd” and an “obsession by the media”. Albanese said the people of Warringah had “rejected Tony Abbott” because of his policies and it “doesn’t matter who the candidate is” because voters had rejected Coalition policies such “climate denialism” and “the failure to have an anti-corruption commission at a national level”. The shadow climate change minister, Chris Bowen, said Morrison’s attacks on Icac in parliament in November were “disgusting” and “undermined every single inquiry, investigation and finding Icac has brought down”. “The Icac is not a smorgasbord, in which you can pick off the findings you like and reject the findings you don’t like,” Bowen told the National Press Club on Monday. “The Icac is a statutorily independent body and should not [be] undermined by the most senior politician in the country … when they don’t like the fact one of their own has been brought into question.” Bowen said a Labor premier under investigation would not get a “leave pass” from the media or opposition and warned Berejiklian “won’t get a leave pass from us” if she runs. Earlier, Birmingham told the ABC’s News Breakfast he would “love to see” Berejiklian run but it was “entirely her call”. Birmingham acknowledged “the issues she’s handling at present” with respect to Icac, but argued she had shown “exceptional leadership in public office” and “great integrity”. “I think it’s pretty sad when Icacs go out and destroy reputations, do so in pretty murky ways, looking into relationships and other things.” Ley told the ABC she would “love to see [Berejiklian] in the federal parliament because she’s an outstanding female representative”. “She has also been a model premier when it comes to New South Wales and the coronavirus,” Ley said.Like most Aucklanders, I can’t wait to get out of the city. After more than three months in lockdown, I’m keen for a break. Last summer, my partner and I went to Tauranga. We had so much fun that we’re planning to return – but this time, things will be different. As Aotearoa New Zealand shifts from the Covid-19 “alert level” system to the new “traffic light” system, hospitality venues have been given a choice. Under the “red” and “orange” settings, they can welcome customers inside, but only if they’re willing to check vaccine passes. If they don’t want to do that, their service has to be contactless. Most venues have welcomed the new vaccine pass – but unsurprisingly, some are resisting it. A small number have announced they will be adopting contactless procedures for all, until they can welcome everyone “equally”. I was especially disappointed to hear that one of my favourite Tauranga eateries is taking that stance. Last summer, their food was a highlight for us. It’s a shame, then, that we won’t be returning to eat there unless their response to the vaccine rules changes. The messaging these venues are using may sound community-focused – especially when they say things like they don’t want to “discriminate”, and they respect personal choices – but their stance reveals the opposite. Their refusal to support the vaccine pass is a harmful political statement that undermines efforts to keep people safe. It may appear that the vaccine pass grants special privileges to people who are vaccinated and punishes those who aren’t, but really, it is designed to protect us all. In fact, by helping to slow the spread of Covid-19, those who will benefit most from it are the unvaccinated, who are more likely to catch the virus and more likely to suffer serious complications when they do. The vaccine rules protect the most vulnerable people in our communities, including children (who cannot yet get vaccinated), the immunocompromised and those with medical conditions that prevent them from receiving the vaccine. If hospitality venues genuinely wish to serve their communities, one of the best things they can do is actively and vocally support the vaccine pass, because this will encourage more people to get vaccinated, helping us beat Covid-19. One of the common objections to the vaccine pass is that it is incompatible with the very notion of “hospitality” – after all, isn’t welcoming people what it means to be hospitable? Well, yes and no. As usual, te ao Māori (the Māori world) is instructive here. I think about the concept of “manaakitanga”. Manaakitanga isn’t just about welcoming people; it’s about caring for them, too. As hosts, we do our best to make sure our guests are well looked-after – physically, emotionally and spiritually. And like many Māori concepts, this one is grounded in reciprocity: being a good guest means respecting your hosts and fellow manuhiri. Manaakitanga requires that we work together in caring for one another. The vaccine pass is a tool that helps us to do this, whether we are hosting or guests. It is misleading to argue – as some critics have – that if hospitality venues use the vaccine pass then the unvaccinated will miss out. As far as I can tell, there is nothing in the rules to prevent venues from offering contactless, takeaway options for the unvaccinated, while still using the vaccine pass with people who wish to sit inside. As Kiwis, we like to look out for each other. One way we can do this is by supporting businesses that embrace the vaccine pass. Let’s tautoko (support) their efforts to promote public health, and make it clear that we think they’re doing the right thing. I can’t wait to get back to Tauranga. I plan to spend those few precious days drinking iced coffee, boogie boarding at the beach and climbing Mount Maunganui. I’ll also be on the lookout for new eateries – ones that are playing their part to slow the spread of Covid-19. Philip McKibbin is a writer from Aotearoa New Zealand of Pākehā (New Zealand European) and Māori (Ngāi Tahu) descentNew Zealand’s former opposition leader Judith Collins has been demoted from the National party’s frontbench and tumbled 18 places in its ranks, nearly two weeks after being ousted following her attempt to crush a rival. New leader Christopher Luxon announced the party’s caucus reshuffle on Monday. Collins, who copped the biggest demotion in the party, will take on a single portfolio – research, science and innovation – but will remain in the shadow cabinet. “Judith has a real passion for the portfolio that she’s been offered there in terms of research, science, innovation and technology. She cares very deeply about it, and she’s going to be absolutely brilliant,” Luxon said. Collins self-destructed after a sudden decision to strip one of her political rivals, Simon Bridges, of his portfolios over a historic complaint. Collins’s unilateral move blindsided many of the party’s MPs, and she was ousted the following day in a no-confidence motion. When asked whether a single portfolio would be enough to keep Collins busy, Luxon replied: “yes, absolutely.” Collins’ former deputy leader Dr Shane Reti took a small fall of three places to number five, but was the least affected member of the former team. He keeps health and picks up the Māori-Crown and Pacific peoples portfolio. Luxon, who is the latest in a string of National leaders, and has only been in parliament for a year, will be tasked with uniting a party long plagued by poor polling, minor scandals and political infighting. The reshuffle is his first major challenge towards this goal. “The lineup I’m announcing today is based on performance and it also best matches people to their strengths and their skill sets. I have deliberately selected a shadow cabinet of 20 members to match the government’s cabinet,” Luxon said. MPs outside the shadow cabinet will not be ranked, he said. “It makes no sense and it’s largely irrelevant, because performance in the portfolio matters much much more than any ranking … we’re doing things different because I’m not from a politics world. I’m coming from a world where we build things on performance, not on hierarchy.” Deputy leader Nicola Willis, ranked number two, will retain her housing portfolio and pick up social investment. Bridges – a former party leader who bowed out of last week’s leadership race to make way for Luxon – is ranked number three and takes on both finance and infrastructure. The major winners in the reshuffle are Covid-19 spokesperson Chris Bishop who has jumped up the ranks to number four and retains his portfolio while taking on shadow leader of the house, and Erica Stanford who jumped from 25th to seventh, keeping immigration and taking on education. “It is also the expectation of my team that they will oppose the spin heavy and PR driven government, but that they will also propose constructive plans to solve some of our most intractable problems,” Luxon said. Luxon will square-off against prime minister Jacinda Ardern on Tuesday in his first question time as leader, in what will be another major first test of his leadership.The New South Wales government has been accused of being “captured” by the coal industry after it overturned a planning commission decision to block a mine expansion that it found could cause irreversible damage to drinking water and release significant heat-trapping gas. The deputy premier, Paul Toole, and planning minister, Rob Stokes, declared on Saturday the Dendrobium mine expansion near Wollongong – proposed by BHP spin-off South32 – was “state significant infrastructure” due to its role providing coal for the Port Kembla steelworks. It reversed a planning commission decision in February to reject the proposal, which would have allowed the company to extract an extra 78m tonnes of coal from two areas near the Avon and Cordeaux dams. The dams supply water to metropolitan Sydney and the Macarthur, Illawarra and Wollondilly regions. The commission found South32 had failed to properly quantify the risk of long-term and potentially irreversible impacts, “particularly on the integrity of a vital drinking water source”. It also factored in the project’s greenhouse gas emissions – estimated across the life of the project to be more than 250m tonnes, roughly half Australia’s annual carbon pollution – and judged the project was not in the public interest. The state government did not mention the water supply or emissions in its statement about the mine expansion. Toole said Dendrobium was a critical source of coking coal for the Port Kembla steelworks and declaring it significant infrastructure would “provide thousands of workers with greater certainty on the future of their jobs”. He said the mine contributed $1.9bn to the state’s economy each year. The NSW government also confirmed it had ruled out future coal exploration in the Hawkins and Rumker areas in the state’s central west, a step flagged by Guardian Australia last month. South32 said it welcomed the government’s decision. A company spokesperson said it “marks an important step” and would allow a submission for an alternate mine plan to that rejected by the planning commission. “We continue to consider our options to determine the best path forward for Illawarra Metallurgical Coal, to continue to supply metallurgical coal for local steel production and support local jobs and investment,” it said. The Dendrobium declaration means South32 can submit an environmental impact statement for community feedback and assessment by the planning department. The department previously recommended the independent planning commission approve the project as its benefits would “significantly outweigh its residual costs, and that it is in the public interest”. It has been supported by Bluescope Steel, which claimed “green steel” – made using hydrogen and renewable energy – was decades away and it wanted to use an existing blend of coking coal until 2048. Steelmaking is one of the biggest emitters of greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. A Grattan Institute report last year found an Australian green steel industry could employ 25,000 people in regional areas largely reliant on coalmining. The independent MP Justin Field said the government’s decision risked making the NSW planning system a “farce” unless there was an independent economic assessment of the need for the project to support local steel manufacturing. He said the planning commission had found most of Bluescope’s coal needs came from other mines and the majority of Dendrobium coal over the next 20 years would be exported or transported elsewhere. “Aside from the well-understood climate impacts and risks to the drinking water catchment from the proposal, the [planning commission] in their February decision effectively rejected the assumptions by South32 that the expansion of the Dendrobium coalmine was needed to support Bluescope’s operations in the Illawarra,” Field said. “If the government is going to override the analysis of the [planning commission] they need to demonstrate the economic justification through a credible independent assessment. It is untenable for the NSW Department of Planning Industry and Environment to do that assessment because they previously backed the flawed claims by South32 that were rejected by the [commission].” Dan Gocher, director of climate and environment at shareholder activist organisation the Australasian Centre for Corporate Responsibility, said the Dendrobium decision “reeks of state capture”. He said South32 and the NSW Minerals Council had lobbied the government for months to overturn the commission’s decision. He said the proposal rejected by the planning commission could have drained up to 8bn litres of drinking water from the Illawarra-Sydney catchment a year, destroying fragile wetlands sitting above the site. “Despite these risks, the NSW government has simply rolled over for the coal industry,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Gocher said the International Energy Agency had found there should be no new fossil fuel projects if the world was to keep alive the possibility of limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal included in the Paris climate agreement and recent Glasgow climate pact. A report by the Australia Institute released during the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow last month said the country had more than 100 fossil fuel developments in the pipeline that could result in nearly 1.7bn tonnes of greenhouse gases a year – equivalent to about 5% of global industrial emissions – if all were to go ahead.When Alana Bell enrolled in a law degree, she didn’t know if she wanted to be a lawyer. “I wasn’t 100% sure, I just knew that I wanted to study something I enjoyed,” she says. “And with law, because the skills are so transferable, I thought as long as I enjoy it, [the degree] is never going to not help me in the future.” Bell graduated from Curtin University with a Bachelor of Laws in 2018. Sure enough, three years down the track, she hasn’t gone into practising law. Instead, Bell now works at PwC Australia as a senior consultant in its capital projects team, project managing the development of major infrastructure. It’s a path she was inspired to follow after studying property law in her second year and becoming fascinated by the topic. After finishing her bachelor degree, Bell undertook a Graduate Diploma in Property. Despite not going into legal practice, Bell has found her law degree to be useful. “In my profession, you’re managing consultants and reviewing contracts on a daily basis. So just having that basic understanding of how contracts work and what you need to look out for makes it a lot easier. “It creates a level of comfort in analysing that information. Whereas if you’re not familiar with law, it would be quite daunting. And there are numerous terms in a legal document that might be quite confusing if you haven’t encountered them before.” Bell’s experience echoes that of a number of law graduates. While a law degree opens the door to practising as a barrister or solicitor, they are far from the only career paths that graduates can follow. Many law graduates go into fields as diverse as politics, journalism, government and business, and find the skills they gained in their law degrees useful. That was certainly the experience of Kirrily Schwarz, who graduated with a double degree in arts and law in 2014. Schwarz won a Young Walkley award when she finished university, which led her to intern at Channel 9 and then go on to work at News Corp. Today, she is a freelance journalist and believes the skills she sharpened during her law degree have been a huge benefit to her. “When you’re studying law, you have to read a huge amount of information, take meaning from it and then apply it,” she says. “That ability to synthesise information and use it in a meaningful way is something that applies to so many industries. “For me, I’m lucky that as a journalist, it’s something I literally do every day when I’m researching articles. I’m looking at a variety of sources, taking in information and speaking to experts, and then I’m gleaning knowledge and applying it in articles that I write. So, it’s a very transferable skill set.” In a full circle moment, one of Schwarz’s biggest clients is the Law Society Journal, a legal industry magazine based in Sydney. Her background knowledge of law, along with her journalism experience, made her the perfect candidate. Today, Schwarz is grateful she made the decision to study law. “I loved both of my degrees,” she says. “I had green lights opening up in the journalism direction, which is why I went down that path, but I am really glad I studied [law] because the level of critical thinking that you get from a law degree is unlike anything I’ve ever experienced. And also, the ability to focus and apply self-discipline has put me in really good stead.” Scott Walker, another arts and law double degree graduate, agrees that a law degree can be an advantage in the workforce - in all fields. After graduation, Walker worked in government policy and communications before making the shift into startups and eventually starting his own consulting business. “Law gives you a lot of skills,” he says. “It tests your problem-solving and cognitive skills. It also helps you deal with large volumes of information, process and analyse it, decide what is relevant, and then make an argument or a case based on your analysis.” Bell found that the level of focus required to take on a law degree helped her develop prioritisation skills. She undertook an accelerated law degree at Curtin University, which moves to a trimester system after the first year and allows students to graduate in just three years. “That does prepare you for working life because it demands a level of commitment,” she says. “So, by the time you’re in the workforce, you’re used to organising and making sure everything gets done on time.” For Bell, a law degree was the right decision - even though, like many graduates, entering the practice wasn’t part of her game plan. Learn more about Law at Curtin University.Labor’s recently announced target to reduce carbon emissions to 43% below 2005 levels will no doubt dominate political and policy discussions leading into the federal election. The Liberal-Nationals coalition will say that would wreck the economy; the Greens will say it shows Labor doesn’t care about climate change. However, an obsession with the target is probably missing the main game. What brings down emissions are the policy instruments that drive changes in how our power grids, factories, farms and buildings are operated. What history shows is that, if we can get effective policies implemented that give clean energy businesses a window of opportunity to show what they can do, politicians usually come to find that reducing emissions wasn’t nearly as hard as what they originally thought. They then become willing to accept even more ambitious emission reduction efforts. From 2010 to 2014 we had a horribly acrimonious battle over carbon pricing and the renewable energy target. The major business lobby groups, such as the Business Council of Australia, the Minerals Council and the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association, ripped down much of the policy framework that had been assembled to reduce emissions. While the carbon price was abolished, we managed to retain the renewable energy target. The wind and solar industry subsequently proved all the doubters not just wrong, but left them embarrassed. This has helped change minds to the extent that much of the business community now accepts the need for more ambitious emission reduction efforts. In spite of tremendous progress in renewable energy and electric vehicles, policy remains pivotal to achieving emission reductions fast enough to contain global warming increases to less than 2C. A few weeks ago I laid out a five-step plan for where Australian climate policy needed to go. Step one involved placing a requirement on major emitting facilities to reduce emissions in line with what could be achieved by the best available technologies in a given industry. On this point Labor has gone one better. Labor has announced that it will steadily tighten emission limits that already apply to Australia’s major carbon emitters via a policy instituted by former environment minister Greg Hunt – the safeguard mechanism. This policy is effectively an emissions trading scheme lying dormant and could be revived to be an effective and efficient way to reduce emissions. The big question mark though is how emissions-intensive, trade-exposed industries will be treated, because Labor has left open an option for them to be at least partially exempted. If they face little to no kind of emission constraint or incentive, it leaves a huge gaping hole for a large proportion of Australia’s emissions. Unfortunately, in the other four policy steps I outlined, Labor appears to be living in either fear or hope. Battery technology and electric vehicles remain too expensive at present to achieve mass uptake. The technology is certainly advancing and costs are coming down. But this is largely because motor vehicle companies know this is their only option if they are to meet ever tightening emission standards in Europe and California. Labor has abandoned its prior commitment to join in the heavy lifting by matching emission standards in place overseas, although its plan to exempt electric vehicles from fringe benefits tax should encourage uptake. Also, as I explained in RenewEconomy, while Australia is doing well in the rollout of solar, without the rollout of battery technology and greater efforts to move electricity loads such as hot water into the middle of the day, it will stall. Those renting and unable to afford their own home have so far almost entirely missed out on the benefits of lower energy bills from solar and more energy-efficient appliances and homes. Unfortunately, landlords have mostly proven to be utterly uninterested in taking advantage of government incentives for solar, insulation, or efficient water heaters. Labor’s proposals for shared or “community” batteries and “solar banks” are tiny tokenistic drops in the ocean that will do little to accelerate battery rollout. Also, due to our network regulatory framework, they won’t actually save renters much money from solar either. Growth in renewable energy will also depend on new transmission infrastructure to transport power to where it is needed. Here Labor has its Rewiring the Nation $20bn loans program. Yet financial markets are falling over themselves to fund these types of monopoly infrastructure assets with regulated rates of return. The choke point here isn’t finance, it’s regulators. Regulators need to be given crystal-clear riding instructions that they need to completely decarbonise electricity pronto. While Labor’s commitment to tighten the safeguard mechanism should be praised, achieving its 2030 targets largely hinges on decarbonising electricity and motor vehicles where its policy cupboard looks a little bare. • Tristan Edis is the director of analysis and advisory at Green Energy MarketsThree judges in disagreement; three winners. Australia’s richest art prize, the Doug Moran national portrait prize, made history on Monday, awarding $100,000 to three artists, effectively doubling the prize pool to $300,000. The event was held at the Juniper Hall in Paddington, Sydney, and featured opening remarks from one of the three judges, the artist Tim Storrier, who won the $150,000 prize in 2017. “Some judges are more stubborn than others, some are better informed,” he said. “In this case I don’t know what it was, but we decided that we couldn’t make a decision. “There are going to be people that disagree with the choices. There always are. But one can’t criticise the generosity of the Moran foundation … that’s three Archibald prizes in one day!” The prize – which was cancelled last year due to the pandemic – invites original works from Australian artists “capturing Australians from all walks of life”. It distinguishes itself from the Archibald prize by not only its money, but its judging panel, which is smaller and weighted towards artists and curators. In 2021 all three winners – Vincent Fantauzzo, Andrew Greensmith and Michael Vale – are from Melbourne, with two of the artists crediting in part the city’s record-breaking 262 days in lockdown, over the past two years, for their success. Vale said he had painted Our Ghostly Crew – featuring himself, his wife, the film-maker Donna McRae, and their dog Pancho (now deceased) – during Melbourne’s first lockdown last year. “I’m very lucky I have a home studio, and Donna was very obliging,” he said. “We’re both very keen on horror and the supernatural, so we agreed [the portrait] should have a slightly gothic feel to it. A combination of having a beautiful model and a vivid imagination meant I could let loose.” Fantauzzo also paid tribute to his wife and sitter, the actor Asher Keddie, who was present at Monday’s ceremony. “I guess we both had a lot of of time on our hands, with all the lockdowns,” the artist told Guardian Australia. Appropriately titled Muse, the portrait is about the sixth Fantauzzo believes he has painted of his wife over the past decade. “Obviously she gets dragged into this all the time,” he said. The artist won the Doug Moran in 2011 for his portrait of Baz Luhrmann, and he has won the Archibald people’s choice four times – once, in 2013, for another portrait of Keddie. He is also known for his 2017 official portrait of former Labor Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Greensmith’s portrait of Holocaust survivor twins Annetta Able and Stephanie Heller completes the 2021 Moran prize trifecta. The artist, who is also one of Melbourne’s leading plastic surgeons, said it was a deeply moving experience being in the presence of “two ordinary citizens who had been through extraordinary life events”. “There was pathos in their faces – and in my line of work I am very interested in faces. I do think people wear their lives on their faces.” The twins were subjected to medical experiments by Dr Josef Mengele in Auschwitz from 1943 until its liberation in 1945. In 1962 the Prague-born sisters and their families moved to Melbourne. Greensmith’s Two Lives One Soul portrait includes a painted photograph of the twins’ with their mother and younger sister, neither of whom survived the Holocaust. The artist completed the portrait just months before Stephanie died in September 2019, at the age of 95. Storrier judged the Moran prize with Dr Peter Moran, the son of Doug Moran, and curator Daniel Thomas, the emeritus director at the Art Gallery of South Australia. Thomas said the number of entries directly referring to contagion and lockdown was notable this year. “But we became aware of a more general emphasis on the intimate life, of family at home, of love and friendship,” Thomas said. “Of course, a few portraits of beautiful or important people occur among the 30 finalists. However, we found most of the selected portraits constituted a wonderfully ordinary survey of all-Australian diversity, many old and plain and modest, but intensely individual and emotional.” The Doug Moran prizewinners and full list of 30 finalists are viewable online.The court has heard the actions of a sitting judge who jailed a man during a routine property dispute were the “grossest parody of a court hearing” and could be likened to the justice doled out by the Queen of Hearts in Alice in Wonderland. Federal circuit court judge Salvatore Vasta is being sued for his handling of a routine property settlement case in 2018, during which he jailed a man for contempt. Sitting judges are generally protected by the doctrine of judicial immunity, making such cases extremely rare. The jailed man, known by the pseudonym of “Mr Stradford”, appeared before Vasta in 2018 to settle a property dispute with his estranged partner. Believing Stradford was not disclosing all his financial information, Vasta repeatedly warned that he would jail him. At various points, he warned him to “bring your toothbrush” and said he would “put you in jail in contempt of this court if you talk over the top of me”. In December 2018, wrongly believing that another judge had found Stradford guilty of contempt, Vasta sentenced him to 12 months jail, to serve six. An appeals court later found he gave him no chance to respond to the allegation of contempt, or put any evidence or submissions prior to his jailing. At one point, Stradford’s former partner said she didn’t want him to go to jail. Vasta responded: “I don’t care.” In his opening submissions to a hearing starting on Monday, Stradford’s barrister, Perry Herzfeld, SC, said the case represented a “gross and complete denial of procedural fairness” and was the “grossest parody of a court hearing”. “Sentence first, verdict afterwards,” he said, in a reference to the system of justice used by the Queen of Hearts in Alice in Wonderland. “And that’s what happened here. Except there was actually never a verdict.” He said judicial immunity did not apply to Vasta, because, as an inferior court judge, he exceeded his jurisdiction. The imprisonment order made by Vasta included a “gross and obvious irregularity”, he said, because there was never a hearing or verdict on whether Stradford was guilty of contempt, and a lack of even a “shred” of procedural fairness. The court heard Stradford endured a torrid time in detention, both in a watch house and a correctional centre. Psychiatric experts said it caused him post-traumatic stress disorder and a depressive condition, which has significantly affected his ability to work. Stradford told the court he was assaulted, taunted by guards, dressed in women’s shorts, and woke to find a fellow inmate’s hands around his neck. He told the court he initially couldn’t afford to pay more lawyers’ fees and Legal Aid lawyers were unable to assist him for months. “From that moment I felt extremely helpless, and I thought ‘there’s no way I’m getting out of here, that’s it’,” he said. Stradford broke down as he explained to the court that he attempted to die by suicide, but stopped when he heard his daughter’s favourite song come onto the radio of the watch house where he was being held. “I’m so glad that song came on, but of all the times a song like that would come on, at that moment,” he said. He was released after spending six nights in jail and is now suing Vasta for aggravated damages. “In our submission, the substantial award of aggravated damages is a suitable response by this court to a gross abuse of the judicial power of the commonwealth,” Herzfeld said. The commonwealth and the state of Queensland are also being sued for their part in the imprisonment. Vasta’s barrister, Jeremy Kirk, SC, conceded the judge had made an error by assuming another judge had found Stradford in contempt. “He’s a human being. He made a mistake,” Kirk said. He said that when the error was drawn to Vasta’s attention, he recognised the mistake and issued a stay. Stradford was then released. The order was overturned on appeal. “That is why we have appeals, because judicial officers err,” Kirk said. “In fact, in law, in discretion or in some manifestation of all three.” He said Stradford’s allegations effectively asserted that if any inferior court judge – including magistrates – made an error while jailing someone, they should be liable to a civil claim. “That is a startling conclusion, in our respectful submission,” Kirk said. Kirk also took issue with Herzfeld’s use of language, including that it represented a gross abuse of power and a parody of a court hearing. “Epithets such as those employed by my learned friend … do not advance legal analysis, and rather distract from it.” Acting for the commonwealth, Tom Howe QC said the language used could pose “grave reputational harm” to Vasta, in circumstances where the court may find that the case against him should not have been brought. The hearing continues in the federal court before Justice Michael Wigney.Tackling the climate crisis is something that requires action from governments, corporations, scientists, and individuals, says Associate Professor Dirk Erler. “I think part of the problem, especially in the younger generations, is that there’s a bit of gloom about the future of what they can do at a personal level,” he says. “I think that’s a big issue. It’s important to realise that a lot of people making small changes actually has a huge impact.” Erler is part of the Faculty of Science and Engineering at Southern Cross University. He and his colleagues work on innovative projects designed to promote sustainability - everything from creating an electric-powered Kombi van to a solar-powered audiovisual production system that can be used at music festivals. But while initiatives such as these can play an important role in combating climate change, educating individuals is another key piece of the puzzle. Associate Professor Dirk Erler “Scientists and educators have to convince people, especially young people, that the solutions do exist,” Erler says. “They are out there and it is possible to make change happen.” So what are the small changes that Erler and his colleagues believe can make a real difference? We spoke to three scientists at Southern Cross University to find out more about the everyday habits that can help to future-proof our world. Eat local Dr Hanabeth Luke, who coordinates Southern Cross University’s regenerative agriculture courses, says: “I think it’s really important to think about where you get your food from. There’s so much amazing local food across so many different regions in Australia, so buying Australian produce is a really important thing people can do today to improve the resilience of our country.” Dr Hanabeth Luke Eating locally grown produce means your food doesn’t have to travel far to reach you, reducing its carbon footprint. “It’s less food miles,” Luke says. “Plus, those farmers will then spend their money in your region - it’s called the multiplier effect. “And in Australia, we produce so much good food, vegetables, meat, wheat, grains and fruit that we shouldn’t really need to be importing much at all. So encouraging the shopping centres and the places that you do buy food from to stock more Australian produce by choosing Australian, I’d say that’s really important.” Tweak your transport Fewer cars on the road equals less carbon emissions, so we should all be trying to reduce the amount of time we spend behind the wheel. Instead of driving to work, look for other transport options - or consider carpooling. “If people live in cities, a huge thing is taking public transport and walking,” Luke says. “All those old-fashioned things!” Go solar Professor Damien Maher Own your home? Installing solar panels on the roof can help you cut your electricity use. Professor Damien Maher says: “It’s quite clear that our greenhouse gas emissions are heading in the wrong direction and we need to turn that around. One way of doing that is reducing our reliance on fossil fuels. And one of the big fossil fuel emitting industries in Australia is electricity generation through coal-fired power plants. By adding rooftop solar, we’re using a renewable energy source.” And, he adds, “there’s a bunch of government incentives out there at the moment to make that cost-effective”. Turn off the tap Reducing our individual water use - for instance, by spending less time in the shower each morning - also helps, says Maher, whose work involves research around water quality. “Australia is the land of drought and flood, so water is a precious resource and a limited resource. During drought periods we see that water restrictions are implemented, and people are really focused on that, but it’s an all-the-time issue that we should be mindful of. “It takes energy to treat that water and move it around, and every drop of water that we’re using we’re taking out of the natural environmental cycle, whether that be through dams or extracting it from groundwater. We should be looking at water as a very precious resource, rather than just something that we turn on with the tap and it comes out.” Recycle (the right way) We all know the importance of recycling. But when we’re using our yellow and green bins, it’s crucial we only put the right stuff in there. Erler says: “Ensure that things are recycled properly. That’s a big issue - we have these different ways of recycling that are often not adhered to. “A couple of plastic bags in your green waste can actually ruin the whole compost process. For a truck that’s contaminated with plastic waste, that means that green waste has to go to landfill because it’s contaminated with plastic.” Vote with your wallet Single-use plastics end up in landfill, which is why it’s so important to go for products with minimal packaging. And Erler believes reducing the amount of plastic waste currently produced has to be consumer driven. “If, as consumers, we’re demanding our products be sustainable and equitable, then that will drive industry towards producing those products,” he says. “It’s about consumers being willing, ultimately, to pay a little bit more for products if we want them to be sustainable.” Don’t be a fool for fast fashion The average Aussie throws 23kg of clothing in the bin every year. That’s a 600,000-tonne landfill mountain. Australia is also the second highest consumer of textiles per person in the world, second only to the US. Luke recommends buying well-made, second-hand clothes. “I buy quality second-hand clothes made of natural materials,” she says. There is also a growing market out there in which fashion labels offer discounts if you return your old clothes. Stay hopeful What’s ultimately most important, Erler says, is to not give in to pessimism. “If everyone’s part of the solution then you can make things happen,” he says. “I think that’s a really important message, to bring back the confidence and the hope for young people. That’s where the university can play a really big role - giving students the opportunity to find solutions to whatever problem they choose to tackle. “Ultimately we want everyone to be making a big change but I don’t think society or nature work that way. We work more incrementally. First of all, it’s about people being convinced that making small changes would have a positive impact. That might be something very simple, like walking to work on occasion or using a sustainable product that might cost a little bit more, or choosing to purchase an electric vehicle as opposed to a petrol car. “You don’t have to do everything. You just have to do those small things that you know make a difference.” Discover more about Southern Cross University’s leading sustainable energy initiatives.Five hundred Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have died in custody in Australia in the 30 years since a royal commission handed down a report aimed at preventing Indigenous deaths in the justice system. The national Aboriginal legal service released the grim toll on Monday, saying it is “beyond heartbreaking”. The latest Australian Institute of criminology figures show there were 489 Indigenous deaths in custody since the end of the 1991 royal commission to June 30, this year. Since then, there have been another 11 deaths, including four in the past five weeks, the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services (Natsils) says. In November, 43-year-old Glen Francis was found unresponsive in a cell at Queensland’s Maryborough correctional centre, a 26-year-old Aboriginal man was found dead in Cessnock jail in New South Wales. Gomeroi man Stanley Russell was shot dead by police at his aunt’s home in north-western Sydney, also in November. In late October, a 27-year-old Indigenous Queensland man died during what authorities described as a “violent struggle” with police. “To have lost 500 of our people in custody since the royal commission handed down their recommendations over 30 years ago is beyond heartbreaking,” said Jamie McConnachie, executive officer at Natsils. State and federal governments continued to “stall on urgent action” to prevent deaths in custody, McConnachie said. She said governments have not fully implemented the royal commission’s 339 recommendations, or those of the Australian Law Reform Commission’s Pathways to Justice inquiry, the Don Dale royal commission and many coronial investigations. “Our people continue, and will continue, to die from failures to implement these crucial recommendations,” McConnachie said. Apryl Day, who created the Dhadjowa Foundation to advocate for and support bereaved families after her mother died in police custody, said the burden of pushing for change should be on governments, not families. “We need justice and accountability so we can begin our healing journey,” Day said. Her mother Tanya died on in December 2017 of a brain haemorrhage sustained when she fell and hit her head in the cells of Castlemaine police station, after being arrested for public drunkenness, an offence that has since been removed from Victoria’s statue books. The coroner investigating her death referred the case to the Department of public prosecutions to determine whether criminal negligence had occurred, but the DPP declined to investigate further. “The system was never created to work with or for us, but against us. There’ve been 500 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples die whilst in the state’s care and not one person has been held accountable. That needs to change,” Apryl Day said. The federal government relies on figures provided by the Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) to track custodial deaths. In May this year the AIC said it would speed up its reporting on Aboriginal deaths in custody, after sustained criticism that it was taking too long to produce data that could drive policy reform. The lack of reliable statistics was a recurring theme of the 1991 royal commission into Aboriginal deaths in custody. Recommendation 41 called for the states and territories to maintain a statistical database tracking all deaths in custody and report annually to parliament. The AIC’s national deaths in custody program was established in 1992 to fulfil this role but until recently only reported every few years. In 2018, Guardian Australia created the Deaths Inside database to track all known Aboriginal deaths in custody, because real-time information had been so hard to find. The Guardian last updated it in April on the 30th anniversary of the royal commission. Since that update, at least 11 more Aboriginal people have died. In 1991, the royal commission concluded that Indigenous people were no more likely to die in custody than non-Indigenous people, but were significantly more likely to be arrested and imprisoned. “The same remains true today,” an AIC report says. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people comprise 3% of the Australian population but make up 30% of the prisoner population. Based on current data, they are six times more likely to die in custody than non-Indigenous people.Chinese weather authorities successfully controlled the weather ahead of a major political celebration earlier this year, according to a Beijing university study. On 1 July the Chinese Communist party marked its centenary with major celebrations including tens of thousands of people at a ceremony in Tiananmen Square, and a research paper from Tsinghua University has said an extensive cloud-seeding operation in the hours prior ensured clear skies and low air pollution. The Chinese government has been an enthusiastic proponent of cloud-seeding technology, spending billions of dollars on efforts to manipulate the weather to protect agricultural regions or improve significant events including the 2008 Olympics. Cloud-seeding is a weather modification technique, which sees the adding of chemicals like small particles of silver iodide, to clouds, causing water droplets to cluster around them and increasing the chance of precipitation. The Tsinghua study’s reported findings add to a small but growing body of scientific evidence around the success of the technology. Other countries have also invested in cloud seeding technology, but China has invested billions despite questions over the degree of its effectiveness, and debate about whether manipulating the weather in one area could disrupt weather systems elsewhere. On Monday the South China Morning Post reported a recent research paper which found definitive signs that a cloud-seeding operation on the eve of the centenary had produced a marked drop in air pollution. The centenary celebration faced what the paper reportedly termed unprecedented challenges, including an unexpected increase in air pollutants and an overcast sky during one of the wettest summers on record. Factories and other polluting activities had been halted in the days ahead of the event but low airflow meant the pollution hadn’t dissipated, it said. The paper, published in the peer-reviewed Environmental Science journal and led by environmental science professor, Wang Can, said a two-hour cloud-seeding operation was launched on the eve of the ceremony, and residents in nearby mountain regions reported seeing rockets shot into the sky on 30 June. The paper said the rockets were carrying silver iodine into the sky to stimulate rainfall. The researchers said the resulting artificial rain reduced the level of PM2.5 air pollutants by more than two-thirds, and shifted the air quality index reading, based on World Health Organization standards, from “moderate” to “good”. The team said the artificial rain “was the only disruptive event in this period”, so it was unlikely the drop in pollution had a natural cause. Last year Beijing announced plans to expand its experimental weather modification program to an area 1.5 times the size of India – 5.5 million square kilometres – covered by artificial rain or snow. The State Council has said it aims to have a developed weather modification system by 2025, including another half a million square kilometres hosting hail suppression technologies. In the five years to 2017 state media claimed China had spent more than US$1.3bn on the technology and induced about 233.5bn cubic meters of additional rain. In 2019 officials said weather modification practices, usually the firing of iodine-packed shells to disrupt unfavourable weather fronts, had helped to reduce 70% of hail damage annually in agricultural regions of Xinjiang. However it has also been used for political and other significant events, including the 2008 Olympics, the 2014 APEC summit, as well as National Day parades and annual Two Sessions meetings. The weather manipulation activities, also known as “blueskying”, are usually implemented in conjunction with social changes in the lead up to events, including the shutdown of factories, construction and other polluting industries, and encouraging people to stay off the streets or leave the region, said Dr Shiuh-Shen Chien, of National Taiwan University’s department of geography, in a 2019 essay for Society+Space. Dr Chien said China’s weather authorities had “institutionalised” climate controls for decades, with technological attempts dating back to the 1980s, but was unique in using it not just for commercial or agricultural reasons but also for “propaganda purposes”.For 16 years, the Belarus Free Theatre has advocated for freedom of expression, equality and democracy through underground performances from ad hoc locations to audiences hungry for an alternative voice to the country’s repressive dictator, Alexander Lukashenko. Now the banned company has taken the momentous decision to relocate outside Belarus, saying the risk of reprisals against its members is too great for it to continue its cultural resistance under the Lukashenko regime. Sixteen members of the BFT ensemble in London rehearsing for a production at the Barbican next year, plus another nine family members, have decided they cannot return home for the foreseeable future. The BFT is the only theatre company in Europe to be prohibited on political grounds. Its new base has not been established, but Poland and other eastern European countries are being considered. The troupe has ruled out applying for asylum in the UK as its members would be barred from working during the process, which could take more than a year. Several members of the BFT were imprisoned amid widespread protests after Lukashenko declared victory in flawed elections in August 2020. The theatre group’s co-founders, Natalia Kaliada and Nikolai Khalezin, have lived in London since being forced into exile in 2011. Kaliada said it was unprecedented in 2021 for a theatre company to be forced to relocate out of a European country “for fear of persecution and torture”. She added: “It is a disgrace that we allow not just artistic freedoms but basic human freedoms to be absolutely disregarded in a country that is a three-hour flight from London. “The sheer existence of Belarus Free Theatre and our continued work, despite repression, is the greatest threat to dictatorship – the will of the people to continue telling the truth is the greatest show of power imaginable.” As the regime cracked down forcefully against protests after the disputed 2020 election, “it became clear we needed to get our team out of the country”, said Kaliada. “There was very severe repression and people being arrested every day.” The members of the company left Minsk in October, taking different forms of transport. Some were smuggled out of the country, she said. All left parents and other loved ones, and brought nothing apart from clothing and small personal items. “It is very painful for them to leave their families, and they have feelings of guilt,” Kaliada added. Members of the BFT were granted six-month artists’ visas, which expire after their production of Dogs of Europe, a dystopian thriller, ends its run at the Barbican in March. In the meantime, the company will travel to Poland later this month where they have been offered accommodation, and return to the UK in February. “We are in limbo,” said Kaliada. Svetlana Sugako, the BFT’s managing director, was one of those arrested in August 2020. She was held for five days, along with 35 others crammed into a cell meant for four people. “There was no air, for three days we had no food, and we had to drink dirty water. I could hear people screaming and shouting as they were beaten. You don’t know how or where it will finish,” she said. “I didn’t want to leave Belarus, but I had no choice. The future is unclear, but I’m alive.” Lukashenko’s crackdown on dissent has ripped through the Belarusian arts community, leading to purges at state cultural institutions and driving hundreds of writers, actors, painters, musicians and others into exile. “There were a huge number of creative people working in the context of protest,” said Khalezin, a founding member of the independent Belarusian Council for Culture. “People of art were among the first cast into Lukshenko’s cauldron of repression.” He said the number of people involved in the arts jailed in connection with the protests rivalled that of other at-risk groups such as journalists and human rights workers. Belarusian security services have made it nearly impossible for independent artists to continue working in the country. One Minsk-based visual artist said she had abandoned a shared studio space after police began visiting her at home this year in connection with the protests. She asked a friend to retrieve and hide her paintings and other artworks because she was afraid they could be confiscated or destroyed. Vlad Kobets of the Belarusian Solidarity Centre, a non-profit group in Warsaw connected to the BFT, said the troupe’s expected arrival there in mid-December was part of a tide of prominent cultural figures choosing to live away from Belarus due to their opposition to the government. “These people of culture ... are often young people, the generation that is the driver of the protest,” said Kobets, pointing to other recent émigrés such as the opera singer Margarita Levchuk. The exodus had exposed the cultural impoverishment of the Lukashenko government, he added. “You can’t build a country on nightsticks alone.” The BFT has streamed many of its productions outside Belarus to audiences inside the country, and has clandestinely performed in residential courtyards, warehouses and garages in Minsk. “We know we are stronger than the regime,” said Kaliada. “The authorities are more scared of artists than of political statements. Everyone believes that things will change in Belarus, but for now the company needs to be safe. “We ask the UK public to stand in solidarity with us at this most critical time in our history. Solidarity is crucial for our survival.” The company is appealing for donations. The award-winning BFT’s patrons and supporters have included Václav Havel, the Czech playwright, dissident and president who died in 2011; the late Nobel laureate Harold Pinter; the Czech-born playwright Tom Stoppard; the actors Jeremy Irons and Kim Cattrall; and the Pink Floyd guitarist and vocalist David Gilmour. The UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office had been very supportive, Kaliada said. Will Gompertz, artistic director of the Barbican, said: “We are delighted to be working with our friends at Belarus Free Theatre and to be able to give the company a platform for their important work at this difficult time.”The overnight storm has battered the landscape and torn the remaining leaves from the beech trees, with only a few small oaks maintaining a grip on their senescent foliage. Frost followed by heavy rain has reduced much of the leaf litter in the lane to a rutted mulch, which deadens the sound of my footfall as I head towards the coast. Away from the dubious shelter of the hills, I realise just how strong the northerly wind still is, raising short, angry waves even in the sheltered waters at the mouth of the Afon Rheidol. Plumes of beech leaves swirl in the confluence of waters at the harbour mouth; a line of foam marks the margin of the salt water. In mid stream, a lone cormorant stands on a bank of shingle in apparent defiance, as the wind tugs at its plumage, iridescent in the late afternoon sunshine. South of the harbour entrance, the bank of large cobbles at the back of the beach blocks some wind, but as I climb over its crest I am forced back by the raw pressure of the gale. Flecks of foam, torn from the confusion of breaking waves around the harbour wall, whip up like driven snow around the curve of the bay. Groups of seabirds fly low, tight to the water, seeking shelter upriver. I clamber southward over the stones, a stronger gust nearly parting me from my hat, while banks of cloud send lines of shadow across the sea and split the sunshine into shards of light. The cliffs ahead of me begin to be outlined with mist and spray from the breaking waves. Heavier cloud, almost fully obscuring the sun, begins to drain colour from the scene – leaving the landscape feeling even colder. Chilled to the bone, I take a final look across the bay, where the last band of light highlights the coast beyond Aberaeron, and turn back towards shelter. Heading directly into the wind, I bury my hands in my pockets and consider where I might find both beer and an open fire. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryDrivers in the Australian Capital Territory can now apply for zero-interest loans designed to boost the uptake of electric vehicles, as industry groups call for similar programs to be adopted across the country. The loans will be available under the ACT government’s sustainable household scheme, which offers interest-free loans for solar panels, battery storage technology and other sustainable equipment. Electric vehicles were added to the program on Monday. Anyone who holds a valid ACT driving licence or owns a home in the territory can apply for 10-year zero-interest loans of up to $15,000. This in addition to other benefits such as a stamp duty exemption for new electric vehicle purchases. Shane Rattenbury, the ACT minister for water, energy and emissions reduction, said the territory wanted to send a strong signal it was embracing the transition to electric cars, both domestically and to carmakers abroad. “The key message here for the external audience is for automakers to say – look at Canberra, get the vehicles into the ACT,” he said. “We’ve got a keen market here. We know people want to purchase these vehicles. We need to see more models at lower prices.” Rattenbury, who drives an electric vehicle, said the federal government “has not been strong supporters of EVs” so it was important for state and territory governments to make their intentions clear. “Nationally, we do have a problem,” Rattenbury. “When you talk to the automakers, they’re hesitant to bring vehicles to Australia because they’re unclear about government policy.” The program is being organised in a staged process with a small number of electric vehicle suppliers participating initially. More will be added over time. Dr Jake Whitehead, head of policy at the Electric Vehicle Council, welcomed the development, saying it could save drivers thousands of dollars in interest payments and improve access to electric cars. “If you own an EV long enough, it’s a cheaper option over time,” he said. “What this loan facility enables you to do is get those savings up front.” Energy company AGL calculated the cost of running an electric vehicle and found it was $1,346 cheaper than running a petrol car, although this result can change depending on location and whether solar panels are used to charge. Whitehead called for interest-free loans to be rolled out across Australia, but said additional policies must also be introduced as well to supercharge uptake.Queensland will open its borders to vaccinated travellers and thousands of returning residents from next week – almost five months since the state closed itself off from most of the rest of the country. Second-dose vaccination rates in Queensland are expected to hit 80% by Friday, which coincides with the end of the local school year. To allow authorities time to prepare for an expected rush to cross the border, the opening will be delayed until 1am on Monday, 13 December. That is still four days ahead of the initial estimate. The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, acknowledged the state’s border policy had caused hardship as thousands of Queenslanders have been locked out or unable to return. “I know people have said to me personally some of them haven’t seen their grandkids for the first time,” Palaszczuk said. “Some of them haven’t seen their aunts and uncles, their mothers and fathers. This is going to be a very, very special time of the year. “And as a government we’ve been very conscious of how important this is to reunite families. And once again, I want to say thank-you to everyone who’s been involved in our tremendous response.” People can cross the border by road from 13 December if they are double-vaccinated and have had a recent negative Covid test. They will also be required to take another test five days after arriving. Queensland closed its border for several months in 2020 during the first wave of the Covid pandemic. After the Delta variant outbreak in Sydney, the border to New South Wales was again closed, on 22 July. In the meantime, thousands of Queenslanders and others seeking compassionate exemptions have been stuck outside the state, in some cases within hours from their homes. The planned border reopening has been beset by uncertainty. Palaszczuk said the state’s pandemic management had been successful. Queensland has recorded only seven Covid deaths; the national figure is now more than 2000. But with vaccination rates now high enough to allow travellers to return, authorities acknowledge cases will spike. Lockdowns and mask mandates might also be needed. “It’s been nearly two years,” Palaszczuk said. “Tragically, we’ve lost seven lives. But the results have been really unprecedented compared to the rest of the world. Our businesses have been able to function. Our children have gone to school. And we’ve fought back and contained more than 50 separate outbreaks. “And I’m very conscious that we want to give people certainty. We want to give families certainty, and business certainty.” Authorities have warned that people attempting to enter Queensland on 13 December and soon afterwards should expect “extensive delays” and should “pack their patience”.A new public sculpture that calls for optimism about humanity’s response to the climate crisis has been installed in a park once home to Glasgow’s last working coalmine. The Hope Sculpture, featuring an androgynous child placed more than 20 metres high, has been erected on the bank of the Clyde as a permanent reminder of Glasgow’s role as host of the Cop26 climate summit in November. It stands in Cuningar Loop, a former industrial site converted into a woodland park that is also the home of a British Geological Survey test facility studying the potential for drawing zero-carbon geothermal energy from the flooded former mine shafts. Now part of Rutherglen, the Farme colliery worked coal seams around Cuningar Loop for more than a century until it closed in 1931, and was emblematic of Glasgow’s status as the heavy industry workshop of the British empire. The 23-metre-high Hope Sculpture has been designed by Steuart Padwick, an artist and sculptor known for his Head above Water sculpture on the Thames near the Oxo tower in London. It has been built using low-carbon, recycled and repurposed materials, including a concrete made without cement – a material globally responsible for releasing 2.8bn tonnes of CO2. It has two companion pieces – a 4.5-metre-high wooden figure on the main concourse at Glasgow Central station, cut from Scottish spruce, and a 3.5-metre-high, three-figure installation in gardens at Strathclyde University cut from reclaimed steel Padwick said he wanted to suggest humanity had a positive future; he had despaired at the anxiety he had seen in children worrying about the fate of the planet. The figure’s outstretched arms are designed to be embracing. “It is reaching out across Glasgow. Its message is very simple: why would anyone want to poison their future,” he said. The child figure perches on top of a tripod designed to echo the industrial brick chimneys that once dominated Glasgow’s skyline. The child is moulded from cement-free concrete using recycled crushed glass. It will be formally unveiled on Wednesday. About 50 companies donated free materials and expertise for the project, including the lead consultant, the engineering firm Ramboll. In collaboration with the Mental Health Foundation, words that resonate with its message have been contributed by Scottish cultural figures such as the poet Jackie Kay, the authors Andrew O’Hagan, Ali Smith and Douglas Stuart, winner of the 2020 Booker prize, and local children, which have been carved into Caithness stone used for landscaping and benches, and the sculptures themselves.This week we can again take advantage of Jupiter and Saturn’s placement in the evening sky to chart the movement of the moon and the development of its phases. What makes it special is that Venus has joined the party to provide even more reference points along the way. The chart shows the view looking south-west from London at 1630 GMT on 6 December. You should be able to see the planets relatively easily but the moon will present more of a challenge. Only 8% of its visible surface will be illuminated and you will need a clear south-western horizon to catch a glimpse. The following night, things improve considerably. The moon will sit between Venus and Saturn and be 16% illuminated. On 7 December, it will have moved to between Jupiter and Saturn, and the illumination will be 25%. The night after it will be near Jupiter, with 35% Earth-facing hemisphere illumination. Venus will be the brightest, lowest planet, with Jupiter the second brightest but highest. You may have to look a bit harder for fainter Saturn in between. From the southern hemisphere, the groupings take place much higher in the western sky.If Boris Johnson’s decision to join the campaign trail in North Shropshire on Friday was a sign of Conservative jitters before the upcoming byelection in the constituency, then Chris Pierce is just the sort of voter to exemplify such anxieties. “I feel taken for granted,” complained the self-described former Tory supporter, standing outside his house in a neat, modern cul-de-sac on the edge of Wem, a compact market town just north of Shrewsbury. “You could put a blue rosette on a straw bale and it would be elected in North Shropshire,” said Pierce, 50. “Owen Paterson would be parachuted somewhere into Wem High Street once every four years, photo taken, then quickly out before any local people realised he was there.” Pierce would, he said, vote Liberal Democrat on 16 December, to the evident delight of Helen Morgan, the party’s candidate, nearing the end of another long canvassing session. But, Pierce added ruefully, he still expected “the guy from Birmingham” – a disparaging reference to the distinctly less-than-local Tory candidate Dr Neil Shastri-Hurst – to win. The odds do remain very much in favour of Shastri-Hurst, who if elected would become the latest in a near 200-year line of local Tory MPs, one broken just once, between 1904 and 1906. But something unusual is happening in North Shropshire, and not just because the byelection was prompted by Paterson resigning in the wake of Johnson’s disastrous attempt to save him from punishment following a serious breach of lobbying rules. One very obvious anomaly is that the Conservatives, even in a mid-term slump, are concerned about holding a strongly rural pro-Brexit seat, one that returned Paterson with a majority of almost 23,000 in the 2019 general election. Another is the way the Lib Dems have become the main challengers in no small part by loudly and repeatedly telling people that this is the case, arguing that strong local election results in May matter more than 2019’s distant third place, behind Labour. Labour’s young and energetic candidate, Ben Wood, vehemently disputes this narrative and talks up positive canvassing data. However, central party officials concede they are devoting few resources to the fight, and so far no senior shadow ministers have been spotted there. Similarly, while the Greens hold 12 of 18 council seats in Oswestry, the constituency’s biggest town, the party privately concedes it does not expect to do especially well. The Lib Dems’ hopes of anti-Conservative sentiment coalescing around Morgan, an accountant and local parish councillor, are of course significantly boosted by the party’s astonishing win in June’s Chesham and Amersham byelection, overturning a 16,000 Conservative majority as the Labour and Green votes collapsed. While Lib Dem activists stress North Shropshire is notably shorter of the sort of internationalist, pro-remain “soft” Tories who helped deliver last summer’s victory, they argue both constituencies share a wider sense of disenchantment with Johnson and his government. “When they talk sleaze, a lot of voters have a real tone of derision,” one activist said. “And it’s not, ‘A plague on all your houses.’ This is very much about the Tories. But perhaps the most toxic thing is picking a candidate from Birmingham. It’s like they don’t care.” As Morgan and her campaign team canvass in Wem, while the majority of concerns are distinctly local, including access to GPs and slow ambulance response times, these are often expressed amid a wider sense that the Conservatives have neglected the area. “The response we’re getting on the doorstep is people are fed up of being ignored, and they’re ready to send a message to say that,” Morgan said. “We’re definitely going to give the Conservatives a scare, and I think we do have an actual chance.” The Lib Dems coming anywhere close to taking the seat would, certainly, spook many Tory MPs. Even the more likely outcome – a reasonably secure Conservative hold, but with many of the party’s usual voters staying at home – could be alarming. Tory HQ appears to be hoping that a brief, slightly below-the-radar campaign – Guardian requests to speak to Shastri-Hurst or anyone from his team were ignored – will get them home. The Lib Dems, in contrast, have sent party leader Ed Davey to campaign in the constituency three times already, with a succession of other MPs and peers on hand to persuade voters and deliver endless leaflets featuring one of the party’s trademark bar charts, this one explaining why only they can defeat the Conservatives. “It’s like carpet bombing,” one opponent said, with a mixture of admiration and annoyance. “It really is win at all costs.” Could it work? After Chesham and Amersham, no one would rule it out. But even Lib Dems privately agree it is a tough ask. “Winning Chesham and Amersham was like climbing a mountain,” one senior party official said. “But taking North Shropshire? It would be the Everest of byelection victories.”Some will plant a modest fruit tree in their small back garden while those with more space might plump for a sapling that will, hopefully, grow into a mighty oak. Over the next year or so every household in Wales is to be offered a free tree to plant as part of a Welsh government call to arms in the fight against the climate emergency. Lee Waters, the deputy minister for climate change, said the initiative was practical – a good way of getting more trees in the ground – but the aim was also to engage people and fire their imaginations by directly involving them in the battle against the climate crisis. “Trees are amazing,” Waters said. “They save lives by keeping our air clean, they improve people’s physical and mental health, they are essential for tackling our nature emergency, improving biodiversity and, of course, in tackling climate change.” The first trees will be available to collect from March from one of five regional community hubs. A further 20 hubs are to be set up across Wales by October 2022 to get trees to people in time for next winter’s planting season. There are more than one million households in Wales so the exercise is a challenging one. In June the Welsh government held what it called a “deep dive” exercise into trees and timber and concluded a step change was needed to create enough woodland to tackle the climate emergency. The Labour-led government judges it needs to plant 43,000 hectares (106,000 acres) of new woodland by 2030, and 180,000 hectares by 2050 to meet climate crisis targets. In 2020, just 290 hectares of woodland was planted in Wales and annual woodland creation has not exceeded 2,000 hectares since 1975. The government argues that planting more trees is not only essential to help avoid catastrophic climate change but will provide a wide range of other benefits, including addressing the nature emergency, mitigating flooding and air quality issues, increasing wellbeing and creating green jobs. It accepts that the vast majority of new woodland will not be planted by the Welsh government, but by the communities, farmers and other landowners across Wales. Waters said: “The deep dive made it clear that everyone will have a part to play.” People who live in flats or do not have room to plant a tree can opt to have a tree planted on their behalf. We understand that not all households will be able to plant a tree themselves, but will still be keen to get involved. “That is why we will make an option that will allow for people to opt to have a free tree planted on their behalf at locations across Wales via the community hubs and volunteers.” Waters said a consultation would launch early in 2022 on plans to create a national forest for Wales. The government is also planning to work with public bodies to map out land that could be used for tree planting. The initiative is being supported by Coed Cadw – the Woodland Trust in Wales – whose director, Natalie Buttriss, said: “While tree-planting is only one way to help tackle climate change, it is a simple and enjoyable way for every single person in Wales to have the chance to plant a tree and watch it grow.”Strictly Come Dancing’s John Whaite – who made history as part of the show’s first all-male couple – has said he initially intended to dance with a straight partner, and expected much more criticism and disapproval than he received. The former Great British Bake Off winner and his professional dancing partner Johannes Radebe followed in the footsteps of Olympian Nicola Adams and Katya Jones, who formed the show’s first all-female couple last year before having to pull out due to Covid-19. But initially, Whaite told the BBC team that he thought he should dance with a straight male partner, “just to make a statement that’s not about sexuality,” he said in an interview with the Radio Times. “But as I was announced, I saw that people were very pro the male-male coupling. I realised it was a big thing for the gay community. When we’re on the dancefloor, I only want to be voted for based on our dancing. But to deny that our partnership is significant would be a really wrong thing.” The TV chef said he had anticipated trolling and hate mail. “But it’s actually not been bad at all. It’s been kind and generous. The amount of people we’ve had messages from saying, ‘I’m proud as a straight mum and straight dad to have children grow up in a world where two men can dance together’ has been truly overwhelming.” He and Radebe said they had compared notes on their experiences growing up, including feelings of shame over their sexuality. Now, Radebe’s mother (his father died when the dancer was 14) gathers her neighbours in South Africa to watch Strictly together. “It’s a big celebration. They’re very proud,” the dancer said. But the pair were aware that not everyone is a fan. In 2019, the show received 189 complaints after the “offensive” broadcast of its first ever individual same-sex routine, and this year there remains negative comments on social media. “On Twitter this week, someone said their grandmother has to leave the room when we come on. She won’t watch us,” Whaite said. “I think it’s a fear thing. To see a world where two men can dance together, it can instil the fear of God into people. But let’s leave them behind.” He added that he hoped straight people would start to do same-sex couple dances to send “a very clear message of inclusion”. Though he wasn’t concerned about the Strictly curse (where dancing partners begin romantic relationships with each other), Whaite said he understood the sentiment after dancing the rumba. “I felt like I loved Johannes. And I do love him to bits … you can see why people hook up,” he said.Literature is open to many interpretations, but as the former children’s laureate Julia Donaldson discovered, some are more embarrassing than others. The writer has revealed that an original line for her and illustrator Axel Scheffler’s children’s classic Superworm was changed after an awkward conversation with Donaldson’s longtime publisher, Alison Green, who objected to her opening couplet: “Superworm is long and pink, Superworm can grow and shrink.” The line was eventually replaced by “Superworm is super-long, Superworm is super-strong.” which proved less vulnerable to misinterpretation, Donaldson said in an interview for the Radio Times Christmas issue. Donaldson and Scheffler’s books, including Zog, Stick Man and The Gruffalo are loved by generations of children. She was inspired to write Superworm, published in 2012, by her grandson’s obsession with Batman and Scheffler’s previous illustrations of bugs. “In some ways he was my most difficult character to draw,” Scheffler said. “It was challenging to give him any kind of expression. But in other ways he was the easiest, because I didn’t have to worry about arms, legs, ears … There aren’t that many possibilities with a worm.” Olivia Colman narrates the story of Superworm, a valiant earthworm, in the BBC’s new TV adaptation, which airs over Christmas and also stars Matt Smith as Superworm, Patricia Allison and Rob Brydon. Nine of the duo’s picture books have been animated for the BBC. Donaldson said preserving the text in any adaptation was sacrosanct to her, while expressing her delight at the worm being voiced by Netflix’s royal family in The Crown. “In the first versions [of the animation], Superworm was too big for his boots, so I suggested they tone that down,” she said. “I was also in two minds about Butterfly becoming a major character, but I’ve come around to it. I’m always a bit wary about them changing too much, but it’s very gratifying … I suddenly realised that Superworm was Prince Philip in The Crown.” “And the Queen is narrating,” Sheffler added.In remarks to diners at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida on Saturday night, Donald Trump called the American media “crooked bastards” and Gen Mark Milley, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, a “fucking idiot”. The meandering, foul-mouthed speech to Turning Point USA, a group for young conservatives, was streamed by Jack Posobiec, a rightwing blogger and provocateur. The insult to the press recalled barbs while Trump was in power, including calling reporters and editors “fake news” and the “enemy of the people”, attacks many in the media regarded as dangerous, inviting political violence. “The country is at a very important, dangerous place,” Trump said, amid familiar lies about his defeat in the 2020 election, which he says was the result of electoral fraud. “We have no press. The press is so corrupt. We don’t have a press. If there is a good story about us, a good story about any of the people that are Republicans, conservatives, they make it a bad story. And if it’s a bad story they make it the worst story in history. It is the most dishonest group of people.” Trump claimed to have transformed Americans’ views of the press, saying “when I first announced I was running in 2015 they had a 94%-95% approval rating. And right now they have a lower approval rating than Congress. “I consider that to be a great honor because they are a bunch of very dishonest, crooked bastards.” The remark met with laughter. As with most of Trump’s claims, his claim about media approval ratings could be debated. In 2015, the year Trump ran for the White House, Gallup said 40% of Americans “had ‘a great deal’ or ‘a fair amount’ of trust and confidence in the mass media to report the news fully, accurately and fairly”. In 2019, midway through Trump’s presidency, Suzanne Nossel, chief executive of PEN America, told the Guardian his attacks on the press were “insidious” and “aimed to intimidate … a kind of dragging-through-the-mud effort, a character assassination … and it’s alarming”. In 2021, the year Trump left office, Gallup said 21% of Americans had “a great deal” or “quite a lot” of confidence in newspapers. For TV news, the figure was 16%. For Congress, it was 12%. Trump insulted Milley as part of a long complaint about Joe Biden’s handling of the US withdrawal from Afghanistan. Impersonating the general’s gravelly voice, Trump said: “I’ll never forget Milley saying to me, ‘Sir, sir. It’s cheaper to leave the equipment than to bring it.’ Trump said he asked: “You think it’s cheaper to leave it there so they can have it than it is to fill it up with a half tank of gas and fly it into Pakistan or fly it back to our country? “‘Yes, sir, we think it’s cheaper, sir.’ “That’s when I realized he was a fucking idiot.” Trump regularly complains about Milley, particularly over his portrayal in bestselling books as a key figure in efforts to contain Trump at the end of his time in power. Trump’s penchant for swearing is well-known, to the extent that his four-year presidency prompted soul-searching among some US media outlets about which words could properly be printed. The Guardian has long had few such scruples.Standards collapsed so quickly at a severely short-staffed care home that families were given just 10 hours’ notice of its final closure triggering a desperate scramble to find new homes for traumatised residents, the Guardian has learned. Berkeley House in Kent looked after adults with severe learning difficulties and autism but, five weeks ago, its operator suddenly decided it could no longer provide safe care and families were informed at 7.30am that their loved ones would have to leave by 5pm, a move branded “inhumane” by one family. Only four days earlier, families had been told by the operators the move would happen after 28 days. The case emerged amid calls for the government to take urgent action to boost staffing levels in care homes and home care across England. Earlier this year there were estimated to be more than 100,000 social care staff vacancies in England and it was calculated this week that about 60,000 workers quit between April and October. Half of councils surveyed in England have had to deal with care homes closing or going bankrupt in the last six months. The operator, Achieve Together, blamed the collapse on severe staff shortages, a problem threatening care nationwide. It said that “due to our inability to recruit and retain staff we were unable to continue to provide a good standard of care”, and it decided to close the home. It added that after an inspection, the Care Quality Commission regulator and the local authority “determined that people’s needs would be better met in alternative provision”. Yola and Graham Wakefield, whose 29-year-old son Michael lived at the care home for a decade, described “heart-breaking scenes” as people arrived to collect their loved ones. “Staff were in tears, residents were being led to awaiting vehicles, confused and scared,” they wrote in a letter of complaint to the provider. They described Michael as “traumatised and devastated”. “Our son had to be sedated so that we could remove him from the home he had known for 10 years,” they said. “We had no time to arrange the removal of his larger personal belongings and so all that was familiar to him had to be left behind. What he experienced was inhumane.” The family of another resident Lawrence Green, 31, only heard he needed to be out that day at about 10am – just seven hours’ notice. “It’s just ludicrous,” his father, Paul Green, said. “It highlights the fact that the governance of these organisations is not to do with the care of the people. Their priorities seem all wrong. In terms of caring for the people, I think they are more interested in the property values.” He said he did not accept the argument that staff shortages were the problem, saying the problem was the care company was not paying enough to attract recruits. Achieve Together is owned, via a chain of several companies, by a company registered in Jersey. Its ultimate parent is AMP Capital, a global investment management company based in Australia. It admitted standards fell “way below” the level people deserve and said “we wholeheartedly apologise for this.” A spokesperson said: “We completely recognise the distress and concern that the speed and nature of this closure caused for the people and families involved.” The Care Quality Commission said it imposed “urgent conditions” on the home after a 20 October inspection and, after another check on 28 October, “the provider chose to cancel their registration”. Residents had to leave the next day. “If we didn’t take this urgent action there would have been a serious risk to people using their services,” said Debbie Ivanova, deputy chief inspector of adult social care. Karen Edwards, whose autistic son Jonathan Edwards, 28, lived at Berkeley for three years but has not yet found a new care home, said: “It is like the care has been taken out of social care. It is now just money and pen-pushing. The vulnerable person at the centre of it all has got lost. Maybe that’s a reflection of our society. That’s not something we should be proud of in our country.” Labour’s shadow care minister, Liz Kendall, said: “This awful case is just the tip of the iceberg”. “The Tories’ utter failure to deal with staff shortages in social care is putting people at risk. We need an emergency winter plan, before parliament stops for Christmas.” A spokesperson for the Department of Health and Social Care highlighted the announcement last week of the adult social care white paper, a ten year plan, they said was “a bold and significant step in delivering a world-leading social care system”. “We will invest at least £500 million to develop and support the care workforce as part of our additional £5.4 billion investment over three years, which will allow us to build our comprehensive adult social care reform programme,” they said. “Care homes and home care providers are already benefiting from the new £162.5 million workforce retention and recruitment fund to assist local authorities and care providers in working together to ease workforce pressures in a variety of ways”.On one side is Tate Modern. On the other are the owners of nearby luxury apartments objecting to what they regard as the prying eyes of visitors enjoying a viewing platform at Britain’s most visited gallery. This week those owners will mount their final attempt to block the alleged daily intrusion when the legal battle reaches the UK’s highest court. One result could be a landmark ruling enshrining tenants’ rights to privacy and potentially opening the floodgates to thousands of neighbour disputes. The case involves five owners of four apartments in the Neo Bankside development on the south bank of the Thames taking action against the Tate over the “hundreds of thousands of visitors” looking into their homes from the viewing platform 34 metres away. The platform, which opened in 2016, provides a panorama of London as well as a direct view into their glass-fronted flats. In 2017, the owners of the flats applied for an injunction requiring the gallery to cordon off parts of the platform or erect screening to prevent what they said was a “relentless” invasion of their privacy. Judges in two courts ruled against the flat owners, albeit for differing reasons. In an initial high court ruling in 2019, Justice Mann accepted the argument that overlooking theoretically falls within the scope of existing legal protections against neighbourly intrusion into the home, the tort of nuisance. However, he decided that the glass-walled design of the flats and their location in central London came “at a price in terms of privacy” and suggested the owners could lower their solar blinds or install privacy film or net curtains. He asked the Tate to limit the hours during which the south and west sides of the viewing gallery could be used. In 2020 the court of appeal took the view that overlooking could never be considered a private nuisance, but argued that if it could, then it would apply in this instance. A spokesperson for the law firm Forsters, which is representing the flat owners, said the clients had taken the difficult decision to continue their legal action to “protect their and their families’ right to enjoy their homes”. “This has been a long journey for our clients. From the outset they have only ever sought to limit very intrusive viewing by the public from a section of the viewing gallery, which enables hundreds of thousands of people a year to peer, photograph, and film directly into their homes at close proximity.” The case will now be heard by the supreme court, a move considered by legal experts to represent an indication that it is considered a matter of considerable public interest. “Overlooking and invasion of privacy does not amount to a nuisance in this country, this would overturn everything because it’s never been upheld in the courts of this country before,” said Claire Lamkin, a real estate litigator at the law firm Kingsley Napley. Lawyers said that if the supreme court ruled in favour of the flat owners, this would effectively create a new strand to the tort of nuisance, to sit alongside existing protections from excess noise and smells as well as against obstruction of natural light. This could theoretically open the floodgates to hundreds more cases brought by homeowners who are frustrated with neighbours peering into their properties, as well as placing potentially onerous limitations on the construction of new buildings, unless a clear test is established to ensure the law only applies in extreme cases, such as proximity to a viewing platform. Donal Nolan, a professor of private law at the University of Oxford, said it would be a difficult case for the supreme court, but ultimately it boils down to two key questions: “Can you bring a claim of this kind, and if you can, is the interference in this particular case unreasonable?” Nolan added that ordinarily questions of proximity and privacy would be solved through planning rules rather than litigation. “The question is whether you need this planning law backstop if the planning system doesn’t work as it perhaps should do,” he said. James Souter, a partner specialising in land disputes at the law firm Charles Russell Speechlys, said the mismatch between the two earlier court rulings suggested that everything was “up for grabs”. He said the supreme court need not worry about the case setting a precedent with too wide an application, as it would be easy to set parameters for extreme examples of overlooking. “It’s going to be such a rare case, there won’t be another one like it, you can barely imagine this intensity of overlooking,” he said. The Tate declined to comment ahead of the supreme court hearing.A friend’s grandmother once told me a story about her late husband’s English golf club. It was the 1960s, and she was having a drink on the club’s terrace with some of the other wives. The men played golf on the links below, and one of them would swear loudly whenever he mis-hit a shot. The women complained to the manager, who promised he would address the matter. The next time the women went to go for a drink on the terrace they found a new sign. It read: “Terrace for male members only.” I am reminded of this story as I watch western governments react to the new Covid variant. South African scientists alerted the world to Omicron and in turn, South Africa and several other African countries were promptly placed under travel and quarantine restrictions by the west. The first country to introduce a travel ban was, naturally, the UK. Thank you for informing us of the problem, our terrace is now closed. There is something farcical about a political decision-making complex that has learned nothing from the past two years – two years during which the UK has tried to minimise and assume, at almost every turn, that it could escape the fate of other countries. Two years during which a very particular strain of Anglo-American swagger has emerged – one that falsely believes that if we raise our walls high enough, stockpile our vaccines and establish travel apartheid, then the pandemic will be over for us, even if it continues to rage elsewhere. It does not seem to matter that during these two years, the worst tragedies did not happen abroad, but within our borders. They happened in our care homes, our hospitals, and in the wake of government indecisiveness over locking down (thrice) when it was clear that cases were rising. Imagine how many lives might have been saved had the UK government put the promised “protective ring” around care homes with the deftness and speed it red-listed and categorised other countries. But we are living in a state of inertia, where politicians continually fail to see that the problem is not that the virus and its variants make their way to the UK, but what happens when they do. But this is how our institutions are built: to be nimble in some areas, almost paralysed in others. It is now the duty of the Home Office to cast a suspicious eye on entrants to the UK, to limit movement, to deport those deemed unworthy to be here. There is only one setting when problems set in: to shut our borders down. UK border policy is a hammer to which everything is a nail. Meanwhile, programmes of foreign cooperation and alliance, be it our terminated membership of the EU or our slashed foreign aid budget, have been diminished by the belief that collaboration and sharing of resources with the rest of the world has no benefit to us internally. It is how we reach such biased conclusions that just because African scientists identified the latest Covid problem, the problem must be African. Meanwhile, research on the new variant is being compromised because the necessary materials cannot be flown into South Africa due to the travel restrictions. The result is that tackling Omicron is compromised right at the very time when any new intelligence of the virus is critical. There is no starker example of how jingoism is a shot in the foot. We move quickly to ban other countries because we are paralysed by the ideological and economic arrangements at home that have undermined much of the response to the pandemic. The stealth privatisation of the NHS, for example, and the stripping of its capacity in the name of “efficiency”. The deregulation of the labour market and weakening of trade unions, which has led to a generation of precarious workers having to choose between their health and their income when they should be isolating. We are caught between two equally powerful forces: the profoundly embedded ways we strive for short-term capital extraction at any cost, and a virus that thrives on the disorder this reckless pursuit of profit creates – as though it has been designed in the lab of a Thanos-like demigod raging against humankind’s propensity for self-destruction. The government can choose to spin its wheels in futile theatrics in response to Omicron, or it can take sensible measures to prevent the spread of the virus. For starters: clarifying its position on mask wearing, acting decisively on any curbs to Christmas socialising, and learning from its mistakes. As we enter the third year of the pandemic, yet again bewildered by how the virus continues to be one step ahead, it feels like there will be no release until we repent. Until it is understood that there is no return to “normal” without dismantling the very notion of what that normal is, the pandemic will continue to resurge. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistJoel Coen’s solo take on Shakespeare is a stark monochrome nightmare, refrigerated to an icy coldness. The text has been whittled; the drama is framed in theatrical, stylised ways: an agoraphobic ordeal in which bodies and faces loom up with tin-tack sharpness out of the creamy white fog. Frances McDormand is Lady Macbeth, a role she was born to play, bringing a hard-won domestic authority and her own sort of military determination to the plan to kill King Duncan. Macbeth is Denzel Washington, who portrays the Thane as already exhausted by his great triumph in the king’s cause at the very beginning, a moment at which he might be expected to look forward to retirement. Washington’s signature rolling swagger looks careworn, but his Macbeth submits to both the duplicitous supernatural promises and his wife’s demands, like a soldier taking his orders. And then, angry and paranoid, he escalates his fanatical rule with a series of pre-emptive murders, while McDormand’s Lady Macbeth retreats into horror and despair. Washington takes the big speeches at an even pace, sometimes rolling over shades of meaning. He sees the floating dagger and the ghost of Banquo, but we don’t. McDormand is more specific and precise in her delivery. Interestingly, Coen lets the two do the cheeky “If we should fail? We fail!” line-reading, which isn’t strictly accurate but has an irresistibly modern sound. Unlike Justin Kurzel, Coen does not directly address the mystery of the couple’s childlessness but lets the issue hang in the air with Lady Macbeth’s lines about breastfeeding. And Coen offers an ingenious new theory about the identity and significance of the third murderer. The movie hits its stride immediately with a taut, athletic urgency and it contains some superb images – particularly the eerie miracle of Birnam Wood coming to Dunsinane, with Malcolm’s soldiers holding tree-branches over their heads in a restricted forest path and turning themselves into a spectacular river of boughs. This is a black-and-white world of violence and pain that scorches the retina.Siobhan Daniels is giving a virtual tour of her home. “I’ve got my gin bar,” she says, flicking on decorative lights, “an oven big enough for Christmas lunch ... and a full-size shower and toilet.” The moment she walked in, she knew it was the home for her. She gave up her flat in Kent, disposed of most possessions – and moved into this two-berth Auto-Trail Tribute motorhome. Daniels, 62, is speaking from a farm in Dorset, where she volunteers in exchange for free electric hook-up. She has recently travelled south from Scotland, where she arrived via Sussex, Herefordshire and the Brecon Beacons. Of course, everywhere now is both an arrival and a departure. “I lie here and look at the map and think: ‘Where am I? Where do I want to go?’ It’s as random as that.” At first, she says, “I was afraid of the enormity of what I’d said I was going to do.” As a single parent, it was the kind of risk she could never have taken while raising her daughter Sammy, now 32. She began to tell people: “‘I need to go to the edge of a loch and scream’ ... I really suffered with the menopause in my 50s. I lost my sense of who I was. I became anxious, weepy, angry with the world.” At BBC South East, where she worked as a news reporter and producer, she found it hard to function. “I was pretending a life, just to get through,” she says. “You couldn’t have a difficult conversation and say ‘I’m struggling’.” Daniels felt “pushed into the back room”. Her mother and her eldest sister died in this period (she is one of eight), adding an unbearable load to her misery. “I was absolutely done. Burnt out.” “I don’t want any woman to feel what I was made to feel,” says Daniels, who has a blog and is writing a book of tips; she gives talks to women’s groups too. Moving into a motorhome is not the obvious response to a crisis, but Daniels has always been adaptive and adventurous. She was a nurse for nine years before getting a job as a BBC trainee at 31. In that “really dark place” in her 50s, with Sammy’s encouragement, she ran a marathon. When Sammy went to university, Daniels sold her house to fund her own gap year. In Thailand, New Zealand and Argentina, she mixed with twentysomething travellers and felt ageless. She thinks that is where her current adventure began. “Once you start getting the seed of an idea for adventure,” she says, “that is the start of the adventure.” Now she has been on the road for two years. Her first stop in the Tribute was the Yorkshire Dales, near where she grew up. After a few months, she reached Loch Morlich in the Highlands. “It was snowing and raining, and there was a partial moon,” she recalls. “I went to the other side of the loch and I stood there. It was a really starry night and I howled like a wolf ... Then I talked to my mum, said all the things I wished I’d said to my boss, and seriously everything went away.” Now Daniels believes that “to be ageless you have to own your age ... People used to say, ‘Oh, you don’t look your age,’ and I’d say, ‘Thank you very much.’ Now, I correct people. Nicely. I say: ‘Thank you, I know you come from a good place, but can I just say that actually this is what 62 and a half looks like.’” Daniels wants “the narrative around ageing to change. I don’t want anti-ageing,” she says. “My sister couldn’t age. It’s a privilege to age. I’ve got loads of wrinkles around my lips but that’s not a negative. I’ve earned those. I’ve lived, I’ve laughed, I’ve loved, I’ve cried.” Of course, she misses Sammy – and a hot bath. Emptying the toilet can be a pain (though since her video of it has been watched 46,000 times on TikTok, even this chore brings a smile). “I’ve made a lifestyle choice to live with very little, to be free and to travel,” she says. “And I’ve never been happier.” Tell us: has your life taken a new direction after the age of 60?Ragdoll 9pm, Alibi From the makers of Killing Eve, here’s another crime thriller that’s similar in tone (slightly odd but beautiful characters who find merriness in the macabre with witty one-liners). It follows a group of cops unpicking the sinister case of the “Ragdoll” – a flesh body made from six different people’s body parts stitched together. They discover that six more people are due the same fate – including one of the officers. Enjoyable, if you can stomach the grisliness. Hollie Richardson The Atom and Us 7.35pm, PBS America “Loved, hated and impossible to ignore – the atom changed our world.” So begins this exploration of our relationship with atomic power – once a great hope for energy demands – from the second world war, across several high-profile nuclear disasters. It examines personal and political reactions, and why hopes for a nuclear future aren’t extinct just yet. Henry Wong Live: Winter on the Farm 8pm, Channel 5 Cannon Hall farm in South Yorkshire was a popular TV destination during the summer. So why not return now to see how it looks with less foliage and possibly a bit of snow? Helen Skelton and Jules Hudson are your guides to this rural idyll, hosting nightly visits across the week. First up: looking after the reindeers. Phil Harrison Succession 9pm, Sky Atlantic Anyone else feel the looming sense of doom coming to a head at Kendall’s party last week? The penultimate episode picks up with sibling tensions more fraught than ever. Will Shiv’s allegiances change? And is everybody going to make it to the season finale? HR Two Doors Down 10pm, BBC Two The Scottish sitcom returns for a six-episode run, with its blend of sharp observation and gently mocking humour. Beth is hoping to celebrate Ian and Gordon’s anniversary with a controversial vegetable curry, though their neighbours have other plans. The night’s main mystery, however, is Ian’s black eye. HW Along for the Ride With David O’Doherty 10pm, Channel 4 The comedian’s moseying, rather shapeless travel show might benefit from this week’s choice of guest: Mel Giedroyc is more a funny companion than an outright comedian, which fits the series’ relaxed vibe. The Northumberland coast, site of their shared cycle ride, is a stunning backdrop. Jack Seale Film choice Topsy-Turvy (Mike Leigh, 1999), 11.25pm, Film4 This 1999 film was a bit of a sidestep by social-realist comedy master Mike Leigh, its subject being the Victorian light opera duo WS Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) and Arthur Sullivan (Allan Corduner) and their creation of The Mikado. Still, it’s a visual treat, with costume, makeup and set design bringing the theatrical world of 1884 to vivid, scrappy life. Naturally, being Leigh, the troubles of the time aren’t neglected but they’re more of a side-issue to the real dilemma Gilbert and Sullivan face: how to follow up their last hit when the creative well has run dry. Simon Wardell“I’m not supposed to talk for this long. I told my publicist beforehand: ‘I need to keep this short so I don’t give quotes I’ll regret,’” chuckles Chris Noth. Too late for that. Ahead of our interview, I had expected Noth – best known as Mr Big from Sex and the City – to be a reluctant interviewee, because that’s how he came across in past articles, especially when he was talking about the TV show that turned him from a jobbing actor into, well, Mr Big. But those were from back in the day, when he bridled at his sudden celebrity. Noth had been in hit TV shows before, most famously when he played Detective Mike Logan for five years on Law &amp; Order. But nothing could have prepared him for Sex and the City. “Initially, when the show became a cultural phenomenon, I was really annoyed by it, because I don’t like to be called a character’s name on the street and actors don’t like [characters] sticking to them. But eventually I thought: ‘Just stop resisting this because it’s not going away. People, for some reason, will always relate you to that part, so just let what you resist persist.’ And if I can be a small part of what people think of as New York City, that’s a really lovely thing,” he says with a relaxed smile. Surely all of the actors on Sex and the City will be seen for ever through the prism of the show, I say. “Yeah, Cynthia [Nixon] ran for mayor, but she’s still Miranda!” he hoots. Maybe it’s because he has a more relaxed relationship with Sex and the City these days that Noth, 66, is in an enjoyably loosey-goosey mood today. We are speaking by video chat ahead of the release of the HBO Max series And Just Like That, the latest chapter to the seemingly never-ending Sex and the City juggernaut. Such is the hysterical security around it, I haven’t been able to see any of it, so all I can un-exclusively reveal is that it stars pretty much all of the original cast, with the notorious exception of Kim Cattrall, who we’ll discuss shortly. Noth is talking to me from the Berkshires in Massachusetts, in one of his three homes, the other two being an apartment in New York and his family home in Los Angeles, where he lives with his wife and two sons (yes, there are definite benefits to being an actor with a character who sticks to you). From what I can see, it looks like a gorgeously luxe cabin, and Noth says he has been coming to this area since he went to school nearby as a teenager. “I’ve always had a love for this area, even though it’s changed a lot. I still love New York City, but that’s changed tremendously. I didn’t come to New York because it was clean, I came because it was exciting,” he says, and goes off on the classic New York rant about how the rents are too high now and the neighbourhoods are too swanky. I say it’s a bit rich for a star of Sex and the City to complain about the gentrification of New York, given a lot of people blame the show for that. “Whoa! Hold on, I gotta sit down to answer that!” he says, laughing, scooping up his laptop and moving us to the sofa. “I feel a little guilty that our show became the look for what New York is. That glamour always existed, but it wasn’t the only look. It’s kind of like what the Kardashians have done to culture in America: millions of people following them because they have a thousand shoes in their closets. No, no – it’s not the same,” he interrupts himself hastily, presumably hearing the sound of a hundred HBO execs having coronaries. “Sex and the City has a lot to offer in terms of its vision of New York, because people do need a certain glamour. But many neighbourhoods have changed, so it’s a love-hate kinda thing.” Surely Friends and Seinfeld provided a view of New York that was just as sanitised, I say. “I’m not sure if it was sanitised, but [Sex and the City] took one part of the city and made it ubiquitous,” he says. Though Sex and the City has always been a target in a way other shows weren’t, I say. It was criticised for its lack of diversity in a time when no one complained about it in Seinfeld or Frasier. “It was the time and we weren’t the only ones, right,” he says. Now critics are focusing on how old Sarah Jessica Parker, Kristin Davis and Cynthia Nixon are. Noth rolls his eyes in despair. “People are like: ‘Oh the girls don’t look the same.’ Yeah, because it’s 25 years later! We’re normal people, we get older, we adjust – why, don’t you?” The truth is, only the lucky get to age. In September, Willie Garson, who played the much-beloved character Stanford Blatch, died from pancreatic cancer at the age of only 57. Did Noth know he was ill? “No, most of us didn’t know. The last time I saw him was on set and I kick myself because I didn’t really get a chance to talk to him. He was extraordinarily fun and funny and there’s nothing to say but that it’s heartbreaking. It’s sad for everyone, and for the show, because I think he was going to have a really huge storyline. But he’ll be in it to the extent that he filmed. Oh God …” Then there’s Cattrall, who will be absent from the new series for a very different reason. Rumours of a feud between Cattrall and Parker date back to 2004, but things really stepped up a notch in 2018. Parker posted condolences on Cattrall’s Instagram when the latter’s brother died and Cattrall accused her of being “cruel” and a “hypocrite”. So, I ask Noth, why do you think Cattrall isn’t in the new series? “I have to tell you, I have absolutely no idea what her thinking is, or her emotions. I do know that I’m very close with SJ and [Cattrall’s] descriptions of her don’t even come close. I liked her, I thought she was marvellous in the show and some people move on for their own reasons. I don’t know what hers were. I just wish that whole thing had never happened because it was sad and uncomfortable,” he says. Did it put the rest of the cast in an awkward position? “I just don’t like to see anyone talking down about SJ because she’s a target and people can be nasty. I feel very protective of her and I was not happy about that. That’s all I’ll say about that.” Noth himself nearly didn’t return for And Just Like That, and I can’t say I blame him. I adored the original show, but there’s no question that it has offered diminishing returns ever since. The first movie was awful. The second was unwatchable, all the originality and courage of the show swapped for nonsensical storylines and garbage dialogue. Does Noth agree that the movies felt different from the show? “Yeah, it’s just the nature of being in a movie, I guess. They did pretty well, though. On my side of it, I thought it was less – I was a little uncomfortable with the, um, in the second one, how the issues between Carrie and Big were resolved,” he says with what sounds very much like cautious understatement. (For those who have spared themselves the second film, Carrie and Big’s problems are resolved in a completely stupid and unrealistic way, the opposite of the careful emotional truth-telling of the show.) “I don’t remember [the films], to tell you the truth. I just remember the series being a lot of fun. I saw the movies once at the premieres and that was it.” Noth was hesitant about returning because he felt, not unreasonably, that he had taken Big as far as he could. So what convinced him otherwise? “A conversation with [the show’s writer and director] Michael Patrick King. It was a long conversation, it continued through the pandemic and he took in a lot of my ideas and we came up with a way for me to work into it.” Sex and the City 2 came out in 2010, meaning this is the first time we’ve seen Big post-Trump era, post-MeToo, and that alpha male Manhattan millionaire seems a little less aspirational these days, I say. “I never saw him as an alpha male, that’s so funny that you say that. But it’s true, I do get offers to play these power-broker types. I know how to put on a suit, but my wife put it perfectly when she said: ‘I don’t think people realise that you’re kind of schlubby,’” he cackles. Noth grew up in Connecticut, the youngest of three boys; his father was a war hero, and his mother was one of the earliest female news correspondents. His parents separated when he was a child and his father died in a car accident shortly afterwards, when Noth was 11. How did that affect him in the long term? “I was always looking to teachers in a needier way, because I substituted feelings of them being a father. I was desperately searching for that male voice,” he says. There is an irony that, as an adult, he ended up playing such male, ultra-masculine figures in Law &amp; Order, Sex and the City and, later, as Peter Florrick, the shamed politician in The Good Wife. But Noth shrugs when I mention that show. “I don’t feel any connection to [it]. It’s odd, because I know it was well received. I have an emotional void about that part, I don’t know why,” he says. How did his mother cope raising three boys on her own? “Not very well,” he chuckles. “She had a hard time of it. There was a lot of wildness in my family. I went to a lot of different schools, basically trying to get away from parental discontent … I’m lucky that my mom lived to a very old age so I could let her know she was appreciated, because I was rebelling against her for most of my life.” Exasperated by her youngest son’s behaviour, Noth’s mother eventually sent him to a boarding school, which got him back on track. What drew him to acting? “I don’t know,” he says, as though he has never considered the question before. “I did plays at college and it was kind of the situation where I thought: ‘I’m having so much fun, why don’t I take my fun seriously?’” Noth went on to train with classic teachers, including Stella Adler. “But there are so many great actors, especially coming out of London, and I think they’re so well-trained,” he says. Like who? “All the actors on The Crown – phenomenal!” You’d be good as Ronald Reagan or Bill Clinton on that, I say. “Oh I’d audition for that!” he says, eyes bright like Mr Big spotting a good bourbon. These days, Noth keeps busy looking after his sons, Orion, 13, and Keats, one; running his rock’n’roll bar, The Cutting Room, in New York; and starring in the US show The Equalizer, alongside Queen Latifah. “I love Queen Latifah. I say this all the time to SJ: I’ve been riding on the coat-tails of female actors for a long time, and it’s carried me along,” he says. So what did he learn about women from working on Sex and the City? “Never go into the makeup room and try to rush them,” he says and laughs. “No, no, let me think … It reiterated something I already knew from having a mother who was such a powerhouse: never underestimate a woman’s opinion.” • This article was amended on 7 December 2021 to correct a quote regarding the training of British actors that was misheard on the initial call. And Just Like That … is available from 9 December on Sky Comedy and streaming service Now, and for streaming on Binge in AustraliaFrom military-grade drones to sensor systems and experimental technology, the EU and its members have spent hundreds of millions of euros over the past decade on technologies to track down and keep at bay the refugees on its borders. Poland’s border with Belarus is becoming the latest frontline for this technology, with the country approving last month a €350m (£300m) wall with advanced cameras and motion sensors. The Guardian has mapped out the result of the EU’s investment: a digital wall on the harsh sea, forest and mountain frontiers, and a technological playground for military and tech companies repurposing products for new markets. The EU is central to the push towards using technology on its borders, whether it has been bought by the EU’s border force, Frontex, or financed for member states through EU sources, such as its internal security fund or Horizon 2020, a project to drive innovation. In 2018, the EU predicted that the European security market would grow to €128bn (£108bn) by 2020. Beneficiaries are arms and tech companies who heavily courted the EU, raising the concerns of campaigners and MEPs. “In effect, none of this stops people from crossing; having drones or helicopters doesn’t stop people from crossing, you just see people taking more risky ways,” says Jack Sapoch, formerly with Border Violence Monitoring Network. “This is a history that’s so long, as security increases on one section of the border, movement continues in another section.” Petra Molnar, who runs the migration and technology monitor at Refugee Law Lab, says the EU’s reliance on these companies to develop “hare-brained ideas” into tech for use on its borders is inappropriate. “They rely on the private sector to create these toys for them. But there’s very little regulation,” she says. “Some sort of tech bro is having a field day with this.” “For me, what’s really sad is that it’s almost a done deal that all this money is being spent on camps, enclosures, surveillance, drones.” Air Surveillance Refugees and migrants trying to enter the EU by land or sea are watched from the air. Border officers use drones and helicopters in the Balkans, while Greece has airships on its border with Turkey. The most expensive tool is the long-endurance Heron drone operating over the Mediterranean. Frontex awarded a €100m (£91m) contract last year for the Heron and Hermes drones made by two Israeli arms companies, both of which had been used by the Israeli military in the Gaza Strip. Capable of flying for more than 30 hours and at heights of 10,000 metres (30,000 feet), the drones beam almost real-time feeds back to Frontex’s HQ in Warsaw. Missions mostly start from Malta, focusing on the Libyan search and rescue zone – where the Libyan coastguard will perform “pull backs” when informed by EU forces of boats trying to cross the Mediterranean. German MEP Özlem Demirel is campaigning against the EU’s use of drones and links to arms companies, which she says has turned migration into a security issue. “The arms industries are saying: ‘This is a security problem, so buy my weapons, buy my drones, buy my surveillance system,’” says Demirel. “The EU is always talking about values like human rights, [speaking out] against violations but … week-by-week we see more people dying and we have to question if the EU is breaking its values,” she says. Sensors and cameras EU air assets are accompanied on the ground by sensors and specialised cameras that border authorities throughout Europe use to spot movement and find people in hiding. They include mobile radars and thermal cameras mounted on vehicles, as well as heartbeat detectors and CO2 monitors used to detect signs of people concealed inside vehicles. Greece deploys thermal cameras and sensors along its land border with Turkey, monitoring the feeds from operations centres, such as in Nea Vyssa, near the meeting of the Greek, Turkish and Bulgarian borders. Along the same stretch, in June, Greece deployed a vehicle-mounted sound cannon that blasts “deafening” bursts of up to 162 decibels to force people to turn back. Poland is hoping to emulate Greece in response to the crisis on its border with Belarus. In October, its parliament approved a €350m wall that will stretch along half the border and reach up to 5.5 metres (18 feet), equipped with motion detectors and thermal cameras. Surveillance centres In September, Greece opened a refugee camp on the island of Samos that has been described as prison-like. The €38m (£32m) facility for 3,000 asylum seekers has military-grade fencing and CCTV to track people’s movements. Access is controlled by fingerprint, turnstiles and X-rays. A private security company and 50 uniformed officers monitor the camp. It is the first of five that Greece has planned; two more opened in November. At the same time, Greece opened a new surveillance centre on Samos, capable of viewing video feeds from the country’s 35 refugee camps from a wall of monitors. Greece says the “smart” software helps to alert camps of emergencies. Artificial intelligence The EU spent €4.5m (£3.8m) on a three-year trial of artificial intelligence-powered lie detectors in Greece, Hungary and Latvia. A machine scans refugees and migrants’ facial expressions as they answer questions it poses, deciding whether they have lied and passing the information on to a border officer. The last trial finished in late 2019 and was hailed as a success by the EU but academics have called it pseudoscience, arguing that the “micro-expressions” the software analyses cannot be reliably used to judge whether someone is lying. The software is the subject of a court case taken by MEP Patrick Breyer to the European court of justice in Luxembourg, arguing that there should be more public scrutiny of such technology. A decision is expected on 15 December. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:In Mdou Moctar’s world, riff and rhythm count but the solo is king. His grounding in the nomadic Tuareg style of assouf (desert blues) made him a popular option on Niger’s wedding circuit, but the guitarist breaks from convention by doggedly following his fingertips to someplace new. A decade’s worth of refinement has led to Afrique Victime, the most complete document of Mdou’s ability to date and one of 2021’s most electrifying releases. The young Mahamadou Souleymane was not just self-taught, but self-assembled: he fashioned his first instrument from bicycle wires and junk wood and discreetly maintained his passion for music in defiance of his family. His early recordings crossed the Sahel via Bluetooth and pricked ears for their application of AutoTune and drum machines – common in the charts of neighbouring Nigeria but unfamiliar in Tuareg tradition. In the early 2010s, the specialist music imprint Sahel Sounds began releasing Mdou’s music worldwide. Label founder Chris Kirkley then spent months trying to track down the one they called Mokhtar (the Chosen) to deliver the left-handed player a guitar better equipped for his needs. In 2015, he wielded the instrument in a quasi-adaptation of Prince’s film Purple Rain (Akounak Tedalat Taha Tazoughai). Mdou, flanked by a full band, gilded his reputation with international tours on which his hypnotic guitar twang emerged as a quicksilver, daring sound. It’s that sort of intuitive fretwork that elevates Afrique Victime, as Mdou blitzes steady two-chord songs into thick whorls of fuzz that engulf the stereo field. Two theoretically opposing rock impulses combine in Mdou’s music. On one hand, the band’s adaptability has a clear connection to the no-frills enterprise of punk and hardcore. They lug their equipment over unforgiving terrain and can spark up a gig pretty much anywhere with a generator. (And fidelity-challenged formats are no impediment to getting the word out: to service fans in regions covered by 2G networks, Matador also sold Afrique Victime in the form of a custom Nokia 6120 handset.) On the other, Mdou’s fixation with the cresting leads and playful showmanship of Jimi Hendrix and Eddie Van Halen has emboldened the Nigerien to flex his dexterous finger-tapping. Already a “feeling player” by nature, as the group’s bassist and in-house producer Mikey Coltun puts it, today Mdou embraces the flair of classic rock. Afrique Victime streamlines the hooky onslaught of Mdou’s 2019 breakout LP, Ilana: the Creator, into something more well-rounded. Coltun’s sequencing affords breathers in between levee-breakers, giving necessary hush to introspective ballads Bismillah Atagah and Tala Tannam while allowing the molten psychedelia of Taliat and Asdikte Akal to sprawl. True to the music’s Saharan origins, there’s ample space here. Sometimes Mdou’s voice is barely above a whisper before the band join him in skyward invocations. Singing in Tamasheq, Mdou expands his romantic and hitherto apolitical songwriting by beseeching people to take pride in the desert’s beauty and train their scorn toward French and American imperial forces who exploit the Tuareg, Nigeriens and communities all over the African continent. Mdou’s evolved technique brilliantly comes to bear on Afrique Victime’s title track, the album’s truest shredder. Tumbling toms and ululating licks scythe through the air like jets barrelling through a thunderstorm as the singer excoriates those who perpetrate crimes against his homeland. If Mdou is a new cult hero of DIY, this is his equivalent anthem to Hüsker Dü’s Reoccurring Dreams or Wipers’ Youth of America: moments where underground favourites unlocked new levels of musicianship, galloping to the edge of noisy expression over double-digit runtimes with sparkling solos that felt as if they might never end. This virtuosity makes Mdou Moctar a curious fit for weddings (which he still plays when not on tour) yet a dazzling presence in left-of-the-dial rock. The alternately personal and provocative sound of Afrique Victime is an eruptive statement of intent, guitar music at once familiar and startlingly fresh.The Australian opposition has attempted to blunt a Coalition scare campaign by ruling out negotiating a stronger emissions reduction target if next year’s election results in a hung parliament. The senior Labor frontbencher Chris Bowen said his party had “paid a big price” in the “climate wars” over the past decade, and a central task of an incoming Albanese government would be to end the “destructive” politics on the issue. Labor’s climate and energy spokesperson said the party was pledging to cut emissions by 43% by 2030 as that was “what’s achievable coming to office in 2022” – compared with the Coalition’s Abbott-era target of a 26% to 28% cut on 2005 levels. With the prime minister, Scott Morrison, attempting to portray the Labor promise as just an “opening bid” for post-election talks with the Greens, Bowen explicitly ruled out such changes. Asked if the 43% target was negotiable, to secure support in either the lower house or the Senate, Bowen replied: “No.” Several studies have suggested Australia should be making at least a 50% reduction this decade, and almost certainly substantially more, to play its part in tackling the crisis. “Of course we are driven by science, but we’re also driven by what’s achievable coming to office in 2022 for a 2030 target,” Bowen told the National Press Club in Canberra on Monday. Analysis shows despite a range of countries’ upgraded emissions reduction pledges in Glasgow, the world remains on track to overshoot the goal of pursuing efforts to limit global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Pressed on whether Labor would be prepared to contemplate a higher target down the track, in response to international momentum for even stronger action, Bowen declared that the newly announced policy was “what we’ll implement and legislate”. Avoiding specific future commitments, he said a Labor government would then set a subsequent 2035 target “at an appropriate time”. Leaders of Pacific Island countries view climate change as an existential threat and have urged the Australian government to take far stronger action by 2030, including curbing coal. The Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, told Guardian Australia during a visit to Palau on Friday that Australia’s target of achieving net zero by 2050 was “ambitious” and acknowledged the issue was “of great importance to the Pacific”. Although the Australian government has not formally upgraded its Abbott-era 2030 target, Payne pointed to the projection that it may achieve up to a 35% cut in emissions by 2030. She also said she wanted to share low-emissions technology with the region. Asked whether the watering down of the language in the final Glasgow communique was a monumental failure and a blow to the Pacific, Payne said Cop meetings were “always challenging”. “Nobody gets everything that they want,” Payne said. “But I think the presence of the Pacific countries – and I know it is no small thing to travel from Palau to Glasgow in the middle of a global pandemic – the presence of Palau and other Pacific nations were extremely important to, I guess, act as a very clear marker to the rest of the world of what the Pacific regards as important.” ‘Australians fatigued by climate wars’ Morrison attempted unsuccessfully to boost Australia’s 2030 target in the lead-up to November’s Cop26 summit in Glasgow, but that idea was vetoed by the National party. With the Australian federal election due by May, the prime minister has attempted to characterise the Labor plan as a threat to jobs and “unsafe”. Morrison campaigned on Monday alongside Liberal MP Dave Sharma, who has been pushing for the Coalition to upgrade its medium-term targets and who is facing a challenge from climate-focused independent candidate Allegra Spender. The prime minister said the 43% target was “just the opening bid from Labor”. “I mean, for Labor to legislate if they were to form government, they would have to do that with the support of the Greens,” Morrison said as he launched a pro-recycling campaign. “And you know what the Greens’ target is, it’s 75%. So vote Labor, you vote Greens and you vote for the Greens targets.” Bowen said the Coalition’s first instinct in responding to Labor’s climate policy on Friday was to promote division “as it is in their political interests to keep the climate wars going”. He said on Monday it was time for Australia to turn the page on the “toxic climate politics of the last decade” and to embrace the opportunity to become “a renewable energy superpower”. “The Australian people, fatigued from the last decade, the last two years in particular of the climate wars, deserve so much more than this,” he said. “They deserve a government with concrete plans and an intention to unite Australians – not divide them – on this most important journey.” Bowen said Labor was seeking an electoral mandate for its approach to climate change as a “first step to building the national unity”. He said he wanted to be “very clear” that there would be “no coal-fired power station closures as a result of Labor policy” – while noting some closures had already been announced and it was ultimately for the market to determine. Decisions about the future of Australia’s coal and gas exports would be “made in the boardrooms in Tokyo, Beijing, New York, New Delhi, London” rather than in the Australian cabinet room. Bowen said there would be pressure on Australian exports as a result of the world decarbonising, and it was important to support affected communities, invest in job diversification “so that young people coming into the job market … have choices”. When asked about gas in the Northern Territory’s Beetaloo basin, Bowen said Labor had “supported the exploration, which I think is an appropriate thing to do” – but whether that gas was exploited was primarily a matter for the NT government. The leader of the Greens, Adam Bandt, said on Monday: “With Labor matching the Liberals on more coal and gas, it’s clear the only way we’ll get climate action is by kicking the Liberals out and putting Greens in balance of power to push the next government to listen to the science.”The reopening of the Queensland border means thousands of people, including some who have been locked out of the state since July, will be allowed to return. Some have been living in caravan parks in northern New South Wales; others have been waiting to plan reunions with relatives. The barricades at Tweed Heads – dubbed “checkpoint Coolie” – have been in place for five months. During that time the closed border has been managed in a way where hardline bureaucracy has trumped compassion and common sense. At the same time, Queensland has dodged the large-scale Covid outbreaks that have hit Sydney and Melbourne. “I know people have said to me personally some of them haven’t seen their grandkids for the first time,” the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said. “Some of them haven’t seen their aunts and uncles, their mothers and fathers.” When will the border open? The Queensland border will open at 1am on Monday, 13 December. Police checkpoints will remain in place at road crossings and airports to ensure arrivals meet entry criteria. Who is allowed to come across? Fully vaccinated people from declared “hotspots” – that includes NSW, Victoria and South Australia – will be able to enter by road or air from 13 December. A person is considered fully vaccinated one week after their second dose of an approved vaccine. Do I need a test? Yes. Anyone crossing into Queensland from a declared hotspot requires evidence of a negative PCR test in the 72 hours prior to crossing the border. Arrivals from hotspots must also take a second test five days after arriving. What about people who live near the border? One of the biggest problems created by the closed border is how it severed interconnected communities on either side. Vaccinated border residents will be able to obtain a border pass – valid for 14 days – that will allow them to move freely across the border without the need for a PCR test. How will border crossings be managed? Logistics are still being worked out, but the Queensland police commissioner, Katarina Carroll, has told people to “pack your patience” and expect very long delays. Carroll says police may do random checks, or they may check all cars crossing the road border. Police also have number-plate scanning technology to record all cars crossing into the state. “To speed up the process, make sure that all of those travelling into Queensland have a border pass that is clearly displayed and easy to see. Motorists, please consider travelling out of those traditional peak hours. “Police will be meeting you at the borders, particularly on the road borders (where) we’ll be conducting anywhere from random to 100% compliance checks.” Do some people still have to quarantine? International arrivals will still have to quarantine, either at home or in a hotel. Does this mean lockdowns are over? Not likely. Queensland has acknowledge it cannot continue to pursue a Covid zero strategy, but that outbreaks might be met with targeted lockdowns or mask mandates in future. When do other rules come into effect? Queensland has already said its plans to bar unvaccinated people from some public spaces, including cafes and restaurants, is set to come in place four days later, on 17 December.Top story: Travel rules ‘too late’ to stop Omicron wave Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are today’s top stories. The Oxford professor who created the AstraZeneca vaccine has warned that the pandemic is far from over and the next one could be even more lethal. As fears grow about the spread of the Omicron Covid variant, Prof Dame Sarah Gilbert said that it “will not be the last time a virus threatens our lives and our livelihoods”, adding that the next one “could be more contagious, or more lethal, or both”. Her warning came as ministers were told by one of their scientific advisers that the new variant was spreading rapidly in the UK, and tougher travel rules starting tomorrow would be too late to prevent a potential wave of infections. There were 86 new Omicron cases reported yesterday, taking the total identified so far to 246. At the same time, activists have warned that failure to vaccinate the world against coronavirus has created a breeding ground for Omicron and should serve as a wake-up call to wealthy nations. New figures show that 12- to 15-year-olds in some parts of England are three times more likely to be vaccinated than others. London has the lowest vaccination rate with just one in three children having received their first jab. Read more on this and other developments in the pandemic at our live blog here. * * * ASSK jailed – Aung San Suu Kyi has been jailed for four years for incitement and breaking a natural disasters law, according to reports, the first sentence to be handed down to Myanmar’s ousted leader since the junta seized power and accused her of a litany of crimes that could lead to decades in prison. Aung San Suu Kyi, 76, has been accused of a series offences - from unlawful possession of walkie-talkies, to breaches of the Official Secrets Act. Her lawyer has previously described the cases as “absurd”. * * * Image problem – Schools and parents should do more to support students who are being sexually harassed through platforms such as Snapchat and Instagram, while the tech companies need to clamp down on non-consensual sexual images being sent to young people, according to new research released on Monday. The study by academics at University College London and the University of Kent found that just over 50% of teenagers who had been sent unsolicited sexually explicit images via social media apps say they have not reported the offences to either their parents, authorities or the companies involved. * * * War on drugs – Middle-class drug users are to be targeted as part of a 10-year strategy to be announced by the government, with a heavy focus on war-on-drugs-era punishment. So-called “lifestyle” users of class-A drugs face losing their passports or driving licences under proposals designed to target wealthy professionals who ministers will argue are driving exploitative practices with their demand. Police will be allowed to go through drug dealers’ phones and contact their clients to warn about drug use. * * * France violence – Violence broke out last night at a rally by the far-right French presidential candidate Éric Zemmour, just days after he formally declared his candidacy, in a video highlighting his anti-migrant and anti-Islam views. Zemmour, a former TV pundit, appeared to be put in a headlock by a protester at the event near Paris, suffering light injuries. Anti-racism activists were also reportedly attacked after they stood up with “No to Racism” written on their T-shirts. Valérie Pécresse was chosen as the presidential candidate for the rightwing Les Républicains, and said her “mission” was to stop “zig-zagging” Emmanuel Macron from winning a second term. * * * Next step – Strictly Come Dancing’s John Whaite – who made history as part of the show’s first all-male couple – has said he initially intended to dance with a straight partner, and expected much more criticism and disapproval than he received. The former Great British Bake Off winner and his professional dancing partner Johannes Radebe followed in the footsteps of Olympian Nicola Adams and Katya Jones, who formed the show’s first all-female couple last year. * * * Lost treasure – A mountaineer who stumbled across a box of precious stones buried on a glacier on Mont Blanc after a plane crash 50 years ago has been given a share of the treasure. The emeralds, rubies and sapphires were thought lost when an Indian airliner crashed on the mountain in 1966 but they were discovered by the climber in 2013. After an extensive search in vain for their owner, the climber will share the €300,000 (£255,000) hoard with the local authorities in France. Today in Focus podcast: Escobar’s ‘cocaine hippos’ Hippos imported into Colombia by the drug kingpin Pablo Escobar have become a biodiversity nightmare after being allowed to roam free after he was shot dead by security forces in 1993. Joe Parkin Daniels tells Michael Safi how the Colombian government plans to tackle the problem. Lunchtime read: New start at 60 – ‘I’ve never been happier’ The latest in our series on people making a new start at 60 features Siobhan Daniels, a former TV reporter from Kent who decided to tackle her career and emotional burn-out by selling her home and taking off in a motorhome. Her adventure has taken her all over Britain and she has even made light of the chore of having to empty the toilet with a much-viewed TikTok video. “I’ve made a lifestyle choice to live with very little, to be free and to travel,” she says. “And I’ve never been happier.” Sport Lewis Hamilton hit out at his Formula One title rival Max Verstappen after the world champion won a chaotic Saudi Arabian Grand Prix, describing him as unwilling to obey the rules and his driving as over the limit. Ralf Rangnick was delighted with Manchester United’s “front-foot” performance as his opening match as interim manager ended with a 1-0 win against Crystal Palace, with Fred the unlikely goalscoring hero at Old Trafford. Emma Hayes praised the tactical masterclass delivered by her team after Chelsea ripped apart the league leaders, Arsenal, to secure last season’s FA Cup with a 3-0 win in front of a buoyant Wembley crowd. Chris Silverwood expects Ben Stokes will make his Test return at the Gabba this week and the head coach believes the very presence of England’s Headingley hero from 2019 has lifted hopes of winning back the Ashes from Australia this winter. Western Australia’s tough Covid rules means the fifth Test will definitely not be played in Perth, with Hobart or Melbourne the possible alternbatives for the finale. Leicester will turn their attentions to Europe buoyed by claiming the scalp of the Premiership champions Harlequins to continue their 100% winning start to the season. Norway’s Magnus Carlsen is on the verge of retaining his world chess championship after defeating Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi for the second time in three days on Sunday in the eighth game of their €2m (£1.71m) showdown in Dubai. Zhao Xintong completed a 10-5 win over Luca Brecel to claim the UK Championship crown in York. Jordan Spieth and Henrik Stenson saw the funny side after they were penalised for playing from the wrong tee in the final round of the Hero World Challenge. Jamaica grabbed a consolation victory, beating England 63-53, but the Roses won the three-match netball series 2-1. Business Economic forecasters have slashed expectations for Britain’s recovery and said further pain could follow, depending on the severity of the Covid variant Omicron. The CBI said in June that it expected the economy to expand by 8.2% but has cut that to 6.9% and revised down its 2022 forecast from 6.9% to 5.1%. Renewed concerns that China Evergrande is heading for default sent its shares crashing 12% in Hong Kong. The FTSE100 is on course to start the week with a jump of 0.4% while the pound is fetching $1.324 and €1.172. The papers Covid concerns top the agenda for most papers, with the Guardian leading with “Next virus could be more lethal, warns scientist behind vaccine”, and the Telegraph reporting “More than 300,000 housebound yet to get booster jabs”. Travel issues are the lead in the i – “Backlash over new travel test rule as families face cost hike” – and the Scotsman: “Scots travel industry fury as pre-flight tests return”. The Mirror says Covid could spread during the holiday season: “Beware cost of Christmas”. The Times splash is “PM plans to let ministers throw out legal rulings”, the Mail goes with “Harry’s swipe at Charles’ Saudi donor”, and the Express says “At last! Brexit shake-up to boost Britain’s firms”. The Sun leads with the Arthue Labinjo-Hughes tragedy – “Throw away the key” – while the FT has “Lloyds targets wealthy and rental property in fresh push for growth”. • This article was amended on 6 December 2021. Pablo Escobar was killed in 1993, not 1995 as an earlier version stated. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekend.Menulog has argued that existing employment law was not designed with on-demand delivery riders in mind, as it urges the Fair Work Commission to establish a new award as part of its push to become the first gig economy company to make its workers full employees. Menulog announced in April it would make its delivery riders full employees, rather than contractors, which would entitle them to award wages and other protections that gig workers do not have. The company’s Australian managing director, Morten Belling, has previously said the move to fully employ workers may cost the company more, but was necessary to “meet its moral obligations”. However, Menulog says the current award system is not suitable and has applied to the Fair Work Commission to create an “on-demand industry award”. The case was heard before the full bench of the commission on Monday, with the company arguing the role was too different to be covered by the existing fast food or road transport and distribution awards. Barrister acting for Menulog, Brendan Avallone, told the commission the existing awards predated the on-demand delivery industry. “It is new, it is something which did not exist when these awards were made in 2008-2009, let alone when their predecessor awards were created in the decade before that,” he said. Unlike other roles in fast food, riders are not employed by the restaurant providing the produce, he said, while the road transport award did not recognise the on-demand nature of delivery riders. However, the Transport Workers’ Union argues that delivery riders could be covered by the road transport and distribution award. In a submission earlier this month, the TWU said the introduction of an app to organise what would otherwise be considered courier deliveries did not change what had been a decades-long practice covered by the existing award. “Menulog and its competitors who provide on-demand food delivery services are in the road transport and distribution industry as they are each employers involved in the transport by road of food, drinks and meals which are goods, wares, merchandise or anything whatsoever ... The transport by road of food, drinks and meals represent the core aspect of their businesses and plainly bring these employers within the coverage of the RTA,” the submission stated. TWU national secretary, Michael Kaine, said in a statement that existing rights for transport workers must not be undermined. “We welcome Menulog’s acknowledgment that appropriate rights and standards in the industry must be put in place, but we must ensure that existing terms and conditions for transport workers are not undermined,” he said. “If we can get that balance right in the award system, then we will also still need to ensure that others, like Uber Eats and Deliveroo, stop deliberately misclassifying work.” The commission will decide whether one of the existing awards is appropriate, whether they could be modified, or if a new award is warranted. The commission reserved its decision on Monday. Should Menulog be successful, it would not ultimately decide the award but rather inform discussions between Menulog, the TWU and others over the path forward, Avallone said.If America has stood for anything, it’s surely forward-looking optimism. In New York, Chicago, Detroit and other shining cities, its soaring skyscrapers pointed to the future. But has the bubble burst in the 21st century? “We don’t see ourselves striding toward a better tomorrow,” columnist Frank Bruni wrote in the New York Times last month, citing research that found 71% of Americans believe that this country is on the wrong track. “We see ourselves tiptoeing around catastrophe. That was true even before Covid. That was true even before Trump.” This disquiet hovers over Futures, a new exhibition that marks the reopening of the Smithsonian Arts and Industries Building after nearly two decades lying moribund on Washington’s National Mall. Spanning 32,000 sq feet, the show offers a sobering reminder from the past that utopian predictions of the future usually turn out to be wrong. It warns about the danger of unintended consequences: today’s wonder invention is tomorrow’s arch polluter. And then it has a dilemma familiar to journalists who report on the climate crisis: how to walk the line between alarm and fatalism. “It’s a needle we tried to thread throughout the whole exhibition,” says Rachel Goslins, director of the Arts and Industries Building. “How do we be hopeful without being naive and how do we surface challenges without creating more anxiety? “Everybody wanted to be part of this exhibition because there’s a real hunger on the part of artists, designers and scientists to be part of a narrative that allows people to imagine the future they want and not the future they fear. To be part of an exhibition that came from a place of hopefulness about the future was attractive.” The display includes innovations in protein production, a “bioreactor” that uses algae to capture carbon from the air with 400 times the efficiency of a tree, an alternative to a coffin in the form of a biodegradable capsule that enables a decomposing body to nourish a tree, and coin-operated washing machines hooked up to grow a garden of wetland plants – “an ecosystem on rinse cycle”. Goslins continues: “Sustainability is woven throughout the whole exhibition, partially in how we built it and the materials we use, but also in the solutions we explore. There are a lot of really big ideas in this exhibition that, if they come to scale, could fundamentally change our relationship with the planet. “No single one of these things is the answer but what we want people to take away is that there are solutions out there, there are answers out there. We have to pick them and we have to invest in them.” But there are also be-careful-what-you-wish-for lessons from the past. Among the objects on show is a 1909 cast iron “Bakelizer” machine used by chemist Leo Baekeland to manufacture the world’s first synthetic plastic, or Bakelite. At first this seemed a giant gain that could be used in electronics, jewelry, toys and much else; now it is recognised as a clear and present danger to the environment. “In so many ways, it opened up the world,” Goslins reflects. “Because of plastic, we can put artificial hearts in babies and we have cars that go faster and are lighter and use less resources. We can fly to the moon. But also because of plastic, our planet is choking. “So as we ask people to walk through this exhibition and imagine the future they want and imagine the possibilities, we’re also asking them to be thoughtful about what the consequences of those choices are and how we can act to lean into the best case scenario of some of these technologies and ideas and avoid the worst-case scenario.” Among the stars of the show are the Bell Nexus, a self-driving hybrid-electric air taxi that has a Star Wars grandeur, and Virgin’s Hyperloop vehicles which speed at 600 miles per hour through an enclosed tube with most of the air removed to eliminate aerodynamic drag. The latter is displayed with a subway-style map that envisions travelling from Boston to New York in 25 minutes, from there to Philadelphia in 12, from there to Baltimore in 13, from there to Washington in six, and so on all the way to Seattle. “It’s not just, ‘it would be great to be able to get to LA in three hours without leaving the ground’, but it could change the way people live in cities. It could change fundamental patterns of the way we inhabit the Earth, which is where we might need to have options around as our climate changes.” Other highlights include costumes from the Marvel Studios movie Eternals, part of an interactive exhibit that shows how films imagine the future, and objects such as a tortoise robot from 1950, an AI-powered kinetic sculpture, an experimental Alexander Graham Bell telephone, the first full-scale Buckminster Fuller geodesic dome built in North America and “the first genderless voice”. There is a solar panel installed at the White House by President Jimmy Carter at the height of the energy crisis in 1979; they were subsequently removed by the Ronald Reagan administration. At the heart of the show is “me + you”, a sculpture by artist Suchi Reddy that incorporates artificial intelligence and is sponsored by Amazon Web Services. It listens for the words “My future is ...” at several circular listening posts and renders the speaker’s sentiment in a display of coloured lights and patterns. Its interpretations will evolve and become more nuanced over time. Standing beside “me + you” in the vast central rotunda, Goslins says: “I saw it in renderings and then I saw it half-assembled, I saw it in pieces and now I get to see it for real. It’s fantastic. “It is this gorgeous, inspiring, luminous structure that’s meant to capture the hopes and dreams of our visitors and mirror those back to them. That is literally the raison d’etre of this exhibition, so it’s a wonderful metaphor and it’s also just a really fun thing to interact with.” The British novelist LP Hartley observed: “The past is a foreign country; they do things differently there.” The Futures exhibition serves up reminders of the follies of the past. The 1904 World’s Fair in St Louis, it notes, was supposed to mark America’s progress and displayed the automobile, outdoor electric lighting and X-rays. A sign continues: “But it also featured ‘Living Exhibits’ with Indigenous people on display, like animals in a zoo. The largest was the Filipino Village, which included more than 1,000 people over a period of seven months. This disturbing exhibit marked the recent colonization of the Philippines by the United States.” The Arts and Industries Building itself has a storied history and mix of architectural styles. It was the first US national museum and the first museum built on the national mall. For 140 years it was a “Palace of Wonders” with contents such as the original Spar-Spangled Banner, the Spirit of St Louis aeroplane and the Apollo 11 command module from the first moon landing. But those objects dispersed to other museums in the Smithsonian Institution, which celebrates its 175th birthday this year. The Arts and Industries Building went dark in 2004, in part because of a need for structural renovation. Now it reawakens with Futures, scheduled to remain open until 6 July and designed by the award-winning architecture firm Rockwell Group. David Rockwell, 65, its founder and president, says: “I thought the building was such an incredible survivor and had seen so many versions of what the future was going to be and had been through so much history, so when Rachel approached us it felt like an amazingly worthwhile project. I liked the fact that I didn’t know the answer before we began. That’s a sign of a good project.” Like Goslins, Rockwell hopes that visitors will come away with a sense of possibilities about the future rather than paralysing despair. “We are living in a world in which there seems to be endless debate about everything and we’ve been through an enormous upheaval. “Optimism is the only way forward. It doesn’t mean blind optimism, but optimism where you’re able to be prompted by things you hadn’t thought about. What’s the future going to be like in 10, 20, 30, 50 years?” Futures is on display at the Smithsonian’s Arts + Industries Building until 6 JulyThere’s a scene in Wes Anderson’s new anthology film The French Dispatch in which Bill Murray’s character – an American midwestern magazine editor called Arthur Howitzer Jr – is asking his senior editors for progress updates on their writers’ stories. In a corn-yellow collared shirt that matches the corn-yellow walls of his office (a very Anderson colour palette, indeed) Howitzer looks down his spectacle-clad nose as copy editor Alumna (played by Elisabeth Moss) tells him he must get rid of one story before print deadline. “The question is, who gets killed?” she says. “There’s one piece too many, even if we print another double issue, which we can’t afford in any circumstance.” “A message from the foreman,” interrupts a young, gangly boy, presumably an intern. “One hour to press.” “You’re fired,” Howitzer bellows. “Really?” the young boy replies, his voice breaking. “Don’t cry in my office,” Howitzer says, throwing back a shot of espresso before the camera pans to a sign above his office door that reads “No Crying”. “Shrink the masthead, cut some ads, and tell the foreman to buy more paper, I’m not killing anybody.” Set in an Anderson-imagined fictional French town named Ennui-sur-Blasé – one with augmented aspects of a 1970s Paris – the film is Anderson’s love letter to old-school journalism: golf ball typewriters; hardball editors; working pages of the print edition splayed across a cork board on a wall. Howitzer gathers the best expatriate journalists of his time to write stories for The French Dispatch, an American magazine published in France and one that Anderson has explicitly modelled on The New Yorker and some of its classic writing stars. “I always wanted to make a movie about The New Yorker,” Anderson, 52, tells (ironically) The New Yorker. “The French magazine in the film obviously is not The New Yorker – but it was, I think, totally inspired by it. “When I was in eleventh grade … I was most interested in [its] short stories, because back then I thought that was what I wanted to do – fiction. Write stories and novels and so on … I have almost every issue, starting in the 1940s.” Anderson says Howitzer is based on The New Yorker’s first editor-in-chief, the Salt Lake City-raised, “quintessentially New Yorker” Harold Ross, with a little bit of the magazine’s second editor-in-chief, William Shawn, thrown in. (The latter was reportedly quiet, and so claustrophobic that he would carry a hatchet in his briefcase should he become trapped in an elevator and have to break free.) “Ross had a great feeling for writers,” Anderson says. “It isn’t exactly respect. He values them, but he also thinks they’re lunatic children who have to be sort of manipulated or coddled, whereas Shawn seems to have been the most gentle, respectful, encouraging master you could ever wish to have. We tried to mix in some of that.” The omnibus film consists of the makings of different stories that appear in the American outpost magazine. Each story draws on the life and work of its writer, many of whom are based on, or are a mix of, Anderson’s favourite New Yorker journalists. We learn that a young Howitzer extended a holiday in Ennui-sur-Blasé in the 1920s and found a career when he transformed the Sunday supplement of a newspaper owned by his father into a travelogue called The French Dispatch. In the film, we follow four writers as they chase down stories for the magazine’s final issue. Bicycle-riding reporter Herbsaint Sazerac (played by Owen Wilson) is working on an interesting travel piece of the town, one that exposes pickpockets and prostitutes. Art critic JKL Berensen (played by Tilda Swinton in a poignant shade of salamander orange) is covering a piece on psychopath Moses Rosenthaler (Benicio De Toro) and a controversial piece of artwork he made while imprisoned: a naked painting of a prison guard named Simone (Léa Seydoux). Political correspondent Lucinda Krementz (Frances McDormand) finds herself intertwined in a student freedom protest – and discovers the leader of the students, Zeffirelli (Timothée Chalamet), writing a manifesto in a bathtub. Lastly, there’s Roebuck Wright (played by Jeffrey Wright), a Black, homosexual food writer who, while eating dinner with a member of the police department one evening, is caught up in a violent turn of events that involves a kidnapping. The stellar cast also includes Adrien Brody, Willem Dafoe, Liev Schreiber, Edward Norton, Saoirse Ronan and Christoph Waltz. Anderson, of course, gave us nutty, cinematic delights in 2004’s The Life Aquatic With Steve Zissou, 2007’s The Darjeeling Limited and 2014’s The Grand Budapest Hotel, but Richard Brody – a writer at The New Yorker since 1999 – argues The French Dispatch is “perhaps Anderson’s best film to date”. “In my mind, it’s necessary to see The French Dispatch twice in order to see it fully even once, which I mean as a high artistic compliment,” Brody writes in his piece, one that would never wind up on Howitzer’s cutting room floor. The French Dispatch is in Australian cinemas on December 9.Despite recent commitments from the luxury fashion industry to reduce its environmental footprint, a report has revealed luxury fashion brands are among the worst in the industry for animal welfare, driven by their continued use of fur and exotic animal skins. As bans on the use of fur become more commonplace, the Animal Welfare in Fashion report highlights how out of step many luxury brands are with the rest of the industry. Released on 6 December 2021 by global animal welfare organisation, Four Paws, the report assessed 111 brands across different markets, including Australia, on their commitment to animal welfare and sourcing transparency. While LVMH-owned Stella McCartney achieved the report’s highest score of 90%, the luxury sector fared the worst overall, receiving an average score of just 23% (lower than fast fashion at 53%). The luxury sector’s attitude to fur changed significantly during 2021. In June Canada Goose stated they would stop using fur by 2022, in September, luxury conglomerate Kering announced all of its brands, including Gucci and Balenciaga, would stop using fur and the same month Oscar de la Renta also agreed to cease using fur, a move the New York Times reported was brokered by singer Billie Eilish. On 3 December, Elle magazine said fur would be banned from its editorial and advertising content. The report found that 57% of brands assessed have a formal animal welfare policy, a figure that has almost doubled since the inaugural report was published last year. The highest performing fashion category was – unsurprisingly – “sustainability”, with an average score of 76%; closely followed by brands in the “outdoor” category, with an average score of 71%. One Australian brand, streetwear label Afends, ranked in the report’s Top 10. The report calls for brands to reduce the use of animal products, refine animal-based supply chain choices to encourage higher levels of welfare, and to replace animal products with sustainable alternatives. The report drew on the Five Domains Model to assess brands, which was created by David Mellor, a professor of Animal Welfare Science at Massey University. The model measures welfare based on the animal’s mental state, which is affected by its nutrition, physical environment, health status and behavioural interactions. The report shares its methodology with Good On You, a website that ranks fashion brands across three areas – people, planet and animals. According to Good On You CEO, Gordon Renouf, to calculate each brand’s score on animal welfare, the platform rates brands based on publicly available information across five key areas: whether or not the brand has a welfare policy and how good this policy is; what materials they’re using and whether or not they’ve committed to banning exotic skins and fur; what certifications the brand is working with; how transparent and traceable their supply chain is; and how strong their governance model is. They use these metrics to give each brand a score out of 100, which results in a rating of: “great”; “good”; “it’s a start”; “not good enough” and “we avoid”. Seven luxury brands received a score of 0% and the lowest brand ratings, including Hermès, Prada and LVMH-owned Fendi, Louis Vuitton and Dior. According to the report, a rating this low is reserved for brands that have little transparency about their position on animal welfare, have not taken any steps to address animal welfare and may be using fur, exotic skins, and angora. “A few position statements just doesn’t cut it,” says Four Paws global corporate engagement manager, Jessica Medcalf. “We’re looking for comprehensive animal welfare policies that lead to impact on the ground.” Four Paws informed each brand they were being assessed, told them how they had scored and provided some insight into where they could improve via email. Though the report indicates broad factors that contribute to a low or high score, it did not publish specific details about what led to the failing scores of each individual brand. The report also noted that some brands with a score of 0% do have policies around animal welfare and certified sourcing – this is the case for the LVMH-owned brands. Others, such as Prada have committed to being fur free. “Not all the worst performing brands are exactly the same. They all have different attributes,” says Medcalf. ‘Much can be learned from brands that are improving’ Medcalf says they have not received a response from the companies that scored negatively in the report, but she is hopeful “we will get to work together to improve their standards of animal welfare”. For all low performing brands, the continued use of “unacceptable” animal products had “the most adverse impact on their scores”. Medcalf says the report’s criteria are impossible to meet when wild animals like crocodiles or snakes are bred, caged and killed on farms. She says, “these animals are inherently difficult to farm in such a way that you can ensure a good level of animal welfare”. According to Medcalf, Hermès – billed as the lowest performer – received their rating because they “use the largest array of animal products in our entire sample of 111 brands” and for “their use of products made from wildlife who have been farmed”. A spokesperson for Hermès said they have “science-based animal welfare policies and a commitment to converge by 2024 toward best-in-class certification” and can ensure strict control of the supply chain, in particular the traceability of leather materials. On their use of crocodile leather – some of which is sourced from Australian farms owned by the brand – the spokesperson said, “regarding exotic skins, Hermès has been collaborating with ICFA (International Crocodilian Farmers Association) for several years now”. On its website, Hermès outlines a plan to create the first specific standards for supply chains for alligator, crocodile and ostrich skins. However Medcalf says “we don’t believe that the crocodile industry can ever ensure a good level of animal welfare”. She says this is the case for all non-domesticated animals. “They’re wild animals, used to far-ranging conditions”. This means a farm environment is “just never going to be OK”. When it comes to domesticated animals, the report places emphasis on the importance of certifications in promoting animal welfare. Medcalf says, “the main way that brands can take responsibility for animal welfare within their supply chains … is by showing a good certification is applied”. The report specifically cited the Responsible Wool Standard and the Responsible Down Standard as preferred certifications – among others. Hermès cites they are moving towards both of these standards by 2024. John Lau, the Dean of Academic Strategy at the London College of Fashion, is critical of the report and the methodology. He says it “is not entirely clear, because the results of the research are not published in full”. Lau says only publishing the scores of the best and worst performing brands is also a missed opportunity, “much can be learned from brands that are improving” he says, specifically citing Kering’s efforts. Medcalf says “we have withheld most scores, as we aim to give the majority of brands the space and support to understand and address animal welfare within their corporate and social responsibility goals”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning However, she states that Four Paws intend to publish all brand scores in the next report, and the scoring will be updated over time on Good On You’s platform. She says the goal of the report is to “benchmark how the fashion industry is progressing” in order to “motivate the brands to change” and “at the same time, give us the information that we need to be able to support those brands to change”. Lau feels that the burden of change should not fall solely on brands. “Farms, which are at the start of the process, must be made accountable to how their animals, whether farmed-on-demand or a by-product, are being treated.” Additionally, it is important to take a holistic view of the issues, Lau says. “Reducing the reliance on animal derived material may improve animal welfare, however this cannot be to the detriment of destroying natural habitat to grow more plant-based fibres, or developing polluting synthetic materials that affects wildlife.” LVMH and Prada were contacted for comment, but had not supplied a response at the time of publicationIn the new dawn of a heady post-revolutionary era, Suzannah Mirghani returned in 2019 to the country of her birth for the first time in years. Her mission was to shoot a short film on Sudanese soil. It proved unexpectedly straightforward. “When the revolution happened, there was this exuberance,” she says, from her Qatari home. “When we came to make our film, we were given the green light. We were told: ‘Anything you want’. “Nobody harassed us. Nobody told us what to do. Nobody asked us for the script. I call this time in the history of Sudan ‘the honeymoon’,” says Mirghani. More than two and a half years after the toppling of the longtime dictator Omar al-Bashir, Mirghani fears the honeymoon is over, at least for her. The turmoil into which Sudan has again been plunged means she feels unable to return safely. On 31 October, as her film, Al-Sit, won the latest of many awards, Mirghani had to give an acceptance speech that was anything but celebratory. Six days before, the military had seized power in a coup, detaining the civilian prime minister and bringing the country’s fragile transition to democracy to an abrupt halt. In a video address from Qatar to the Africa in Motion film festival in Scotland, Mirghani said “the only reason” she and her crew had been able to make Al-Sit was the active encouragement given by the civilian-military partnership government. “Now,” she added, “we’re in very serious danger of going back to the bad old days of military rule and stifling creative expression.” Since the coup, a lot has happened: huge pro-democracy protests thronged through Khartoum and other cities, with at least 40 demonstrators killed. After almost a month, the prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok, was released as part of a deal struck with the coup leader, Gen Abdel Fattah al-Burhan. But the protesters, who want the military out of politics for good, are not convinced, and even less so as security forces fire teargas into the crowds that continue to gather despite Hamdok’s return. With the creative gains made after the revolution now hanging in the balance, Sudanese artists feel they have to speak out. “We artists will be the first to be targeted if the military government continues in power,” writes Aamira*, a painter, in an email from Khartoum. “We are demonstrating in the streets, facing guns, unarmed. There is nothing to fear any more.” In an interview with the Financial Times last week, Hamdok defended his decision to strike a deal with the military, saying it was essential to stop the bloodshed and “preserve the achievements of the last few years”. It may not have been uppermost in his mind, but one of those achievements was the flowering of an artistic community that had long been harassed, censored and forced into the shadows. Assil Diab, a street artist, says: “I painted Omar al-Bashir as the [face of] coronavirus in a stadium in Bahri during the daytime, which would have been just impossible; my whole family could have been killed two years ago.” Feeling compelled to return amid the revolutionary fervour, Diab returned to Sudan in 2019 and made her name painting the faces of the revolution’s “martyrs” on the outside of their families’ homes, with a getaway car close by in case the notorious paramilitary Rapid Support Forces saw her. For Mirghani, the “absolute elation” of the revolution yielded creative results. Al-Sit is the beautifully observed story of a Sudanese village girl whose parents want her to marry the sharp-suited son of a wealthy cotton trader in Qatar. “To finally be able to express yourself, to say what you had wanted to say to these people for 30 years: it’s amazing. “My film is about women’s rights. It’s social commentary on arranged marriage. I don’t think we could have said that a few years ago,” says Mirghani. The “honeymoon” was not without its challenges. The dictator was gone, but social and religious conservatism – and a reluctance to champion the arts – remained. Artistic freedom was patchy: in 2020, the renowned film-maker Hajooj Kuka and several others were detained during a theatre workshop. Asim*, a documentary film-maker in Khartoum, says that, although in the capital the “direct censorship” of the Bashir era has eased, the rest of Sudan is not as relaxed. “It’s partially freedom and partially censorship,” he says. “It is a battle about 10% won.” Khalid Albaih, a political cartoonist based in Qatar, returned after the revolution to launch the Sudan Artist Fund (SAF), to provide budding creatives with money and mentors, and with an ambitious plan to create a public art and design library. He says: “I thought: this is it. All doors were open and this is what we were going to do. “I took all my papers, and for the first time in 10 years I’m in Sudan walking around, not scared of any police, or secret police, or anything. I went to every business owner in Sudan and everyone that can donate money to these causes. And I got nothing but rejection – for a library and for an artists’ fund.” Finally, Albaih secured $7,000 (£5,300) from CultuRunners, a cultural exchange organisation, and the SAF awarded its first grant of $500 in October – just before the coup. “It was incredible because the internet cut out [after the coup leaders imposed a nationwide online blackout] so the artist didn’t even know he had won. We had to call him. It took two or three weeks to send the money to him,” says Albaih. The cartoonist knows there will not be any more funding for a while. “Now everything is rocky. No one knows how things will go. It’s going to be really hard for artists and these kinds of initiatives to move forward. The coup, says Diab, left the creative community feeling “disappointed and just broken down … because we finally thought we were free and then this happened.” She intends to apply for political asylum in the US, where she is studying, feeling she “can be of better use to Sudan” from overseas. Those in the thick of it cannot afford to give up hope. Asim was at a protest in Khartoum against the post-coup deal last week and was “teargassed the entire afternoon” amid chants of “no partnership, no negotiation, no legitimacy”. He is realistic about future challenges but knows that people have made up their minds. “I feel like there is a grip on power and it will not end today; it will not end tomorrow. Whether those power-hungry authoritarians will roll with democratic transition and allow people to express their freedoms, allow journalists and film-makers to operate or not, that is something that is still [up in] the air, because you never know with the ever-changing dynamic of power in this country,” he says. The momentum towards democracy is undeniable, he says. “I believe that is possible and I believe there is hope. The people will not stop asking for what they really want. [Will] that future come tomorrow? The day after? In two years? In five? We never know. But it seems like the consensus is that people agree it has to happen.” *Names have been changed to protect their identity Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:I am too old for Disney’s Little Mermaid. My sister was the right age, but our right-on 80s household was a princess-free zone (though The Little Mermaid is arguably one of the more subversive films in the canon, with its exploration of identity and conformity and nods to drag culture). I have, however, gleaned that the transformation from mermaid to human is a risky business; I believe a crab says so. But what about the reverse? Because today, I, a human, am becoming a mermaid, thanks to Donna Rumney of Mermaids at Jesmond Pool, in Newcastle upon Tyne. Donna is booked out with children’s mermaid parties but adult sessions are popular, too: everyone wants to be a mermaid now. There are mermaid pageants and conventions; people pay thousands of pounds for custom-made silicone tails. Something about that in-between state, the grace and fluidity, appeals when life on land feels so hidebound and joyless. I love the idea of achieving a state of otherworldly aquatic grace; what could possibly go wrong? Well, I’m a terrible head-out breaststroker, for starters. Then there’s the retro floral hat that I thought looked good but covers my ears, so I can’t hear any of Donna’s instructions properly, and without my glasses she’s just a blurry shape on the poolside. On top of that, four young staff members are joining in, as athletic and beautifully at home in the water as selkies. The floating verruca-plaster cherry on top: we are sharing the pool with a group of teenagers learning lifesaving skills. It’s an anxiety dream come to life. Thankfully, my hirsute husband (a keen freediver) is joining in and providing an entertaining distraction for all, testing out an orange stretchy tail. To earn those tails, though, we have to pass a swim test. It’s a width with faces submerged, then a width swimming “dolphin kick” (butterfly legs) on our fronts, backs and sides, both on top of and under the water. We do these exercises one by one when Donna calls our names. It would be reminiscent of school swimming lessons, if I hadn’t avoided those by claiming to have my period every week. Still, uneasy memories of chlorine-tinged humiliation stir whenever I hear my name. I can put my face in the water, but I have no technique or breath control. Swimming on my back underwater proves physically impossible. How does anyone do it? I just bob up. The movement is almost as hard to master. “Keep your knees and ankles together,” shouts the shape I assume is Donna. “The movement comes from the hips. Like belly dancing.” I understand what it should look like – sinuously elegant and powerful – but thrash about like a dying mackerel. Despite this, she lets me wriggle into my silky blue and purple scale-patterned tail and “mono-fin”, a flipper for both feet. Once equipped, I’m more beached seal than beguiling siren: a helpless, pity-inducing lump. Honking, I flop back into the pool, hoping I’ll be miraculously transformed into something lithe and amphibious. I’m certainly splashier on my first trial run on the surface, which is not an improvement. “It’ll be much easier underwater,” Donna assures me – and she’s right: it is better down where it’s wetter. The hip movement makes more sense with a bit of resistance and the mono-fin is amazingly powerful. I’m astonished how quickly the pool wall appears. We try another set of widths, on our fronts, backs and sides, on top and beneath. Everyone except me does brilliantly, including my husband, the traitor, who wows everyone with his flashy underwater merman action. “He’s a natural,” our pool staff classmates murmur. Then they quiz him on how long he can hold his breath and gasp at his answer; they even teach him to dive in a tail. His effortless physical competence is inconsiderate, and why I never usually let him come on Trying Something New outings. The pool staff are absolutely adorable, exorcising the memories of the sporty mean girls at school. They tell me I’m doing “really well” – a lie – and, more plausibly, that I’m not the worst they have seen. Donna confirms this: she once hosted a mermaid hen party. “Only three of the 18 would put their faces in the water; the rest of them had their fins on top of the water doing breaststroke.” Ego boosted, it’s time to put our moves together in a mini-routine: we swim underwater, switching from front, to side, to back, and front again. I say “we”: I manage a bit of side and front, and none of the rest; everyone else is flawless. Next, it sounds as if Donna says we should “try a handstand”, but surely that is the swimming hat playing tricks on me. I lift up the edge and cock my ear: no, she definitely, inexplicably, says “handstand”. At the count of three, everyone inverts themselves, perfectly vertical, like an Olympic synchronised swimming team. I do not. My head has no desire to be in the water, which, I accept, is a problem for a mermaid. “You need to get down low,” Donna says, “then get your legs up.” With little hope, I crouch, hands down, then heave my tail skywards. For a glorious nanosecond, it works. The Donna-shaped blur appears animated as I resurface, spluttering: I think it has both thumbs aloft. Front and backwards somersaults are less successful, and when a hoop and some balls are produced to swim through and retrieve, respectively, I pretend not to see them, like a disobedient aquarium octopus. Finally, it’s free play time. I swim around the deep end in short semi-submerged wriggles. Sometimes, I manage a few decent undulations and get a tiny hint of that feeling of magical balletic freedom, before miscalculating the depth and coming up in a panic, nose full of water. As I surface, a swimming teacher and his tiny charge scoot out of my way. I can only hear his side of their conversation. “Yes, a mermaid!” “Yes, of course they’re real!” And for that moment, despite the chlorine and the teenage lifesavers hauling a dummy on to a raft behind me, I feel real. Can water burn? Dolphin kicks deliver a brutal core workout. My midsection feels like jelly for days. Smug factor: 3/5 – I’m an awful mermaid in motion, but love my tail, which covers a multitude of sins. You don’t see enough tails in fashion magazines.Sarah Isaacs, a therapist in Raleigh, North Carolina, sees mostly clients between the ages of 22 and 30, many of whom missed out on the usual dating and networking because of the Covid pandemic. “They literally haven’t been able to do anything for two years,” said Isaacs, who specializes in working with people with eating disorders and people who identify as LGBTQ+. They are just some of the people in the United States whose mental health has suffered during the pandemic. A Gallup poll conducted in November found that, like last year, only 34% of Americans describe their mental health as “excellent”. Those are the lowest levels in two decades. Even though many people in the United States are now vaccinated against the virus and able to engage in something like a pre-pandemic lifestyle, the country’s population continues to suffer from anxiety and depression. And now there are fresh worries about the Omicron variant and the impact it could have on public life this winter. The new variant – which, early reports suggest, could be more contagious than previous strains – is already spreading in the US, triggering concern. If Omicron does lead to another Covid-19 surge, the impact on mental health will be serious. “Despite vaccinations, we still see that people are not back to pre-pandemic levels of wellbeing,” said Silvia Saccardo, a social scientist and co-author of a recent study on college students at the University of Pittsburgh students. “And they are not back to pre-pandemic levels of physical activity, which could have consequences as well, and this is quite worrisome, because if lifestyle habits and wellbeing don’t naturally rebound, it’s important to think about what to do, about interventions to help them.” Psychologists and others who study mental health attribute the high rates of anxiety and depression to continued worries about the virus, and lingering trauma from the worst parts of the pandemic. That is not unusual, said Sharon Hoover, co-director of the University of Maryland-based National Center for School Mental Health. For example, more than 18 months after Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, 15% of youths exposed to the natural disaster continued to suffer from serious emotional disturbances, such as anxiety disorders, compared with a 4.2% national average, according to a study in the Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Like the twentysomethings Isaacs has seen, children and teens have also missed out on significant life events, Hoover said, and “that doesn’t get remedied overnight by reintroducing those things”. “Many children and adolescents don’t yet have the coping mechanisms that they might need, and they are in some respects at the mercy of adults who are there to take care of them,” said Hoover. “It’s a grave mistake for people to say, ‘Our kids are going to be OK, it’s just the adults who are going to suffer.’” The same concerns about mental health continue to linger on college campuses. Before the pandemic, in fall 2019, one-third of college students across the country reported that they were struggling with anxiety and a quarter reported depression, according to an American College Health Association report. A survey conducted by the organization in spring 2021 found that one in four students had screened positive for suicidal thoughts. “If there are still concerns about a variant or who knows what may come down the road, that poses a lot of anticipatory anxiety,” said John Dunkle, a former director of counseling services at Northwestern University who is now a senior director with the non-profit Jed Foundation, a suicide prevention organization. To combat what some public health groups have declared a national mental health emergency, schools must build up coping skills for adolescents in classrooms rather “than waiting for kids to get routed to mental health providers that they may not see for six months” in part due to a workforce shortage, said Hoover. “We got kids back to school to improve their learning loss in the context of Covid, but we have to also be putting social and emotional supports in the school settings,” said Hoover. While there is a shortage of mental health professionals in the United States, Dunkle said focusing on the number of providers at a counseling center should just be one consideration. Schools must also educate other staff on how to respond to students’ mental health needs and help students navigate insurance issues, he said. Despite worries about students’ mental health struggles, Dunkle sees causes for optimism. In conjunction with Dunkle’s organization, Ithaca College recently established a “Stop and Breathe week”, aimed at helping “students cope with the stress of preparing for final exams”. After two students at Saint Louis University died by suicide in September, the school canceled classes for a day to help students focus on mental health. “That’s a good sign, where we say to students in the community, ‘Let’s stop and think about our mental health and balance,’” said Dunkle. Ideally, they would take such steps “proactively, not necessarily in the aftermath of a tragedy”. Isaacs, the North Carolina therapist, also can take positives from recent reports on mental health in the United States. She and the other provider in her practice have a two-month waiting list of people seeking appointments, in part because therapy has become more normative, she said. “I think the fact that people are seeking therapy in droves is a good thing,” said Isaacs. “It has been a grim two years, but I think everybody having it together at the same time has made people feel like they aren’t so alone.”Q My boyfriend and I would like to buy our first property together. We will be joint owners and both contribute towards the deposit, the repayment mortgage and upkeep of a £740,000 house. He is on a significantly higher salary than I am (it’s more than double mine, and likely to increase in the next couple of months). He has therefore been able to save much more than I have so I am only going to be able to contribute about £20,000 while he – with help from his parents – will have £100,000 to put towards the deposit and the stamp duty. I don’t need or particularly want to live in a £740,000 house but I don’t have a lot of choice as he is being very inflexible in terms of location. He has suggested we create some sort of legal document before buying a property, declaring that in the event we sell the house, he would get back the percentage that he put in. He has also suggested that I pay a higher percentage of the mortgage repayments, as he will be putting in more of the deposit. While I understand that he would like to protect his assets in the case of us breaking up in the future (we are not engaged or married), I would like to understand what this means for me. If we were to break up and sell the house, what would this mean in terms of my ownership/stake in the house post-sell? Would this affidavit simply mean that I would need to pay him back 20% of the total value of the house, as this is the deposit I put in? How would my higher monthly mortgage repayments affect this split, if at all? How do interest payments affect this? Is there another way you would recommend to keep things fair and simple? My boyfriend’s job means he is much savvier about getting the best out of a financial situation – I would really appreciate any advice as I feel quite out of my depth here. JD A My kneejerk reaction to your question was: don’t do it! My more measured reaction is to tell you that you do have a choice and you don’t have to enter into the joint purchase of a house which you don’t want to buy, which is in a location you don’t like and which, I suspect, will challenge you financially. Judging by the responses from readers to other letters I have answered about joint purchases where one partner was calling all the shots, if you do go ahead in spite of your reservations, it is unlikely to end well. Your boyfriend is right to say that you should have a legal agreement – usually referred to as a deed of trust – drawn up setting out how you own the property, your shares in it and what will happen in the event of a split. It shouldn’t just say what percentage your boyfriend would get back in the event of a sale but also how much you would get back. Your boyfriend is wrong, however, to say that you should pay a higher percentage of the mortgage repayments. The fact that he put more of the deposit is reflected in your percentage shares in the property with his being bigger because he contributed more than you. Your contribution of £20,000 plus half the £620,000 mortgage gives you a share of just under 45% while his contribution of £100,000 plus half the mortgage gets him a 55% share (which may surprise him). What may also surprise him is that in insisting on buying such an expensive place, he is missing out on concessionary rates of stamp duty land tax (SDLT) for first-time buyers. If you could convince him to stick to a budget of £500,000 or less there would be no SDLT on the first £300,000 of the purchase price and 5% on the remaining £200,000. You would also have a much more manageable mortgage which I suspect would suit you better. Finally, unless you can get your boyfriend to take your views into account – and select a property, price and location you are both happy with – I still think that you will regret going ahead with the joint purchase.A few months ago I decided to switch energy supplier and moved to Octopus Energy’s Go tariff, principally because it offers cheap electric car charging overnight at a rate of 5p/kWh. I applied to have the required smart meter installed. But after being given a date, I was later declined on the basis that smart meters cannot work at my address because they interfere with the missile early warning system at RAF Fylingdales. Initially, I thought this was a joke. I have been involved with the construction of hundreds of new homes in Teesside, all of which have had smart meters installed. Smart Energy GB, the body responsible for the rollout, has confirmed that this is very real, and smart meters installed in the area will not have had their smart capacity turned on. I was told that a new meter is being worked upon and will eventually replace those already installed. Meanwhile, I am having to charge my car at a premium rate of 16.76p/kWh which is costing me about £26 more a week than it would be on the Go tariff. AM, Guisborough Given that your house is more than 20 miles from the RAF base in question, I, too, was amazed that this could be an issue, but it is – and also in other areas close to bases. Smart Meter GB has confirmed this is the case and says it is working on a solution – a communications hub that will enable people living near sensitive RAF sites to use smart meters. It says these will be offered to customers “in the coming months”. It adds those in the affected area, who had already had smart meters installed should be able to have the hubs retrofitted. Meanwhile, Octopus has come up with a solution for your problem. It has offered to add you to the trial of these new meters, which, in turn, will allow you to go on the Go tariff. It says it hopes to install your new meter before Christmas. It has also said that if you get the log from your charging firm, showing how much electricity you have used for the car since the switch took place, it will retroactively apply the savings that you would have gained had the smart meter worked from the start – a generous offer. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include a phone number. Letters are subject to our terms: gu.com/letters-termsDon’t make it easy for them When you go out, or to bed, check you have shut and locked all windows and doors. Don’t leave your keys in locks when you are in, as a burglar may be able to reach them through the letterbox. Think about your family calendar, says Diane Ivory, a former Scotland Yard crime scene examiner who runs an education and entertainment company called Forensic Minds. “Be careful if the dates you’re away are on display and can be seen through the window,” she says. Burglars can hide behind big pots and hedges, allowing them to reach your home unseen by others, so keep them low if you can. Pretend someone’s in Put lights on timers and leave the radio on to make it look and sound as if someone is at home. Leave an ironing board up with a pile of clothes. “It will look like you’ve just popped out (but don’t leave the iron turned on),” says Ivory. Naomi Willis, from the SkintDad blog, suggests enabling a free “guard dog skill” on Alexa. “It allows you to set off a barking and growling dog noise by remotely activating it,” she says. Get neighbours to help When all the bins are out on a street except yours, or yours are the only ones out, that can give away the fact that no one is at home, so ask a friend or neighbour to put yours out and back, too. If you have a drive and your car is usually on it, ask them to park there so it looks like someone is home. Using her 22 years’ experience in the police, Toni Frost says to check the weather forecast while you are away. If leaves or snow fall at your doorstep and aren’t cleared, this can be a sign that no one has been going in and out of the door. Post piling up can be another give away. If you have a long trip planned, the Royal Mail’s Keepsafe service holds your mail while you are away, says Frost. It costs from £16, which covers a 10-day period. If, instead, you have a friend coming in for your post, remind them to put it somewhere out of sight. Take care with social media It may be tempting to post photos online while you are on holiday – or to say that you’re off on a break or a night out – but this lets people know you are not at home. If someone tags you when you are away, remove the tag. Facebook notifies you when this happens, so select “remove tag” on the post. James Bores from Bores Security Consultancy says criminals get information from social media. “It’s fairly easy for someone with the right knowledge of searching to identify someone, find their address, work out where the picture was taken, friends, relatives, workmates, where and when they go on holiday, and almost anything else that’s ever been made public,” he says. “So much personal data has leaked over the years that it’s almost guaranteed your address and phone number is recorded against your name somewhere. And anyone who knows where to go can pay a few quid for access to these details..” NimbleFins Insurance analysed crime and burglary statistics from the annual Crime Survey for England and Wales and found that burglars frequently know their victims. “One in four burglary incidents are perpetrated by someone the victim knows well; in one in five cases they are known by sight or to speak to. The burglars are complete strangers in just over half of incidents (57%),” it says. Keep your presents safe From the minute you get hold of them, to the minute you give them, be careful about who sees what you have bought. Don’t leave gifts in your car in full view while it is unattended, as opportunist thieves will smash the glass and run. Avoid leaving the boot open while you unload the car – even if you are juggling with bags, children and other demands. Hide presents. Leaving them all round the tree in view is advertising to potential burglars, so, too, is posting a photo of them online. Break up the packaging and don’t put your branded boxes next to the bin, advertising what’s inside your house. Insure against the worst Buildings and contents insurance will cover your home if there is a break-in – as long as you have met all of the policy requirements. Check with your insurance company if any alarms and/or security cameras you have must be activated every time you leave the property unoccupied. Photograph your possessions and keep the pictures safe, and, with Christmas presents and other new purchases, keep hold of the receipts. These will be proof of ownership if you need to claim. If you are using a shed or garage to hide your presents, check they will be covered before you leave them there. Check your policy to see if it will automatically increase the contents insured by a fixed percentage over Christmas time to reflect any increase in the value. After Christmas, assess the value of presents such as jewellery and increase policy limits accordingly. You may invalidate your insurance if you do not take reasonable care to secure your home and possessions. An insurer may well research your social media, decide that you have not taken reasonable steps to protect yourself, and refuse to pay.No one saw Spring Awakening for the first 15 years of its existence. Written in 1891 by Frank Wedekind, a former cabaret performer, the German play about a group of randy teenagers trying to figure out themselves and their desires was outlawed for obscenity. Criticising and satirising bourgeois oppression, moral convention and the lack of anything close to comprehensive sex education, it was deemed entirely inappropriate for audiences. Sexual assault, abortion and suicide are all central to the plot. But they’re not there just for the shock of it. This is a show that takes the concerns and fears of teenagers seriously; and being 130 years old, Wedekind’s play was arguably one of the first to do so. As late as the 1960s, the show was still being censored in Britain. But Spring Awakening has prevailed, and when the play was first transformed into a heady rock musical in 2006, with Glee stars Lea Michele and Jonathan Groff, it became an instant hit, winning eight Tony awards including best musical. Now that version musical is being restaged at London’s Almeida theatre, under the hand of artistic director, Rupert Goold. Goold’s cast is primarily made up of recent drama school graduates. The day after their “stumble through”, where the show is put on its feet for the first time, six of the cast are squashed on to old sofas and battered armchairs, talking over each other about how they don’t even want to think about the last night of the show. “If I look at you,” one says to another, “I’ll cry.” With music by Duncan Sheik and lyrics by Steven Sater, the scandalous musical packs in a generation’s worth of teenage tumult and sexual exploration. “You’ve got that rocky vibe,” says Taylor Bradshaw, 23, who is in the ensemble. “That’s the fun bit of it, uptempo. But when you listen to the lyrics, you’re like: ‘Oh, damn, your character’s really going through it.’” Bradshaw was appearing in Mamma Mia! as Eddie, friend to the show’s love interest Sky, when the pandemic swept everyone off the stages. “I was on my way to warm up and they said you can’t do any shows today,” he says. “Or tomorrow.” He became a receptionist at a dance school, where he then asked to teach, and recently finished performing in Chichester Festival theatre’s production of South Pacific. He describes the energy of the young Spring Awakening cast as “hungry”: for most of them, it’s their first big show since the pandemic. “We want to make sure it bangs,” he says. “And we want to make it our own.” The cast collectively apologise for being “a bit crazy” and “very high energy”; as they talk, they verbally leap over each other. For most of them, this is their first time giving an interview; at one point, 24-year-old Bella Maclean swears and then claps her hand over her mouth, and asks if we can cut that bit out. For Maclean, Emily Ooi and Joe Pitts, this is their professional stage debut. “It’s a dream,” says Ooi, 27, who’s another member of the ensemble, “but it’s intimidating as well.” Ooi is the most recent graduate of the team, only finishing drama school two months ago. Having originally trained in biochemistry and worked for three years, she ditched a career in nutrition to follow her desire of studying musical theatre – even though it meant retraining during the pandemic. “I cried every time I had to go to work,” she says. “That’s why I didn’t defer; I thought, it’s now or never. And now I’m here.” She discovered Spring Awakening when she was 16: “I remember listening to the score and feeling like someone had read my diary.” Having risked a stable career at the most uncertain of times, she says her decision feels just right. “It’s like everything’s clicked into place.” Both she and Maia Tamrakar, who plays Anna – a loyal and level-headed character amid the chaos – had the unmooring experience of attending drama school during the pandemic. “It was hard,” says Tamrakar, 23. “We would do stage combat online and pretend to fight your partner through the screen.” Ooi nods: “And when we did our summer show, we were only allowed an audience of 26 [because of Covid restrictions]. It’s going to be a bit of a shock to the system performing to a full house now.” They hope the show’s message and music chime with a new audience, one that is actively engaged with protest. As a performance about young people who feel they’ve been restricted and held back from the world, there are obvious contemporary resonances. “This play is an explosion of angst,” says Maclean. “We’re playing 14, 15, 16-year-olds – that age who were stuck in the pandemic going through it all in their bedrooms. It feels like it’s coming at the perfect time.” “The world is changing,” Bradshaw adds, “and young people are at the forefront. We were talking in rehearsals about Greta [Thunberg], Malala, John Boyega at the Black Lives Matter protests, how they’re saying what they need to say.” And being listened to, he says, comparing their calls for change to the radical roots of Spring Awakening: “It’s really nice to have a piece of art that’s going with time.” “And one that has stood the test of time,” Ooi adds. “We’re so lucky,” says Pitts, 25, who plays Georg, a teenager obsessed with his piano teacher. “That this is the first thing we’re doing out of a really difficult time, a show that is all about a need to connect and communicate.” Pitts and Maclean graduated from Guildhall in 2020. They had planned to leave school early for Spring Awakening, when it was originally due to run before the pandemic. “Our teachers were going to come and mark us in it,” says Pitts. Two weeks beforehand, lockdown hit. “Everything was so uncertain,” he says. “People were losing jobs left, right and centre. I felt lucky that there was this potential.” Their freshness means there are no expectations, adds Carly-Sophia Davies, 25, who spent the pandemic shooting her film debut in Joanna Hogg’s The Eternal Daughter. In Spring Awakening she plays Ilse, a character running from a cycle of abuse. “It’s not like audiences will know us from our last TV show,” she says. “We’re all discovering ourselves … in a [production] that’s about discovering yourself.” The cast’s lack of experience also means “there are no hierarchies” in the rehearsal room, Maclean says. “We’re willing to say: ‘I don’t know what I’m doing,’” Tamrakar adds. Davies likens their team to a group of musicians: “It’s like we’ve all come with an instrument. Together we make an orchestra.” The show may deal with heavy, difficult topics but underlining it all, the cast say, is a pulse of hope. “The kids keep on striving,” Bradshaw says. The final song, The Song of Purple Summer, is a harmony that moves from a single voice to encompass the whole company, Tamrakar notes: “It’s all about hope. It’s about moving forwards and what’s next, and what it’s like to become a young adult.” Maclean hums in agreement: “And not being defeated by the past.” All that chimes with their experience of emerging into the theatre scene during a pandemic. “You don’t know what’s coming next,” Ooi says, looking at her team, “but you cling on to hope.” Spring Awakening is at the Almeida theatre, London, from 7 December to 22 January.Downhill Skiing and snowboarding, Scotland and northern England Although skiing or snowboarding at indoor snow domes such as Hemel Hempstead’s Snow Centre (from £29 an hour adults, £24 juniors, group lessons from £42 an hour), or the country’s dozens of dry ski slopes is a lot of fun, they can’t really compare with sliding down proper snowy mountains in the great outdoors. The five main ski resorts of Scotland’s Highland and Aberdeenshire region – Cairngorm Mountain, Glenshee, Glencoe, Nevis Range and The Lecht – usually open in December, with the best snow from January until resorts close in April. If you can, go last minute when there’s snow incoming, ideally midweek when the slopes are quieter. Register for snow alerts in advance and check resorts’ own websites or Facebook pages for conditions updates. A quick lowdown: Nevis Range (day tickets £37.50 adults, £24.50 junior), Scotland’s highest resort, has arguably the widest variety of terrain, with 35 runs, 12 lifts and an off-piste area of “Back Corries” – steep chutes – for experts. Glenshee (adult day pass £32, junior £21) has the biggest ski area, with 36 runs totalling 25 miles across three valleys, and 21 lifts. It also promotes the surrounding area for ski touring, offering a ski touring ticket (£12) for those climbing up under their own steam, as well as standard lift passes. Scotland’s sixth-highest peak, Cairngorm Mountain (adults £35 a day, child £22), near Aviemore, offers this too, with 11 lifts accessing 31 runs, and three snow parks with jumps. Glencoe Mountain Resort (£27-35 per day adult, £20-22 junior), with 20 runs and nine lifts, claims to have the longest and steepest pistes, and has “microlodge” wooden cabin accommodation (from £65 sleeping four) at the resort base. The smallest of the five, The Lecht Ski Centre (adult day ticket £32, children/juniors £16-21 per day) in the eastern Cairngorms, has 20 runs and 13 lifts on a rolling hillside. All the resorts have artificial snow-making, ski schools, equipment hire shops and extra activities such as ringos and tobogganing. As they roughly form a ring of about 300 miles by road between Perth and Inverness, you could opt for a road trip between them all. A smaller area in the south of Scotland, Lowther Hills, has two tow ropes accessing a nursery ski slope and an intermediate area. It’s community-owned and run by volunteers, with no hire shop and obligatory annual membership to access the slopes (£45 per adult, £75 family pass, under 18s £25). In England, a drag-lift is set up in the North Pennines at Yad Moss (day ticket £20, juniors £10, annual pass £55 adults, £10 juniors) when there’s snow (check website for updates). There’s no hire shop or lessons, so it’s not for beginners, but it’s more than two miles of fun, and an absence of rocks on the landscape allows skiing on relatively thin snow cover. The Lake District Ski Club (£20 per day, £50 annual membership) sets up a button lift on Raise, the peak next to Helvellyn, to access nine spectacular ungroomed runs; while Weardale Ski Club (£20 adult day ticket, £48 season ticket) in County Durham has two button tows accessing off-piste terrain and about six runs, for intermediates only. In Northumberland, volunteer-run Ski Allenheads (annual membership only, £35 adults, £20 junior, £70 family) has several tow lifts, a cabin, and is beginner friendly, offering short runs. Buy the annual pass for Yad Moss and you can ski at the others at a reduced cost. Dog-sledding, Gloucestershire and Kincardineshire Key to establishing life and society in the Arctic Circle 4,000 years ago, dog-sledding has become the focus of countless holidays to Scandinavia and North America, and a popular extra activity on Alpine ski trips. Trying it in Gloucestershire involves something of a paradigm shift, but there’s nothing like the thrill of driving a team of huskies at speed, even if it’s beside the River Avon rather than across the icy tundra. Taster sessions with Arctic Quest in Tewkesbury (£99pp for two and a half hours, for group of four) offer “the full mushing experience”, on snow when possible or with wheels when not, and include drinks and snacks by a campfire for extra Scandi vibes. A traditional wooden Herder’s Hut, based on a Sami home, is available too, from £120 a night, sleeping two. In Scotland, Huskyhaven, near Stonehaven in Kincardineshire, takes guests on a run with the pack on a three-wheeled cart along trails. Choose from half-day, full-day, evening rides and a seven-mile “Aurora experience” with Wattie McDonald, who twice completed Alaska’s tough, 938-mile Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race (from £45pp). Ice-climbing, Highlands and Snowdonia Using ice axes and crampons to ascend walls of ice is a portal to a beautiful, dangerous frozen world – those who master the sport scale frozen waterfalls and glaciers. Indoor ice walls provide introductory sessions and safety advice. Ice-Factor at the National Ice Climbing Centre near Ben Nevis is home to the world’s biggest indoor ice-climbing walls, offering beginners’ lessons (£30 adults, £25 juniors), or non-instructed (£9.50 adults, £5.75 juniors). Outdoor ice climbing courses are run in winter by Climb365, whose two-day introductory course in Scotland’s West Highlands costs from £275-350 for a group of one to four people per instructor, starting from Fort William. Similarly, Snowdonia Adventures has outdoor courses (from £250pp per day). Reindeer safari, Cairngorms, Scotland They’re honestly not just for Christmas, insist the owners of the Cairngorm Reindeer Herd, a 150-strong, free-ranging gang of Rudolph wannabes that live on the flanks of the Cairngorms. Guided hill trips (daily, adults £18.50, kids £13.50, pre-book) lead visitors on a short mountain hike to meet the majestic beasts, or you can visit a smaller group in a paddock (adults £3.50, kids £2.50). Torch-lit ascent, Cumbria A common apres ski fixture is the torch-lit descent – skiing down pitch black mountain paths with flaming torches in a group, usually fuelled by a tot or two of grappa or schnapps along the way. A similarly atmospheric after-dark adventure on home turf is a guided head-torch walk up into the Howgill Fells to the summit of Winder (473m) with BEExpeditions (17 December, £50pp including pickup from Manchester, or £30 if you meet at the start point in Sedbergh). Sleigh rides, Windsor and London Can a horse-drawn carriage ride through the British drizzle ever equal a proper Snow Queen-style sleigh ride through the snow? Windsor Great Park’s Ascot Carriages (£75 per carriage for 30 minutes for four people give it a good go in the festive season, when between 4 December and 3 January carriages are festooned with gold and white berries and garlands, and the part-shire horses wear antlers. Fancier still, in London’s Richmond Park, two white Royal Parks shire horses pull a smart Park Brake carriage for a 75-minute experience (royalparks.org.uk, £450 for six) including sloe gin and mince pies in Holly Lodge and a behind-the-scenes visit to the stables. Tobogganing, nationwide There’s nothing like a good old-fashioned sledge down your local hill on a knackered tray or bin bag, but to dial up the gnarliness you have to try a Cresta-style toboggan run. Three sister UK snow centres send tiny sit-on cars hurtling along a 500-575m metal track. Llandudno Snowsports Centre (two rides £8pp) and Chatham, Kent (five rides £14pp) have “sno-tubing” on outdoor dry ski slopes too, while the venue at Swadlincote, Derbyshire (five rides £15) also features a 70m “drop slide”. Avalanche and winter mountaineering courses, Snowdonia and Inverness-shire What to wear, what to carry, how to respond to the sort of grim weather forecasts that keep most folk tucked up indoors … these are topics covered on a two-day Welsh Winter Skills mountaineering course at Plas Y Brenin National Outdoor Centre in Snowdonia (£360pp for two nights’ accommodation, meals and kit, December-February). Small groups develop skills that open up more enjoyment of the winter countryside, such as using crampons and navigating in poor visibility. Alternatively, Much Better Adventures has two-night weekend group trips to climb Ben Nevis while learning survival skills (December-April, from £415pp including two nights’ B&amp;B in Fort William). The National Outdoor Training Centre for Scotland, at Glenmore Lodge in Aviemore, has a quiver of courses to train adventurers in the skills needed to tackle mountains under cover of snow. As well as winter mountaineering, rock-climbing and navigation courses, there’s an “introduction to avalanche planning and decision making” (next course 2 March 2022, £90pp, or £115 including one night’s accommodation), which would benefit off-piste skiers and snowboarders as well as hillwalkers and mountaineers. Cross-country skiing, various locations Serious cross-country skiers train through summer on roller skis. Try beginners’ and improvers’ sessions in Hyde Park, London and Dorney Lake in Windsor with Rollerski (£35 for 90-minute session including equipment). It also offers five-week courses in Hyde Park and east London’s Victoria Park (£140pp), plus one-day sessions (£96pp) in Ascot, Berkshire, Betteshanger Park near Deal in Kent, or Redbridge, Essex. In Aberdeenshire, the Huntly Nordic and Outdoor Centre rents cross-country skis for use on a special matting track (adults £10, juniors £5.50 for hour rental and track), or on country paths when it snows (£12 for a half-day per adult, juniors £9), as well as roller-skis for a designated trail. Japanese onsen, Ceredigion One of the best things about a skiing or snowboarding trip to Japan – apart from the karaoke, sushi breakfasts and waist-deep powder – is being able to visit an onsen, the traditional hot-spring baths that are heaven after a day on the mountain. Glamping and self-catering site Fforest, by the River Teifi near Cardigan, has replicated the experience at its four onsen domes, cedar-clad pods with wooden floors, futon beds and an outdoor bathhouse with sunken concrete tub for stargazing (from £260 for two nights, sleeping four). Ice-skating, London, Kent, Newcastle upon Tyne After the mass cancellation of Christmas fairs last winter, the usual cinnamon-scented shenanigans around pop-up outdoor ice rinks and mulled wine stalls resumes in many – though not all – locations for 2021. Choose London’s Hampton Court Palace Ice Rink (13 November-9 January, from £11.50-14 per child, £16 per adult); in Kent, the rink at Calverley Grounds in Tunbridge Wells (19 November-3 January, adults from £13-21, under 16s from £8-14), with Bavarian curling at night (from £50-73 for six people); or Winter Wonderland at Newcastle upon Tyne Racecourse (1 December-2 January, ice skating £9.50 per adult, £7.50 per child). There are dozens more.The International Tennis Federation has said it will not cancel any tournaments in China over concerns for Peng Shuai, because it does not want to “punish 1.4 billion people”. The ITF – the world governing body for the sport – had been facing calls to join the Women’s Tennis Association in suspending all tournaments in China over the government’s refusal to provide assurances of Shuai’s wellbeing. Peng, a former doubles world No 1, was not seen for several weeks after she posted an essay to social media accusing the former vice-premier of China, Zhang Gaoli, of sexually assaulting her. After Chinese authorities failed to initiate an investigation or provide assurances of her wellbeing which satisfied the WTA and its chief executive Steve Simon, the organisation announced it was suspending all tournaments in China. On Sunday the ITF’s president, David Haggerty, told BBC Sport the allegations needed to be looked into and they would continue to work on that resolution, but they would not be following the WTA. “You have to remember that the ITF is the governing body of the sport worldwide, and one of the things that we are responsible for is grassroots development,” he said. “We don’t want to punish a billion people, so we will continue to run our junior events in the country and our senior events that are there for the time being.” Haggerty’s comments added to a short statement released last week by the ITF after a board meeting. “The International Tennis Federation, as the governing body of tennis, stands in support of all women’s rights,” it said. “Our primary concern remains Peng Shuai’s wellbeing. The allegations Peng made must be addressed. We will continue to support all efforts being made to that end, both publicly and behind the scenes.” Peng’s allegation prompted extraordinary levels of censorship in China. As a member of the seven-member Politburo standing committee until 2018, Zhang was one of the most senior Chinese officials in the country, and the most significant Chinese figure to be named in China’s struggling #MeToo movement. Her post disappeared from Weibo in about half an hour, and all discussion was censored online. The WTA and others said they were unable to reach her for several weeks. Following sustained international attention including a campaign by sporting bodies and celebrities, China’s state media produced photos and videos of Peng in public which it said proved her wellbeing. However Simon said the purported evidence only made him more worried as there was no sign she was not under any form of control and was able to speak freely. Video meetings between Peng and the president of the International Olympic Committee also failed to reassure those advocating for her. CNN reported on Sunday that the Biden administration is expected to announce a US diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing this week in a protest against human rights abuses in China. The WTA’s stance on Peng’s case has been widely praised, amid a global reckoning in sport on how to balance human rights, players’ freedom of speech, and the need for the lucrative Chinese market. However, so far other associations, including the men’s Association of Tennis Professionals, have not made or threatened similar action. The ITF and ATP have been contacted for further comment.And with that, we’ll wrap up the blog today. Here’s everything that went down today: Prime minister Scott Morrison said former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian would be “very welcome” in federal team, and slammed Icac’s handling of its investigation. Queensland will reopen its borders from 13 December for fully vaccinated domestic travellers. Shadow minister for climate change, Chris Bowen addressed the National Press Club, bemoaning the history of climate discourse and dismissing the PM’s criticisms of Labor’s plan. The Northern Territory recorded one new Covid case overnight, a three-year-old girl from Katherine, where the lockout was also extended for 24 hours. NSW has recorded 208 new cases and zero deaths. Victoria recorded 1,073 new cases and six deaths while he ACT recorded six new cases. Cricket Australia have stripped Perth of the fifth Ashes Test due to Western Australia’s border restrictions. Some residents have been given the all-clear to return to flood stricken homes in NSW, while others still face being inundated by floodwaters. Australia’s travel ban to several southern African countries due to the outbreak of the Omicron variant was labelled as discriminatory by South Africa’s high commissioner to Australia. And you can read Paul Karp’s yarn on what was arguably the biggest story of the day, on the PM backing former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian to return to politics, at the link below: Liberal MP Katie Allen was on ABC News earlier, discussing the potential for former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian to contest a seat in the upcoming election, and was asked what she made of a federal Icac. Allen has previously supported a proposal for a federal anti-corruption commission, and was asked if she was disappointed in the lack of urgency around the issue. She goes on to blame Labor for the lack of progress, echoing the PM on that front: I would say that there has been a lot of work going into a federal Icac, with a lot of work being done engaging with stakeholders right across the community plus $150m put aside in the budget. The intention of many pieces of legislation is that they get past, and certainly I am a big supporter of that. As you know, quite a lot of different legislation is at different stages of success throughout the parliament, but what I would say is that we have passed hundreds of pieces of legislation through parliament this term despite the fact that we have had a pandemic and in August the opposition leader said that they only had two jobs, vaccination and quarantine facilities. We are looking for support from Labor. We’re not getting that support from Labor. A series of strikes by New South Wales teachers and public transport workers have begun this week, with bus drivers in Sydney’s inner-west walking off the job today, and drivers in the city’s south-west due to strike tomorrow. The two groups will stage a coordinated walkout for two hours during the Friday afternoon peak. That same day, train drivers are refusing to drive foreign-made trains that run three-quarters of the services on the network. Around 60 bus routes were affected today, as around 1200 drivers and members of the Rail, Tram and Bus Union and Transport Workers’ Union NSW walked off the job. The bus drivers are protesting a “two-tiered” pay system and cuts to services as a result of privatisation. You can read more on the strikes in the story below: New Zealand has recorded 135 new Covid cases overnight, including 125 in Auckland. It comes as the country hit the 88% double-dosed vaccinated mark. Cricket Australia have confirmed that they have moved the Ashes series finale, which was due to be played in Perth, due to Western Australia’s border restrictions. In a statement, CA cited WA’s “stringent Covid-19 travel restrictions” but said a decision on where the finale would be played is “yet to be finalised.” Following the emergence of the virus’ new Omicron variant last month, WA Premier Mark McGowan reaffirmed the state’s hardline stance on quarantine rules on arrivals from New South Wales. Under those protocols, players, their families, as well as match and broadcast staff travelling to Perth after completion of the fourth Test in Sydney (January 5-9) would be required to complete 14 days quarantine upon arrival in WA. The Test was due to be played at Perth’s Optus Stadium from 14-18 January, with Hobart touted as a potential replacement location. So, the independent MP for Warringah, Zali Steggall was just on the ABC with Patricia Karvelas discussing the potential threat former NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, would pose if she was to decide to run. Berejiklian has been touted as an option to contest the seat former PM Tony Abbott lost in 2019, and the incumbent Steggall seemed unfazed. Steggall said she believes integrity is important in Warringah, and said it didn’t matter who the Liberal candidate was. Everyone needs to remember the issues that matter and trust and integrity are important in Warringah. Integrity, women and climate are the key issues and no matter who the candidate is they are stuck with Scott Morrison and Barnaby Joyce as policy positions and those have not moved, and so the electorate has an issue with that. I think popularity is one thing, but position on issues still really matter, so people have an issue with trust, especially in the federal government, right? The fact that Scott Morrison has not introduced a federal integrity commission really bothers people. People have had enough of the pork barrelling and rorting. Look, you do not determine who you are up against, but I know how to be ready for race day, I know how to meet the challenge and I am certainly ready for whoever is the candidate. I have no doubt the Liberal party will throw everything they have at winning back Warringah, but the question is it is not an entitlement of owning Warringah. Warringah has a mind of its own, and Warringah cares deeply about a number of issues. And with that, Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk’s press conference comes to an end. Here’s a quick, handy guide to the new rules around Queensland’s border: The border reopening date has been brought forward to 13 December. Fully vaccinated people from hotspots (like NSW, Victoria and the ACT) can arrive by road or air. They must have a negative test from 72 hours before arrival. No quarantine will be required for fully vaccinated domestic arrivals. All arrivals from hotspots will need to have a test on day five after arriving. Domestic arrivals that are not fully vaccinated will need to quarantine for 14 days. People are considered fully vaccinated one week after their second dose. Fully vaccinated border zone residents will still need a border pass, but will not need a test to cross the border. Queensland has also recorded three new Covid cases, all in hotel quarantine. Two are interstate arrivals and one is an international arrival. It comes as Queensland’s Chief Health Officer, Dr John Gerrard, said the state needs to prepare for more cases, despite closing in on the 80% double-dosed vaccination mark. The vaccine stops people from getting really sick. It doesn’t stop people from getting Covid. Palaszczuk also specifically address border-zone residents, saying they will not need a test to cross the border, but will still require a border pass. I know this has been very, very tough on our border communities and thank you for your patience and your understanding. But from Monday, vaccinated border-zone residents will be able to move freely across the border for any reason. You will need a border pass, and the border pass will run for 14 days. But you will not need a test. There is currently a hot spot declared that will be out of the border bubble, and we will address that if there are any changes. But we know that it has been extremely difficult for our border communities, and we’re hoping to provide some greater flexibility and freedom of movement for those communities. Palaszczuk has warned that travellers should expect borders to be “very busy” in light of the coming holidays and the border reopening earlier than planned: We do expect it to be very busy. And we do want to make sure that we are processing, as well - there’s a lot of people who’ve been caravanning and who are, you know, right at the end of the border there - they’ve been there for some time. We really want to get them through smoothly as well. So QLD premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is giving her major announcement, and has moved to bring forward the date the borders will open, from 17 December 17 to 1:00am Monday 13 December. That means fully vaccinated travellers from interstate hotspots will be able to arrive by road and air. If you are not fully vaccinated, you’ll need to quarantine for 14 days. There are also some additional rules: Residents will not have to wait two weeks after the second dose to be considered fully vacinated, you only need one week. Domestic arrivals from hotspots will need to get a test on Day 5 after they arrive. Arrivals from hotspots must show a negative test from the 72hours before they arrived. It comes as the state is expected to hit the 80% double dose mark sometime this week. The retail industry is concerned at a rise in violent or aggressive behaviour from customers towards staff. The Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association’s secretary Gerard Dwyer was on RN Breakfast earlier today, saying staff have been followed home or harassed by angry customers, and was worried the situation may get worse as we head into Christmas. The levels of customer abuse are unsatisfactory to begin with, but then when you put the pressures of the pandemic over the top, in every jurisdiction with which we surveyed, we saw an increase in customer abuse. We just need to do better. We are trying to ensure that the community understands that retail workers are there to do their job. Dwyer said enforcement of Covid protocols was leading to the increase in abuse faced by staff, and added it was unfair the responsibility fell to retail workers. It is actually not the retail workers job to enforce those public health guidelines. Those requirements are in place and have been put in place by government and health authorities. They are not there to be enforced by shop assistants. It’s all about respect. These retail workers could be your neighbour’s son or daughter, it could be your friend’s mother or father. Sticking with South Australia for now, premier Steven Marshall told reporters earlier he was hoping the state will enjoy a “pretty normal Christmas” amid the concerns around the Omicron variant. The first thing is the transmissibility, and we are getting information to show this is highly transmissible. The second is what the effectiveness of the existing vaccines are, and we do not have information and we’re still days away from getting that information. South Australian premier Steven Marshall says he is “very concerned” by the spread of the Omicron variant in NSW, and has left open the prospect of closing the borders again. It comes as the state records four new cases overnight, with two being mystery infections. Marshall said he had been advised to close the border, but was taking precautions “gradually”: We are very concerned (about Omicron). We’re meeting on a very regular basis and we don’t take any option off the table. Professor Spurrier came to the directions meeting with a recommendation to close the borders, which would be the most risk-averse approach we could take. It was a consensus decision, supported by everybody in the directions committee, that we step through this as gradually as possible. Lets go back to Bowen, who is asked what he thinks of the PM’s backing of former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian, in spite of Icac not yet releasing their findings into her conduct. Bowen did not hold back: Firstly the prime minister’s attack on the Icac on the floor of the parliament, I have seen few more disgusting displays on the floor of the parliament than that. The Icac is not a smorgasbord in which you can pick off the findings you like and reject the findings you don’t like. The Icac is actually a truly independent body which should be respected, not undermined by the most senior politician in the country. Respected by politicians not undermined when they don’t happen to like the fact that one of their own has been brought into question. I welcome the fact that former members of the Labor party who have been corrupted been dealt with by the Icac. If you are corrupt, you betrayed the Australian people and betray your party. You deserve to be dealt with and jailed if appropriate and we welcome Icac looking at people in the Labor party. We don’t criticise the Icac for doing so, we defend their work and protect them, it is absolutely outrageous that the prime minister of the day has undermined the Icac and not just undermined their work on Gladys Berejiklian but undermined every single inquiry and investigation and finding that the Icac has brought down. That is what the prime minister has effectively done. Undermined the Icac as a whole and all the state and territory based on similar bodies, frankly, because they are all independently statutory based. He defended Gladys Berejiklian by saying there had been no findings against her. There have been no findings at all, they haven’t released them yet. If he claims to know what the Icac will find I’m sure that the Icac will be interested to hear what he knows. Otherwise, he is lying. Shifting away from Canberra for a moment, the Northern Territory has recorded one new locally acquired Covid case overnight, in a three-year-old girl from Katherine. The new case has led to authorities extending the lockout in Katherine by 24 hours. It is now scheduled to end at midday on Wednesday. We’re having a discussion about whether or not Labor’s policy will lead to coal power plant closures, with a journalist also asking how the policy won’t lead to closures if they’re hoping to convert the current reliance on coal for power, into a dependence on renewable energy. Bowen: As a result of any policy decisions, there is no earlier coal-fired power stations. As I said a moment ago, coal-fired power stations are set to shut and Liddell and others to follow. The market will determine that. The market is determining that. Is there any policy lever that a Labor government will pull that will bring any of those coal-fired power station closures forward? No. If you’re asking me to rule out if any coal-fired power station will close? No, I can’t do that because some are already scheduled to close. Those coal-fired power stations also close regardless of who is in office because that’s been determined by the market. We should be straightforward about that. I am straightforward about that. I visited the power station. I’ve spoken to the workers there. I mean, we have to, as I said to them, I have to win the argument with you because you’re the ones who have your jobs being determined by this conversation. We have to be honest about that. But in answer to your question, how all of this can work. Let me give you two answers, two complementary. One is technical though obviously the government is introducing capacity mechanism. We’ve outlined some principles that would govern our support for it being consistent with net zero and actual payment for dispatch. Let’s go back to Bowen, who is asked if Labor’s target is flexible, especially if Labor enter a minority government and need to negotiate with the Greens or crossbenchers. So, is the number negotiable? Bowen kept it short: No. On a side note, we are expecting a “major announcement” out of Queensland in two hours: Bowen shoots back at the prime minister Scott Morrison, who called Labor’s 43% emissions reduction target unsafe: The parliament heard from the prime minister a few months ago that if you committed to net zero, you’re automatically committed to a 43% medium term target. That was before he committed himself to net zero. Now he says that he can be committed to net zero without a 43% target. dishonesty catching up with him yet again. He says that 43% isn’t safe. Now, if Labor’s 43% isn’t safe, what does the prime minister think of New South Wales’s 50% by 2030 target? Or South Australia’s 50% target? Or Tasmania’s 100% target? Are these targets by conservative state administrations unsafe? The reason that Scott Morrison’s attack makes no sense is because he only ever cares about the politics of the moment. About the grab ... that works for him in that interview. He doesn’t care if it’s consistent with what he said before or what he’ll need to say in the future. He’s always about the directly immediate political opportunity. Bowen has continued, now spruiking the jobs his party’s climate plan will generate: The world’s climate emergency is Australia’s jobs opportunity and the modelling confirms it – $52 billion of private investment unlocked because of our policy; 64,000 direct jobs and over 600,000 total jobs created by 2030. Power bills cut for households and businesses across the national energy market. This shouldn’t come as a surprise, because our independent modelling is very consistent with so much analysis by others. Bowen has dived into his party’s climate policy now, comparing Labor’s target to the one set by Canada: That net zero by 2050 is necessary but not sufficient on its own and we need a strong pathway to get there. And that’s why powering Australia delivers the 43% reduction to 2030. We can’t leave ... that timing of net zero to a set of assumptions and a hope about technology emerging in the 2040s. Partly because aggregate emissions in the next decade will determine whether the world stays below 1.5C and 2C of warming and partly because of the benefits to Australia’s economy of greater ambition to the 2020s. The risk of missing out on the opportunity if we leave it too late. In many ways, the economy of our country is most analogous [to] Canada’s – of our mutual reliance on resources. And I don’t think that it is an accident that our targets are similar. No two countries’ policy mixes will be the same, but powering Australia’s target does return Australia to the sensible approach of similar economies. Bowen then shifts into attack mode, and lambasts the Coalition’s “identity politics” that apparently makes his “blood boil”: And arguably, the even greater, even greater to the economic cost of the LNP’s inaction has been the cost to the body politic, to the constant identity politics and division. They’ve spent years dividing Australians and pitting cities against the regions on the issue of climate change. It’s meant to be the job of the national government, and particularly the job of the prime minister of the day, to unite Australians around important national goals and projects. But when Scott Morrison sneers at the climate concerns of people who frequent city wine bars – when Barnaby Joyce dares to speculate, dares to speculate that people who lost their homes in the bushfires were probably Greens voters – they betrayed that important unifying role. This pandering to identity politics of division makes my blood boil. On past Labor’s climate policies: Let’s be frank. Our party has paid a big price in these climate wars. There are some keen observers who predicted that Labor would simply match the Coalition’s approach to climate to minimise the risk of yet another destructive scare campaign from a government that has no record and no agenda to campaign on. As if signing up to their weak and pathetic targets and effectively endorsing their politics of division might be an effective tactic to convince people to vote Labor. As far as I’m concerned, this was never going to happen. Because while we must of course learn the lessons of battles lost, we must ensure that the right lessons because the right is to craft our policies to win the argument that climate action is an essential element of, not a break on economic investment and growth and jobs. Chris Bowen has begun his National Press Club address by bemoaning the history of discourse around climate change in Australia: For many years, particularly under John Howard, Australia’s approach to climate change policy was governed by the principle of no regrets. This of the concept that any potential action should be governed by the principle of not regretting the economic cost of that action. The irony, however, is that that approach has left Australia with plenty to regret. While we were told that we would regret the economic cost of action, we’ve ended up regretting that Australia has missed out on so much economic opportunity. More pedajoules of sun hit our land mass each year than any other country. Our wind resource is some of the best in the world as well. We’re an energy exporting country, meaning we have the skills and expertise to lead the transformation to renewable energy. Australia, which has for so long searched for areas of comparative advantage, has for the better part of two decades taken a pass on a comparative advantage staring us in the face. We could have by now been well on the way to becoming a renewable energy superpower. Of course, we still can be. But we’ve left our run so very late and we don’t have a day to waste in catching up. Shadow minister for climate change, Chris Bowen, has begun his address at the National Press Club. So, the Western Australian attempt at nabbing the second Ashes test has been rebuffed. Earlier today, the WA government suggested Perth could host the second test, due to be held at Adelaide Oval on 18 December. Their argument was that due to Covid border closures they should be considered a host for the second test. It also comes as Perth is likely to lose the fifth test, due to begin on 14 January, because of the state’s border rules. WA sports minister Tony Buti said he contacted Cricket Australia about the change: We’re now waiting for them to make a decision on that, but also they haven’t made a firm decision on that fifth test in any case, but if the fifth test is not going to be held in Perth it could easily just transfer the second test to Perth. Adelaide could end up having the fifth test as we know Adelaide has it’s own issues with COVID at the moment. But soon after, the South Australian Cricket Association confirmed they’re keeping the match: SACA continues to work closely with Cricket Australia and is committed to delivering the iconic Adelaide Day-Night Test Match, celebrating the SACA’s 150th year. Tough times for WA cricket fans. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, and a quick thanks to Matilda Boseley for another fantastic shift this morning. With that, I shall hand you over to the always fantastic Mostafa Rachwani, who will take you through the rest of the afternoon’s news. Approval of Covid-19 vaccines for five- to 11-year-olds is imminent, with a January rollout likely, reports AAP. Federal health minister Greg Hunt said the Therapeutic Goods Administration and Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation should make a call on Pfizer pediatric doses before year’s end. It is understood the first shipment is due to arrive in Australia before Christmas. The process is “heading in a positive direction”, Hunt said. [The TGA] will provide that advice, ATAGI will then provide their response and we’re hopeful that if we’ve got two green lights we would commence the children’s pediatric doses in the first part of January. While January 10 is a possible starting date for the rollout, it could commence a week either side. Hunt said Moderna booster doses for the general population are also on the cards, with confirmation by Christmas or sooner. I’m due to get my booster in the next 10 days, so that might be a very good option to show that message. The TGA is also making progress on the protein-based Novavax vaccine and could issue a pre-Christmas approval for doses to become available in the new year. On Sunday, Australian broadcaster and ardent gardener Peter Cundall died aged 94. Best known for his 18 years as host of the ABC program Gardening Australia from 1990 until 2008, Cundall’s passion for plants stretched back to his childhood vegetable patch in Manchester. We want to hear your memories and favourite moments from his near five decade career. Did his suggestions help resurrect your rose bush? Did he teach you the value of mulch? Or was it his work as an activist that most resonated? Share your fondest memories and favourite gardening tips from Cundall in the comments section of the below article: In early November, fruit pickers on Australian farms were granted a minimum wage, in a historic decision handed down by the fair work commission. However, unfair pay is just one example of the shocking conditions plaguing this sector, where it’s alleged that workers – many from the Pacific Islands – are routinely exploited. Full Story podcast executive producer Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to reporter Cait Kelly about the dark side of Australian farm work. You can listen to the episode wherever you get your podcasts or by clicking on the link below: The ACT has recorded six new cases in the latest reporting period. There are now 98 active cases in the territory. We are waiting for Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk to stand up today and chat about the (fast-approaching) reopening of the state’s borders. Queensland is set to pass the 80% double vaccination mark this week. (Better late than never!) Reporter: Your pitch yesterday was about renewal, not revolution. But if you’re saying most things aren’t going to change after the election, why should people vote for a change in government? Albanese: We’re going to change. But what we’re going to do is have safe change and I’ll make no apologies for that. Australia’s a great country. The question is: can we be better? I say, yes, we can. This is a great campus. I don’t want to bulldoze it, I want to improve it. I want to give it more funding, I want to give its students more support, I want to give its teachers more support. I want to link in the TAFE with the university here on this great campus. I want to make sure that we build on what we currently have and build back stronger. That’s the key, that’s the key - Australia is a great country, I think we can be even better in the future. And what the next election is about is Labor that has the capacity to have a vision for a better future and then set about creating one with practical, affordable, realistic plans. That’s what Australians want going forward. It’s what I want to deliver as prime minister. Okay, it’s time to chat about the Gladys Berejiklian situation ... and Albanese isn’t going as hard against the possibility of her running for the seat of Warringah, in Sydney’s northern beaches, as one might expect. I note this ongoing obsession by the media with a [former] premier who is still subject to proceedings under the Independent Commission Against Corruption. I think people should allow those processes to take their course. They are processes in which we have seen some public hearings. I’m not going to comment on the outcomes of those, but they’re there for all to see. But I make this point: the former premier before the former premier was also talked about a candidate for Warringah for some period of time, Mike Baird, and the speculation has changed there. I await the speculation about Nick Greiner running for Warringah because he could come back from the New York consul general position. Like it’s getting a bit absurd, isn’t it! The fact is that [the] people of Warringah rejected Tony Abbott at the last election. I have got my differences with Tony, but he lived in that electorate, he is someone who was passionate about that electorate, and they rejected him because of the policies. And doesn’t matter who the candidate is for Warringah. The policies of climate denialism, the lack of funding for universities, the lack of support for TAFE, the failure on health, the failure on so many policy areas, the failure to have an anti-corruption commission at a national level will not be assisted, no matter who the candidate is. Earlier this morning Scott Morrison accused Labor of having a Trojan horse with its 43% emission reduction by 2030 target, claiming the party would bump that up closer to 75% if it got into office. Albanese hit back against this when asked by a reporter if the 43% target was simply a “minimum”. No, that’s our target. This government have had more than 20 policies in the almost decade that they have been in office and they haven’t landed one. We have one policy that we have announced last Friday. It’s fully costed. The modelling is all there. It is one policy that we would implement in government and what the modelling shows is that we would reach 43% by 2030 under the policies that we have announced which are comprehensive, which are clear. Albanese: And our university sector has been so hard-hit during the pandemic. This government abandoned them for reasons beyond my comprehension, they excluded universities from getting JobKeeper. They basically said, ‘you’re on your own’, at a time when what we should be doing is valuing our university sector. Here at the campus where I visited on multiple occasions now, we see the best of Australia, people who are committed including the management of the university here to making sure that people can get that access to skill up so that they can improve their lot in life. Labor’s commitment is clear - it’s time that we actually plan going forward so that out of the pandemic we grow back stronger. The treasurer began his budget speech last week by speaking - last year by saying, “oh, we just want to go back to what was there before”. Well, I think that Australians can aspire to better. We should be ambitious for our country. I want to lead a government that’s as optimistic, as positive, as determined, as hopeful as the Australian people are themselves. Side note: Albanese! Why are your sentences so long? Okay, back to the press conference. Albanese is speaking about Labor’s election pledge to create extra university and Tafe places, to help rebuild the hard-hit tertiary education sector. One of the big distinctions between Labor and the government is that we understand that investment in education is not just an investment in an individual, it’s an investment in Australia’s future, in our whole society. Our whole society benefits when people get access to proper education, whether it be for a trade, whether it be through a university qualification, whether it be by ensuring that early learning is properly funded as well through our cheaper child care package. One of the things that Labor is about is making sure that we take the opportunity that is there, from being co-located in the fastest growing region of the world in human history. We can either take that opportunity to be the smart country, to give people the skills, to give people the knowledge to grow high value, high wage, good jobs, or we can try and compete by driving down wages, by seeing more insecure work, by not giving people the opportunity to be the best that they can. Our announcement yesterday was about that. Federal opposition leader Anthony Albanese is speaking now from Newcastle, and I’m sure will have a thing or two to say about this whole “Berejiklian for Warringah” situation. I’ll being you all the updates here. Looks like we will be hearing from the Greens leader Adam Bandt at 1.30pm, and by the sounds of it, he will have some choice words to say about both Labor and the Coalition’s climate plans. The finance minister Simon Birmingham has ruled out raising taxes to improve the budget bottom line, saying it would be counterproductive to growing the economy, reports AAP’s Colin Brinsden. Birmingham and treasurer Josh Frydenberg will hand down the mid-year budget review on 16 December. Frydenberg has already indicated he will be upgrading growth forecasts for next year, as the economy rebounds strongly from the contraction seen in the September quarter due to Covid-19 related lockdowns. “Our low tax approach is not only fuelling Australia’s successful economic recovery, but it is also leading to improvements to our budget position,” Birmingham told an Australian Financial Review conference on Monday. “With more Australians in work and less on welfare we can make significant indents in that budget position quite quickly.” The government’s financial statement for October released on Monday shows the underlying budget deficit for the 2021/22 financial year running at $43.9bn, $7.8bn smaller than expected after four months. Receipts were $20.2bn higher than expected at that stage of the year and were only partly offset by payments being $12.4bn above forecast. The deficit for the full financial year was forecast at $106.6bn in the May budget. Birmingham said this was part of a trend that saw the final budget outcome for the 2020/21 financial year - released in September - being $80bn smaller than forecast in October 2020. It was also a $27bn improvement on expectations in the May budget. He said the Morrison government was backing lower taxes as an essential way to drive confidence and investment. We certainly won’t be looking at ways to increase taxes on businesses or households in the future, as we see that as being very much a counterproductive thing that will only dampen confidence and hurt growth. Reporter: Do you think she should still be running? Morrison: What I found is that Gladys was put in a position of actually having to stand down and there was no findings of anything. I don’t call that justice. Reporter: She chose to resign. Morrison: I don’t call that justice. What I saw is a pile on* and we are all used to pile ons on our side of politics. I see them all the time. We have thick skins and we can deal with it and Gladys certainly knows how to. She is a person of great integrity. If she wants to have a crack at Warringah for the Liberal party, I suspect the people would welcome that in Warringah. We will let the people decide. *A pile on... by... Icac? Wait, Morrison, so if the public investigation into whether one of the most powerful politicians in Australia was complicit in the misuse of public funds is “shaming”, what isn’t? Gladys Berejiklian has won support for a federal bid from the biggest name yet, with prime minister Scott Morrison stating she would be “welcome” in the federal Liberal party, slamming Icac’s choice to hold public hearings into the former premier as “shameful”. I think she would be great. The way that Gladys Berejiklian has been treated has been shameful. I have been clear about that. Anthony Albanese thought that was the right thing to do to Gladys Berejiklian. I don’t think it was and I look forward to her - she will make her own decision in her own time about what she would look to do. If she wished to join our team, she would be very welcome. I have no doubt that whatever Gladys sets her mind to, she will be a great success. Reporter: “She is being investigated for turning a blind eye to corruption and for breaching her own ministerial standards. You are someone, as prime minister, who pays a lot of attention to ministerial standards. I have seen two ministers go and one stood aside. Given this cloud is over her head, what message does it send if you support her running for Warringah at this election?” Morrison: I don’t agree with the way you have characterised that. There is no suggestion of criminal conduct by Gladys Berejiklian, none whatsoever. Reporter: “She is being investigated.” Morrison: We have seen plenty of these things and recordings of private conversations detailed intimate things that were paraded around in the media. What was that about?* Was that about shaming Gladys Berejiklian? I thought that was awful. I have no doubt that Gladys will have her own reflections on these things but the way she was treated publicly over this, I just thought – and I have no doubt that many of my fellow residents here in New South Wales felt pretty much the same way – I think this is a great opportunity, if Gladys wishes to run, but that is up to her. *Umm, it was about investigating whether or not she breached public trust? Morrison’s tactic leading into the election seems to really be driving home the (allegedly) close-knit relationship between Labor and the Greens. At this election next year it is a choice. It is a choice between the Liberals and Nationals, and Labor and the Greens. At the end of the day, someone is going to be chairing cabinet and that will be me or Anthony Albanese. Someone will be chairing the national security committee of cabinet and making decisions about keeping Australians safe in our region against some of the greatest threats we have seen since before the second world war. Either me or Anthony Albanese is going to be chairing the expenditure review committee. I have got plenty of experience chairing those and through some of the most difficult decisions this country has ever made and these are the choices. Elections are about choices between two alternatives and that is the choice that Australians have to make and here locally, who you choose locally. Morrison has accused Labor of hiding their true intentions with their newly announced 43% emissions reduction target by 2030, suggesting that they will actually try to creep that figure toward’s Green’s much more ambitious goal. (Perhaps I’m just not the right demographic, but I don’t think that is really the damning accusation Morrison thinks it is!) Labor said at the last election and since the last election that they thought 45% was the wrong decision and apparently, 43% is the right decision. I think that is just the opening bid from Labor. For Labor to legislate, if they were to form government, they would have to do that with the support of the Greens – 43% is just the opening bid from Labor. You know what the Greens target is, it is 75%. Vote Labor, you vote Greens and you vote for the Greens targets. Here is the environment minister Susan Ley discussing the need to create an industry for recycled goods within Australia. We know that when we came into a government and we saw those stockpiles of waste on the docks, the famous mountain of glass in Melbourne, prime minister you said it is our waste, our responsibility and then we did something about it. We took practical action. On 1 December [came] the third of our waste bans, for export of whole tyres. Before that, glass. Mixed plastics. Already we are starting to see this recycling revolution that is taking place over the last few years. It is pretty exciting. It isn’t just about finding another destination for what was previously land fill. It is not even about burning waste and turning it into energy. It is about new recycling, remanufacturing processes, new kit that has come from overseas, innovative procurement we haven’t seen before, the jobs, manufacturing, the industry. That is true microeconomic reform. OK, after trying on plenty of sunglasses, Scott Morrison is speaking now, and MYSTERY SOLVED! The whole morning has been about recycling. We have been making good on our promise to ensure that we take responsibility for our waste. I said three years ago, our waste, our responsibility. The export ban on our plastic waste. I grew up by the beach. Back in any day when I used to swim at the beaches not far from here, the surf report wasn’t just about what the waves were, it was what was in the waves. There has boon so much progress that has been made since then. Getting plastics out of the ocean is one of our big challenges as we see the plastic islands that are floating across our blue Pacific. It is one of most regular issues raised with me by leaders in South-East Asia and our Pacific family. Australia is doing its bit. We have put in place the export ban on plastics. That means there will be, at its peak in a few years time, 43,000 containers of waste that is not going up into south-east Asia, which ends up in rivers and in our oceans. Australia has taken a leadership position on that to ensure we are doing the right thing, not just by our own environment here in Australia but in our regional environment as well to get the plastics out of the ocean. Recycling is a massive part of that. Residents have been given the all-clear to return to a northern NSW town that was evacuated last week, but others still face being inundated by floodwaters, reports Jack Gramenz from AAP. People in Boggabilla were given the all-clear by the State Emergency Service on Sunday afternoon after flooding eased on the Macintyre River. However, an evacuation order issued to Toomelah residents is still in place and the border town of Mugindi has been warned to brace for the Barwon River to flood from this weekend. Wee Waa is emerging from days of isolation, a week after floodwaters on the Namoi River peaked, with one road into the town reopening. Others remain cut off by the slowly receding waters. While some communities face an anxious wait for floods to arrive, others are preparing to clean up. On a Sunday visit to flood-hit Forbes, prime minister Scott Morrison said responding to disasters was “not unfamiliar territory” for his government. We’ve become very experienced in understanding what the needs are and targeting support, working with state governments to ensure it can make a real difference. The three times the prime minister has visited Forbes, the town has been affected by drought, fires and now floods. The resilience of the people of the central west is something extraordinary. I have no doubt they’ll come through these challenges. Flood warnings are still in place for the Gwydir, Namoi, Macquarie, Bogan, Lachlan, Murrumbidgee, Warrego, Paroo and Barwon Rivers. I would love to give you an update on what the prime minister is doing this morning but honestly, I can’t figure it out. There seems to be lots of sunglasses being tried? I assume there must be a press conference coming up. Stay tuned to unravel this mystery with me. Just further to Anthony Carbines’ new position in the Victorian Andrews government cabinet. A New South Wales government program aimed at convincing professionals to become maths teachers attracted only six people last year, five of whom dropped out before their scholarships were complete. As the state’s public school teachers prepare for their first strike in almost a decade on Tuesday, new figures have cast doubt on the success of the government’s attempts to address teacher shortages in NSW without significantly increasing pay. In 2019, the state government announced the Teach.Maths NOW scholarship to lure current undergraduates and industry professionals with a background in pure or applied mathematics to become teachers. But the program has struggled to attract and retain applicants. Despite funding for 160 placements, the program was only offered to 53 people in its first two years. Now, new figures obtained by the Guardian show the program has also failed to keep many of the industry professionals who did apply. You can read the full report below: Victoria’s daily case numbers are once again above 1,000, with 1,073 new infections recorded in the last reporting period. Sadly, six people infected with the virus have died. The NSW numbers are out and the state has recorded 208 new Covid-19 cases but no deaths. Victorian Labor MP Anthony Carbines will replace Luke Donnellan in premier Daniel Andrews’ cabinet after Donellan, the Age has reported. Donellan quit cabinet in October after the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission inquiry into branch-stacking heard that he had paid for other people’s party memberships. Carbines will take on Donellan’s former portfolios of ageing, disabilities, carers and child protection. I mentioned before that environment minister Sussan Ley has also thrown her support behind the former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian’s potential candidacy for the federal seat of Warringah; despite the ongoing Icac investigations. Here she is on ABC a short time ago: That process will take its course and I don’t want to comment on that process, but what I will say is that just from the people that I represent, they were horrified that this sort of public shaming seemed to be happening on their television screens everyday. So a lot of people reached out to me directly to actually say, “Why is this happening to our premier who’s done so much for us? We’re really quite angry on her behalf.” So I think the feeling is with her, I think she’ll be an outstanding representative and, you know, there’ll be some steps for her to take and processes to go through. But, of course, we’d love to see her in federal parliament. Host Michael Rowland: Some people will see that as public shaming, others will see the presentation of cold-hard evidence. We heard the phone taps where she fixed hospital funding for her then boyfriend Daryl Maguire in his seat where she learned about clearly dodgy behaviour but didn’t alert the corruption commission. Do you think it really was just public shaming? Ley: What I trust is the voters’ reaction. I was quite surprised with the number of people who came to me and said they really didn’t like this and that’s how they described the process. And, you know, it was pretty awful and it didn’t need to play out in such a way on our TV screens. I don’t think so. But more importantly, I will let that process take its course. I am simply – look, I know Gladys, she’s been an outstanding woman in public life. She has devoted so much of her life to public service, and people understand that and they appreciate that. And they know that she has a contribution to make. Here’s a little blog treat for you: Australia’s travel ban to several southern African countries due to the outbreak of the Omicron variant has been labelled as discriminatory by a senior diplomat, reports Andrew Brown from AAP. South Africa’s high commissioner to Australia Marthinus van Schalkwyk said the ban needed to be overturned, due to large numbers of Omicron cases being detected in other continents, and not just in parts of Africa. He told ABC Radio this morning: We believe it is discrimination, because the only difference is these countries (on the travel ban list) are on the African continent ... The ban is unfair, there is no evidence the ban works, the World Health Organization confirms that. The travel ban to nine southern African nations was instituted in the wake of the Omicron variant being detected. The detection of Omicron also led to a two-week delay to the return of visa holders without the need for a medical exemption, which is now set to take place from December 15. Despite the pause on international arrivals, 250 fully vaccinated students will arrive on Monday in Sydney as part of a NSW government pilot program. The arrivals will still need to isolate in student accommodation for three days. There have been 15 cases of Omicron detected in NSW, while two have been identified in the ACT and one in the NT. A New South Wales government plan to control feral horses in Kosciuszko national park will allow horses to remain in the only known habitat of one of Australia’s most imperilled freshwater fishes and risks pushing the species closer to extinction. Conservationists say allowing horses to continue to roam around some sections of the park will put vulnerable wildlife and ecosystems at risk. They include the stocky galaxias, a fish that was listed as critically endangered last year after the 2019-20 bushfires and was named as one of 100 priority animals in the Morrison government’s new threatened species strategy. You can read the full story below: TGA head John Skerritt told ABC News Breakfast that it’s important for children to get vaccinated, now that those aged five to 11 are eligible, partially because it will help protect parents and grandparents from Covid-19: There are lot of reasons even though they don’t get as sick as adults, they have a pretty strong role in spreading it back to family members and of course that can include parents and also, of greater concern, the grandparents. The older you are, the impacts of getting seriously ill or worse with Covid is greater. The other reason is just so kids can do what kids are meant to do – go to school, play with their friends, do sport, do exercise, do social things. We are worried about the mental health impacts on all the lockdowns that children have had over the last couple of years. And finally – there’s about one in 3,000 children who, even though they mightn’t get all that ill with Covid, have this long-term multi-system inflammatory syndrome where even when they recover from Covid, they can be quite ill for some months with fever, rash, intestinal, heart, neurological issues, even though it’s one in 3,000 of those kids it’s a very serious condition. Lots of reasons to vaccinate young children. Anthony Albanese is well and truly out on the campaign trail this week – and it seems the polls are behind him. The latest Newspoll, conducted for the Australian, shows 47% of voters believe Labor will form the next government after an election expected in March or May. Just 37% expect the Coalition to be returned for a fourth term, reports AAP. Labor leads the two-party-preferred race over the Coalition, 53 to 47%, on a primary vote of 38%. And to celebrate the opposition leader’s deputy Richard Marles has been on ABC radio this morning talking up the big man: I think when it comes to character, there is a chasm, a massive chasm between Scott Morrison and Anthony Albanese, there’s no doubt about that ... I think Australians coming out of the pandemic are looking for a government that will have a plan to create a better future, right now I think what they see with the Morrison government is a government that is consistently behind the play. Ian Haywood’s partner is blunt when asked to sum up the couple’s latest battle with the National Disability Insurance Agency. “They don’t think it is ‘reasonable and necessary’ for Ian to have nursing funding,” Bianca* told Guardian Australia, referring to the key legal test for NDIS funding. “We think it is reasonable for him to stay home and it is necessary in order for him to live. It’s cheaper for them if he dies.” Haywood, 43, lives with the terminal illness motor neurone disease and is the latest NDIS participant to speak out about what the federal Labor party and disability advocates claim are “stealth cuts” being seen around the country. Communicating with Guardian Australia via email as he is non-verbal, Haywood said the NDIS had been funding 24-hour nursing care that allowed him to live at his home on the Mornington Peninsula rather than remaining in hospital. You can read the full report below: Michael Rowland: Do you agree with the prime minister that, in his words, she was done over by the commission against corruption? Simon Birmingham: I think that it is pretty sad when Icacs go out and destroy reputations, do so in pretty murky ways, looking into relationships and other things. There’s ... Rowland: It was more of the relationship that we were talking about. It was more than her relationship that was brought up, excuse me, minister, at the hearings? Birmingham: Michael, the nature of the way in which the New South Wales Icac works, it’s one of the reasons why we’ve presented a very detailed model for a commonwealth integrity commission that absolutely has the power to tackle criminal corruption and to address serious issues. But doesn’t go and destroy reputations first and then look at the details later. Rowland: We’ll see that next year? Birmingham: Well, we’ve got the legislation. It’s there. We’ve done the work on it. There’s several hundred pages of it. Despite the NSW Icac not yet handing down its findings concerning the state’s former premier, that hasn’t stopped Simon Birmingham from voicing his support for her rumoured candidacy for the federal seat of Warringah. ABC News Breakfast host Michael Rowland: Would you support Gladys Berejiklian running as the Liberal candidate in Warringah? Birmingham: I would love to see Gladys do so, but that is entirely up to her. She has been a friend of mine for many decade and I know that she has immense talent. Rowland: You don’t think that there’s an integrity question mark over her head? Birmingham: I think that Gladys has shown exceptional leadership in public office and an ability to make tough and difficult decisions when required and she is showing that she is a person of great integrity and I realise the issues that she’s handling at present. She’ll keep working through. If she has other decisions to make about her future, I’m sure that she’ll make them when she’s ready. As you might have heard, children aged five to 11 now have TGA approval to be vaccinated with the Pfizer vaccine. Finance minister Simon Birmingham has been out and about this morning discussing the development. Here is is speaking with ABC news breakfast: We will encourage every Australian to go out and get a vaccine when they’re eligible, and particularly for parents to do that with five- to 11-year-olds. A conversation that I had over the weekend with my kids and a conversation that we’ve been having for a little while. Everybody should have that chat with their children and make sure that they’re ready for it. But with 88% of the double dosing in Australia and a strong turnout in the 70s of the 12- to 15-year-olds, we’re now at a point where we’re one of the most highly vaccinated countries in the world. We’ve got one of the first nationwide booster programs in the world and it will be really great to be able to bring the rest of those school-aged kids on board and have them all vaccinated, pretty much for the very start of term one or close to it. Former chief of the Australian defence force Retired Admiral Chris Barrie has welcomed Labor’s climate policy announcement on behalf of the Australian Security Leaders Climate Group and urged the Australian government to follow its lead. In October Guardian Australia reported Barrie’s concerns that Australia’s military will be less ready to confront other security crises if troops are increasingly required to respond to climate-related disasters. Barrie said: The Australian Labor Party are facing up to the threat that climate change poses to our future safety and well-being, but the Government remains missing in action on climate-security risks. Our closest allies, including AUKUS partners the USA and UK, have recognised and are acting to mitigate the impacts of climate change on the security of their people and on peaceful relations between nations, yet our own government is falling behind. In particular, Barrie welcomed that Labor had “adopted key climate and security recommendations from ASLCG’s policy proposals, including committing to an urgent climate risk assessment, which the Group has been strongly advocating for”. He said: Climate change remains the most significant threat to our security and we must now act accordingly with the necessary scale and speed of action. It is perplexing that a government that claims to be strong on security issues is weak, and even silent, on the greatest threat to the future security, safety and wellbeing of all Australians. Good morning, everyone! It’s Matilda Boseley here, back on the blog with you this morning. I hope you all had a relaxing weekend and are ready for another week of news. At least parliament is over for the year, so I mean, the news can’t be that bad! Right? Right! First up, if you are in the inner west of Sydney I hope you left plenty of extra time for your bus commute because that’s where the planned widespread strikes across NSW’s public transport sector have begun. The industrial action was prompted by the ongoing dispute over pay equality and on Tuesday bus drivers in the south-west of Sydney will go on strike too, before the two groups combine to go on strike for two hours during the Friday afternoon peak. Tomorrow Rail, Tram and Bus Union members won’t be driving foreign-made trains – which run three-quarters of the services on the network. The RTBU has been negotiating a new enterprise bargaining agreement for months, after the old one expired in May. The union’s NSW secretary Alex Claassens said: We don’t like it, but we don’t have any other options at this stage ... The good news is that the NSW government can put a halt to this by simply delivering on some basic requests. Sydney Trains chief executive Matt Longland says the strikes are disappointing because there have been “more than 40 meetings” between Sydney Trains, NSW TrainLink and the union. Up north, across the border, authorities have warned Queensland’s flood-hit areas that heavy rain is set to return. The Bureau of Meteorology warned heavy rain was expected to be back mid-week to the three areas of concern in Queensland – the Dawson River near Theodore, the swollen Macintyre River around Goondiwindi and the Condamine River at the township of Condamine. BOM meteorologist Shane Kennedy told AAP: For the areas currently in major flooding the rain will return on Wednesday with widespread rainfall, unlike today where it was very isolated. The Macintyre River peaked at 10.43 metres at Goondiwindi in the state’s south-west border on Saturday, receding to about 10.10 metres yesterday afternoon. It’s the biggest flood in a decade for the town. The river is expected to remain above the major flood level through to today. OK, party people, with that, why don’t we jump right into the day?Jack Dorsey is resigning from Twitter to spend more time with his other company, Square. In some ways, the choice between Twitter and Square is a straight choice between political clout and profit. Square, a payments platform co-founded by Dorsey in 2009, is worth almost three times Twitter’s current value at about $97bn (£73bn). But Square will never be credited with the equivalent of the “Twitter revolution”, or make headlines by banning a former president. Venture capital is pouring money into cryptocurrencies and payment platforms. Twitter, by contrast, having only started to become profitable since 2018, has always been more notable for its political impact than its commercial pull. However, Twitter, like the wider social industry of which it is a part, may be experiencing the limits of its growth. In terms of commercial reach, Twitter is no competition for industry giants such as Facebook, YouTube, WhatsApp, Instagram and TikTok, which each have well over a billion users. But even Facebook and Instagram are slowing down. Generation Z is turning off the major platforms. Downloads of Facebook and Instagram have been declining, according to a Bank of America report published in 2019. Both Twitter and Facebook have been losing ground with businesses due to this demographic shift in demand. By capitalising on the rise of video-sharing, TikTok has captured a much younger audience than Facebook or Twitter. Some businesses are also abandoning social media entirely, from fashion house Bottega Veneta, to Tesla, Lush and JD Wetherspoon. It makes sense that investors are looking for the next big thing from tech, and that social media bosses would be searching for ways to profit from the cryptocurrency bubble. Before he left, Dorsey had been trying to expand Twitter into offering crypto-based payments and non-fungible token services. His replacement as CEO, Parag Agrawal, was tasked with developing Twitter’s crypto strategy, and it seems likely that Twitter will continue to plough that field. Twitter is not the only social media firm attempting to exploit such opportunities. Facebook’s parent company, Meta, has been trying to launch a cryptocurrency that could be sent worldwide via Facebook products, so far to no avail. This move makes more sense for a platform like Facebook, given that it has always offered a patchwork of services, such as video, photo, fan pages, gaming, buying and selling, and so on, compared with Twitter’s straightforward microblogging service. However, this isn’t just about profitability. It is about the economic power of belief. Dorsey is also a cryptocurrency fanatic. A particular champion of bitcoin, he claims it will one day “unite a deeply divided country” behind it, and eventually become the world’s “single currency”. Square accepts payments on its cash app from bitcoin, but no other cryptocurrency. Recently, Square released a white paper for a decentralised bitcoin exchange platform that would appear to freeze out competing cryptocurrencies. Dorsey is also a doom-monger about fiat currencies – those issued by governments. “Hyperinflation,” he oracularly warns, “is going to change everything. It’s happening.” This is baseless. Recent inflationary pressures due to the increased costs of production and transit caused by Covid and extreme weather patterns are real. But there is no hyperinflation in the global economy. Given Dorsey’s profile and potential impact on investors, it could be considered a reckless thing to say; but it also reflects the strange ideology of all bitcoin enthusiasts. According to its devotees, bitcoin is a deflationary force that routes around the inefficiencies and tyrannies of central banks and fiat currencies. It is deflationary because it is designed to mimic the supply of a real-world commodity, gold. This means that the number of coins that it is possible to mine is restricted: the supply will eventually hit a ceiling with 21m bitcoins. So even though, as the People’s Bank of China recently noted, the digital coin is not backed up by any real value, it operates as its own virtual gold standard. Moreover, bitcoin’s apologists say, decentralised blockchain technology cuts out all middle men, a principle that can be deployed in gaming, finance and social networks. It makes transactions cheaper and faster and keeps efficient records without the oversight of a big state. The advantage of this “upstart” libertarian ideology is that it chimes directly with the commercial interests of bitcoin investors. Currently, one bitcoin will trade for £42,973. But it wouldn’t be worth a dime if enough investors hadn’t decided to treat it as though it were gold. It is a “hyperstition”: a fiction that makes itself true because enough people believe in it. All currencies rely on what Michel de Certeau called a “secret network” of believers. We all must believe, not only in the value of the currency we exchange, but that others believe in it too. We look to a higher power, typically the central bank, to guarantee this belief. In the case of cryptocurrencies, the tech itself is supposed to eliminate the need for all these elaborate systems. This is typical of the “California ideology”, which blends the values of the libertarian right with the countercultural ethos of some of the internet’s pioneers. Yet, far from driving any great disruption, the value of cryptocurrencies is mainly a byproduct of developments in fiat currencies. The latter benefited from a glut of spare investment capital caused by the institutionalisation of quantitative easing. The crypto boom since Covid has therefore been made possible by central banks sending money supply through the roof. Ironically, the cryptocurrencies have benefited from precisely the sort of central bank policies that the libertarian right tends to complain about. Dorsey’s belief in a single global cryptocurrency is not likely to happen. And, as the economist Yanis Varoufakis has pointed out, it would actually be disastrous if bitcoin did replace fiat currencies. The “bitcoin community” would have no incentive to expand the money supply in the event of a crisis. That scenario would benefit the rich holders of the coin, such as tech monopolists, investment bankers and energy oligarchs, while wrecking the lives of everyone else. Nonetheless, we would be fools to underestimate belief backed up by spare investment capital. Since at least 2017, when a bitcoin was trading at less than $1,000 (£750), there have been a glut of articles explaining why the bitcoin bubble is unsustainable. But, far from falling apart, it continues to surge. Even after Elon Musk dropped the coin earlier this year, and China banned traders from offering bitcoin prices, its tradeable value climbed. The total value of cryptocurrencies today is close to $3tn. With Amazon looking to accept payment in bitcoins, there is space for further growth. Dorsey’s messianic belief in the power of crypto will probably be rewarded with profit for some time, in a way that the hype around Twitter never was. If we underestimate the economic value of belief, we will underestimate how large the bubble can grow. Richard Seymour is a political activist and author; his latest book is The Twittering MachineIn early October, the Guardian’s consumer desk totted up how many pounds’ worth of fraud had been reported to us by readers over the summer, and were horrified to find that it was in excess of £1m. This year we have been inundated with letters from readers who have been unfortunate enough to be caught up in all kinds of fraud – amplified and complicated by the pandemic – and asking for our help. We have seen everything: from dating scams to people using the Covid-related boom in online shopping to catch others out with fake delivery texts, and pension frauds using fake websites. We offered advice to people on how to claim refunds and, with the help of a guest appearance by my cat, looked at how easy it is to give away valuable information to fraudsters online. The devastation scams causes victims goes beyond financial loss, and we have tried to reflect this in our coverage. Sadly, even with our intervention, people do not always get back their money. But we hope by highlighting these stories we can at least help other people be alert to the danger. The hundreds of letters we get from readers every week lie at the heart of our operation. This correspondence makes us the canaries in the coalmine – if something is going wrong somewhere, then we are often among the first to know. Back in January, we started to hear from people who had been hit with unexpected customs bills on goods they had ordered from the EU post-Brexit. Despite the promise of tariff-free trade, it was becoming apparent that our online shopping had become more costly. Our experts alerted people to the new rules, explained the complexities of the post-Brexit tax situation, and even got involved in a few cases. In March, Miles Brignall took on the case of a cyclist who was facing an unexpected £2,000 bill to receive a bike imported from Poland, or a £1,500 bill to return it. With Miles’s help, the bill to keep the bike was adjusted down to £1,000 – a welcome result for a reader who had described their situation as Kafkaesque. Anna Tims uncovered further Brexit fallout. After warning last year that problems could arise from asking EU citizens to use a digital system to prove they had right to remain in the UK, she followed up the cases of some of those affected. In June, she revealed how women were being caught out by a glitch which meant the wrong surname would show on the system; then in September she revealed problems arising from a technical anomaly for people changing their status. But the big problems for readers this year centred around Covid and the myriad consumer issues associated with it. Just 12 days into the new year we reported on how the private companies offering Covid tests for travellers were failing to deliver results in time for travellers, and we received more and more emails on the subject as people started to travel again. The whole system seemed flawed, and as the summer holidays got into full swing, Zoe Wood put the spotlight on providers who were charging much more than the headline rates, discovering that the Advertising Standards Authority was investigating. Pressure mounted in the summer, and there was more in September, when we found that companies were turning down requests for refunds when tests failed to turn up. Anna Tims’s story was picked up elsewhere, causing Boots to relent and repay a reader whose case she featured. The competition watchdog has now called for better vetting of the testers that appear on the government website. Because people were travelling and needed tests, however badly the system might be set up, we did our best to help them get a good deal, with Rupert Jones providing an exhaustive guide to the most reliable providers. In addition to taking up readers’ cases when they’ve got problems, we have several other tasks on the desk: covering breaking news; answering questions people might have when something goes wrong or there’s a big change in policy; spotting patterns when cases are not just isolated ones; and trying to find out what’s happening behind the scenes. Writing explainers is something we spend a lot of time and effort on. Tackling a Q&amp;A about an unprecedented event can be tough. Sometimes we know very little about an emerging topic in the morning, but once we’ve spoken to those in the know we are able to share our new understanding with the readers. This year’s energy crisis has put us in uncharted territory, with much of the usual consumer advice turned on its head. While at the start of the year we were telling people to review their bills and switch to a better deal, now we’re explaining why they should sit tight. We’re indebted to the people who take our calls and help us make sense of events for our readers. It hasn’t all been gloom on the desk. Among it all there have been some lighter moments. We’ve given readers a guide to the best meal kits, looked at the cost of doggy daycare, discovered why people are buying woodland, and looked at why you won’t get your loft converted any time soon. More recently, the cost of living has started to become a concern to more and more households, and we are doing our best to help people navigate higher bills and prepare themselves for any financial shocks that might arise in future. Whatever next year holds, we’ll do our best to explain what it means for our readers, and to take up the fight for them when they need our help. It could be yet another busy year.Champion long jumper. Coach of the Senegal national football team. Mayor of Dakar. Head of global athletics for 16 years and hailed as a spiritual leader by Seb Coe. Olympic powerbroker. Fixer. Corruptor. Convicted super criminal. Lamine Diack packed a lot into his extraordinary 88 years, which came to a quiet end on Friday. Yet we are perhaps still nowhere close to knowing all of his felonies – and the friends he helped along the way. True, what we know is staggering enough. Last year Diack received a four-year sentence from the French courts for masterminding a scheme in which the IAAF, now World Athletics, agreed to cover up secretly 23 cases of Russian doping in exchange for £2.7m in bribes. And while another French investigation into Olympic vote-rigging continues, Diack has already been named by a senior figure in the Rio 2016 team as receiving £1.77m for securing African votes. Yet when I spoke to his son, Papa Massata Diack, last year, he hinted that this might be scratching the surface. “The day Lamine Diack opens his mouth the IOC and Fifa will fall apart,” Papa Massata told me. “Because Lamine Diack knows a lot of secrets, on how the deals were cut to get a lot of the Olympic Games. He knows everything. He’s been the power broker. He was a force in the IOC for a long time.” Some will say that Massata Diack is a discredited voice, given he was sentenced to five years in prison, fined €1m and banned from sport for 10 years for his part in the Russian doping scandal. It is also true that he remains the subject of an Interpol wanted notice. However, Massata Diack, who is protected by the authorities in Senegal, maintains he was not given a fair trial by the French courts, is innocent and will appeal. What is also indisputable is that Massata Diack operated in the corridors of power long before he became an IAAF marketing consultant after his father took charge of global athletics in 1999. He pointed out that he started his company Pamodzi in 1987 and sold $620m of sponsorship contracts in his career. But, he added, cryptically: “Maybe the time of keeping quiet is finished.” In recent weeks Massata Diack has used his Twitter account to drop a few hints about what he might know. And when I spoke to a seasoned Olympic consultant on Friday, who talked on condition of anonymity, he believed this could be just the start – and that Massata Diack did indeed know many of his father’s secrets. “With Lamine Diack’s passing, there will be a lot of very important people around the world holding their breath as to what Papa will do next,” he said. “Because if this liberates Papa to say: ‘Well, now my father can’t be punished one way or the other, and I’m safe in Senegal, I might as well just let rip,’ there’s going to be a lot of people, from bids going right back to the 90s, who will be extremely anxious as to what Papa is going to do.” That person also reckoned that Lamine Diack was the last of the great sports dictators, people who – like Sepp Blatter, Juan Antonio Samaranch, João Havelange and Primo Nebiolo – could pretty much do what they liked with their federations. “It was an opportunity to basically create a fiefdom that you controlled with total power,” he added. Few opposed Lamine Diack. Another source remembers him demanding lots of expensive Seiko watches to give to his friends at his last IAAF congress before the world championships in Beijing 2015. When Diack was told all the quota of watches in the Seiko sponsorship deal had been used up, he immediately demanded a load more be provided from future years. Who would dare say no? But has the era of the sporting dictator really ended? Recent history suggests not. Last year a report into the International Weightlifting Federation found shocking levels of corruption, cronyism, cover-ups, bribes and an omertà that would impress the five families. At one point the report noted that the former head of the IWF, Tamas Ajan, even called up the head of the Albanian weightlifting federation and issued an ultimatum: pay a $100,000 fine for doping offences – in cash – or his team would not go to the Rio Olympics. Meanwhile the governing body of amateur boxing, Aiba, is still trying to earn its place back in the Olympic movement after being stripped of its right to run the Tokyo 2020 boxing tournament after the IOC warned that its behaviour presented “serious legal, financial and reputational risks to the IOC and the Olympic Movement”. It is easy to see why this happens. International sports federations are autonomous, which means there is no sheriff to watch over them, and they also face little scrutiny from the press, public or the IOC. Clearly executive term limits, greater transparency, independent ethics committees and clear anti-corruption guidelines should be a given for all sports bodies. They are not. As things stand, it is easier for those who should be scrutinising power to fall in line rather than rock the boat. That was seen, of course, with the IAAF. And while Diack has passed on, the question remains over what secrets he took to his grave. Dead men tell no tales but living ones still might.While at the till in a clothes shop, Ruby received a call. She recognised the woman’s voice as the genetic counsellor she had recently seen, and asked if she could try again in five minutes. Ruby paid for her clothes, went to her car, and waited alone. Something about the counsellor’s voice gave away what was coming. The woman called back and said Ruby’s genetic test results had come in. She did indeed carry the mutation they had been looking for. Ruby had inherited a faulty gene from her father, the one that had caused his death aged 36 from a connective tissue disorder that affected his heart. It didn’t seem the right situation in which to receive such news but, then again, how else could it happen? The phone call lasted just a few minutes. The counsellor asked if Ruby had any questions, but she couldn’t think of anything. She rang off, called her husband and cried. The main thing she was upset about was the thought of her children being at risk. Over the next few weeks, she Googled, read journal articles, and tried to become an expert patient in what was quite a rare genetic disorder. There wasn’t much to go on, and, not being a scientist herself, it was hard for her to evaluate what she did find. She learned that a link between mutations in this particular gene and connective tissue problems had only recently been discovered. A few years earlier this disease did not exist, or at least it had yet to be named. Over time, some details emerged. Nobody had ever seen her own family’s particular mutation in anyone else. So that meant it was very hard to know what to make of her situation. Her risk of a heart problem was surely increased, but nobody could say by how much. From that initial phone call, it was six months before Ruby was seen by any other medical professional. She saw a cardiologist first, followed by a series of other specialists, since each appointment seemed to trigger a chain of others. The outcome was that Ruby would have regular body scans, and she began to take medication to lower her blood pressure, which she was told to do as a precaution for the rest of her life. She was also told to avoid anything that would cause her body to suddenly jolt. The vagueness of what this meant in practice became another source of worry. Should she carry on playing basketball, for example? She had always loved going abroad, but now travel insurance became exceptionally hard for her to get, partly because nobody knew how to categorise her. Ruby believes that it was definitely better to have been informed of her genetic inheritance, because in her case there were things she could do to lower the risk of it becoming a real problem. But it took a long time for her to understand that she was not actually ill. She was only at risk of being ill. In fact, nothing had actually changed; she had only become aware of a possible future. Every one of us is susceptible to one illness or another to some extent. As science progresses, many more of us will find ourselves in Ruby’s situation; drowning in estimates and probabilities that play games with our mind and our identity, and require us to make difficult decisions about our health and how we live. Every one of us will be shown to be subtly suboptimal. Or every one of us will be shown to be special. It depends on how you look at it. As Andrew Solomon writes in Far from the Tree: “The general culture feels that deaf children are primarily children who lack something: they lack hearing. The Deaf culture feels that they have something … membership in a beautiful culture.” We must be very careful in defining what constitutes disease or disability, especially as our ability to link genes with human traits expands. Bill Bryson puts it like this in The Body: A Guide for Occupants: “Twenty years ago about 5,000 genetic diseases were known. Today it is 7,000. The number of genetic diseases is constant. What has changed is our ability to identify them.” Even in the hard data, things get messy. For example, someone who has inherited an immune system gene called HLAB27 is about 300 times more likely to develop the autoimmune disease ankylosing spondylitis. Around 8% of people in the UK have this gene variant and most do not suffer from the disease. What’s more, inheritance of this gene may be useful in fighting HIV. About one in 300 people infected with HIV are able to control the virus so that they don’t go on to develop Aids, at least for a very long time, and HLAB27 occurs frequently in these people. So there’s a yin and yang to genetic inheritance that is hard to fathom, even for experts. One day, a watch that can measure a few simple things about your body will be seen as a laughably primitive tool. In the future, a whole cloud of information will be available and you must decide how much you want to delve into it. The agricultural, industrial and digital revolutions affected our environments and societies, but the genetic revolution equips us individually with new powers, and each of us will need to decide for ourselves if and when to deploy them. One way we should be preparing now is by making sure society is scientifically literate, and that our children are educated to understand risk, probability, genetic diversity and health. Perhaps the insight to hold on to is that we are not merely our genes, our cells, our microbiome or our brain. We are all these things, but we are also more. How we see ourselves and others – the stories we tell and the philosophies we live by – are going to be just as important to our wellbeing. • Daniel M Davis is a professor of immunology at the University of Manchester and author of The Secret Body. Further Reading: Far from the Tree: Parents, Children and the Search for Identity by Andrew Solomon (Vintage, £18.99) The Body: A Guide for Occupants by Bill Bryson (Black Swan, £9.99) The Code Breaker: Jennifer Doudna, Gene Editing and the Future of the Human Race by Walter Isaacson (Simon &amp; Schuster, £30)1) Full-backs the first sign of Rangnick revolution? Perhaps Ralf Rangnick’s biggest selection call in his first match in charge was to retain Diogo Dalot at right-back ahead of Aaron Wan-Bissaka, with Alex Telles continuing at left-back in the absence of Luke Shaw. Both were integral to United’s win: Telles having more touches than anyone else on the pitch, Dalot a frequent and threatening outlet on the right flank. In a way, this is another area in which United have fallen behind the elite in recent years, and Rangnick’s approach here suggested an attempt to redress the balance. Attacking full-backs? It may just catch on. Jonathan Liew Match report: Manchester United 1-0 Crystal Palace 2) Villa seize on Leicester’s typical failings Leicester’s performance at Villa Park felt like a showreel of the things they’re doing wrong this season. They conceded, again, in the first half. Their haplessness at defending set pieces was culpable once more. And there’s still a sense they need Jamie Vardy’s goals. Vardy wasn’t fit enough to start against Aston Villa, giving Patson Daka a chance to prove himself in the Premier League having shone in the Europa League. And in the first half at least, he took it, showing a combination of tenacity and deft footwork to set up Harvey Barnes’s goal. Leicester’s failure to turn dominance into goals always seemed likely to cost them given their defence’s vulnerability at every deep cross. The vigour Steven Gerrard coaxed from his side after the break will encourage Villa’s manager as much as it will depress Brendan Rodgers that his side had no answer. These domestic travails make progress in Europe all the more important. Napoli away on Thursday feels pivotal. Tom Davies Match report: Aston Villa 2-1 Leicester 3) Jansson exposed by his beloved Leeds Before the game, Thomas Frank had said his captain, Pontus Jansson, was in love with Leeds and, if there was no proof the feeling was mutual, it was notable that a former Elland Road cult hero was not booed on his return to his old club. Perhaps, however, there was an indication of why Marcelo Bielsa surprised many by allowing Jansson to leave. With Leeds man-marking all over the pitch, they left only one outfield player free. Time and again, it was Jansson, Bielsa presumably having primed his current players to believe their former colleague was sufficiently limited in possession they need not worry about him and choosing to put sentries on the other two Brentford centre-backs instead. When Jansson left in 2019, Bielsa replaced him with a better passer, the borrowed Ben White. Richard Jolly Match report: Leeds 2-2 Brentford 4) Newcastle drink in a long-awaited win Icy rain was sheeting down, but as Eddie Howe and his Newcastle players set off on a celebratory lap of the pitch and St James’ Park roared its appreciation, it might have been a sunny day in May. The unconfined joy was more befitting of Howe’s team having secured a top-six finish rather than winning their first Premier League game of the season at the 15th attempt, but it was entirely understandable. After all, Callum Wilson’s decisive goal against Burnley had ensured it was the first time a full house on Gallowgate had witnessed Newcastle winning at home since 18 January 2020. It also ranked as Howe’s first victory since taking charge last month. Anything, even avoiding relegation, now seems possible on Tyneside. Louise Taylor Match report: Newcastle 1-0 Burnley 5) Liverpool lucky to have a player like Origi After watching Divock Origi fire a late winner at Wolves that could have seismic implications for the title race, Jürgen Klopp could not believe his luck. “If I would be in another club I would go for him,” he said. “I thought that would happen. I am very happy he is still here but I cannot believe if you don’t play for Liverpool, you cannot be good. This team is outstanding, and if you are here and are number 12 or 13 or 14, you are outstanding.” It was only Origi’s third league outing of the season but his name is writ large in Liverpool folklore, not least due to his dramatic contributions in 2018-19, and Klopp was visibly delighted to see him step up again. Origi is that rare breed in the modern game: a player who understands that he occupies a backup role and embraces it. If and when the 26-year-old does opt to seek regular starts elsewhere, it will be with the most grateful of send-offs. Nick Ames Match report: Wolves 0-1 Liverpool 6) Grealish still struggling for impact at City Jack Grealish ought to have departed with the match ball at Watford. Instead he walked off early and slowly, substituted on 68 minutes and smarting after a performance that was marked by profligacy. Manchester City’s record signing had just watched a deflected shot skim the crossbar and it was not his day, the tone having been set when he blew an easy close-range header – the first of five missed chances. Grealish admitted last week that he had found it difficult to adapt at City and he is conscious of his low output: two goals and three assists in 17 appearances. Playing as the false 9, Grealish did not see as much of the ball as he wanted and, when he did get it, he seemed to be trying too hard to impress, taking extra touches or a little too long, rather than relying on his instincts. David Hytner Match report: Watford 1-3 Manchester City 7) Belligerent Bowen proves his worth Jarrod Bowen can be frustrating. The winger is a scurrying, driving menace on the right flank for West Ham but sometimes his finishing lets him down. He missed several chances during the draw with Brighton last week and had not scored since 31 October before facing Chelsea. Yet part of Bowen’s appeal is that he never stops going. He is always willing to try his luck and was outstanding against Thomas Tuchel’s side. Bowen drove at Chelsea’s defence from the start and he was rewarded for his energetic pressing when he dispossessed Édouard Mendy, who conceded a penalty with a clumsy foul. Then, with West Ham 2-1 down, it was Bowen who pulled them back into the game with a fizzing left-footed drive. He has been excellent since joining West Ham from Hull in January 2020 and is improving all the time. Jacob Steinberg Match report: West Ham 3-2 Chelsea 8) Now or never for Tuchel’s expensive understudies In terms of sheer depth, Chelsea’s squad is probably the strongest in the league. Just as well, because with the festive fixture crunch looming, Thomas Tuchel can count a good few walking wounded among his ranks. The manager said he has “no idea” when N’Golo Kanté will return from a knee injury, adding: “We’re also missing Mateo Kovacic for four or five, six weeks. And Jorginho is playing with hip pain.” Marcos Alonso and Kai Havertz limped off against West Ham, while Ben Chilwell is out until the new year. The good news for Chelsea is that their forthcoming games are eminently winnable – Wolves are the highest-placed of their next six opponents – and the players waiting in the wings boast serious pedigree, as demonstrated by Saturday’s £300m subs’ bench. But it’s time for the understudies to prove their worth: if Christian Pulisic, Ross Barkley and Timo Werner don’t make their mark in Chelsea colours over the next few weeks, will they ever? Alex Hess 9) Skipp custom-made for Conte Oliver Skipp has already made more Premier League starts this season for Tottenham than in every previous season combined and the England Under-21s midfielder showed why he has been tipped to become a “top player” by Antonio Conte with his all-action performance against Norwich. Skipp, who spent last season on loan at Norwich and was a key component of the side that won promotion, was the driving force in the Spurs midfield and deservedly named man of the match. While Gareth Southgate has a growing list of options to choose from, including the emergence of Jude Bellingham in particular, Skipp could be another useful alternative for next year’s World Cup if he can maintain his form and continue to improve under a new manager who will provide him with opportunities. Ed Aarons Match report: Tottenham 3-0 Norwich 10) Depleted Seagulls continue to fight to the end The problems are piling up for Graham Potter but, such is his calm demeanour, you would never know it. The Brighton captain, Lewis Dunk, was in the stands at Southampton and a knee injury is expected to rule him out against Tottenham next week, when Potter will also be without two more centre-backs in Shane Duffy (suspension) and Adam Webster (calf). Leandro Trossard was also forced off with an elbow injury at St Mary’s, while Adam Lallana missed the trip to his former club with a hamstring problem. Brighton have not tasted victory since September and have drawn nine of their past 11 matches, but a refusal to go quietly means they continue to build momentum, Neal Maupay popping up with another late equaliser on Saturday to prevent defeat. “It feels like you have to be close to perfect in the Premier League but if you can’t win, get a point,” Potter said. Ben Fisher Match report: Southampton 1-1 BrightonNFL players don’t normally get to choose when they retire, time makes that decision for them. Reports last week suggested what we had suspected all season: this will be Ben Roethlisberger’s last year with the Pittsburgh Steelers. Assuming the reports are true, Sunday’s 20-19 win over the Baltimore Ravens may go down as a last hurrah for the Hall of Fame-bound quarterback. It was an ugly game, as it often is when the Steelers face their historical rivals, the Baltimore Ravens. Ugly but compelling. Roethlisberger had put the Steelers ahead thanks to two touchdown passes. But with 12 seconds left, Lamar Jackson connected with Sammy Watkins to cut Pittsburgh’s lead to a solitary point. Head coach John Harbaugh had a decision to make: the Ravens could tie the game on an extra point from Justin Tucker – probably the greatest kicker in the history of the NFL – or win in regulation with a successful two-point conversion. The Ravens felt uncertain about heading into overtime with a battered cornerback corps. So, Harbaugh made the gutsy call to go for two. It didn’t work. Jackson’s pass bounced off Mark Andrews’s fingers and the Ravens’ ensuing desperation onside kick failed. In the most unlikely of manners, Pittsburgh survived yet another wrenching, low-scoring game against Baltimore. In sports, nobody remembers if a head coach makes the correct decision, only whether that decision gets results. In this case, it didn’t, and Harbaugh is already facing heavy criticism. In a vacuum, however, going for two feels like a sound call, especially in a league where overtime victory is so heavily-dependent on the toss of a coin. What Harbaugh does deserve some blame for is his team’s inability to execute the play. And it handed Roethlisberger perhaps his final victory over the Ravens. Sunday’s game marked the 39th fourth-quarter comeback of his career. That number feels low since few QBs in recent memory have been as dangerous under pressure or have displayed such productive improvisation when calls go awry. During his peak, defenses broke down the protection surrounding Big Ben at their own peril: he was unique among peers in becoming more dangerous when working within a collapsing pocket. That prime, however, was forever ago in NFL years. Partly because of the way he plays, the 39-year-old has taken a beating on the field and was never going to hold off Father Time in the way Tom Brady has. Even with Sunday’s win, the Steelers are 6-5-1, behind both the Ravens and Cincinnati Bengals in the AFC North and barely ahead of the 6-6 Cleveland Browns. They are in the playoff hunt, but only just. Strangely, Roethlisberger may have ended up helping another one of his old rivals on Sunday. With the Ravens dropping to 8-4, the New England Patriots will have sole possession of the best record in the AFC if they beat the Buffalo Bills on Monday Night Football (conversely, if the Bills win they will top the AFC East ahead of the Patriots.) For the Steelers though, the playoffs are an outside bet at best. Sunday’s win over the Ravens may well prove to be the last big win of Roethlisberger’s long career. MVP of the week Kyler Murray, QB, Arizona Cardinals. Murray showed no signs of rust upon his return from injury, throwing a pair of touchdowns and rushing for two more. Murray only put up 182 all-purpose yards, but that was understandable considering the miserable weather he was working in. How bad were the conditions at Soldier Field on Sunday? Well, the defining image of the game might have been an unfortunate Bears fan attempting to put on a poncho in the wind and rain. Maybe they should have kept their eyes covered: the Cardinals crushed the Bears 33-22, improving their record to 10-2, the best in the NFL Video of the week It finally happened! The Detroit Lions defeated the Minnesota Vikings 29-27, for their first victory of the season. Yes, the Lions are now 1-10-1 which is still terrible – but not as bad as 0-11-1. Rookie offensive tackle Penei Sewell celebrated his first professional win by letting out all the emotions. Unfortunately for Sewell, if you want to earn prestigious Quote of the Week honors, you must actually express your joy in words. It was understandable, however, as Detroit didn’t just win but did so in exciting fashion. Jared Goff hit the impeccably named wide receiver Amon-Ra St Brown with a touchdown pass as time expired. Stat of the week 12-0. Heading into Sunday’s game, the Philadelphia Eagles had an 11-0 all-time record against the New York Jets. Well, they improved that to 12-0 with a 33-18 win. It was good news for the team, except maybe regular starting quarterback Jalen Hurts. That’s because Eagles fans have discovered perennial backup/cult hero Gardner Minshew. Hurts sprained his ankle against the New York Giants and wasn’t available against the Jets. Minshew admirably stepped in and threw for two touchdowns and 242 yards. This already has fans eager to anoint Minshew as the Next Nick Foles, the backup who memorably stepped in to defeat the New England Patriots for the franchise’s sole Super Bowl victory. It’s easy to feel happy for Minshew, but Eagles fans should keep their expectations down. If you look at the record books, it doesn’t really matter who they start as a quarterback – along as they are facing the Jets. Quote of the week “What in the world is going on here?” – CBS broadcaster Kevin Harlan. Including this call of a Jimmy Garoppolo interception as the Quote of the Week is more like a lifetime achievement award for announcer Harlan, one of the NFL’s all-time great voices. Harlan has provided play-by-play coverage for the NFL, NBA, and college basketball for decades and it’s easy to hear why he is considered one of the best in the business. Harlan combines old-school gravitas with a flair for the dramatic. Plus, on rare and magical occasions, he sometimes calls animal touchdowns. Harlan had an entertaining game to cover on Sunday, a topsy-turvy game between the San Francisco 49ers and the Seattle Seahawks. The Seahawks broke a three-game losing streak with a 30-23 victory. Among other things, the game featured a fake punt touchdown from Seattle, something which Harlan very much appreciated. Elsewhere around the league -- With Daniel Jones out injured for the Giants on Sunday, Mike Glennon made an appearance for the sixth team of his NFL career. One can have a long and lucrative career as a second-string QB (Glennon has earned $31m during his time in the NFL), but it’s often not a pretty one. Right out of the gate, Glennon almost immediately threw an interception. That set the tone for the Giants, who were outplayed by a Miami Dolphins team in a 20-9 defeat. To add injury to insult, Glennon was diagnosed with a concussion shortly after the game. -- Daniel Sorensen’s main role for much of the season was to be the stumbling symbol of the Kansas City Chiefs’ awful defense. On Sunday Night Football against the Denver Broncos, he recorded a 75-yard pick-six and stopped a two-point conversion. Now Sorensen is a symbol of the Chiefs’ turnaround: their defense looks pretty good and, after a comprehensive victory over the Broncos, Kansas City have the joint-best record in the AFC. It was also the Chiefs’ 12th consecutive win over the Broncos. -- The Carolina Panthers didn’t play on Sunday, but they made headlines anyway, firing their offensive coordinator Joe Brady. The Panthers started 3-0 but couldn’t capitalize and are now 5-7 and have lost nominal starter Sam Darnold to injured reserve. Their hope is that Cam Newton bounces back after his attempt to put together a feelgood comeback story hit a hurdle in last week’s loss to the Dolphins. -- Since winless streaks seem to be the theme of today’s column, it’s also time to talk about how Matt Ryan’s Atlanta Falcons have never won a game against a Tom Brady-led team. That trend continued on Sunday as the Tampa Bay Buccaneers defeated the Falcons 30-17. Brady, as usual, had a fantastic game against the Atlanta defense, throwing for four touchdowns – and a single interception – and 368 passing yards. With the Buccaneers’ at 9-3, it looks like he’s keeping his MVP case afloat, even if he’s the last player who needs any more hardware (just ask the Falcons). -- Apologies to all the messy people who love drama: there was absolutely none in the Los Angeles Rams’ 37-7 demolition of the hapless Jacksonville Jaguars. Nobody could have expected Trevor Lawrence to instantly lift a team whose 2020 record was bad enough to get the first selection of this year’s draft, but the Jaguars are now 2-10 and have shown very little improvement under Urban Meyer.“Tonight it is quite nice, very nice to see the presidential box once again being occupied,” David Letterman said to knowing applause. “And the same with the Oval Office.” The comedian was introducing the 44th Kennedy Center Honors, where Joe Biden restored tradition merely with his presence after four years in which the annual gala was snubbed by then president Donald Trump and upended by the coronavirus pandemic. Biden was joined by the first lady, Jill Biden, the vice-president, Kamala Harris, and her husband, Doug Emhoff. The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, and Chief Justice John Roberts ensured the heads of all three branches of government were present in the main opera house. Lifetime achievement awards for artistic excellence were presented to the opera singer Justino Díaz, Motown Records founder Berry Gordy, Saturday Night Live (SNL) mastermind Lorne Michaels, actor and singer Bette Midler and folk music singer Joni Mitchell. It was the first full ceremony for America’s most prestigious performing arts awards since the outbreak of Covid-19. Guests were required to show proof of vaccination and a recent negative test and to wear masks. It was also a return to political norms. Trump’s chaotic, rule-breaking presidency often meant events such as these could be rocked by a single tweet. Biden came into office promising to restore order to Washington. His attendance at the Kennedy Center was one such small but symbolically important gesture and met with multiple standing ovations. Biden held a black-tie ceremony for the five honourees earlier in the evening. Trump did not hold such a reception during his four years in office and did not attend the event, breaking from predecessors who nearly always showed up. In lighthearted remarks about Michaels – the creator and executive producer of SNL – that again struck a different tone from Trump, Biden alluded to the comedy sketch show’s struggle to find an actor to impersonate him. “And Lorne Michaels – Mr Wise Guy over here,” the president said. “He’s trying out seven guys to play me. As we say in our family: bless me father for I have sinned. I don’t know what’s going to happen. And, finally, it’s my turn to say something about him.” Later, at the main event that ran for four hours, the audience was treated to a montage of SNL clips of actors’ impressions of presidents and other politicians which, perhaps to avoid any hint of controversy, did not include Trump or Biden. Biden was not spared, however, by Michael Che, a co-host of the show’s popular Weekend Update slot. He said: “It’s so nerve-racking, I’ve not been here in DC since January 6.” After the audience erupted in laughter, he added: “It’s not what you think: I needed a new laptop. “It’s a bit intimidating to do jokes in front of President Joe Biden. I keep having to remind myself, there’s no way he’s still awake right now.’ SNL cast members were cheered by members of the public as they entered the Kennedy Center, then sat together at a long table at a post-awards dinner in the atrium. Colin Jost was beside his partner, Hollywood actor Scarlett Johansson, who chatted with SNL alumnus and late night TV host Seth Meyers. The event, which will be broadcast on the CBS television network on 22 December, began with cellist Yo-Yo Ma playing the national anthem and asking the audience to sing the final lines together. It featured speeches by Jimmy Fallon, Goldie Hawn, Steve Martin and Martin Short and performances by Brandi Carlile, Andra Day, Norah Jones, Billy Porter, Smokey Robinson, Paul Simon and Stevie Wonder. Guests included the secretary of state, Antony Blinken, White House press secretary Jen Psaki, transportation secretary Pete Buttigieg and his husband, Chasten Buttigieg, former transportation secretary Elaine Chao, former House speaker Newt Gingrich and senators including Joe Manchin and Bob Menendez. Letterman joked: “This night is about the honourees whose unique gifts cross all boundaries and represent all parties from the left to the far left.” Earlier, Midler, who has received Grammy, Emmy, Tony and Golden Globe awards for a career spanning decades, told reporters on the red carpet: “It was divine at the White House. Very clean. Lovely. Great staff. Food was excellent. Wine was a little sweet.” Gordy, a songwriter and record producer from Detroit who shaped the careers of singers including Marvin Gaye, Michael Jackson and Diana Ross, said: “I think I’m in a dream, and it’s a wonderful dream.” He added: “I had a wonderful talk with the president and I was very appreciative of him taking his time to come here when he’s trying to run the world and run all of the things that he has to do. I was thrilled. I didn’t realise he knew so much about Motown.” Pelosi, also doing interviews on the red carpet, did not dwell on Trump’s past failures to attend. “I don’t want to go into what he didn’t do,” she said, before taking a playful dig at Biden’s Irish ancestry. “For all the years that I have known him, he has always been quoting poets and Irish music. I think he thinks being Irish gives him a little bit of an edge in terms of the arts.”Despite everyone’s hopes, the shadow of Covid-19 has been hard to escape this year. Michael Rosen’s account of his near death and subsequent recovery from the virus, Many Different Kinds of Love (Ebury), is one of the first of no doubt many reckonings with the pandemic. Rosen’s poems are supplemented by messages written by the NHS staff looking after him while he was in an induced coma. The book is unflinching, showing the ravages of being seriously ill – but hopeful and uplifting, too. The crisis of climate change has seen poets reaching for new expressions to alter the narrative about the challenge we all face. Out of Time: Poetry from the Climate Emergency (Valley Press), edited by Kate Simpson, is the best eco-themed anthology to emerge this year, with poems that are dynamic, elegiac and hopeful. In a similar vein, Penelope Shuttle, in her wonderfully clarifying Lyonesse (Bloodaxe), paints a picture of mythic lands submerged under seas and the loss, personal and environmental, that follows. Two exceptional debut collections grapple with physical and economic dislocation. Comic Timing by Holly Pester (Granta) is astringent and acutely funny on the cost of living – and being alive: “I hope therapy is real I hope it’s healthy it is expensive.” Meanwhile Victoria Kennefick’s Eat Or We Both Starve (Carcanet) braids ruminations on hunger, the body and the past through a viscerally rich and meaty language: “I lick the wall as if it were a stamp, / it tastes of bones, this smelly city”. All the Names Given (Picador), Raymond Antrobus’s richly inventive second collection, traces the history of his family name – “so anciently English that it has become foreign to itself”. Inspired by Deaf sound artist Christine Sun Kim, the book is studded with startling “caption poems” that explore how sound can be presented and represented on the page. In a similarly restlessly brilliant vein is Living Weapon by Rowan Ricardo Phillips (Faber), in which flights of fancy – sometimes literal – are grounded by a subtle and probing intelligence. A generous mix of cosmic myth and earthy wit, Tishani Doshi’s fourth collection, A God at the Door (Bloodaxe), is wise and profound, with the lightest of touches: “You and I may never be butterflies, but we recognise one another / zoomorphic ancestor. We bow and reach for the invisible thing that beats.” Ian Duhig’s New and Selected Poems (Picador), meanwhile, is a wonderful career summary of one of our finest poets. It showcases his ability to blend the divine with the demotic, knowing salvation lies somewhere between the two; the newer poems sparkle, confirming that he remains in fine creative fettle. Two more brilliant collections reminded us that formal dexterity is no bar to poems being utterly contemporary and delivering deep emotional riches. Kayo Chingonyi’s second book, A Blood Condition (Chatto &amp; Windus), is one of the most arresting and beautiful set of poems of this or any year. His ability to blend music, grief and yearning is unmatched. And Hannah Lowe’s The Kids (Bloodaxe), inspired by her time teaching in an inner London sixth form, is a series of sonnets full of joy. The book is generous in its compassion, and in love with the idea of learning, in the classroom and outside it. Considerations of the virtues of poetry, as well as its vices, can be found in A Vertical Art: Oxford Lectures (Faber), as delivered by Simon Armitage during his tenure as Oxford professor of poetry. Genially, sometimes waspishly, he expounds his belief in language as humanity’s most powerful tool, and poetry as the ultimate expression of its potential. The year’s most pleasing books have been those that delivered the most unexpected delights. Marit Kapla’s Osebol (Allen Lane) renders the oral history of a small Swedish village since 1945 into verse. A variety of voices form a symphonic whole ruminating on seasons passing, people leaving and a way of life almost disappearing. Staying in the north, Maria Dahvana Headley’s radical translation of Beowulf (Scribe) turns the old epic into a rollicking tale for today, grabbing your lapels from its very first word, as Headley renders “hwæt” as “Bro!” Finally, in the Forward prize-winning Notes on the Sonnets (Penned in the Margins), Luke Kennard takes Shakespeare to a house party you’d never want to attend. Through a cycle of anarchic, playful and despairing prose poems, he shows us the endless need we all have to connect: “If the dull substance of my thoughts were skin we’d walk along the skin-lined thoroughfare and pause under a fleshy, pulsating tree, I’d say, in all this hideous world you found me.” It’s a reminder of how poetry makes the world a touch less hideous. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.John Barton, the chairman of the fashion chain Ted Baker and the former chair of easyJet and Next, has died. Ted Baker said the veteran businessman, who was appointed non-executive chairman of the troubled fashion retailer last year, died suddenly. “John was a source of great wisdom for me and for so many of us at Ted Baker, and we will hugely miss his support and guidance,” said Rachel Osborne, the chief executive of Ted Baker, who joined a month before Barton’s appointment in April 2020. “Our thoughts and deepest sympathies are with his wife, Anne, and their family.” Last week, the 77-year-old stood down as chairman of easyJet, ending a near nine-year stint during the most tumultuous period in the airline’s 26-year history. Dame Carolyn McCall, easyJet’s former chief executive, said: “The words wise and calm will always be used about John. He was also warm and kind, able to be steely when needed and totally engaged with the whole airline, with a sense of humour that never wavered. I loved working with him through many ups and downs, he will be greatly missed.” Barton last year weathered an attempted ousting by Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou, the airline’s founder and largest shareholder, who threatened to requisition a series of shareholder meetings after the coronavirus pandemic struck to force easyJet to abandon £4.5bn of planes from Airbus he believed would bankrupt the business. At an extraordinary general meeting, Barton came through an attempt to oust him, winning 58% of the vote. “I am truly shocked and extremely saddened to hear of John’s passing,” said Johan Lundgren, the chief executive of easyJet. “I was very fortunate to have worked closely with him over the years and benefited greatly from his wise counsel. “He was a man of huge integrity who was very much liked and respected by everyone across the airline. On behalf of all of his former colleagues at easyJet, we send our heartfelt sympathies to John’s family at this time. He will be greatly missed.” Stephen Hester, the former boss of Royal Bank of Scotland who took over from Barton as the chair of easyJet, said he was a “distinguished chair who made an outstanding contribution to the company” and was “also a wonderful human being”. Barton spent 15 years on the board at the high street fashion retailer Next. Joining as a non-executive director in 2002, he rose to the position of chairman in 2006. He retired in 2017. “John was a wonderful, wise and deeply perceptive man whose calm good sense was rarely too far ahead of his wry sense of humour,” said Simon Wolfson, the chief executive of Next. “Hard working and never afraid to speak his mind, John’s moral courage, humility and resilience served Next well in both the best and worst of times. He held the respect and deep affection of those around him. I will miss him, as will his many friends at Next.” Barton has also served as the chair of the insurers Catlin, and Cable &amp; Wireless Worldwide, as well as a senior independent director at the high street chain WH Smith, the property group Hammerson, and SSP, which runs the Caffè Ritazza and Upper Crust chains at transport hubs. Born in Lahore, Barton was educated at Gordonstoun school and went on to complete an MBA at the University of Strathclyde. He was a chartered accountant. “John combined a generosity of spirit with insight, humility and humour, and we will all miss him,” said Helena Feltham, the senior independent director at Ted Baker. “He led the board with great skill and it was a privilege to have worked with him. Our hearts go out to his family.”Thalissa Teixeira does not cope well with extreme gore, which made starring in the year’s most gruesome police drama something of an ordeal. Ragdoll revolves around a nauseating crime scene: a figure sewn together from the body parts of different victims, suspended from the ceiling of a London flat. When she was introduced to the eponymous monstrosity on set, Teixeira recalls: “It properly spun me out.” Thankfully, the cast and crew were on hand to “pick my limbs up off the floor and stitch me back together”. Ragdoll – which is written by Freddy Syborn, best known for his comedy work with Jack Whitehall, and loosely based on the novel by Daniel Cole – is in its own way a similarly outlandish patchwork creation. Teixeira plays DI Emily Baxter, tasked with solving the case, alongside her already-traumatised colleague DS Nathan Rose (The Inbetweeners’ Henry Lloyd-Hughes) and newbie DC Lake Edmunds (Lucy Hale, of Pretty Little Liars fame). Blending the knotty plotlines of Line of Duty with a barrage of surreally bizarre deaths, the show, which launches tonight on Alibi, is a serious meditation on the institutional failings of the police with a very high gag rate, the joke kind and the other kind. This fusion of tones reminds Teixeira of Killing Eve (they share a production company) and she says the show’s creators took inspiration from South Korean films, such as Memories of Murder and Oldboy, that weave humour into their horror. Fans of disturbing drama might recognise Teixeira and her distinctively gravelly voice from the recent Emily Watson thriller Too Close. Fans of envelope-pushing fare may know her from the BBC polyamory drama Trigonometry. The 28-year-old, who spent part of her childhood in Brazil, moving with her British mother to Buckinghamshire when she was eight, first made a name for herself in classical productions in the West End, before cropping up in a slew of interesting and diverse TV projects. She recently featured in Channel 5’s Anne Boleyn. That said, this is the second time Teixeira has played a police officer in little over a year, following her part in the also-very-irreverent Maisie Williams comedy-drama Two Weeks to Live. But acting in a police procedural is not the uncomplicated gig it once was. “After the last two years, the way that we view cop shows is going to change dramatically,” she says, referring to the global protests prompted by the murder of George Floyd by a police officer in Minneapolis. The show began filming in April, soon after the murder of Sarah Everard by a police officer, a crime that occasioned a huge shift in perceptions of the police in Britain. Both cast a shadow over the production, but Teixeira says that, as a woman of colour, she has been distrustful of the police for most of her life. “The other night, I was cycling home and the fear I had was being stopped by the police. The only encounters I’ve ever had with the police have been to do with race problems and none of it anyone’s fault.” Ragdoll also examines how it feels to be a person of colour inside such an institution. Baxter is hugely conflicted about her job, says Teixeira. “She’s definitely not fond of it, but she feels like she has an obligation to be there and represent something.” She also worries that “being in the police is actually a Judas move”. But (spoiler alert) it’s even more complex than that: despite making a significant mistake, Baxter is not fired because the “optics would look bad. Yet she’s asking for some sort of equality.” Syborn, who is white, was keen to involve Teixeira in these issues. “He put his hands up and was like, ‘I’m very aware of the sector I represent, so let’s have conversations about your experiences.’” In person, Teixeira is wry and witty, appealingly prone to self-deprecation. “I hope this comes across OK on a page,” she says sheepishly, “but luckily I haven’t stopped working since I left drama school.” Despite her success, though, Teixeira is now planning to “step away a bit” from acting to focus on writing. “Possibly talking about Brazil a bit more, because there’s a huge lack of that in this part of the world.” The country and its culture still loom large in her life: her housemates are Brazilian and they speak Portuguese together at home. Still, she will be tempted back if a second series of Ragdoll gets the go-ahead. Teixeira is already bracing herself for more depravity from the mind of Syborn. “I think there’s something fascinating about why we want to watch programmes about the extremes humanity can go to,” she says. “I haven’t got an answer for that yet. But I certainly won’t be going to Freddy Syborn’s house for dinner any time soon.” Ragdoll starts on Alibi in the UK tonight, and screens on Foxtel and Binge in Australia.A party of the sort that is alleged to have taken place inside Downing Street last December might not necessarily have broken the strict lockdown rules in place at the time, the policing minister, Kit Malthouse, has appeared to argue. Malthouse’s comments contradicted those made by Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, who conceded on Sunday that a “formal party” of the sort reported would have been contrary to the then-Covid-19 guidance. Malthouse also took a different view to Raab’s claim that the police “don’t normally look back and investigate things that have taken place a year ago”, saying it would be right for police to follow up any formal complaints about the event. Questions about the gathering on 18 December, when London was in the top level of Covid restrictions, dogged Malthouse throughout a round of media interviews on Monday, one intended to showcase a new government strategy on drugs. Malthouse was asked on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme whether the type of party reported inside Downing Street, involving dozens of people drinking, eating and playing games, would have contravened the rules if the BBC had done the same at the time. He replied that this was not necessarily the case. He said: “You’re asking me a hypothetical question. I don’t know what the circumstances might have been, how far people would have been apart, what size and space it was. There’s all sorts of variations.” Malthouse repeatedly dodged questions on how such a party could possibly have been in compliance with the rules, which explicitly barred any office gatherings not connected to work. “The reassurances I have been given is that none of those rules were broken at Downing Street, that they complied with Covid regulations at the time,” he said. Asked how this could be the case given Downing Street had not denied reports about the party, Malthouse said: “I wasn’t there. I don’t know. A description that hasn’t been denied doesn’t mean that’s what actually took place.” Asked why No 10 had not denied such a party happened, Malthouse said: “I don’t know, you’d have to ask them.” Pressed on why he had not asked, he replied: “Well, I’m not an investigator. My job is to seek reassurance.” The controversy, he added, was primarily “of interest in the media”. Asked if he believed Downing Street’s version of events, Malthouse said: “I’m comfortable with the reassurance they’ve given me, yes.” He did, however, concede that the police should look into the matter if a formal complaint was made. Two Labour MPs have reported the alleged gathering at No 10 to the Metropolitan police. “As policing minister, my view is that if offences are committed of any kind and reported to the police, there should be an investigation by the police,” Malthouse said in a separate interview with Sky News. “They should examine it and decide whether they’re going to pursue it. That should be a decision for them, and not something that I ask a politician should seek to influence.” He added: “The police should be investigating anything that is a historic crime that is reported to them.”Boris Johnson is due to discover the outcome of a high court challenge over his decision to back Priti Patel after accusations of bullying. The FDA union brought a judicial review over the prime minister deciding last year to go against the findings of his then adviser on ministerial standards in order to back the home secretary. High court judges are expected to deliver their ruling in the case on Monday. Why was there a court case involving Priti Patel? The FDA union challenged a decision by Boris Johnson last year that Priti Patel did not breach the ministerial code by bullying her staff. This followed an investigation by the independent adviser on the code, Alex Allan, which concluded that she had bullied civil servants, including incidents of shouting and swearing at them. Allan concluded: “Her approach on occasions has amounted to behaviour that can be described as bullying in terms of the impact felt by individuals. To that extent her behaviour has been in breach of the ministerial code, even if unintentionally.” Despite this evidence, the prime minister sought to give weight to the home secretary’s assertion that any behaviour was unintentional and he therefore concluded that she had not breached the code. Allan left his role in Downing Street after Johnson contradicted his advice. What was Patel alleged to have done? Patel was accused of bullying staff across several government departments including the Home Office. Philip Rutnam, her former permanent secretary, said he was subjected to a “vicious and orchestrated campaign” against him in the media for challenging Patel’s alleged mistreatment of civil servants. According to reports, a senior Home Office official collapsed after a fractious meeting with Patel, who is understood to have successfully asked for another senior official in the department to be moved from their job. Further allegations emerged against Patel in the aftermath. An official in the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) received a £25,000 payout after she alleged that Patel, who was employment minister at the time, had bullied her in 2015. The DWP did not admit liability and the case did not come before a tribunal. Officials in Patel’s private office at the former Department for International Development allegedly accused her of humiliating civil servants in front of others while a minister in 2017. Patel previously issued an “unreserved, fulsome apology” and said there were “no excuses” for what happened. What were the grounds for the challenge? The FDA union, which represents the UK’s most senior civil servants, claims that the prime minister’s decision was irrational given the obligations of the code, and his own words in its foreword that “there will be no bullying and no harassment”. The Home Office itself deals with this very issue in its definition of bullying: “Bullying is not about whether the perpetrator of the acts intended them or not, but about the impact on the recipient and how it makes them feel.” Solicitors for the FDA have also said that when Allan’s inquiry was announced in parliament by Michael Gove, the then minister for the Cabinet Office, Gove pledged his support for the home secretary. Days later, the prime minister, knowing he would be the final arbiter of that investigation, also pledged his full support at PMQs, the FDA claimed.Sky News host Peta Credlin’s apology to the South Sudanese community for comments which incorrectly linked them to a Covid-19 outbreak was a condition of a resolution to a human rights commission complaint against her. On Friday, Credlin issued a four-minute on-air apology for blaming the community for an outbreak in Melbourne and making other harmful comments. Her apology came almost 18 months after the offending statements were broadcast on 26 June 2020. Two individuals, who were also acting on behalf of other members of the community, made a complaint to the Australian Human Rights Commission on 3 November 2020 regarding Credlin and Australian News Channel (ANC), the company which operates Sky News Australia. The complaint related to the 26 June 2020 segment, and an apology Credlin made three days later. The complainants alleged the segments were discriminatory, contrary to s18C of the Racial Discrimination Act, and lodged a complaint on behalf of themselves and “other members of the South Sudanese community in Victoria who are aggrieved by the making and broadcasting of the Credlin Imputations”. A lawyer for the complainants, Charles Reichman, confirmed to Guardian Australia that the complaint had been resolved. The conditions of the resolution include that ANC and Credlin agreed to broadcast the apology and two further segments on the South Sudanese community. Credlin said in her apology that they would be “positive” news stories about the community. The complainants can not be identified and no further action can be taken against ANC or Credlin under the agreement, Reichman said. If the complaint had not been resolved, action could have been taken in the federal court. Ron Merkel QC, who was involved in a similar complaint made against Andrew Bolt on behalf of Indigenous Australians a decade ago, was also involved in the claim, along with the barristers Phoebe Knowles and Shanta Martin. Sky News was contacted for comment. The human rights commission declined to comment. Credlin claimed during her segments that the Victorian government’s health orders could not be understood by the South Sudanese community because many of them did not speak English. She claimed while South Sudanese migrants could speak Dinka, many of them – especially women – could not read it because they were banned from attending school in their homeland. “This just underscores why new migrants need to urgently learn English … so that they can quickly become part of mainstream Australian society,” she said at the time. She also said the Covid outbreak had been caused by Ramadan dinners within the community, despite the vast majority of the community being Christian, not Muslim. Credlin said in her apology on Friday that she had not intended to cause hurt or offence to the community. “In June last year, while commenting on the Covid-19 pandemic, the escalation of new infections in Victoria, and various public health measures, I incorrectly linked the South Sudanese community to a cluster of cases that had developed following an end-of-Ramadan dinner in Melbourne’s northern suburbs,” Credlin told viewers on Friday night. “This was factually wrong, and I again deeply regret the error. On the basis of that error, I made various other statements that I accept have caused genuine hurt and offence to South Sudanese community members. It was not my intention. “My statements were understood to mean that the South Sudanese community had been reckless, irresponsible, or even deliberate, in breaching social distancing requirements, that the community had failed to adapt its cultural practices like other Australians, and that this was putting Australians at risk. I do not believe there was any truth to those inferences.” South Sudanese community leaders who spoke to Guardian Australia on Monday, including some who said they had met Credlin and other senior Sky figures after the segment last year, said the apology did not mend the damage caused by the comments. Ring Mayar, the president of the South Sudanese Community Association in Victoria, said that while the apology was a win for the community, and Australians generally who are vilified by the media, he was upset it had only been made after a complaint was lodged to the commission. “[The apology] didn’t come out of her heart,” he said. “It’s not her decision; it’s because she was forced to apologise out of the agreement.”The Book of Dust: La Belle Sauvage, adapted by Bryony Lavery, is being staged at the Bridge theatre in London, directed by Nicholas Hytner. How did this adaptation come about? We had lunch together about three years ago but then the great lockdown happened. I wasn’t able to do what I had done for the National Theatre production [of His Dark Materials, also directed by Hytner in 2003-04] and go up to watch things. One thing I knew that Nick, in particular, would do well was tell the story with a brisk directness and clarity. You have spoken of how much you liked the NT’s two-part adaptation of His Dark Materials, but so much had to be left out from the trilogy. It was their thing, not mine. I’m responsible for the book but that didn’t have to be withdrawn or banned just because there was an adaptation made of it. Every different adaptation to every different medium has its own possibilities. His Dark Materials has been a stage play, a radio play, a movie, a TV adaptation, an audiobook and a graphic novel in France. Somebody the other day asked if they could make it into a ballet. I said yes, of course. I’d be most intrigued. I went to a run-through of La Belle Sauvage and there were some parts of the story that hadn’t made it on to the stage. I expected that because it’s long and fairly episodic – more like a romance than a novel, in the medieval sense. How does the NT’s His Dark Materials compare with the film starring Nicole Kidman? The cast [of the film] was terribly good but I think they lost the story a bit … [Film] costs a lot more, which means that there’s a great deal more corporate anxiety … There’s a lot more talking and arguing, a lot more diplomacy going on, which didn’t really help the telling of the story. And then I don’t think the studio realised what the story was about. When they got to the part where they realised that it’s actually anti-religious there was a collective shiver, I think, and that’s really why there wasn’t a second film. So to compare the film and stage play, I was far happier with the play. What first led you to create your heroine Lyra and her world almost three decades ago? I started writing Northern Lights in 1993 and it was published in 1995. I had been thinking not about that particular story but about the issue of growing up – the difference between what William Blake terms as innocence and experience. I had been teaching boys and girls of 11, 12 and 13 in a middle school in Oxford. It’s an age of huge intellectual curiosity, tremendously exciting but very troubling as well. I also remembered my own adolescence and how important it was for me. It was a thrilling stage of my life with the sense of a world opening, like Lyra with the new world. What is it about this multiverse, and this set of characters, that pulls you back time and again? The sense of discovery. I wanted to know more about daemons and their relation to the human part of them. I wanted to think about the idea of consciousness and it seemed to me that I had a ready-made metaphor in front of me: I was using Lyra’s story to think with. In the third part of The Book of Dust, which is what I’m writing now, Lyra is looking for her own imagination because it seems to have gone missing. This involves a lot of thinking about the imagination, what it is and how it works. Does the news, and politics, affect what you write? I don’t set out to write a state of the world book but any task that is going to take you years, and which you’re going to take seriously, will engage your deepest beliefs and your most strongly felt emotions and convictions. So they will show up whether you intend them to or not. But I seldom, if ever, write in the first person. I almost always write as if I’m a camera looking at [the characters]. I find writing in the first person cramping and claustrophobic because it’s just one person’s view. I want to get out and see what’s happening around them. So you’ll never write a memoir? I’ve threatened to write my memoirs but mainly to alarm my friends and my family. Here’s a new idea: you ought to be able to take out insurance against being written about in somebody’s memoir. How do you manage to write for children and adults in the same sentence? That’s something I’ve always valued. It comes from the time I was a teacher and used to do a school play every year. What I realised very quickly is who the audience is: it’s not just the children or their parents but the other teachers and the dinner ladies and everybody else involved. It’s not about having silly slapstick for the children and clever wordplay for the grownups. If you do something successfully, everyone will enjoy it in a different way. Did you have to work very hard at writing this way? I’d had 12 years of practice by doing the plays at the school but also the practice of retelling the Iliad and the Odyssey in classes, which I did year after year. So I was making the Iliad into a story that I could tell in half-hour chunks and in doing that, you learn what sort of storyteller you are, what you can do and what you’re not good at. I know I’m no good at making people laugh but I can make you want to know what happens next. As an atheist, you revisit biblical stories and Christian beliefs in your writing. Does religion feed your creative preoccupations? Yes. It tells a cosmic story with you in the middle of it, which is huge and dramatic with enormous consequences. That’s what I valued about the Christian story. My grandfather was a clergyman so I went to church a great deal and at a time when they still used the 1662 Book of Common Prayer. Its rhythms are still with me, as well as the rhythms of the psalms and the King James Bible. The questions that religion poses and pretends to give us the answer to are important ones. Why are we here? How did we get here? Were we created? What is good and what is evil? Does it matter if I do something evil? Who will forgive me? All these questions are hugely important to us psychologically, emotionally, in every other way. The fact that I don’t believe in the doctrines of the Christian church any more doesn’t mean I deny their importance. You have used your platform on Twitter in campaigning ways but some months ago you issued an apology after an intervention in the Kate Clanchy controversy. Has that mistake changed the way you relate to social media? It’s reminded me that Twitter is not a person. When you’re talking to a human being, you have a much wider bandwidth – you can look at their eyes, hear their tone of voice. You don’t get that on Twitter. You just get 280 characters and it’s easy to misunderstand people because we are speaking through a very narrow tube. I still love Twitter for the fact that it lets me praise things. If I see a film I enjoyed, read a book I liked, hear a piece of music, I like to be able to say so. That sort of thing is immensely valuable, and it’s also valuable because you can make jokes but that’s when it begins to get dangerous because not everybody has a sense of humour. You have spoken about the dangers of what William Blake called “single vision” [religiously, politically, scientifically]. Doesn’t a platform like Twitter encourage this singularity? You can try to be subtle in a medium that isn’t subtle but it does depend on the person who’s reading it having a sense of more than a single vision themselves. It depends on things like irony and implication. Somebody once said we should have a typeface for an ironic tone, a bit like italics. You could print in that so you’re not taken literally. The Book of Dust: La Belle Sauvage is at the Bridge theatre, London, until 26 February.’Tis the season to be reading everything into the first ball of an Ashes series, while an army of memers awaits on Twitter. So, pity the poor soul thrown the scarlet Kookaburra at Brisbane on Wednesday morning: may his sinews be stiffened and his radar strong. Here are three memorable first balls from previous Ashes series which proved prophetic, at least in parts. 2006-07 “Only three slips – I think they could afford another one or two of those – they’ve got three slips, a gully, backward point, there’s a big gap in cover, Harmison, does he want Langer driving? Get the ball on the right length, get it bouncing through, you might need a fourth slip there. Steve Bucknor, adjudicating at the Stanley Street end. A perfect day in Brisbane, first ball of the first Test match … woaaah, wide delivery, taken at slip by the skipper, the nerves are showing already.” Channel 9. Put “Steve Harmison wide” into Google and you get 5,090,000 results. Not bad for a ball bowled 15 years ago, and which lasted less than six seconds from the lummoxing start of the runup to arriving into the surprised hands of the England captain Andrew Flintoff at second slip. Watching with the benefit of hindsight, you wonder about Harmison wiping the sweat from his forehead with the crook of his elbow just before the start, and Bucknor fiddling with a notebook with a biro attachment – did they have an inkling that they were about to be part of an infamous cricketing moment? The 2006-07 Ashes series had come hot on the heels of the triumph of 2005 – the summer England’s cricket’s cup spilleth over – before the game promptly disappeared behind the iron curtain of satellite television. In the 15 months that followed, Flintoff became a superstar and Simon Jones a model, while Glenn McGrath warmed up for the summer’s fun by once again predicting a 5-0 triumph for the baggy green “Dad’s Army”. The Sydney Morning Herald proclaimed it “the most eagerly anticipated Ashes series ever”, while Richie Benaud said he’d never known so much anticipation for a sporting event in his lifetime, and tickets flew from the box offices like droplets from a shaking damp dog. In hindsight, this was lucky for Cricket Australia, as the cricket was as utterly one-sided as McGrath had predicted. It was the worst result for England since JWHT Douglas’s side limped over the other side of the world, carrying the after effects of the first world war in their kit bags. Harmison’s first ball was a stinker, and happened to be representative of everything that was to follow – in the words of Wisden “the gold reverted to lead”. The following March, Harmison spoke to the Daily Mail: “I can’t think of a worse ball to bowl than that. In fact, I can’t remember ever bowling a ball as bad as that. I guess it set the tone. After the first over I went down to field on the boundary and was subjected to a barrage of abuse from the Australian fans. I’ve no idea what was said, though, because my mind was a complete blur. It was my worst nightmare.” 1994-95 “A very, very important toss this one, the pitch looked as though it was going to be an absolute belter for a couple of days then it might take some turn but basically a very good Brisbane pitch. And extremely important once Australia had won the toss and decided to bat that the England pace bowlers did well, that they bowled with skill and a little bit of common sense and used the swing … bowling well or suffering the consequences.” Richie Benaud. Philip DeFreitas wasn’t supposed to be the strike bowler for the Ashes series, but Devon Malcom had fallen ill with chickenpox so the job fell to him. Nor was he supposed to be bowling from the Stanley Street end – but Mike Gatting, for one, had sniffed the air and sensed a change in the wind direction. Wind billowing his baggy whites, in DeFreitas sprinted, huge wristwatch on his left arm. The ball was a bit short, a lot wide, and Michael Slater leaned on to the back foot and square cut it through point for four, following up with an ease through the gap in the slips to make it two boundaries in the opening over. With Martin McCague losing his radar at the other end, not helped by some village fielding, Australia knocked up 26 in the first four overs, 329 in the day, with Slater pocketing 176. The overall result wasn’t quite as disastrous as in 2006-07 but England, beset by injuries, lost 3-1. Five players flew home crocked, four more picked up lesser strains, and six replacements were shoved on the plane for the journey down under. England looked a team in sepia, the Australians magnificent Technicolor. “England trained and grass grew at the MCG yesterday,” wrote Greg Baum in the Age, “two activities virtually indistinguishable from one another in tempo, but each with its own fascination.” 1936-37 “The Brisbane wicket is always lively for an hour and a half or so on the first day of a match and, though it later became easy, McCormick was able to make the ball lift during that spell before lunch. His height aided the natural conditions, and he had three of England in the pavilion with only 20 on the board.” Wisden 1938. England travelled to Australia for their first tour since Bodyline – but without Harold Larwood, who refused, and Douglas Jardine, who had withdrawn from first-class cricket. It was Don Bradman’s first series as captain, and all looked perky for him when the England opener Thomas Worthington was caught by Bert Oldfield from the very first ball of the series by Ernest McCormick. England, however, went on to win the game by 322 runs thanks to a fortuitous thunderstorm turning the wicket into a last-day sticky dog. They would go 2-0 ahead after the Sydney Test, only to ultimately lose the series 3-2. Poor Worthington only played two more matches, averaging 12.33, and was described by Wisden as “dead out of luck throughout the trip”. Bradman made a duck in the second innings of his first Test as captain, lost the toss, and was criticised for his tactics. The England captain Gubby Allen noted approvingly in his diary how Bradman appeared “very jumpy” – but The Don finished the summer at the top of the batting averages with 810 runs at an average of 90, and with the Ashes clutched between his forefinger and thumb. • This article was amended on 6 December 2021. Steve Bucknor was the umpire adjudicating at the Gabba in 2006-07, not “Steve Bucknall”, as an earlier version said.Directed by Leyla Yilmaz, this film finds troubled waters underneath the seemingly placid surface of a typical middle-class household in Turkey. As member of the school water polo team, Umut (Emir Özden) is under constant pressure to perform well in the pool and in his exams. All is not well for his parents, either. A compassionate doctor at a public hospital, his mother Selma (Senan Kara) spends her evenings secretly messaging a former flame on Facebook. Meanwhile, his father, Sinan (Yurdaer Okur), an engineer, endures daily intimidation from his new, much younger boss, whose demands lead him to drink heavily. The shaky stability of this nuclear family topples over when rumours about Umut’s sexual orientation spread through the school, causing the sensitive young boy to suddenly disappear without a trace. Dealing with the loaded topics of growing pains, homophobia and bullying, the film expresses characters’ interior lives entirely through dialogue. The enveloping sense of uncertainty – Umut never acknowledges whether he is gay or not – isn’t helped by uninspiring visuals or sudden narrative revelations that announce mounting emotional turmoil. Certain plot points, such as an inheritance dispute, are introduced and never explored fully, and character motivation is at the mercy of the sequence of events: Umut’s bullies are threatening one moment then sob remorsefully the next. Social messaging appears to eclipse everything. What remains is a cautionary tale that functions better as a public service announcement than a humanist drama. • Not Knowing is on digital platforms from 6 December.Public funding for the arts in Britain has, since it began in the aftermath of the second world war, operated at arm’s length from the government. The principle has a particular purpose in the cultural field. It shields the arts from ministers’ direct intervention; at the same time, it prevents ministers from being answerable in parliament for controversial theatre productions or provocative exhibitions. “God help the minister that meddles with art!” wrote the Liberal prime minister Lord Melbourne, wryly and wisely. More broadly, the arm’s length principle is what it says it is: a principle, one that embeds the notion that a sign of a functioning society is the independence of its artists to create work that pushes against prevailing political tides. On a deeper level, it acknowledges that artists can – should – act as a nation’s conscience, expressing truths that may be unpalatable or otherwise inexpressible. National museums and galleries are arm’s length bodies. So is what began as the Arts Council of Great Britain, which later splintered into devolved national organisations, leaving a rump Arts Council England to remain in the orbit of the UK government, apportioning funding to individual English arts organisations. The Arts Council began as a successor to the wartime Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts (Cema), which took theatre, music and art “to air-raid shelters, to war-time hostels, to factories, to mining villages”, as John Maynard Keynes wrote in 1945 in the Listener. A one-time chair of Cema, Keynes was also the founding chair of the Arts Council. Because of, rather than despite, his life’s work in economics, he was utterly uninterested in the economic impact of the arts. Their role, rather, was one of “enlarging our sensibility”. The Arts Council, he wrote, was to be a “permanent body, independent in constitution, free from red tape, but financed by the Treasury”. That “free from red tape” will make anyone who’s ever applied for an Arts Council grant laugh mirthlessly, but the point for the moment is “independent in constitution”. There were plenty of obvious reasons for making sure of that independence. EM Forster, during a series of wartime broadcasts, had connected political freedom to artistic freedom in his denouncing of nazism – which was intent on the “fettering of the writer, the scientist, the artist and the general public all over the world”. When the war was over another war would have to begin, “for the restoration and extension of cultural freedom”. The revival of the arts and culture were to be the fruits of peace, part of a way of life that was worth fighting for. At the time it was clear that after the hardships of conflict, public arts funding would be both necessary and desirable; only through public patronage, and organisations such as the BBC, would the arts become available to the many, not just the few. Keynes’s direct model was the body established by the historian HAL Fisher to apportion funding to universities. But the BBC was there in the background, too. The British Broadcasting Company began in 1922 as a private enterprise, but in 1925 a parliamentary committee advised that it should become a corporation whose “status and duties should correspond with those of a public service”. It would be funded by a licence fee set by the government, but the government would have no direct say in its affairs. Early on, the BBC held out against demands that it should be commandeered as a government instrument during the national crisis of the General Strike – to Winston Churchill’s fury. Like any other system, this arm’s length model is, of course, imperfect. “It is customary for the body to direct its arm, and all that is gained by an arm’s length is a certain notion of removal of directly traceable control,” wrote Raymond Williams in 1979 after a stint serving on the Arts Council. True independence is tricky when the government holds the purse strings. The system is subtle. The “principle is no more than a convention or series of conventions”, wrote Robert Hutchison, who worked at the Arts Council in the 1970s, and later wrote a book about its politics. Williams was writing before the antagonism Margaret Thatcher and later governments unleashed on the BBC’s news coverage. Far away in the future, too, was the loathing the current government has rained down on cultural organisations in England about contested heritage and history, especially the history of empire and Britain’s role in slavery. Last year, the former culture secretary Oliver Dowden came very close to rupturing the principle of arm’s length when he wrote to Arts Council England and other bodies restating (in case anyone was in any doubt) the government’s opposition to the removal of statues and other memorials. “I would expect arm’s length bodies’ approach to issues of contested heritage to be consistent with the Government’s position,” he wrote. What did he mean by his use of the conditional in the phrase “I would expect”? Was it the stern and headmasterly, “I would expect all pupils to strive their hardest” – in truth, a command? Or was it airily hopeful, as in, “I would expect the sun to come out later”? If the former, he was instructing an impartial arm’s length body to adopt the patently political position of the government – a breach of the principle. If the latter, he was expressing only a vague prediction that they might possibly do so. The necessity for such close reading of an ex-minister’s note itself seems rather blackly comical, redolent of other less democratic times and places. In fact, the real threat isn’t contained within ministers’ oddly worded letters. Arm’s length is also atmosphere, manner and practice: it is about dignity, maturity, decency, respect and a kind of continence. None are qualities that could possibly be associated with the current prime minister. As has often been noted recently, the behaviour modelled at the very top has a habit of seeping downwards. One does not have to look far in the cultural realm to see boundaries being challenged at the moment. Take the trustee of the BBC, Theresa May’s former communications director, Robbie Gibb, who, according to the Financial Times, texted the organisation’s head of news to warn her off making an internal appointment of someone who had expressed anti-government views in the past. (The FT also reported that a person close to Gibb denied that he’d sent a message with the words attributed to him by the paper.) Take the former chair of the Royal Opera House and Tory donor who anonymously arranged to buy an £11m David Hockney from the Royal Opera House, without telling his fellow trustees until after the purchase – even if well-intentioned, it was remarkable behaviour. More dangerous still is a general atmosphere of threat created by the government. The BBC often tries to anticipate and dodge criticism in order to survive another day – as when John Birt outpaced Conservative opprobrium in the 1990s with his reforms to the BBC – but it incrementally weakens itself by so doing. There’s a risk that other cultural organisations follow suit in their own way: that, afraid of the noises made by the government, they find themselves internalising the Tories’ views on, say, empire instead of remaining impartial and following the impulses of their own scholarship. The arm’s length principle is not just a line to be crossed, it’s a state of mind. Self-inflicted wounds hurt as badly as those that come from outside. Charlotte Higgins is the Guardian’s chief culture writerFrom his home in Exeter, Paul “Pen” Farthing reruns the events of late summer through his mind. The former Royal Marine, who 15 years ago established the Nowzad charity in Kabul to care for animals suffering the fallout of war, still cannot believe that America “would just throw Afghanistan to the wolves”. When the retreat began in August, he realised “things were going south very, very quickly. We’d got young female staff who had trained as vets, who feared they would be married off to Taliban fighters. Their faces were just horrible to see…” At the time, the Nowzad animal refuge employed 24 Afghan staff. Since Farthing first adopted his own street dog in 2006 while stationed in Helmand, Nowzad had reunited 1,600 soldiers back home with animals they cared for on active service, while establishing a pioneering veterinarian practice and neutering programme. Farthing had been living at the compound since the beginning of the pandemic. Given the charity’s symbolic and practical mission, with Kabul about to fall, it was clear that he had to get both his team and the animals out of harm’s way. “If I got the staff out, there would be no one there to look after the animals,” he says. “The Taliban aren’t fans of dogs. And a lot of these animals were owned by people who were being evacuated. After all the work we’d done, do I just sentence them to death?” Nowzad launched Operation Ark , a fundraising operation, to charter a plane to transport its staff and their dogs and cats to the UK. “We could see the horrendous situation that was unfolding on the ground at the airport,” Farthing says. “The terrible images of people falling off planes. So for us, this was potentially a good news story.” He still cannot comprehend the chaos of the British withdrawal: the emails sent to passport holders to make their own way to the one-runway city airport rather than Bagram, which had inexplicably been abandoned two weeks earlier, having been defended for 20 years. “We knew that people were going to die. There was just this very narrow corridor airport road with very high concrete walls on either side.” The first time Farthing set off for the airport – with two buses of staff and their families, from one-year-old babies up to 80-year-old grandparents, along with two trucks piled with crates of cats and dogs – they were stopped four times at Taliban roadblocks on the five-mile journey. Each time, Farthing explained their mission to bemused fighters enjoying the power of their AK-47s. At the airport, they were told that the animals could go, but not the staff – not without visas. Farthing and the convoy returned to the Nowzad compound in the early hours and there was an emotional debate about what to do next. He recalls unanimity from his staff: “You have to at least get the animals out.” The following day, he returned to the airport with the trucks and US servicemen helped to load the animal crates into the hold of the chartered plane. Up to the last minute, he imagined the plane’s 229 seats would be filled with some of the thousands of people desperately looking for safe passage. But then he found himself sitting alone, on his way back to London. It was only when Farthing landed that he realised the size of the media storm Operation Ark had created. A threatening voicemail he’d sent to a Ministry of Defence official demanding visa assistance had surfaced in the papers. The Tory MP Tom Tugendhat was relaying a story about how an Afghan man had asked him why Britain was prioritising dogs over children. Farthing claims he could not recall making the call to the MoD – “we had Taliban next door, I was calling everyone I could”. He still sees the briefing to the media about “pets over people” as a deliberate smokescreen for the scandalous ineptitude of Britain’s exit, made while the foreign secretary was holidaying in Greece. Farthing was able to start breathing more easily when he got news that his staff had escaped across the Afghan border to Pakistan in September. On the morning we spoke, the last of them were due to arrive at a hotel in Exeter; he has used some of the money raised to organise English lessons and help them get vocational training. “There’s a big shortage of vets here,” he says, “so work shouldn’t be a problem.” The dogs and cats, having passed through quarantine, are largely being reunited with their owners. He can’t see a prospect of returning to Kabul, but hopes Nowzad might have a life elsewhere in the world’s conflict zones. In recent months, he has never stopped hearing that people should come first. How does he reply? “I completely agree,” he says. “But animals in a cargo hold never got in the way of people getting on a flight. We had an aircraft with 200 empty seats on it – but that wasn’t my choice.”Wherever I Go … there will be an island, and an ocean will be what rings me. We are to the very end a naming not our own, though we leave to find what is left behind and that holds us, more than we know, like a small beach has the ear of the great sea and a trillion ebbs are never without returns. This flow is the staying, though we depart. An oyster takes a single grain and stores it in her heart’s muscle like a lover’s memento; she never lets us go … This week’s poem is from the latest collection by Trinidadian writer Jennifer Rahim, recently published in the UK. Wherever I Go … seems to demonstrate the creation of one of those sacred spaces referred to in the book’s title, Sanctuaries of Invention. “Travel cures imagination,” Rahim writes in a longer poem, Homing Now to Stardust, part of which is an affectionate epistle to a globe-trotting nephew, “but home is where we anoint ritual.” While Rahim’s own pleasure in travel is clear in the many descriptively exuberant poems in the new collection, Wherever I Go … seems to say that the home country is more resistant, a portable sanctuary that travellers must form from their own images and symbols. The poem’s stanza pattern may itself be symbolic. While the title begins the poem, and evokes a first phase of imagined travel to unknown destinations, the three-line structure of the opening stanzas suggests containment. It may also allude to the name, Trinidad – Spanish for “Trinity”. (The full name imposed on the island by Christopher Columbus was “La Isla de la Trinidad”, replacing the original Arawak word Iëre, “Land of the Hummingbirds”). So, for the first three stanzas, the lineation suggests an island surrounded by sea. This ocean, the poet memorably says, will always be “what rings me”. The variety of meanings in “ring” includes encirclement, and perhaps the physical ring used in tracking a bird’s migratory flight. End-rhymes, too, assert the sense of containment in these tercets. The poem’s thought will move on, and the tercet structure change to couplets, the pairs of lines walking firmly and carefully into a wider world, when the powers of imagination will be most needed. Before this happens, though, there is a central acknowledgment of alienation through “a naming not our own”. Again, some lines from Homing Now to Stardust shed light on the colonial contexts of Wherever I Go … “We joke de ole Buckingham / would drown in our Queen’s Park Savannah. / No name they gave us / could contain the largeness of islands.” To rediscover what has been obliterated a difficult personal acknowledgment is needed: “though we leave to find // what is left behind / and that holds us, / more than we know, // like a small beach / has the ear of the great sea.” The voice of the “small beach” is listened to by the “great sea” as if the sea were some kind of generously maternal or paternal spirit. The exchange is furthered in the imagery of “ebbs” and “returns” and the “flow” that “is the staying, / though we depart”. The poet has spoken of herself in the first stanza, but from the second stanza to the end of the poem, she speaks for her people in their collective movements of migration. In the enticing metaphor of the oyster and the single sand-grain, there’s a return to the earlier idea of enclosure, with a symbolic protective entity, the oyster in its shell, very much smaller than the “great sea” and even the “small beach”. The poem imagines a new-old world in miniature. At first, it seems as if the “single grain” might symbolise the country, the oyster being the person whose memory lovingly recreates and encloses its presence, and, implicitly, transforms it to a pearl. But the idea is more original than that: it is, I think, the island that’s represented as the oyster. Warmly, safely, she (now female) “stores” each individual islander “in her heart’s muscle // like a lover’s memento”. The last line echoes and revises the main verb, “go”, in the title, and also ends in an ellipsis. It tells us that, although movement and change remain unavoidable, fundamentally “she never lets us go …” A writer of fiction and criticism as well as poetry, Rahim won the 2018 OCM Bocas prize for Caribbean literature for Curfew Chronicles: A Fiction. One of her acclaimed earlier collections, Approaching Sabbaths, is reviewed here, in an essay that includes an interesting short introduction to the anglophone poets of Trinidad and Tobago.Music Accept no slow acoustic covers – there are not enough Greatest Songs of All Time playlists out there to adequately contain the magnificence of Robyn’s original heartbreak hit Dancing on My Own. Watching on as an ex-partner finds new love in the club, the Swedish songwriter finds a bittersweet haven in the euphoria of dance, weaving a gossamer thread between joy and despair. It set the blueprint for a whole new school of sad-banger pop but, 11 years on, nobody has quite managed to ascend to Dancing on My Own’s cathartic heights. Pour a glass, play it loud and hug yourself tight: you deserve this. Jenessa Williams *** Television If you had said 10 years ago that one of the most moving cultural meditations on solitude of the 2010s would be an animated series about a horse, you would surely have been met with neigh sayers (sorry). And yet BoJack Horseman was all that and more, its cartoon exterior merely a vessel for a soul-shredding story of fading fame, guilt, grief and addiction. Nowhere was this more evident than in the series three episode Fish Out of Water – an almost wholly silent, almost entirely underwater episode that says so much while saying so little. Hannah J Davies *** Books In Hunger, Knut Hamsun’s unnamed narrator wonders the wintry streets of Kristiania (now Oslo), experiencing the terrible isolation of being alone among crowds of people. He can’t connect. He loses all feeling towards society. When he encounters others, he is met with indifference. His only real companion is hunger. He sucks a stone, chews on wood shavings, tries a brown old piece of orange peel. He nearly eats the pencil with which he tries to scratch out a living as a journalist. He nearly eats his own finger. He nearly loses his mind. He feels like “a solitary beacon on a rock in mid-sea, whilst the tides rush and roar about it”. It is a desperate, prolonged scream of a novel. Sam Jordison *** Art Edvard Munch’s Self-Portrait With a Bottle of Wine is the loneliest self-portrait I know. Munch sees himself, and is not happy. He is by himself in what looks like a good restaurant, in a neat suit, the table laid for one, well into a bottle of wine. Earlier artists had portrayed Romantic solitude as something liberating but for Munch it is just emptiness. He looks at himself with self-knowledge, wondering how it came to this. The other people are far away, disconnected from him. The bottle is handy. And he observes the whole sad story as if he stood apart, watching his predicament. Jonathan Jones *** Film In the wake of the 2008 financial crash, the movie business found a creative way to cut budgets – a whole series of movies with a single actor on screen. (Among other examples, Ryan Reynolds found himself hostage in a coffin in Buried; Sandra Bullock spent most of Gravity in solo orbit.) But the purest expression of loneliness I’ve ever seen on film came with a love story made long before that: Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s aching German melodrama Fear Eats the Soul. The solitude of the 60-year-old widow Emmi was the everyday kind: a sad, subtle pang you sense she only registered herself when it was ended by Ali, a younger Moroccan man with whom she starts a relationship. But for both, isolation still has a way of gnawing even as a couple. The film is a high-wire act – two people each teetering above a sheer, lonely drop. Danny LeighThe largest oil and gas companies made a combined $174bn in profits in the first nine months of the year as gasoline prices climbed in the US, according to a new report. The bumper profit totals, provided exclusively to the Guardian, show that in the third quarter of 2021 alone, 24 top oil and gas companies made more than $74bn in net income. From January to September, the net income of the group, which includes Exxon, Chevron, Shell and BP, was $174bn. Exxon alone posted a net income of $6.75bn in the third quarter, its highest profit since 2017, and has seen its revenue jump by 60% on the same period last year. The company credited the rising cost of oil for bolstering these profits, as did BP, which made $3.3bn in third-quarter profit. “Rising commodity prices certainly helped,” Bernard Looney, chief executive of BP, told investors at the latest earnings report. Gasoline prices have hit a seven-year high in the US due to the rising cost of oil, with Americans now paying about $3.40 for a gallon of fuel compared with around $2.10 a year ago. The Biden administration has warned the price hikes are hurting low-income people, even as it attempts to implement a climate agenda that would see America move away from fossil fuels, and has released 50m barrels of oil from the national strategic reserve to help dampen costs. But oil and gas companies have shown little willingness so far to ramp up production to help reduce costs and the new report, by the government watchdog group Accountable.US, accuses them of “taking advantage of bloated prices, fleecing American families along the way” amid ongoing fallout from the Covid-19 pandemic. “Americans looking for someone to blame for the pain they experience at the pump need look no further than the wealthy oil and gas company executives who choose to line their own pockets rather than lower gas prices with the billions of dollars in profit big oil rakes in month after month,” said Kyle Herrig, president of Accountable.US. The analysis of major oil companies’ financials shows that 11 of the group gave payouts to shareholders worth more than $36.5bn collectively this year, while a dozen bought back $8bn-worth of stock. This apparent focus, rather than on further drilling, has caused some frustration within the federal government, with Jennifer Granholm, the US energy secretary, stating that “the oil and gas companies are not flipping the switch as quickly as the demand requires.” A glut of new oil drilling has made the US awash with oil in recent years, turning the country into a top-level exporter as well as domestic supplier, but this has kept prices low to the displeasure of investors. “A lot of this has been driven by investor sentiment,” said Helima Croft, head of global commodity strategy at RBC Capital Markets, of the current reluctance to expand production. “They don’t want them to spoil the party.” The situation has left the White House in an awkward position with its commitments to rapidly reduce planet-heating emissions, with environmentalists furious at administration attempts to expand drilling and fossil fuel companies also unhappy over some of its earlier climate-related moves, such as shutting down the controversial Keystone XL pipeline. The oil and gas industry has fought Joe Biden’s attempts to pause new drilling permits on federal land, despite its unwillingness to expand operations in order to reap the returns of costlier oil and the fact the industry currently sits on 14m acres of already leased land that isn’t being used, an area about double the size of Massachusetts. “It’s not the government that is banning them from drilling more,” Pavel Molchanov, an analyst at Raymond James, told CNN. “It’s pressure from their shareholders.” Aside from its role in the current high gasoline prices, the oil and gas industry is a leading driver of the climate crisis, the reality of which it sought to conceal from the public for decades, and is a key instigator of the air pollution that kills nearly 9 million a year, a death toll three times that of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. The American Petroleum Institute, a leading industry lobby group, pointed to a blog that blamed the Biden administration for policies that “significantly weaken the incentives to invest in America’s energy future” but did not answer questions on production rates of oil companies.‘I hate to dictate to people. I don’t like too many rules,” says Iain Mellis, a cheesemonger of 40 years, with cheese shops bearing his name scattered across Scotland. Mellis has spent his life trying to make artisan cheese more accessible; the last thing he wants is to be so prescriptive that people are put off. Yet the world of good cheese is already mired in misunderstandings that, at best, detract from its enjoyment and, at worst, result in its ruination. Cheese stored incorrectly is easily marred, while the mistaken beliefs that you need red wine, specialist knives or even a cheeseboard to enjoy it only reinforce cheese’s recherché reputation. As we enter the season of cheese – and the month during which we will buy (and eat) more cheese than in any other – it is worth debunking some of the more commonly held fictions regarding fromage. Choosing your cheese You can cook with cheap cheese “That is a false economy,” says Mellis. “Our cheese might be double the price [of supermarket varieties], but you’ll only need half the quantity.” If you are using a block of mild cheddar for a macaroni cheese, you will need an awful lot more than you would using, say, Montgomery’s cheddar – and you will probably ruin your sauce in the process. “It’ll make it oily and more likely to split.” Pre-grated cheese is fine Grated parmesan, mozzarella or cheddar, for example, are “a terrible addition to your recipes”, says Luca Dusi of the wine and cheese bar Passione Vino in east London. “Once grated, cheese will start oxidising” – meaning it also begins to lose flavour. The older, the better The “most pernicious myth of all”, according to Dominic Coyte of Borough Cheese Company. “All cheeses have a peak period, during which they are their best, and then they decline. The art of the affineur – a person who ages cheese – is to recognise that peak.” A 48-month comté will be far more expensive than a 24-month comté, but less universally liked. Storing cheeses Wrap in clingfilm or keep in an airtight container “Clingfilm is the worst environment for cheese, because it traps the moisture,” says Mellis. The same goes for a plastic container, says Jason Hinds, the director at Neal’s Yard Dairy. “It makes it humid and precipitates the growth of white surface mould.” This mould is edible – but it will taint the taste and the appearance of the cheese, and is easily avoided by using beeswax wraps (a favourite of Mellis), waxed paper or even baking paper. “Anything that allows you to wrap it entirely and snugly; not so tight that the cheese can’t breathe, but not so loose the cheese dries out.” You can store it in the fridge door (the space often marked “dairy”) “The fridge is an exceptionally dry environment – and the door is particularly dry,” says Hinds. Ideally, you should avoid the fridge entirely and go for a cellar or larder, says Mellis – but not everyone has that option. If a fridge is your most hygienic choice, Hinds recommends the salad drawer. “It’s cool enough to stop the cheese from moulding up, but it’s separated from the rest of the fridge and is gently humid, so the cheese won’t dry out.” If it goes mouldy, it’s bad Cheese – good cheese – is a living product. If given a chance, it will develop mould – but that mould is rarely, if ever, bad for you. “Like the rind, it will penetrate in a tiny way and may change the taste of the cheese very slightly,” says Mellis, “but it’s not dangerous.” Indeed, a streak of blue mould in a hard cheese like a cheddar is considered a good thing, adding complexity and depth. White mould should be cut off, says Hinds, simply because it will taint the flavour. Likewise brown and grey moulds are also best sliced off, but for taste reasons rather than health. How to serve The temperature of your room is “room temperature” “The biggest mistake you can make is eating cheese straight from the fridge,” says Em Brightman, the head chef at Angela Hartnett’s London restaurant Murano – but it is also worth remembering that “room temperature” in cheese terms “means 14C to 18C. If the room is hotter than that, then that’s not desirable, either. You don’t want the cheese to be glistening,” she says. Keep cheese somewhere out of the way of a heat source “until it is lukewarm to the touch and the texture slightly yielding”. You need specialist cheese knives … “I have a couple of cheese knives, but I don’t put them out,” says Mellis. “I tend to serve cheese with paring knives, which are sharp and small.” The most important thing is that the knife is thin. The wider the blade, the more you’ll break up the cheese. That doesn’t mean splashing out on specialist – and often overpriced – equipment, adds Hinds. “The kind of knives you use for prepping fruit and vegetables are usually thin enough.” … and a cheese board While lovely to look at, they can leave cheese at the mercy of guests, who might not appreciate the nuances of cutting cheeses or the order in which to eat them. “Be sure to eat your way from the mildest cheese to the strongest in flavour,” advises Brightman. “I prefer to serve individual plates of cheese, with five or six servings of a similar size and with the rind,” says Hinds. How to eat Rinds are inedible With the obvious exception of rinds that are made of cloth, wax or plastic, most rinds are edible – even on hard cheeses. “It has its own flavour, and sometimes the best flavours, as the result of mould ripening,” says Hinds. “One of the cheeses I love the most is taleggio, a soft, creamy, pungent cheese,” Dusi tells me. “I hate seeing people removing, with difficulty, the crust, which adds to the final taste.” Red wine is the best pairing … “The truth is, the tannins in red wine can seriously clash with many cheeses,” says Alan Watson, the head cheesemonger at Funk in London. “I would recommend searching for more sparkling whites and even orange wines.” The natural acidity of white wine is perfect for fresh and crumbly cheese – “even blue cheeses, with their sharp, threaded veins, work well with white wines”, argues Patricia Michaelson, the founder of La Fromagerie, “Chardonnay, with its buttery richness, is perfect with hard cheeses such as gruyère and Lincolnshire Poacher.” … but beer is a no-go “Beer and cheese were born to go together and share a lot of history,” says Jonny Garrett, the founder of the Craft Beer Channel and the author of A Year in Beer. “For centuries, they were made using local ingredients by women at home. The fact they have always shared the table means they have similar or complementary flavours.” What’s more, he says, “there is such a wide variety of beer styles that there is always somewhere to turn. Classic best bitters are wonderful with lancashires; krieks and frambois add fruitiness to soft goat’s cheese; and imperial stouts and barley wines are revelatory with blues.” A question of digestion Cheese gives you nightmares Chances are you will have cheese quite late at night at this time of year – and it is eating (and drinking) late that results in poor-quality sleep, which in turn makes you more likely to remember your dreams, rather than an inherent property of cheese. Michaelson advises avoiding fizzy drinks, tea and coffee, which don’t complement cheese from the perspective of your palate or your digestive system. “If you don’t want wine, have apple or grape juice.” You can’t eat any cheese if you are lactose intolerant On the contrary, one of the reasons humans developed cheese in the first place was in order to digest the milk of ruminants, argues Ned Palmer, the author of A Cheesemonger’s History of the British Isles and A Cheesemonger’s Compendium of British and Irish Cheese. During the cheesemaking process, bacteria convert the lactose in the milk into lactic acid, which those with lactose intolerance can tolerate. “There are people who are allergic to cow’s milk cheese, but that’s to do with the type of protein it contains, not the lactose,” he says. Hard, aged cheeses are your best bet if you are lactose intolerant, as the fresher the cheese, the higher the lactose – although there is still precious little that remains. Making the cut Just slice any way you like No. While you don’t need a set of designated cheese knives, you do need an array of sharp knives, in order to avoid getting blue cheese on other cheeses or vice versa. The biggest faux pas in fromage is cutting the nose off a cheese, rather than slicing it lengthways – not for reasons of etiquette, but because “the cheese tastes differently from the centre to the outside,” says Hinds. “If you cut the nose off the cheese, not only have you brutalised the look, but you’re denying yourself or your guests the opportunity to taste through a range of profiles: from the centre, where it’s brighter and more acidic, to the outside, where you get more savoury flavours.” The thinner the slice, the better, says Watson, because it means more oxygen. “This excess oxygen will really bring out the flavour profile of the cheese – similar to taking air in when drinking wine.” If you are a big consumer of cheese, it might be worth investing in a cheese wire, which will get you the finest cut.The prime minister of Solomon Islands has defended his government’s decision to establish diplomatic relations with China, accusing “agents of Taiwan” of attempting to destabilise the government. Manasseh Sogavare made the comments during a heated day in parliament as the opposition leader, Mathew Wale, attempted to remove the prime minister through a no-confidence motion that was defeated by a significant majority. Wale blamed Sogavare for the deadly anti-government protests and riots that have shaken the country in recent weeks. Protesters marched on the parliamentary precinct in the east of Honiara on 24 November, where they allegedly set fire to a leaf hut next to Parliament House where MPs and staffers go to smoke and eat lunch. Riots followed lasting hours with buildings being torched in Chinatown, as well as at a police station and a school. Rioting continued for days. The bodies of three people were found in a burnt-out building in a store in the Chinatown district of Honiara. Many of the protesters come from Malaita province, the most populous province in the country, where the provincial government has had tense relations with the central government for years. Tensions increased in 2019 when Sogavare announced that Solomon Islands would switch its diplomatic allegiance from Taiwan to China, a decision that the Malaita premier, Daniel Suidani, has strongly criticised. In parliament on Monday, Sogavare defended the decision, saying that traditional donor partners had not been able to assist Solomon Islands with its development challenges. “China as an economic powerhouse provides an opportunity for us to engage and address our development needs and challenges,” he said. “The national government does not need to bow to the interest of Taiwan and its agents on this matter … Solomon Islands recognised the People’s Republic of China and that is the end of that matter,” Sogavare said. He also said “agents of Taiwan” had been calling for the government to conduct consultations about potentially switching allegiance back to Taiwan, something he said would not happen. “Move on, stop wasting time and energy on this.” “Solomon Islands as a sovereign democratic state reaffirms its decision and stands by its traditional bilateral partners: United States of America, United Kingdom, Australia, Japan and New Zealand and the rest of the world … in recognising the People’s Republic of China as the legitimate government of China,” Sogavare said. Sogavare added that the government did not need the approval of provincial governments to make decisions on bilateral relationships. Wale said China was not the issue, but rather the prime minister’s lack of humility and unwillingness to listen to the people “The issue is the prime minister’s deception. You made multiple statements here and in the media that the government will consult widely as possible and hear everyone’s views on the question of the switch. You will leave no stones unturned. You will reach out to all the constituencies,” he said. Wale said unfulfilled promises by the prime minister had fuelled the protests. Sogavare, a controversial figure in Solomon Islands parliament, was first elected as prime minister in 2000 after a coup against the government. He has served four terms. It was not the first motion in parliament to remove Sogavare. In 2017, he was voted out following claims he no was no longer listening to his fellow MPs and did not tolerate dissent. Honiara, the capital, was relatively quiet when the motion was defeated in parliament. More than 200 peacekeepers from PNG, Fiji, Australia and New Zealand have flown in over the past two weeks to assist the local police force in maintaining law and order.Olivia Colman gives a powerhouse turn in The Lost Daughter, prickly and combustible as Leda Caruso, a middle-aged languages professor on a working holiday in Greece. In flight from her past, possibly from herself, she stares at the sea as though it’s done her a great wrong and eats alone at the bar, repelling anyone who draws close. She haunts the resort like a ghost while other ghosts are haunting her. In an excellent directing debut, Maggie Gyllenhaal turns Elena Ferrante’s 2008 source novel into humid, sensual cinema. This is Colman’s stage and her tragedy; you can’t take your eyes off her for a second. Leda can’t seem to relax into her tranquil island break: she’s disturbed by the unruly, faintly criminal family from Queens that rents the enormous pink villa just up the coastline. Nina (Dakota Johnson), the brood’s volatile young mother, mislays her infant daughter on the beach. The daughter, in turn, has mislaid her favourite doll. Leda immediately collects them both: she returns the child right away but, prompted by some repressed maternal memory, keeps the doll for herself. Leda will explain that she has two girls of her own; Martha and Bianca, now both in their 20s. But even here one wonders whether the woman is being entirely straight with us. Her social armour keeps coming loose. Her warm professional front is ripped by capricious cold snaps. She’s solicitous one second; downright spiteful the next. In flashbacks we see her (played by Jessie Buckley) struggling to stay afloat, one eye on the kids and the other on the exit door. Work is much better. The Lost Daughter wrong-footed me and took a different, more nuanced direction; one that is just as rewarding in its way. Gyllenhaal’s delicious drama might seem like a storm in a teacup. But what a cup, and what a storm. • This article was amended on 7 January 2022. In an earlier version the character of Martha was misnamed as “Marsha”.Joseph was just 16 years old when he arrived completely alone in Scotland – a country he had never heard of – seeking safety, after travelling across the world for six months from Vietnam to the UK, living in forests and being smuggled across the Channel. On his journey, he had learned not to trust people, so when he first met his guardian – an “on your side” adult allocated to every unaccompanied young arrival – he had doubts. “She was saying nice things but I wasn’t sure she was going to help me,” he says. Six years on, Joseph, who is studying business at college and works as an interpreter, says his advice to anyone meeting their guardian is simple: “They are the only person you can trust. They will help you no matter what, they will fight for you. Tell them everything you’ve been through.” Guardians are qualified immigration advisers, and can accompany their charge to Home Office interviews and appeals but, as Joseph explains, their role is as various as the young person they are supporting. “They helped me understand the law, with my sleep problems, with the culture. They helped me establish my own life here.,” he says. “I’ve only lived here for six years but I feel it’s a lot longer, because of the knowledge that’s been passed on to me.” He was granted discretionary leave to remain in the UK last year. As for Scottish culture, Joseph says he would love a kilt “but they’re very expensive”. Since 2010, more than 850 asylum-seeking and trafficked children and young people have been supported by the Scottish Guardianship Service, which is run by the children’s charity Aberlour in partnership with the Scottish Refugee Council. This scheme is unique across the UK in offering continual one-to-one support in everything from navigating the gruelling bureaucracy of the asylum system to grasping the meaning of local slang. For one teenager from Angola, named Tati, this became pressing as soon as he began classes at the local Scottish high school: “They used to call me ‘tattie scone’ at school. I didn’t even know it was a potato.” “When a young person arrives in Scotland, traumatised and completely alone, it is overwhelming,” says Aberlour’s service manager, Catriona MacSween. “They are suddenly involved in all these processes – asylum, trafficking, criminal justice, age assessment – and they just need someone to explain how everything works.” With 405 cases active across Scotland, Aberlour guardians support young arrivals who are mostly male and aged between 15 to 17, although the youngest case at present is just 10 years old. Since it was first piloted in 2010, the scheme has expanded to include a befriending service and the Allies project, a specially tailored group course to support trauma recovery in partnership with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. “Sleep is one of the main problems that affects our young people,” says Alexis Wright, who leads the project. “For some, their sleep has been so disrupted for years that it is hard to break that pattern. For many, night-time was a dangerous time. During their journey, they speak of taking turns to stay awake and keep watch.” To help young people coax themselves back into the present moment after experiencing a nightmare or a flashback, they are offered a “grounding pack”, which includes a stress ball, scented oil and the sort of postcard you might pick up in any convenience store: four panels of sentimental Scottish scenes, including a castle at dusk and a fluffy Highland cow. For a teenage asylum seeker waking alone and fearful in the dark, it is a psychological lifeline. Wright says: “We encourage them to put it beside their bed if they wake up afraid, and to write on the back messages that will make them feel safe: ‘You live in Scotland now, no one can hurt you now.’” The Allies project gives young people a chance to reflect on the experiences that brought them to Scotland with others in similar situations, and often for the first time, says Wright. “Many have family members who have died, and for others they have lost all contact and don’t know whether their family are alive or dead,” she says. They are invited to decorate a stone with an image that reflects this loss, then the group holds a minute’s silence to honour it. “Many young people have not had that opportunity. Going through the asylum process, officials always want details, but there’s no space to process the loss.” While the Allies project necessarily focuses on past trauma, these young people are also itching for skills to map the present. Recently, they requested more guidance on relationships, and now Aberlour offers sessions on consent, healthy boundaries and the basics of sexual health. “They might not know where to get free condoms, if sexual health provision didn’t really exist back home,” says Wright. The guardians also organise fortnightly meet-ups for the young people in their care, where they can try activities like storytelling, cooking, art and drama. “That is a lifeline,” says Wright. “Some of them are so isolated, and this is a chance to just be young, to feel that sense of connection with other young people.”News from around the world The use of gene-editing technology to create female-only and male-only litters of mice has opened the door for the same technique to be used in the chicken industry to prevent the birth of male chicks. Millions of male chickens are culled every year because they don’t lay eggs so are surplus to requirements of egg farmers. The demand for animal protein in China could increase by up to 30% by 2050, according to new estimates published in the scientific journal Nature, increasing demands on land and water, as well as greenhouse gas emissions. A significant amount of agricultural goods will need to be imported to meet the demand, with China already hugely reliant on soya bean imports to feed livestock. The EU ban on the use of animal byproducts for animal feed – introduced after the BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) crisis in the early 1990s – has been lifted. It will allow practices such as the use of pork-based feed by chicken farmers, reducing their reliance on soy. Nine US pork plants have been given permission to apply to trial faster processing line speeds. Faster slaughtering would help meat companies boost pork production at a time of strong demand and high bacon prices. The United Food and Commercial Workers union has previously sued the US Department of Agriculture over concerns about worker safety. Mink farming is to be phased out in the Canadian province of British Columbia. The Department of Agriculture said it was making the move because the animals are “reservoirs” for Covid-19. All mink farms must be closed – and all pelts sold – by April 2025. France has also passed legislation to outlaw mink farming. Legislation to make fur farming illegal in Ireland has moved a step further. Pippa Hackett, land use and biodiversity minister, said: “We are hoping the bill will pass before the end of the year, and that from January 2022, fur farming in Ireland will be consigned to the history books.” Meat has been taken off the menu at meetings, seminars, workshops and public events in Finland’s capital, Helsinki, the city government has announced. From the new year, attendees will instead be served seasonal vegetarian food or “responsibly caught local fish”, oat milk will replace cow’s milk and fair trade products will be offered. Consumers in the US are facing “meatflation” as animal protein prices rise rapidly. The cost of meat, eggs, fish and seafood have all increased. Meanwhile, sales of plant-based meat in the US are falling due to supply chain problems. Shares in plant-based meat substitute producer Beyond Meat dipped by 19% after the company reported slowing demand in grocery stores and restaurants. Speaking at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow, the US secretary of agriculture, Thomas Vilsack, said Americans can carry on eating meat while keeping the world within safe global heating limits and that the industry could “make production more sustainable”. UK news The meat giant Cranswick reported revenue of close to £1bn this year despite labour shortages across the sector and a drop in pork retail and export sales. A dedicated off-farm cull and render service to help producers struggling with a backlog of pigs will be funded by the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board’s pork section. The facility will have the capacity to slaughter between 2,000 to 3,000 mature pigs a week. Charity World Animal Protection has unveiled what it has called “the worst toy in the world” – a play set which it says represents factory farming conditions. The charity hopes the toy farm will allow children “to re-imagine the traditional farmyard narrative we are taught while we are young”. With the UK supply chain crisis causing price rises and shortages on supermarket shelves, the Guardian looked at the potential impact on Christmas dinners – including turkeys and pigs in blankets. But Britain’s biggest poultry producer is confident of meeting festive demand after announcing plans to hire up to 900 temporary staff from overseas. The government has been urged to adopt recommendations from the House of Lords on animal welfare as a new trade deal is negotiated. The UK government is in talks to join the trans-Pacific trade partnership, which includes Australia, Canada and Japan. Some members of the partnership use methods that are illegal in the UK, and farming groups fear that meat produced to lower welfare standards could be imported into the UK. Proposals for an immediate ban on farrowing crates – used to confine sows before and after birth – have been dropped from animal welfare legislation. Shadow environment minister Daniel Zeichner lodged the clause in the animal welfare (kept animals) bill, but it was rejected by MPs after the farm minister, Victoria Prentis, warned it could lead to a mass exodus from the pig sector. From the Animals farmed series Storms in the Pacific north-west of Canada set off an animal welfare crisis, killing thousands of farm animals and leaving many more trapped by floods in desperate need of food and water. A group of pigs has been drafted in to combat a hazard in the skies above the runways of Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport, the Netherlands’ aviation hub. A six-week pilot project is studying whether the small herd can deter flocks of geese and other birds attracted to discarded sugar beet on nearby farmland. Brian Barth and Flávia Milhorance examined plans for a deforestation-free farming zone in Brazil, which critics fear could effectively legalise deforestation in the region. Lisa O’Carroll looked at a report which concluded that up to 1.3 million cattle would have to be culled in Ireland to reach anticipated government targets for reducing greenhouse gases in the agriculture sector. And the Guardian’s Our unequal earth series investigated the safety of workers in the US meat packing industry. Share your stories and feedback Thank you to everyone who has been in touch to share their thoughts on the series. Responding to our report on cows, methane emissions and the climate crisis, Robin Brown wrote: If change is going to occur, it has to come – and is already coming to an extent – from below, from a rejection of the product by consumers, possibly inspired by ethical and progressive television cooks, and driven by concern for the future of the planet and for the welfare of the animals we eat, the people who have to kill them and process the carcasses, those who have to live near stinking factory farms and processing plants and, increasingly, for their own health. Sign up for the Animals farmed monthly update to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at animalsfarmed@theguardian.comTwenty years since Halo: Combat Evolved, Master Chief is still “finishing the fight”. Made infamous by Halo 2’s premature cliffhanger ending, the line is uttered with zero irony at Halo Infinite’s conclusion: it’s become the catchphrase for a series that is travelling in circles, always defaulting to something like the original fable of a craggy supersoldier fighting alien zealots for control of universe-ending Forerunner relics. Infinite takes place on yet another gorgeous ringworld, where Master Chief teams up with a nervy pilot and a chirpy new AI buddy to battle a renegade group called the Banished. It’s the same old story with the same rousing musical motifs, but the geography has changed: main missions are now threaded through a lush open expanse comparable to that of a Far Cry game, where you’ll tackle sidequests such as hostage rescue, and claim bases that let you fast-travel and rearm. The extra space amplifies Halo’s existing brilliance as a martial playground, defined less by reflexes and accuracy than giddy improvisation, but it’s not quite enough to make this backward-glancing game unmissable. Halo is part of the great “Daddification” of action gaming, in which long-serving heroes have been reinvented as scarred patriarchs struggling with years of war trauma. For Master Chief, this means wrangling with the women who made and guide him – Dr Halsey, his unreachable mother figure; Cortana, his first AI soulmate, and the Weapon, this year’s holographic sidekick, who puts in double duty as palm-top comic relief and lock breaker. Women are rarely permitted to star in Halo games, but they are central in ways both dramatic and mundane. Without the Weapon, Master Chief wouldn’t make it past the first sealed door, and it’s through conversation with her that we explore his awkward romance with Cortana, who isn’t quite a memory. The last three numbered Halo games hit similar beats, and returning players may struggle to care, not least because the soul-searching accompanies a lot of corridor-crawling. Save for a few base assaults, main missions are spent in shiny hexagonal chambers underground, tracking down buttons and power cells for elevators or bridges. These interiors are great combat spaces, with a rewarding play of sightlines and elevations, but they are visually monotonous – as is the plot. The villain is another scenery-chewing faux-Klingon warlord and the “twists” are retreats to themes from previous games. Unlike in most numbered Halos, however, there’s no hidden second enemy faction to spice up the final hours. Infinite’s star isn’t a character but Master Chief’s new grappling gun, a familiar video game toy that proves transformative here. It both speeds you across the newly vast surface spaces and zests up your footwork in battle, letting you slingshot around corners and reel yourself towards stunned opponents. You can also yank things around with it: Infinite’s ace move is lassoing fuel canisters and bowling them at foes. This touch of Spider-Man points to Halo’s status as an undeclared slapstick comedy, its violence as wacky and infectious as its story is po-faced. Most things in the world are primed to explode – and explode again, as fragments collide with silos, flipping cars as if they were tables and sending punctured spacesuits whistling across the floor. Infinite is best when it embraces this absurdity. There is much more battle chatter than in previous games, and it has never been more obviously written for laughs – be it a charging alien Grunt squealing “I’m gonna regret this!” or a proud Elite bellowing in outrage when you glue a bomb to its leg. The open world sections exaggerate all this beautifully, letting you pounce on the opposition from all angles using any combination of vehicles and ordnance. The emphasis on ad libbing rescues the game from the fatigue that often afflicts open-world games with mountains of optional objectives. The chaos continues in the standalone multiplayer, which is split between 4v4 gangland throwdowns and bewildering 24-player big-team battles, with modes ranging from capture the flag and vanilla deathmatch to time-limited oddities such as Fiesta, which grants you random weapons. Halo’s secret sauce as a multiplayer shooter is longevity – recharging overshields stretch out duels, emphasising agility and a level head over twitch reactions. The maps are spacious, elegantly broken down into pockets of terrain that encourage specific tactics, and carefully sprinkled with tide-turning pick-ups such as rocket launchers. Infinite’s title reflects Halo’s evolution into a service game, with themed seasons and purchasable battle passes unlocking cosmetic items for multiplayer use, but there’s no paying for items that give you an edge in the fray. This is old-school Halo blasting, through and through. You could argue that Master Chief is the necessary foil to Halo’s inherent silliness, the gravelly undertone that ties all the pratfalls together. All the same, he and his inability to get over Cortana have long since lost their charm. The series has tried to move away from him before – in that regard, Halo 3: ODST remains its finest hour. It needs to carry on trying. • Halo Infinite is released on 8 December, £54.99.Boris Johnson has successfully fought off a high court challenge over his decision to back Priti Patel after accusations that she had bullied civil servants. The FDA union, which represents senior civil servants, brought a judicial review after the prime minister decided last year to go against the findings of his then adviser on ministerial standards in order to back the home secretary. In a ruling released on Monday, Lord Justice Lewis, sitting with Mrs Justice Steyn, dismissed the FDA’s claim. Lewis said Johnson had not misdirected himself as to the provisions of the ministerial code when reaching his decision. The judge said: “The question for this court is whether the prime minister proceeded on the basis that conduct would not fall within the description of bullying within paragraph 1.2 of the ministerial code if the person concerned was unaware of, or did not intend, the harm or offence caused. “Reading the statement (made by Johnson) as a whole, and in context, we do not consider that the prime minister misdirected himself in that way.” In an investigation into Patel’s behaviour, published in November last year, Sir Alex Allan, Johnson’s then adviser on ministerial standards, found Patel had not always treated civil servants with “consideration and respect”. He concluded: “Her approach on occasions has amounted to behaviour that can be described as bullying in terms of the impact felt by individuals. To that extent, her behaviour has been in breach of the ministerial code, even if unintentionally.” Johnson, the arbiter of the ministerial code, said Patel was “unaware” of the impact she had and he was “reassured” that she was “sorry for inadvertently upsetting those with whom she was working”. After “weighing up all the factors”, he concluded the code had not been breached. At a hearing last month, lawyers for the FDA, which represents senior public servants, argued that Johnson “misinterpreted” the term “bullying” in the ministerial code when deciding if Patel’s treatment of civil servants breached its standards. They alleged he made a “misdirection of law” in reaching his decision. Lawyers for Johnson argued that the FDA’s claim was “not justiciable” and there was “no error of law”. They said the ministerial code “does not create or impose any legal duties on ministers or the prime minister”, is “not required by law” and its contents “not regulated by law”. Johnson’s lawyer claimed the code was a “political document” and “not about protecting the rights of civil servants” who still had access “to all the employment law rights”. Allan left his role in Downing Street after Johnson contradicted his advice. Reacting to the judgment, the FDA said it represented a step forward for civil servants because the high court had confirmed the prohibition on bullying, discrimination and harassment in the ministerial code was justiciable in the courts. Dave Penman, the union’s general secretary, said: “The court has determined that the prime minister did not acquit the home secretary of bullying, and that he did not reject the findings of Sir Alex Allan that her conduct amounted to bullying. “This will bring some comfort to those civil servants who were brave enough to come forward and give evidence to the investigation about the home secretary’s conduct.” The prime minister welcomed the ruling, his official spokesperson said. “It supports our longstanding position that the PM is the arbiter of the code, and ministers must retain the confidence of the prime minister to maintain in office,” he said. “ As the ultimate arbiter in this case, the PM considered Sir Alex’s advice, he’d weighed up all factors to draw his own conclusions.”As part of a 10-year strategy to tackle drugs in the UK, the government is set to announce that “lifestyle” users, such as wealthy professionals, of class A drugs will face losing their passports or driving licences. We would like to hear what you think of the new proposals to deter people from drugs. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Nigeria’s inclusion on England’s red list after cases of the Omicron Covid variant were linked to travel from the country has been condemned as “travel apartheid”. People arriving in the UK from Nigeria have to spend 10 days in hotel quarantine at a cost of £2,285 and have two negative PCR test results, as part of measures that came into force from 4am on Monday. The Department of Health said 21 Omicron cases in England were found to be linked to travel from Nigeria. There are 134 reported cases in the UK. The Nigerian high commissioner to London, Sarafa Tunji Isola, said he agreed with the UN secretary general, António Guterres, who criticised measures imposed by various countries against African nations as “travel apartheid”. Isola told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “The reaction in Nigeria is that of travel apartheid. Because Nigeria is actually aligned with the position of the UN secretary general that the travel ban is apartheid, in the sense that we’re not dealing with an endemic situation, we are dealing with a pandemic situation and what is expected is a global approach, not selective.” He added: “[Omicron] is classified as a mild variant – no hospitalisations, no deaths. So the issue is quite different from the Delta variant. I mean, the position has to be taken based on scientific and empirical evidence. It is not a kind of panicky situation. We must have the facts.” The UK minister for policing, Kit Malthouse, said the phrase “travel apartheid” was “very unfortunate language”. “We understand the difficulties that’s created by these travel restrictions, but we’re trying to buy a little bit of time so that our scientists at Porton Down can work on the virus and assess how difficult it’s going to be for us to cope with as a country,” he told Today. Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary, said Labour supported the measures because there was a need “to stop there being lots of additional new cases” of Omicron to slow its spread. “That’s what happened in the first wave, it’s also what happened in the Delta wave,” she said. Dozens of countries have imposed sweeping travel restrictions on African nations, some of which have yet to detect any cases of the variant. It has reignited the debate over the effectiveness of border closures and measures have been met with outrage and claims of scapegoating regions after South Africa raised the alarm about the new variant. Guterres said bans that isolate specific countries or regions are “not only deeply unfair and punitive, they are ineffective”. He added: “We have the instruments to have safe travel. Let’s use those instruments to avoid this kind of, allow me to say, travel apartheid, which I think is unacceptable.” His comments echoed those of Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director general of the World Health Organization, who said last week it was “deeply concerning” that southern African countries were being “penalised by others for doing the right thing”, and called for countries to take “rational, proportional risk reduction measures in keeping with international health regulations”. The WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, Maria Van Kerkhove, said travel bans had limited the ability of South African researchers to ship virus samples out of the country. “We do not want to see countries penalised for sharing information, because this is how WHO and our partners make assessments and how we provide advice,” she said. Leaders of African countries have also condemned the bans as unfair. The South African president, Cyril Ramaphosa, said on Sunday the measures were “deeply disappointing”, adding: “The prohibition of travel is not informed by science. Nor will it be effective in preventing the spread of this variant. The only thing the prohibition on travel will do is to further damage the economies of the affected countries and undermine their ability to respond to and also to recover from the pandemic.” The president of Malawi, Lazarus Chakwera, wrote on Facebook: “Covid measures must be based on science, not Afrophobia.”Coming out wasn’t easy for Neil. Although he’d been on a few dates with men while studying at medical school, he worried about people’s reactions. By the spring of 1987 he finally plucked up the courage to tell his parents. “I was living in New York, working as a pathologist, and they were based in Connecticut,” he says. Before visiting them, he stopped to pick up a book that he hoped would help his parents to understand and accept his sexuality. When he walked into A Different Light, a popular LGBTQ+ bookshop, he spotted Mark. “He helped me to find what I was looking for and I went to see my parents,” says Neil. “When I told a friend where I had been, he asked if I’d seen the ‘hot clerk’. I realised it was the man who served me.” Neil returned to the shop soon after but didn’t feel comfortable asking for a date. “Instead, I ordered a book that I knew would take ages to arrive so I had to give him my phone number,” he laughs. Neil continued to return to the store over the next few weeks so he’d have an excuse to speak to Mark. “We were chatting a lot but it became clear he just wasn’t going to ask me out,” says Mark. “Eventually I called him to ask if pathologists like beer and we went out for a drink.” They hit it off straight away and went back to Mark’s apartment that night. But Neil already had a date with another man lined up for the next day. “I lied and told Mark I had an autopsy I had to do and that’s why I had to leave,” he says. “The date was really bad, though, and made me realise how much I liked Mark.” At the time, Neil was housesitting at a duplex apartment with a wine cellar. “I invited Mark to come and stay, and we spent the next few weeks together. It was like a honeymoon.” Over the next few months, Mark introduced Neil to gay culture. As well as working in theatre direction and for the bookstore, he had a keen interest in politics. “I was involved with some activities associated with Act Up – the Aids Coalition to Unleash Power. They were an activist group trying to find the first HIV drugs,” says Mark. For Neil it was a “learning curve”. “Mark introduced me to the community,” he says. When Neil moved back to his own apartment in Washington Heights, Mark came to stay. They ended up living there for five years, before moving to the East Village in 1992, then on to the Lower East Side in 2003, where they have lived ever since. A year after they began dating, Mark came out to his mother and introduced her to Neil. “She accepted it and eventually both our mothers became friends. I think they wanted to talk about us,” he laughs. Although they loved going out with friends and exploring New York together, living in the shadow of the Aids crisis was hard. “We lost 75 friends and we went to a memorial service every week,” says Mark. “It wasn’t until the late 1980s that there were tests, so although people practised safe sex, you never really knew who was infected. In the 90s, I even wrote a play about gay life and activism.” Neil also remembers enjoying a lot of fun times. “The club scene was crazy. There was a feeling of living every moment like it was your last,” he says. In 1992, they held a commitment ceremony, then married in 2011 when it became legal. “We never wanted a wedding because it seemed heteronormative, but we wanted to get married for legal and tax reasons,” says Neil. “We knew a rabbi and he married us. It was just him, two witnesses and some good food.” Neil says that Mark is his favourite person. “Even when he’s in the toughest emotional state, he takes care of people. He is always supportive of the Jewish holidays I want to celebrate, as well as my interests.” Mark, for his part, is attracted to his partner’s intelligence. “The minute we met, there was a physical connection but also a profound intellectual connection,” he says. “We got together at a very difficult time but we’ve taken care of each other. I found someone who will always be there for me.” Want to share your story? Tell us a little about yourself, your partner and how you got together by filling in the form here.The verb stuzzicare means to tap repeatedly, poke or pick with something pointed, which might be a bad idea – a finger in a wound, for example – or a relief. Stuzzicarsi i denti means to pick something from between teeth. That gives us the object – a toothpick (stuzzicadenti), something missing from trattoria tables post-pandemic, understandably, but terrible for teeth that invite spinach. The verb stuzzicare also means to awaken wishes, feelings, curiosity or appetite. It can be used as an adjective, too: an idea, book, crisp or olive can be stuzzicante (tantalising). This brings us to the name stuzzichini, or tasty things to tickle and wake up the appetite in preparation for what is to come, be it a meal or more tasty things. I wish I could go back in time, to feel once again the power of sitting on a high stool at the bar in my granny’s pub, and to reassure everyone I had no intention of spoiling my appetite. Quite the opposite, in fact; the cheese-and-onion crisps and dry-roasted peanuts were preparation for Sunday lunch, to be eaten on the small, brass-topped tables that, as soon as the pub closed at 3pm, were pushed together to make a long table. While I’m at it, I’ll travel to another point in time, 15 years after the high stool, taking with me Rebecca May Johnson’s Against Roast Chicken: An Hors d’Oeuvres Theory of Cooking. This beautiful essay, the result of watching and thinking about the 1990 film Mermaids, is full of insight about the traps of domesticity and building “the kitchen you need to survive, as weird and unnatural as you want it”. Also pleasure, especially the idea that the “portability” of the snacks and cocktail-stick meals prepared by Mrs Flax, played by Cher, “liberate the diner from the table (and the cook from work) and allows a different relationship to space”. That, “finger food facilitates flight”. Books are weightless when you fly in time, so I will also take Nigella Lawson’s How to Eat, which contains more pleasure and more wisdom than most philosophy books, not least her reminder that you can never have enough cocktail sausages and that for a party she generally cooks 200. And the book of Antipasti e Salse by Lisa Biondi (who you might remember from a previous column as being the fictional creation of a food magnate intent on selling margarine, pickled vegetables and mayonnaise). It goes without saying that you can forget the cauliflower, if you prefer, or you could chop it up along with other crisp vegetables and put on a plate with however many other things you like. Other suggestions are bowls of crisps, peanuts, Twiglets, little sandwiches or milk rolls filled with salami, or egg and tuna, or Nigella’s butter and Marmite spread. I would usually suggest fried food, too, or Anna Tobias’s anchovy puffs, but I am not turning the oven on that night. Of course, there should be lots of drink, much of it bubbles, and music; I am planning to dance this Christmas, starting with a tribute to Cher dancing with her daughters at the end of Mermaids, and Beverly Moss in Abigail’s Party, and ending like Liza Minnelli. Last thing, if you have skipped the kaleidoscope, I would still offer optional cocktail sticks for those who don’t like to use their fingers, or who get something stuck between their teeth that needs picking out. Caleidoscopio di stuzzichini – kaleidoscope of appetisers Serves Many 1 cauliflower A selection of salami and cheese, mortadella, olives, gherkins, preserved artichokes, pickled vegetables, hard-boiled eggs Toothpicks Cut the base off the cauliflower so it sits flat on a large plate or board, covered in foil for extra disco, if you like. Cut your chosen ingredients into bite-sized pieces and then, matchmaking them as you like, impale them on cocktail sticks and stick these into the cauliflower to make a ‘kaleidoscope’. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoA British teenager who was mauled by a crocodile in southern Africa feared she would need to have her foot amputated, and said she felt “very lucky” during an interview from her hospital bed. Amelie Osborn-Smith, 18, was left with her right foot “hanging loose” and a dislocated hip after the attack in the Zambezi River in Zambia while she was taking a break during a white water rafting expedition. In her first interview since waking up from surgery, Osborn-Smith urged people not to let what happened to her put them off being adventurous and taking risks. She said that when the attack happened her brain went into overdrive and she did not see her life flash before her eyes. “You just think: how do I get out of this situation?” she said, after being told that her bravery had fans worldwide. “I was very, very lucky,” said Osborn-Smith, adding that people should not to be put off rafting as these incidents were rare. “Your life can be over so quickly. It sounds [a] cliche but if you live thinking you’ll regret everything, you won’t have a fulfilled life.” Her condition is stable and she is being transferred to a trauma unit at a London teaching hospital. Osborn-Smith was attacked during a trip after passing her A-levels at school in Hampshire. She was taking part in a professionally organised rafting expedition when the group stopped for lunch and were reportedly encouraged by the guides to have “a quick dip” over the side of the raft to cool off as the area was deemed to be safe. When returning to the boat, the 18-year-old came under attack and a crocodile tried to drag her under the water. She said she had expected to lose her foot after being taken to hospital and was “so relieved” when she woke up from surgery to find that medics had been able to save it. “I told all my friends, it’s fine if I lost my foot but was still alive,” she added. Osborn-Smith was taken by helicopter to hospital in nearby Livingstone. Her family were informed of the incident and she said her grandmother slept on the hospital floor in a foldout chair. During the interview, Osborn-Smith’s grandmother said she was grateful she could stay and that her granddaughter had flashbacks and terrible dreams during the first few nights after the attack but was much better now. Osborn-Smith’s father, Brent, has previously spoken out about what happened to his daughter, saying she was grateful to be alive and hoped to return to the UK this weekend. “Amelie is a fit, intelligent, brave and conscientious individual who is extremely grateful to be alive and to have been looked after so well by all those involved in her rescue,” he said.‘Some will say it’s too long, but I could have done with eight more hours’ As a younger Beatles fan who grew up with the idea that the band were falling apart in January 1969, Get Back was a joy. My immediate thought was how bright and vibrant everything looked, compared with the graininess of the original Let It Be film. It could have been shot yesterday – apart from the outfits and hairstyles. While not exactly a big revelation for those of us who never believed that Yoko Ono broke up the Beatles, it’s great to see that her presence here didn’t upset Paul, George and Ringo nearly as much as it seemed to upset commentators. We see absolutely no evidence of her “interfering”, as has been claimed over the years, and I loved McCartney’s prescient remark that in 50 years’ time people would be saying the Beatles broke up “because Yoko sat on an amp”. The documentary is like being in the room with them. Seeing the creative spark between all four, and the incredible way the whole mood lifts when Billy Preston joins the sessions, was special. And seeing the rooftop concert in its full 42-minute glory was wonderful. I found myself noticing little moments I hadn’t before, such as John and Paul grinning at one another for a few seconds, completely overtaken by the joy of making music. Some will say it’s too long, but I could have done with eight more hours. I came away feeling quite emotional, but glad that new generations of fans will watch Get Back and see that, despite everything, they really did love each other. Sarah Stacey, 29, freelance radio and podcast producer, Ireland ‘Christ alive, it’s long’ My dad made me watch it with him. It’s good, I suppose, and he’s having the absolute time of his life – I can’t go 20 minutes without him saying how amazing it is to see them make all this music. But Christ alive, it’s long. I’ve lost so many hours of my life to watching these four men and some random other people talking over the top of some lightly strummed guitar. We’re finally on the rooftop concert, and honestly I’m so glad the end is in sight. Why was one part of the series almost three hours long? I really relate to Yoko Ono whenever she screams into the microphone. Amy, 24, illustrator, Kent ‘It made me pick up the guitar again’ As a rusty guitarist, the best compliment I could give the documentary was that it made me pick up the instrument again for the first time in months. It is quite incredible how music made more than half a century ago can still inspire in that way. Like many, I have always considered myself to be pretty well-versed on the Beatles’ music. Having read and watched so much about the band before Get Back, I felt as though there wasn’t much left to discover. I was proved wrong. As a huge fan of John and George, I have always rather reluctantly acknowledged Paul’s genius, but it is on full display here. I left with much more respect for his role in the band than I had before. A control freak he apparently was – but it does make you wonder whether these last albums would have been made if it wasn’t for his determination. The section where he wells up at the prospect of the band breaking up, and the subsequent hidden-mic-in-the-flower-pot conversation with John on how they’re going to get George back, was almost uncomfortable in that you felt you had no right to be listening in. Also, Paul had great jumpers. James, 35, working in communications, Walthamstow, London ‘A slow burn’ Get Back is a slow burn and somewhat meandering, but to see the four of them in their prime, at their creative best, is a privilege. Watching Paul come up with the first few riffs of Get Back and then to see it morph into the song we know and love 50 years later was a joy. The “pay off” rooftop concert at number three, Savile Row (two doors down from my old office) was amazing to see in its entirety – from the musicianship, the joy the band had when they simply played together, to the vox pops with the people on the street below. It was a window into a different time and a London that is unrecognisable now. Ashish Burman, 46, investment banker, London ‘The little things in this footage shine through’ I had to keep reminding myself that this was filmed when I was 10 years old because I’m so used to grainy films and photographs of the 60s. I remember watching the rooftop footage on TV with my dad. He had been a Beatles fan and used to buy sheet music to play on his guitar. Sadly, by 1969, my 35-year-old dad thought they’d gone too far with their long hair and hippy lifestyles. This documentary was a reminder of their genius playing and writing, but also the corny 60s humour. In contrast, some of the lyrics were shocking – such as wishing a girlfriend dead rather than she go out with another man. The little things in this footage shine through, like Harrison asking Billy about piano chords, McCartney experimenting with different surnames in the song Get Back, and all the smoking. Belinda Forbes, 63, funeral celebrant, Bracknell Forest ‘There are priceless moments for an old fan like me’ Born in 1946, I was fortunate to see the Beatles at the Cavern Club in Liverpool quite often around 1961 before they made their Parlophone recordings. I was in a group at the time, playing chart covers and instrumentals by the Shadows. When I first saw the Beatles, one wet Wednesday lunchtime, my musical world changed forever. I’ve just finished watching episode three and I see all that was good or great about the Beatles: the music, the personalities, the fact John Lennon could be one of the funniest people you could ever see on stage – so different to how he is often portrayed by the media and by actors. The sense of fun and camaraderie is still there within the group, who had all taken on different personalities due to marriage, commitments, ego, over the previous 10 years. Yet there are priceless moments for an old fan like me when those years just disappear, leaving four young lads desperate to “to make it in the rock’n’roll world”. Dennis Conroy, 75, Liverpool ‘It has made me see the Beatles in a new light’ It has given me a greater respect for Paul McCartney in particular. Over the later years of his career, I feel that perhaps he has developed a kind of lame reputation. I’d been under the impression that Lennon was the talent and Paul largely benefited from John’s incredible abilities. This is not how Get Back depicts things at all. Here, Paul is the driving force. It has made me see the Beatles in a new light. Now, if Peter Jackson could find some footage and do the same for Led Zeppelin, I’ll be really happy. Alan, 47, HR manager, Manchester confirmed ‘It’s just four young men being silly’ There were moments when I felt fatigued watching it, but this beautiful film allowed me to be the fly on the wall I’d always wished to be. Although the band are well aware they’re being filmed, there are times when it seems they forget about the cameras. You really gain a feel for their process, in which there is apparently no methodology. It’s just four young men being silly – and from that they found the unexpected, the wondrous and the magnificent. I often read the description of the Beatles as being “two and a half geniuses and Ringo Starr”. I disagree. They are four ordinary men from working-class Liverpool propelled to fame, with a unique musical connection. The highlights for me are those moments between Paul and John, where they look into each other’s eyes and seem to know instinctively where the other will place their next chord, and where they’ll take their hodgepodge jam next. The beautifully restored footage makes this documentary one of the best pieces of television I’ve seen this year. Jackson, 24, PR consultant, Glossop ‘Very much a documentary for the fans’ It’s very much a documentary for the fans. I’m not sure there is anything particularly revelatory in it; anyone who watched the Anthology documentaries from the 90s or has read any of the gazillion books and biographies will be well aware of the how the Let It Be sessions unfolded. However, it was still fascinating viewing. Seeing how those guys put together an album under such (self-inflicted) pressure – in full HD and surround sound – was a joy. Highlights included Paul coming up with Get Back while George and Ringo look completely uninterested, even yawning; John pining for Clapton when George leaves the band; and Ringo and George working on Octopus’s Garden around the piano with such enthusiasm. Then there’s the Paul/John relationship, which just oozed brotherly love despite some friction at times. Robin Smith, 38, construction worker, EdinburghGood morning. Dismissing as “preposterous” a Republican senator’s claim he is “overhyping” Covid-19 as he did HIV and Aids, Dr Anthony Fauci said on Sunday the threat to the US from the Omicron variant remained to be determined – but that signs were encouraging. “Thus far – though it’s too early to really make any definitive statements about it – it does not look like there’s a great degree of severity to it,” Fauci told CNN’s State of the Union. “But we have really got to be careful before we make any determinations that [Omicron] is less severe or it really doesn’t cause any severe illness comparable to Delta.” Fauci’s evident caution stood at odds with the bizarre accusation made by the Wisconsin senator Ron Johnson, who told Fox News this week Fauci had overhyped Aids and created all kinds of fear. He said: “He’s using the exact same playbook for Covid.” What did Fauci say about Johnson? “Overhyping Aids? It’s killed over 750,000 Americans and 36 million people worldwide. How do you overhype Covid? It’s already killed 780,000 Americans and over 5 million people worldwide. So, I don’t have any clue of what he’s talking about.” How bad is the spread of Omicron? The variant has been detected in 15 US states. Fauci was cautiously optimistic current vaccines might work against it. Republicans confident supreme court will overturn abortion rights As the supreme court weighs the future of abortion access in America, Republicans expressed confidence on Sunday that the landmark 1973 Roe v Wade decision would soon be overturned, paving the way for a raft of anti-abortion legislation around the country next year. On Wednesday, the supreme court heard arguments over a Mississippi law that bans abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy. Observers suggested that the conservative supermajority on the court appeared poised to uphold the law and potentially go further by overturning Roe, which protects a woman’s right to choose. A decision is not expected until June next year. Mississippi’s governor, Tate Reeves, told CNN’s State of the Union he had “some reason for optimism” after this week’s arguments. He also confirmed that if the landmark ruling was overturned entirely, Mississippi would enforce a ban on almost all abortions in the state under a so-called “trigger law”. What do Americans think about overturning Roe v Wade? According to recent polling, seven in 10 are opposed to overturning the landmark ruling while 59% believe abortion should be legal in all or most circumstances. Trump attacks media and Mark Milley in foul-mouthed Mar-a-Lago speech In remarks to diners at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida on Saturday night, Donald Trump called the American media “crooked bastards” and Gen Mark Milley, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, a “fucking idiot”. The meandering, foul-mouthed speech to Turning Point USA, a group for young conservatives, was streamed by Jack Posobiec, a rightwing blogger and provocateur. The insult to the press recalled barbs while Trump was in power, including calling reporters and editors “fake news” and the “enemy of the people”, attacks many in the media regarded as dangerous, inviting political violence. “The country is at a very important, dangerous place,” Trump said, amid familiar lies about his defeat in the 2020 election, which he says was the result of electoral fraud. Why did Trumo mention Milley? He insulted Milley as part of a long complaint about Joe Biden’s handling of the US withdrawal from Afghanistan. He regularly complains about Milley, particularly over his portrayal in bestselling books as a key figure in efforts to contain Trump at the end of his time in power. In other news … Aung San Suu Kyi has been sentenced to four years in prison for incitement and breaking Covid restrictions – the first verdict to be handed down to Myanmar’s ousted leader since the junta seized power in February. The 76-year-old has been accused of a series of offences that her lawyer previously described as “absurd”. Tributes have been paid to Bob Dole, the longtime Kansas senator who was the Republican nominee for president in 1996, who has died at the age of 98. Joe Biden called Dole “an American statesman like few in our history, a war hero and among the greatest of the greatest generation”. Chinese weather authorities successfully controlled the weather ahead of a major political celebration earlier this year, according to a Beijing university study. On 1 July, an extensive cloud-seeding operation in the hours prior ensured clear skies and low air pollution for a political celebration. Joe Biden has restored tradition by returning to the Kennedy Center Honors after four years in which the annual gala was snubbed by then president Donald Trump and upended by the coronavirus pandemic. Biden was joined by Jill Biden, Kamala Harris, and Nancy Pelosi, among others. Stat of the day: only 34% of Americans describe their mental health as ‘excellent’ A Gallup poll conducted in November found that, like last year, only 34% of Americans describe their mental health as “excellent”. Those are the lowest levels in two decades. Even though many people in the US are vaccinated, the country’s population continues to suffer from anxiety and depression. And now there are fresh worries about the Omicron variant and the impact it could have on public life this winter. If Omicron does lead to another Covid-19 surge, the impact on mental health will be serious. Don’t miss this: Chris Noth on feuds, family and Mr Big The Sex and the City star is back for the reboot, And Just Like That … Here he talks to Hadley Freeman about bereavement, rebellion, the fun of acting – and the absence of Kim Cattrall. He was actually hesitant about returning himself, he says, because he felt, not unreasonably, that he had taken Big as far as he could. So what convinced him otherwise? “A conversation with [the show’s writer and director] Michael Patrick King. It was a long conversation, it continued through the pandemic and he took in a lot of my ideas and we came up with a way for me to work into it.” Climate check: why some of your favorite podcasts are filled with oil company ads If you’re a regular listener of the New York Times podcast The Daily, you would have heard an ad for ExxonMobil’s carbon capture investments more than once in November. Similar ads have run on NPR podcasts, including Invisibilia and Up First that suggest they are taking aggressive climate action. Climate experts call them greenwashing but why the sudden interest in podcasts? One reason could be explained in the different ways advertising is regulated on newer media compared with the stricter rules around adverts on legacy media such as print and radio. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last Thing: mountaineer given jewels he found on French glacier 50 years after plane crash A treasure trove of emeralds, rubies and sapphires buried for decades on a glacier off France’s Mont Blanc has finally been shared between the climber who discovered them and local authorities, eight years after they were found. The mountaineer stumbled across the precious stones in 2013. They had remained hidden in a metal box that was onboard an Indian plane that crashed in the desolate landscape about 50 years earlier. “The stones have been shared this week” in two equal lots valued at about €150,000 ($169,000) each, Chamonix mayor Eric Fournier said.There’s standard-issue onstage chemistry – and then there’s the extravaganza of hip shimmies and floor kissing that erupts periodically between mezzo-soprano Jamie Barton and composer-pianist Jake Heggie. No need to check the programme to discover that these two are friends as well as collaborators: the easy banter and goofingspoke loud and clear. “We don’t have any fun,” Heggie deadpanned, somewhere between jokes about their recent Grammy nomination and a fleeting imitation of a cat. But it was Barton’s straightforward delight in performing that set the tone. And it was much more than delight: Barton’s extraordinary talent as a musical communicator was clear from the deeply soulful unaccompanied opening of the first item (a song from Heggie’s cycle The Breaking Waves), her low notes thrillingly rich, her delivery so compelling as to instantly create the kind of silence in which no one dares to breathe. Britten’s arrangement of Purcell’s Music for a While abounded with colour, fearlessly embracing rather than smoothing over the differences between registers. Schubert’s An die Musik became almost seductive and Brahms’s Unbewegte Laue Luft was unequivocally so. In four beautiful songs by the African American composer Florence Price she trod a fine line between brash Broadway lyricism and ultra-intimate lieder singing. Sadly – and despite their complementary qualities – Heggie couldn’t match Barton’s musical subtlety. The finger-twister in Schubert’s Gretchen am Spinnrade was muddy, his touch elsewhere heavy. Predictably, he did better in the all-Heggie second half, where hypnotically circling accompaniments fell neatly under his fingers. In its UK premiere, his lockdown song cycle What I Miss the Most had occasional moments of poise and beauty amid increasingly bland bitonality. Barton could make bewitching musical sense of more or less any score, I’d hazard – but she needs an accompanist who can do the same.Marcel Brands has left his role as director of football at Everton with immediate effect, with the club now set to undertake a strategic review after suffering a collapse in form and subsequent slide into relegation trouble. The Dutchman joined the club in May 2018 following a successful spell as sporting director at PSV Eindhoven and with a reputation as a shrewd talent-spotter and purchaser of players. But despite over £300m being spent in the transfer market under his watch, Everton’s squad has, if anything, got worse, reflected in the team sitting 16th, five points above the relegation following a run of eight games without victory. “The owner and directors would like to thank Marcel for the service he has given to the club over the past three and a half years and wish him well for his future,” read a statement from Everton on Monday. “A strategic review of the football structure will now take place which will inform the best model for the club to proceed with in the long-term. In the meantime, the owner and board of directors will continue to provide our manager, Rafa Benítez, with their full support.” Brands added: “On Friday, following a personal conversation with the chairman and my fellow board members, we agreed that I would step down from my post as director of football and as a member of the Everton board. This decision has taken some time and some consideration and was one of the most difficult I have faced in my career. “The board and I agreed that there is a clear difference in the vision and direction for this beautiful club and, with that in mind, the decision was taken. I want to thank everyone in the club who I have worked closely with over the last three and a half years. I want to wish all of the squad every success, and I am convinced that there is enough quality to improve the current situation quickly.” The 59-year-old is unlikely to be missed by many, if any, supporters and his departure only sharpens the focus on Moshiri, under whom Everton have hired five permanent managers in five years, with Benítez the latest. The Spaniard was a controversial arrival to the club given his links with Liverpool and, following the heavy defeat to his former side in midweek, it was thought he could be sacked after a little more than five months in charge. Instead, however, Moshiri stood by Benítez in a text exchange with TalkSport presenter Jim White the day after the Merseyside derby, insisting he needed time and would be backed with funds in January. Not surprisingly, that has done little to quell unrest among Evertonians. Many of those who remained inside Goodison Park after the final whistle on Wednesday could be heard chanting “sack the board” and all those attending Monday night’s visit of Arsenal have been encouraged to take part in a protest organised by various fan groups and entitled #27minutesfor27years, referencing the number of years Everton will have gone without a trophy come the end of this season and with the plan being for supporters to walk out of the ground in the 27th minute as a show of their displeasure with the “governance and management of the club” under Moshiri.Oscars are probably not on the cards, but this is a decently mounted creature feature by Canadian director Matthew Ninaber, which has enough mucus-coated hijinks to make it worth 90 post-pub minutes. A team of mercenaries are airlifted into the country of “Bosvania” to storm a bioresearch compound and rescue a scientist who appears to be the sole remaining staff member. Nice guy Beckett (Jeremy Ninaber) and trash-talking sniper Marshall (Ethan Mitchell) are on Bravo squad, tasked with shielding Alpha from a unit of local militia in the surrounding woods. But “shit” goes south, and the pair are forced to take refuge inside, where something has been painting the walls a nice shade of scarlet. Some weedy-looking airstrikes aside, Death Valley wears its low budget well, with the forest firefights impressively punchy and – a bonus in action scenes these days – keeping a good sense of spatial awareness. Ninaber also handles the subsequent bunker crawl briskly: the duo locate stricken boffin Chloe (Kristen Kaster), navigate corridors with the flickering lighting standard in failing facilities, and tiptoe around her infected colleagues and a head monster that is like a Lord of the Rings orc wearing its brains on the outside. Copied near-wholesale from the Alien handbook, this can’t muster that classic’s sense of remorseless encroaching terror. But Ninaber threads this critterwalk with just enough morsels of story (some hokum about the monster being the biblical Nephilim) both to keep our curiosity burning and justify making Kaster’s character what initially appears to be just another box-ticking kickass lady. The special ops pair’s banter, with Mitchell relishing his line in cheerful sarcasm, is another light in the darkness. Death Valley is never fully disturbing, but enjoyably gross is good enough. • Death Valley is on Shudder from 9 December.Coroners in England have said lessons must be learned from failings made by overstretched services that struggled to adapt during the Covid pandemic, as details of inquests into deaths only now emerge. At the height of the pandemic, everything from mental health and coastguard services to care homes had to quickly change how they operated, and coroners across England are highlighting failures made during this time through reports that identify avoidable deaths. They include a woman who missed out on vital mental health care because of Covid cancellations and a frail elderly woman who fell and died in a care home after she was put into self-isolation. These notices, known as reports to prevent future deaths, are issued in very rare cases when it is decided that if changes are not made another person could die. Among the cases are those of: Azra Hussain, 41, who died in secure accommodation in Birmingham on 6 May 2020. Two months before her death, she had been due to begin electroconvulsive therapy, but because of an administrative error the treatment was cancelled and was then no longer possible because of Covid restrictions. The inquest jury concluded that had she been given this treatment, she would probably have lived. Ruth Jones, a frail older woman thought to have caught Covid, who died in a care home after a fall in self-isolation. A coroner said the care home was not equipped to watch Jones during her isolation but she needed to be monitored because of her risk of injury if left alone. Anthony Williamson, an experienced sea kayaker who died on his 54th birthday after getting into difficulty. The coroner said he was concerned there was a reduced level of coastguard cover around the Cornish coastline owing to the pandemic. There have been at least 16 deaths so far where coroners have been so alarmed by findings that they have issued warnings. Coroners are obliged under the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 to issue a notice if they believe shortcomings by a person, organisation or public body, such as a hospital trust, council or government department, are so serious that other people may die unless urgent action is taken. In the death of Williamson, Andrew Cox, the acting senior coroner for Cornwall and Isles of Scilly, wrote in his report: “My current cause for concern is to ensure that there is an adequate level of coastguard cover around the Cornish coastline. To what extent, if at all, has the coronavirus pandemic caused a reduction in the level of coastguard protection in comparison to 2019? If there has been a reduction in the level of cover, how has this been mitigated? Is the amount of cover now at an acceptable level?” Another death highlighted was that of Sgt Paul Hills, an RAF firefighter trainer who had served more than 20 years and had completed two tours of duty in Afghanistan. His mental health care was moved to a virtual appointment because of Covid, but a coroner said no risk assessment of this change was made. There was no plan in place for patients who required an urgent review because of their deteriorating mental health. Matthew Fitten, from Haverhill, had been prescribed methadone by a charity to help address drug dependency problems. The 43-year-old appeared to be healthy when his family last saw him on 15 April last year. While he had previously been given the drug in daily dosage bottles three times a week, the pandemic meant he had to collect his prescription once every 14 days and in larger doses. He had no measuring implement or instructions on how to use the medication. Nigel Parsley, senior coroner for Suffolk, said: “Had Matthew been given daily dose bottles of methadone as prescribed, or a measuring jug and instructions on how to use it had been provided, on a balance of probability basis his death would not have occurred.” Deborah Coles, the executive director of the human rights charity Inquest, said the reports showed the hidden impact of the pandemic on vulnerable people. She said: “What concerns me is the lack of any effective mechanism for ensuring that the impact of the pandemic is considered during these inquests, and if systemic failings are identified then they need to be acted upon by relevant public authorities. Too often these deaths are looked at in isolation, and where patterns are emerging it is hard to see that without qualitative research.”Exhausted oil and gas wells would be turned into the UK’s first deep test sites for burying carbon dioxide next year, under plans from a consortium of universities and energy companies. There are hundreds of active onshore oil and gas wells in the UK. But as they come to the end of their lives, some need to be redeployed for trials of pumping CO2 underground and monitoring it to ensure it does not escape, the group says. The test wells could also be used to assess how hydrogen can be stored underground. CO2 capture and storage (CCS) will be a significant part of tackling the climate crisis, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the UK’s official advisers, the Climate Change Committee (CCC). The reservoirs under the North Sea provide the biggest potential storage for CO2 from fossil fuel burning, but the consortium said reusing existing onshore wells was the fastest and cheapest way to research and develop safe and effective systems. The Net Zero Rise (Research Infrastructure for Subsurface Energy) project involves the universities of Newcastle, Oxford and Durham, and the fossil fuel companies IGas and Third Energy. It has identified 20 candidate wells, mainly in Yorkshire and the Midlands. A CCS test site would bury a relatively small amount of CO2, about 1,000 tonnes, at 1-3km depth. The cost of repurposing a well, plus two monitoring wells and the monitoring equipment would be about £5m, the group said. “CO2 storage in the North Sea is probably going to be very important, but we need an onshore capability, a national asset, so we can do testing and look at what monitoring is adequate to understand where the CO2 has gone,” said Prof Richard Davies, at the University of Newcastle, who is leading the project. “If we don’t do this soon, we will lose an opportunity to use this infrastructure,” he said, because exhausted wells are usually filled with cement. “These assets are already there, while drilling [new] boreholes is very expensive and adds a certain amount of risk. The range of boreholes we have will also give opportunities to test different rock types.” Test sites already exist in the US, Canada and Australia, but Davies said UK facilities would be better as they could have very similar geology to that under the North Sea. The British Geological Survey is also examining the case for an underground CO2 storage research laboratory. Hydrogen is seen as part of the move to a low-carbon economy and being able to store it underground would help ensure a secure energy supply. It is a tiny molecule and large rock salt formations are likely to be best at trapping the gas, but the UK has few such deposits. “We want to look at hydrogen as well,” Davies said. “Could it go into sandstone which is sealed by a shale, a fine-grained, low-permeability rock? Can we monitor hydrogen underground if it was to be stored there?” A CCS project in the Sleipner gas field in the North Sea has pumped millions of tonnes of CO2 under the sea floor since 1996. “It’s a pioneering project, in that they proved it can be done at scale and over a long period of time, and they could monitor it effectively,” said Davies. “But it’s not a test facility that’s open to other organisations – it’s an Equinor project – and it’s in one type of rock formation only.” The government’s net zero strategy anticipates 50m tonnes of CO2 being captured and stored by the mid-2030s, and ministers are backing the development of CCS hubs on the north-west and east coasts of England. The CCC projects up to 95m tonnes of CCS by 2050, mostly for capturing the CO2 from burned biomass, which removes CO2 from the atmosphere, as well as from gas power stations and hydrogen production plants. The energy company IGas has about 100 oil and gas wells in England and its development director, Ross Glover, said CCS was a “key plank” in the company’s transition to a low-carbon economy. He said IGas was diversifying into geothermal and solar, although it had not set a date for ending oil and gas production. Glover said industrial plants, cement works and incinerators sited inland, away from the coastal CCS clusters, might be able to bury their carbon emissions in repurposed onshore wells. “[The government] has identified a series of emitters up and down the spine of the country, who have, frankly, a problem going forward. There is a real opportunity in and around the east Midlands for us,” he said. Mike Childs, the head of science at Friends of the Earth, said: “Research into CCS technology is important, however the embers of potential in this technology could be stamped out if fossil fuel companies are allowed to use it to greenwash their climate-wrecking activity. Fossil fuel companies are still seeking to extract more oil and gas.”Shares in the struggling Chinese property developer Evergrande hit a record low on Monday after strong indications that it is on the verge of a potentially disastrous default and could be forced into a full-blown restructuring. The company has lurched from one crisis to another in recent months as it faced a series of repayments on debts – three times waiting until the last possible moment to stump up the cash needed to stay afloat. However, a statement from the company over the weekend said there was “no guarantee” that the group could meet its obligations and added that creditors had demanded immediate repayment of a total of $260m (£196m). Its most pressing problem is how to repay $82.5m due on Monday – a deadline pushed back 30 days when it failed to meet the obligation on the due date in November. “Since September 2021, the group has been diligently reviewing its capital structure and liquidity condition with the help of its financial and legal advisers, evaluating all available strategic options, and maintaining ongoing dialogue with offshore creditors,” the statement said. “In light of the current liquidity status of the group, there is no guarantee that the group will have sufficient funds to continue to perform its financial obligations … The company received a demand to perform its obligations under a guarantee in the amount of approximately US$260m. In the event that the group is unable to meet its guarantee obligations or certain other financial obligations, it may lead to creditors demanding acceleration of repayment.” There were reports that its billionaire founder Xu Jiayin had been summoned by officials to explain the statement, and Guangdong’s provincial government said it was sending a team to Evergrande to “supervise and promote enterprise risk management”. The latest news sent Evergrande shares down 20% in Hong Kong, to a record low of HK$1.81 (17p). China’s central bank said on Monday it would cut the amount of cash that banks must hold in reserve, its second such move this year, releasing an estimated 1.2tn yuan (£144bn) in long-term liquidity to bolster slowing economic growth. The People’s Bank of China said on its website it would cut the reserve requirement ratio for banks by 0.5 percentage points, effective from 15 December. “This is anything but routine, except in the sense that this how central banks must react to a sudden surge in financial risks,” said Craig Botham, the chief China economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics. Botham added that property market pressures had “again boiled over” and that an Evergrande default was “the base case”. Evergrande was once China’s top-selling developer but is now grappling with more than $300bn in liabilities, meaning a collapse could ripple through the property sector and beyond. Analysts have warned that a third of China’s developers could face a similar crisis as the country’s bloated housing market stagnates after a crackdown on reckless borrowing by Xi Jinping’s government in Beijing. On Monday a smaller developer, Sunshine 100 China Holdings Ltd, defaulted on $179m of debt and interest payments that had been due on Sunday. The default was down to “liquidity issues arising from the adverse impact of a number of factors including the macroeconomic environment and the real estate industry”, the company said in an exchange filing. Sunshine 100 has repeatedly struggled to meet its debt obligations this year and also defaulted on a bond repayment in August. The company has $385m of outstanding dollar notes, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. Investors are also concerned about a potential default by Kaisa Group Holdings Ltd, which faces a $400m bond maturity on Tuesday because it failed to secure a debt swap that would have bought it crucial time to pay back some of its bonds. After Evergrande, it owes the most to foreign bondholders, with debts of $12bn.In Robert Holman’s play Jonah and Otto, Otto says: “I think we learn to love, by loving, by listening to another person. Love is paying attention.” The extraordinary plays that Robert leaves us are full of his wisdom, and full of him. But I think nothing in his plays articulates with more clarity the reason why he was such a wonderful playwright, and a wonderful friend, than Otto’s belief, which Robert certainly shared. He was sceptical about the notion of a play being driven by ideology or ideas, not because there’s anything necessarily wrong with plays like that. Modestly, he didn’t think he was clever enough to say anything new about history, politics or philosophy. But he felt that “our emotions, our feelings, are always slightly special and different to each of us”. He preferred to trust himself and write emotionally, to trust his characters, what happened moment by moment, and to let the characters surprise him, surprise themselves and surprise his audiences. He liked to listen to himself and to his characters. They, in turn, listened to each other, sharing their fears, hopes, dreams, fantasies and tentative discoveries. It takes great courage to write that way and that courage finds its way into the plays and the actions of his characters. My favourite Holman stage direction is “finds the courage”. He said he wanted one day to write a play without thinking at all. That may sound absurd, but he was committed to the notion of empathy in art and life to an astonishing degree, and this is at the heart of why his work is so good. He understood that all great acting comes from listening. It’s where great friendships come from, too. Not that any of this is easy. Listening, really listening, is hard, unselfish and brave. Robert was a great romantic. He liked to flutter his eyelashes and flirt and occasionally he hinted at the odd great passion in his life. Some of his sensuality went into the plays, but he shared a belief set out by the writer Lisa Appignanesi. While “we long for Himalayan peaks of rapture and find ourselves enmeshed in grand and unruly passions and their accompanying anguish, it may not come amiss if, in the name of common humanity, we also stretch our ways of loving into those foothills where it’s good to walk and talk with friends”. His close friend, the actor Matthew Tennyson, who appeared in three of Robert’s plays, two of them in roles written for him, says this: “Robert was a radical. It is radical to be that empathetic. Robert taught me this in our work together and in our friendship. His plays are full of characters learning to love and to be loved. To love each other takes so much courage. Robert understood this to his core.” I couldn’t agree more.The Norwegian top-flight club Tromsø have released a kit featuring a QR code that puts the spotlight on human rights issues in Qatar with just under a year until the World Cup there. The club say the third kit has been created in collaboration with Amnesty International and is the world’s first to feature a QR code which will take those who scan it to a page featuring detailed information on conditions in Qatar. “Tromsø were the first professional club to speak out against the inhumane conditions in the country,” read a statement on the club’s website. “We hoped Fifa and Qatar would listen but obviously money still trumps human rights and human lives. How many human rights violations will it take before the football community unites to demand better protection for migrant workers?” The kit is being promoted by Malcolm Bidali, a former migrant worker and labour activist who was arrested in Qatar for writing an online blog about the brutal conditions he faced there. Bidali speaks at length in a video on Tromsø’s website about his experience of being detained and interrogated in Qatar and the “power imbalance” that he believes exists between employer and employee for migrant workers in the Gulf state. “It’s innovative and will raise awareness about the things that are happening in Qatar,” he said. “It’s a brilliant, brilliant move.” Tromsø started the discussion about Qatar in Norway by suggesting that teams should boycott the tournament. In March Norway’s players wore T-shirts bearing the slogan “Human rights – on and off the pitch” before a World Cup qualifier against Gibraltar. In promoting the kit the club said, “We must never look the other way when some use our beautiful game to overshadow human rights violations. We can change this together. Stop sportswashing. Keep the game clean.” Last year Qatar passed into law reforms that were said largely to bring an end to the kafala – or sponsorship – system, under which workers are unable to change jobs without their employer’s permission. However, human rights groups said the measures did not go far enough and some migrant workers were still earning as little as £1 an hour. The government of Qatar has consistently rejected Amnesty’s assertion that labour reforms have not translated into changes on the ground for migrant workers.Joni Mitchell addressed her health difficulties in a rare public speech as she accepted her Kennedy Center Honor, one of the most prestigious awards in American cultural life. At a ceremony attended by Joe Biden – in a show of support for the arts after the awards were snubbed by Donald Trump – Mitchell discussed the issues she’s faced in the wake of an aneurysm in 2015 that left her temporarily unable to walk or talk. “I always think that polio was a rehearsal for the rest of my life,” she said, referring to the disease she suffered aged nine. “I’ve had to come back several times from things. And this last one was a real whopper. But, you know, I’m hobbling along but I’m doing all right!” She described the award as “a fantastic honour … enjoy yourselves, I’m gonna go back and sit down!” Mitchell hasn’t released a studio album since 2007’s Shine, though two volumes of an ongoing archival project have been released in recent years. In a conversation with Cameron Crowe that was included on the album Joni Mitchell Archives Vol 1: The Early Years (1963-1967) and published in the Guardian, she spoke more about her health. Mitchell said she was “just inching my way along. I’m showing slow improvement but moving forward … the aneurysm took away a lot more [than polio], really. Took away my speech and my ability to walk. And, you know, I got my speech back quickly, but the walking I’m still struggling with. But I mean, I’m a fighter. I’ve got Irish blood!” This year’s other recipients at the 44th Kennedy Center Honors were opera singer Justino Díaz, Motown Records founder Berry Gordy, Saturday Night Live creator Lorne Michaels and singer Bette Midler. Midler quoted lyrics from Talking Heads’ song Once in a Lifetime in her acceptance speech, and summarised: “How did I get here? I have absolutely no earthly idea how I got here.” She discussed her “mediocre education”, credited her work ethic (“I had my nose to the grindstone … I worked like a fucking animal”) and discussed the epiphanies she had as a child, including seeing Edith Piaf perform. “I was mesmerised by the idea that someone would get up in a pool of light and be completely and utterly transformed,” she said. “And that, when the light hit them, they had something not just to say – but something to reveal.” Díaz sang Beva con me from Verdi’s Otello by way of accepting his honour, and Gordy said of his artists and peers at Motown: “We all loved each other, and we fought. ‘Competition breeds champions’ is something we would always say and feel. And we fought hard for the best records, for the best recording, for the best of everything. But we couldn’t let that get in the way of the love. And we all loved each other.” In a brief speech, Michaels said: “As someone who’s spent his entire career in comedy, when we first entered the room and people began to speak I thought: ‘I really don’t deserve this.’ And then I thought: ‘In a way, you do.’ Thank you very much!”GPs are to begin prescribing “judgment-free” fitness classes for women seeking help with conditions including diabetes and depression. Designed by Sport England, This Girl Can classes will be launched across the country early next year, drawing on the success of its award-winning campaign of the same name. This Girl Can was launched in 2015 after research showed women wanted to be more active but were held back by fear of being judged. In five years it helped more than 500,000 women and girls to become more physically active. But while things improved, research commissioned by Sport England found more than half of women continued to say they were prevented from exercising, at least occasionally, by worries about what others think. Drawing on disciplines including boxing, dancing and yoga, the lower-intensity sessions are designed to be inclusive and appealing to women who are intimidated by the idea of group exercise or have had negative experiences previously, with attendees encouraged to “do your worst”. Doctors will be encouraged to refer patients to the classes as part of social prescribing, in which instead of being offered medication, patients are sent to a range of local, non-clinical services to support and boost their health and wellbeing, in conjunction with a link worker. The patient’s non-medical needs are addressed by taking part in social activities such as walking clubs and art groups, as part of a more holistic, community-based approach to treating conditions such as obesity, depression and diabetes. It is estimated that about one in five GP appointments focus on wider social problems and needs, rather than medical issues. Sport England also hopes the programme will begin to address the gender imbalance in physical activity levels, which has worsened during the pandemic. In February, campaigners warned that women had fewer opportunities to exercise during lockdown, and a recent survey found women were taking longer than men to return to their pre-pandemic exercise habits. Tim Hollingsworth, Sport England’s chief executive, said: “Despite the enormous progress we have made with supporting more women to get active in recent years, the gender gap for activity stubbornly persists. It’s never been more important. Getting active boosts mental and physical health, helps manage anxiety and stress and creates social ties, but millions of women are missing out on these benefits.” Frances Drury, the head of activation at Sport England, told The Times many women often felt judged or embarrassed in group exercise classes where an instructor focused on them. “So with the instructor training we’ve focused on those soft skills to create a warm and welcoming environment, where it feels free of judgement,” she said. Drury added that many women experienced sexual harassment in gyms or while exercising outdoors, making the availability of female-only classes important. The focus of the classes was not on weight loss but “directly talking about health”, she said. “What we want to convey is the joy of exercising in itself and then trying to tackle the fear and judgment barrier that we know women are more likely to experience when it comes to physical activity.”For months in the UK we have had 30,000-50,000 new Covid cases of the Delta variant a day and about 1,000 dying from the disease every week, and NHS leaders are saying the hospital and ambulance services are at breaking point. Now, to make matters worse, the Omicron variant has arrived. This new variant will probably evade immunity to some extent, but we don’t know by how much. It may be more transmissible, but we are not sure. And we don’t know whether or not it will cause more severe disease. Faced with this uncertainty and contradictory messages, what are we to do? After the disappointment of last Christmas, many of us are desperate for socialising, parties and fun. We are also desperate to avoid lockdowns. So should we be making that one stitch now to save nine later; taking steps now to try to save Christmas? Steps such as wearing masks in all indoor public spaces, working from home where we can, only going shopping and travelling where necessary and engaging in only our top priority social events? Last year, behavioural scientists participating in Sage wrote about how people could protect themselves and others over the winter season. They set out evidence-based principles for reducing household transmission during social interactions and how to make a household plan to protect ourselves and others. The principles set out then still hold for this festive season. First, it’s important to remember that all social interactions increase the risk of infection. The risk is greater with larger events that last a long time and are held in poorly ventilated and crowded spaces. The safest interactions are outdoors. Consider whether in-person interactions are essential and cannot be postponed or replaced by safer forms of interaction. Interactions with those you are familiar with are likely to be risky. They may pose greater risks than interactions with those you don’t regularly come into contact with as people are more likely to relax and let their guard down. Loud talking, laughing and singing all increase risk as infected people breathe out viral aerosols that are inhaled by others. Sadly these are all things people enjoy doing at Christmas, but as much as we might like to, we can’t avoid these facts. The risks posed by social interactions can be reduced by ensuring indoor spaces have good ventilation or air filtration. High ceilings ensuring large air volumes per person are likely to reduce risk. Reducing the numbers of people, the time they are together, avoiding close interaction, shouting and singing, and asking everyone to take a lateral flow test before and after the event will all help. Planning for an event in advance and agreeing on a risk mitigation strategy will make everyone safer. Planning for events should be done in an inclusive way that enables people from different groups to engage and ensures that support is provided to those who are physically and/or socially vulnerable. This can help educate as well as protect. Principles of equality and fairness must be at the heart of providing guidance as measures are more likely to be adhered to if perceived as fair and just. The past 19 months have been difficult for us all, and everyone was looking forward to this holiday season as a time to celebrate with friends and family. Omicron is a challenge to our plans. Let’s maximise our chances of fulfilling our festive hopes by socialising safely. Susan Michie is director of the UCL Centre for Behaviour ChangeThe number of new cars sold in the UK rose in November for the first time in four months, fuelled by a doubling of sales of electric vehicles as consumers increasingly look to more environmentally friendly forms of transport. Almost 22,000 pure electric vehicles were registered in November, more than double the 10,345 registered in the same month last year, as the share of total sales accounted for by battery-powered electric vehicles climbed to 19%. The Tesla Model 3 was the third bestselling car, with 3,077 sold, and is the bestselling pure electric vehicle in the UK, according to the figures from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT). The boom in electric car sales helped overall sales of new cars to reach 115,706 in November, a 1.7% rise on the same month last year. While the increase is a welcome boost for the car industry, sales are still close to a third down on pre-pandemic levels. “After four miserable months that the motor industry would rather forget, the tide is finally turning for new car sales,” said James Fairclough, the chief executive of AA Cars. “But the patch supply of new vehicles continues to peg back the number of sales dealers can make. Stock levels of some vehicles are so low that some dealers are even struggling to offer test drives.” The SMMT said the global shortage of semiconductors, the chips that are the “brain” in all electronic devices and new cars, continues to stymie production of new vehicles. “What looks like a positive performance belies the underlying weakness of the market,” said Mike Hawes, the chief executive of the SMMT. “Demand is there, with a slew of new, increasingly electrified, models launched, but the global shortage of semiconductors continues to bedevil production and, therefore, new car registrations.” He expected disruption in the production chain to carry into 2022. Sales of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles also rose 40% year on year, to 10,796, meaning in total 28% of cars sold in November were capable of zero-emission driving. Meanwhile, sales of diesel vehicles continued to plummet, down 63% compared with a year ago, while new petrol vehicle sales fell 10%. Hawes said: “The continued acceleration of electrified vehicle registrations is good for the industry, the consumer and the environment. But with the pace of public charging infrastructure struggling to keep up, we need swift action and binding public charger targets so that everyone can be part of the electric vehicle revolution, irrespective of where they live.” The SMMT said the ratio of electric vehicles to each public charger had reached 16 to one, and only one new charger was installed for every 52 plug-in cars registered so far this year. Last month the competition watchdog secured a commitment from the charge-point operator Electric Highway to end exclusivity rights contracts with three of the UK’s largest motorway services from 2026 – Moto, Extra and Roadchef – which will give electric car drivers more choice. So far this year, 1.53m new cars have been registered, a 2.7% rise on the same period last year, but 31% below the pre-pandemic five-year average. Sales to the public, as opposed to businesses or fleet purchases, grew 42% year on year to 62,600 in November. Sue Robinson, chief executive of the National Franchised Dealers Association said: “The November new car market is below pre-pandemic levels. However, the strong increase in sales to private buyers shows consumers are confident.”Drag king Mark Anthony loves Christmas. He always has – it’s a big thing in his family. Still, he says he found his Christmas “blighted slightly” in recent years since coming out as transgender and non-binary. “It wasn’t a big sob story of rejection,” Anthony, whose family fully accepts him for who he is, explains. “It was a discomfort type thing, from both sides, where you’re trying to work out how you fit into a different role. By this point, we’re pretty much adjusted now.” (Out of drag, Anthony, performed by Isaac Williams, uses the pronouns they and them.) Anthony knows how Christmas “might have quite negative associations” for those LGBTQ+ people “who don’t feel they can be authentically themselves at home with their families”. It is a time that “puts a spotlight on anything that’s changed and makes it feel really kind of awkward”, for example, if someone has come out about their sexuality or gender identity. It is the need to provide these LGBTQ+ people with a sense of community during the festive season that Anthony is hoping to harness as he stars in the festive show The Grotteaux at Woolwich Works, south London. Anthony is promising a “really big glitzy, glamorous, probably quite silly camp Christmas show”, with a cast of all-LGBTQ+ performers, combining drag, cabaret, circus, burlesque, comedy and other art forms. “We want to create a space where people can lose themselves in their queerness and Christmas at the same time, and for those things to feel fun and celebratory together,” he says. The Grotteaux will be hosted by drag queen Lilly SnatchDragon, and feature performers including Leah Kirby (who performs as drag artist Cyro), drag king Len Blanco, burlesque performer Cleopantha, and others. It will incorporate the experiences of those who did not grow up celebrating Christmas, including SnatchDragon, who is from a Buddhist background and moved to the UK from Bangkok some years ago. “When you don’t have your family because they live abroad, it’s very much a time where you feel alone, especially as a queer Asian person,” she says. “It’s really nice to have a show that has Asian representation, but that also focuses on the holidays. There are going to be so many different perspectives of what Christmas is to all of us.” The Grotteaux isn’t the only show setting out to bring festive cheer to the LGBTQ+ community – and everyone else – this year. In London, drag king collective Pecs will perform a one-night-only Christmas show, called The Pecsmas Office Party, at Shoreditch town hall in London. In Birmingham, comedian Joe Lycett is hosting a “big queer Christmas house party”, a 90-minute set in his home city, broadcast on Channel 4. In Manchester, The Black Pride Manchester Vogue Ball is a night of drag, cabaret and music hosted by Rikki Beadle-Blair. At the Pleasance Islington in north London, this year’s Christmas performance, Dog Show, stars drag queen Ginger Johnson, who describes it as “anarchic cabaret” that “exists in a world where queer people are represented by dogs and everybody else walks around on hind legs, like they own the place”. It will include burlesque, comedy and drag, and feature an original score of music by David Cumming, who co-created it with Johnson, inspired by the 1990s club scene. “LGBTQ+ people have always been part of Christmas entertainment,” says Johnson. “We’re central to the entertainment industry. But, for some reason, our queerness seems to be swept under the carpet a little at Christmas, like we should be focusing more on family and that maybe it’s not appropriate to lean into our queerness. I believe the opposite. If it’s a time for celebration, then we should be celebrating our whole selves, and the people that surround us.” Anthony explains how he hopes the diverse experiences of The Grotteaux’s cast “project to someone in the audience who might feel the same way, and bring some joy to them by seeing someone like them reflected back”. SnatchDragon, meanwhile, has a couple of words of wisdom for any LGBTQ+ person who may be struggling at this time of year. “We’re here, you’re not on your own. We want to just give as much love and positivity as possible. We see you, we hope you see us and …” she pauses as Anthony, who interrupts in the background, adds: “Come and have a big, queer Christmas party with us!” The Grotteaux is at Woolwich Works, London, 16 December–8 January. Dog Show is at the Pleasance, London, until 19 December.The Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci has become an oft-quoted point of reference for commentators struggling to read the signs of these turbulent times. During the political turmoil of the 1930s – we have read more than once – Gramsci observed that: “The crisis consists precisely in the fact that the old is dying and the new cannot be born; in this interregnum a great variety of morbid symptoms appear.” During the 2010s, the startling rise of the Scottish independence movement, the shock of the Brexit vote and the unexpected election of Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader cumulatively lent themselves to a similar style of diagnosis. It seemed plausible to maintain that in various ways a 40-year settlement, inaugurated by Margaret Thatcher in 1979 and broadly accepted by successive Labour and Tory leaders, was breaking down. From resurgent nationalism on the right to a renewed commitment to nationalisation on the left, a realignment away from an era of economic liberalism and high globalisation has challenged orthodoxies across the spectrum. Something new was struggling to be born. But as 2021 draws to a close, it might be advisable to put the Gramsci away and look up the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche’s doctrine of the Eternal Return of the Same. Following the disorienting years of disruption, a restoration movement is gathering steam on both the Labour and Conservative sides of the parliamentary aisle. It’s true that Boris Johnson’s political future may depend on successfully shoring up the new electoral coalition forged in the “get Brexit done” election of 2019; and his instincts urge gamechanging investment in the red wall seats that went Tory two years ago. But small-state Tories are mounting a concerted attempt to reclaim Brexit from what the Spectator describes as the “high-tax, high-spend European social democratic model” reportedly being pursued by the prime minister. From the back benches, free-market rebels such as Steve Baker and David Davies are weaponising widespread discontent at National Insurance rises to pay for social care reform. Baker, who is forming a low-tax campaigning group at Westminster, demanded a return to Thatcherite verities recently, telling the Sunday Times: “We have to rediscover the kind of conservatism that cuts taxes, not raises them.” Rishi Sunak’s Treasury has brazenly positioned the chancellor as the frustrated champion of this agenda in a time of Johnsonian apostasy. Burnishing his old school credentials, Sunak breezily generated damaging red wall headlines by ruling out the eastern leg of HS2, and removing state-funded costs from the new £86,000 cap on personal liability for social care. Last month it was reported that no new money would be made available to fund the government’s long-awaited “levelling-up” white paper, the publication of which is likely to be put back to next year. For context, Germany has spent €2tn on the ongoing economic rehabilitation of eastern states following the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989; the government’s levelling-up fund to deal with an equivalent north-south divide is £4.8bn. Labour, as the shadow cabinet reshuffle underlined, is also turning to familiar strategies from the pre-Brexit era. Keir Starmer and the shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, have begun to channel the spirit of New Labour circa 1996 by attacking Tory sleaze and promising fiscal restraint – to be symbolised this time round by the creation of a new office of value for money. Talk of nationalisation of utilities is dismissed as belonging to the anomalous Corbynite interlude, and Ed Miliband has been defenestrated as business secretary after voicing public dissent. In a well-received speech that contrasted with the prime minister’s Peppa Pig pratfalls, Starmer told the CBI conference in November that “when business profits, we all do”. The tone and style was redolent of Labour’s “third way” rhetoric in the 1990s. An approving Peter Mandelson subsequently commented: “What the Labour party under Keir Starmer has to do is come back to the centre-left political ground and be much clearer about the role of markets and the private sector in partnership with the state. You begin to see that in Keir’s speech to the CBI.” The point is not to denigrate understandable political positioning and calculation by Labour, or to present Johnson as a thwarted one-nation idealist who deserves our sympathy. Starmer is, of course, right to see government sleaze and the prime minister’s erratic relations with business leaders post-Brexit as a political opportunity. Johnson’s levelling-up agenda is the product of electoral circumstance rather than principle. But the restorationist politics of the moment seem dispiritingly small and lacking in ambition, given the challenges of the age. The twin insurgencies represented by Corbyn and Brexit (in its red wall version) were a profound rejection of the political economy of the status quo ante. The shock caused by the leave vote exposed the extent to which horizons had shrunk at Westminster, rendering invisible a deep disillusionment felt in post-industrial, non-metropolitan England. The astonishing manner of Corbyn’s election laid bare the simmering outrage on the left at the normalisation of deep inequality, in which Labour was deemed to have been complicit. And the extraordinary rise of the Scottish National party, in the wake of the 2014 independence referendum, foreshadowed both these later shocks to the system. The disruptions held in common a widespread desire to go beyond the economic categories of liberalism and express collective values that had been buried in the preceding decades. Nationhood, sovereignty, pride in community, public ownership, radical devolution and localism: all these themes spoke to a yearning for a new politics of belonging. It is hard to escape the sense that, in both the government and the opposition, the radical implications of this period of politics are being closed off in the name of something more comfortable and familiar. The Conservative party seems set to deliver a simulacrum of levelling up, and strains at the leash to revert to type. Labour hopes an impression of competence, probity and fiscal caution can see it over the line at the next election as it did in the past. Dramatic as the political eruptions of the post-crash decade were, the old order may be gradually “taking back control”. Julian Coman is a Guardian associate editorThe World Health Organization has called for a “massive, urgent” effort to get the new malaria vaccine into the arms of African children, as it warned that about 180,000 more people were dying annually from the disease than had previously been thought. Dr Pedro Alonso, director of the WHO’s global malaria programme, said the RTS,S vaccine, recommended for widespread rollout in October, represented a historic opportunity to save tens of thousands of lives, mostly those of under-fives in sub-Saharan Africa. But he warned that the global community risked “massive failure” if funding commitments aimed at boosting production and helping deployment of the vaccine were not rapidly made. “What I think is the real barrier [is] international solidarity,” he said. “Is the world going to allow that there is a first malaria vaccine that can save the lives of tens of thousands of African children every year and they’re going to let it sit on a shelf? Or are they going to step up?” The British pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKlein, which developed the RTS,S vaccine, has committed to donate up to 10m doses for use in the pilot programmes already under way, and to supply up to 15m doses annually. However, with more than 240m cases globally last year, the potential demand could reach 80 to 100m doses annually, Alonso warned. “Therefore, this is a prime example of where international mechanisms will need to come into play,” he said. “A vaccine that could save somewhere between 40 and 70-80,000 lives every year, of African children, is something that needs to be treated with the utmost ambition and sense of urgency. And therefore, a slow, gradual scale-up, if you ask me, would not be acceptable. This needs to be a massive, urgent operation to ensure that we can reach as many children as possible and as soon as possible.” He added: “If the global health community does not respond to this challenge, it will represent a massive failure. I cannot imagine how different leaders, leaders of philanthropy or of financing institutions, are going to go to Africa and advocate for efforts to prevent childhood deaths if they don’t, first and foremost, support the deployment of this vaccine.” Last week, the global vaccine alliance, Gavi, said its board had approved an initial $155.7m (£117m) for the rollout of RTS,S. The funding would help the introduction, procurement and delivery of the vaccine for eligible countries in sub-Saharan Africa from 2022 until 2025, it said. Dr Abdourahmane Diallo, CEO of the RBM Partnership to End Malaria, said the announcement would give the private sector “a crucial motive to scale up” the rollout. “We now call on leaders to step up investment to accelerate the development and delivery of more effective, transformative tools to combat the ever-evolving malaria parasite,” he said. New figures released by the WHO on Monday underlined the scale of the problem, with a new, “more precise” method of counting estimating that 627,000 people died of malaria last year, 180,000 more than the total would have been according to the old methodology. The vast majority of all malaria deaths – 96% – were in sub-Saharan Africa. In its annual malaria report, the WHO said the “doomsday scenario” some had predicted at the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic – that deaths from malaria would double as a result of disruption to treatment and services – had not materialised. Nonetheless, it said, deaths had risen by nearly 70,000 last year, an increase of 12%, of which nearly 50,000 were attributable to disruptions during the pandemic. One main cause of disruption was that more than a quarter of insecticide-treated bed nets – the backbone of WHO efforts to combat malaria – were not distributed in 2020. Faced with a slowing of progress in the fight against malaria, the WHO believes the vaccine could be a crucial new weapon, even though questions have been raised over its limited efficacy. Over four years of trials, RTS,S was found to prevent 39% of malaria cases and 29% of severe malaria cases. But Alonso rejected concerns. “A reduction of 30% [in] severe cases of malaria means a massive public health impact, larger probably than any other vaccine against any other disease being used right now,” he said.World champion swimmer Adam Peaty, the unbeaten world record holder of the 50m and 100m breaststroke, is friendly and engaged, but he makes no bones about being hypercompetitive. He once said that he felt like a “god” in the pool. He says now, “You have to be better than everyone else, there’s no sugar-coating it.” A swimming phenomenon (think of him as a kind of national Aquaman), Peaty has had a stellar year, even by his standards: he won two golds and a silver in Team GB in the Tokyo Olympics; he also signed up for Strictly Come Dancing, where he was partnered with Katya Jones. After seven hip-swivelling weeks, he went out on a jive that placed him bottom of the Strictly leaderboard; his mother was so upset, she thought it was a fix. Was it humbling to learn a new discipline? Peaty gives a kind of groaning laugh: “It did humble me. I’m not used to getting last place, to be honest.” Humbling moments on the dancefloor aside, Peaty says constantly winning in the pool can become a problem. “I dream of losing, honestly. You can’t match the hunger, adrenaline, fight-back, that losing gives you. It can make you even more successful. You cannot be afraid to lose.” For Peaty, 26, the Tokyo Olympics allowed Team GB to shine: “For all the hard times we’ve gone through over the past 18 months, we showed we can still perform at the highest level. Obviously, the Olympics is a very, very special event.” Leaping into Olympic pools, or dancing on Strictly, it’s clear he has an intimidating, muscular, alpha body. Does he feel macho? He laughs: “I guess so. My job is to look like that. I’m a big guy. I have lots of muscle. That obviously helps me go faster and faster in the pool as well.” Competing in Tokyo meant travelling, something Peaty enjoys: “I love experiencing different foods, different environments, different people and cultures. That’s one the best things about sport, you get to travel the world.” Peaty comes from a working-class background in Uttoxeter, and his recent book, The Gladiator Mindset, lays out his conviction that anyone can fulfil their potential: “I’m literally just a normal person who trained really hard and worked my arse off every single day.” For all the giggles and spangles, the Strictly regime is gruelling – a veritable showbiz Olympics – sportspeople usually do it once they’ve retired. “It was almost like a boot camp,” says Peaty. He considers Jones to be as much an athlete as he is: “It’s unbelievably hard. Sometimes I was like, wow, my brain is absolutely fried.” Then there was the media focus: on him, his family, his partner, Eirianedd Munro, with whom he has a one-year-old son, George. Peaty is philosophical (“It is what it is”), but it was intense: “I’m not used to being in the headlines on a Sunday morning. For a dance! Some of the articles ruined the experience a little bit for me. They obviously made Eiri feel bad, which made me feel bad.” For Peaty, Strictly was a chance to get away from the pool, mix things up, bolster his longevity as an athlete. Avoid burnout? “Exactly. Avoiding actual burnout and avoiding a scenario where you start to hate what you do every single day.” He isn’t tunnel-visioned about sport. “I enjoy my lifestyle and my life as much as my training. It’s a very good balance to have… especially as I’m getting older.” Adam, I say, you’re 26! He laughs drily: “I’m 26 and I feel like 40.” Munro is part-Nigerian, part-Welsh, which illuminated race issues for Peaty: “It gives you more clarity. It can be a horrible world out there.” He’s also aware about sexism, especially as he has a female coach, one-time British swimmer Mel Marshall: “Has she got the recognition of a male coach who’s achieved the same things?” This year, Strictly featured a same-sex male couple (John Whaite and Johannes Radebe), and Peaty is similarly scathing about anti-LGBTQ prejudice. “Homophobia? It’s ridiculous that we’re in the 21st century and we’re still having these conversations.” “No one’s born with hate,” he says passionately. “If you look at two little kids, they’ll play together and show love.” He thinks the answer could lie in education and upbringing: “The conversations we have with our children. That’s why I like being a father, because I can be a voice on that.” What else does he enjoy about fatherhood? “I honestly love the little things – going to the cafe, park, picking him up from nursery. I want to give him my wisdom, my world. I love being a dad, it’s incredible.” For all Peaty’s achievements in 2021, he also learned a lesson: “Strictly showed me that competition doesn’t always have to be serious – that I can just relax and enjoy it.”Parties! Parties, no matter what the size, are what we need to feel human again. Seeing loved ones and old friends this Christmas, kicking back and shrugging off some of the worries of life has never felt so important. So invite a few people around and delight them with these sticky, spiced sausages and a thoroughly delicious cocktail to make them feel as if they were away with you on some far flung adventure. Sticky apricot-harissa merguez cocktail sausages with mint yoghurt, and a cardamom-infused mojito These sticky, rose-scented, spicy and caramelised sausages are delicious with the mint dip. The perfect accompaniment to the cardamom mojito, which is a great cocktail to get a party in full swing. Prep 30 min Cook 20 min Serves 8 For the merguez 80g apricot jam 1 tbsp rose harissa 1 tbsp dijon mustard 500g merguez sausages For the yoghurt dip Juice and zest of ½ lemon 1 handful mint leaves, finely chopped ⅓ cucumber, coarsely grated 175ml Greek yoghurt 1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed Salt and black pepper For the cardamom-infused mojitos 2 bags English breakfast or other black tea 24 cardamom pods, lightly crushed in a mortar 200g fresh mint, plus sprigs to serve 8 tbsp demerara sugar 140ml fresh lemon juice 320ml dark rum Rosewater Sparkling water, to top Heat the oven to 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5 and line a baking sheet with greaseproof paper. Put the jam, harissa and mustard in a small saucepan with a tablespoon of water, and heat gently to melt the jam. Arrange the sausages on the tray, smear all over with the apricot paste and roast for 15 minutes. At this stage, the sausages will have released their fat, so pour this off into a heatproof saucer and put the sausages back in the oven for five minutes more, to caramelise. Meanwhile, mix all the ingredients for the dip in a bowl, season to taste and put to one side. Cut the sausages in half or thirds, and serve them with cocktail sticks and the yoghurt to dip into. Meanwhile, muddle the mint and demerara with a rolling pin or cocktail muddler. Add the lemon juice, muddle into the sugar to dissolve, then pour in the infused tea, preferably while it’s still warm, to help dissolve the sugar. Fill eight highball glasses with ice (crushed or whole) and a fresh mint sprig. Pour 40ml dark rum into each glass, then pour in an eighth of the mojito mix through a fine sieve and stir. Add a few drops of rosewater to each glass, top with sparkling water and serve at once. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoIt’s a terrible thing, when you can hear a man sweat through the radio. The Home Office minister Kit Malthouse was being questioned by Mishal Husain on the Today programme this morning, about last year’s Downing Street Christmas party. If it was as described – two-score people at least, in the same room, drinking and playing party games – then how could it have been within the rules? “This is hypothetical,” Malthouse kept saying, as if he was tapping into an ancient interview woo-hoo, the magic word you could say to make it all stop. Unfortunately, he was not. Finally, he executed his handbrake turn: he couldn’t comment on the party, because he didn’t know what had happened; he couldn’t find out what had happened, because he was much more focused on the war on drugs. Mired in terrible headlines, one story of corruption or incompetence after another, each untoward event reminding the world of some past promise that never materialised, the prime minister has seized the agenda by the throat. He has a new enemy (drug dealers); a new feral underclass (drug takers); a new initiative (take away all their passports and driving licences); a new slogan (it’s a war on drugs); and a new load of old blarney. “Drugs … are not going to make you cooler,” Johnson said. “They’re bad news.” Not since Zammo’s rap has such an unarguable message had such a counterproductive messenger. Nothing has ever made me want to take drugs more than this wreck of a man telling me they’re bad news. And I’m writing this at nine in the morning. There’s so much to pick apart in the initiative. The “war on drugs” is, in fact, not new; the war is as old as the drugs, and the drugs, so far, have always won. Taking away drug users’ passports is obviously chillingly authoritarian, and will surely be challenged on civil rights grounds to the point that it never materialises as policy. But it’s also peculiarly lacking in insight. The last thing an addict wants to do is go abroad. It’s way too risky to take drugs with you, and just adds 10 layers of complication to the business of buying them. I know this first-hand, having once found myself in Latvia with another Briton who was a massive cokehead. He had no prior knowledge of what a Latvian drug dealer looked like, spoke no Baltic languages, and was armed only with the rumour that there was cocaine in Russian cough medicine. We ended up in a pharmacy, trying to do a cough in a Russian accent. Fair play, we didn’t have the internet then. Maybe it’s easier now, but I would guess only fractionally. This passport idea is like removing a bicycle from a miscreant fish. Recent history teaches us, however, that it takes more for an initiative to fail than simply for it to be stupid and make no sense. Happily, there is more: because just as Johnson was delivering his half-asleep lecture, some newshound was testing the toilets of parliament to check for traces of cocaine, and – waddayaknow? – finding plenty. In the toilet next to Johnson’s office, in the one at the top of the stairs in Portcullis House, and in the one at the bottom; for brevity, let’s say pretty well all of them. This is a scoop as old as time. I remember being sent to the Royal Opera House scouting for gak in its lavatories in the 90s. Lacking any inherent news value, this kind of exercise is only ever undertaken for mischief, but nobody could have planned how all these stories would swirl together, in the emotional segment of the brain. People in Westminster taking drugs at work while the prime minister sermonises against drugs; government officials partying while the government enjoined the nation not to party. I’m past caring about the hypocrisy, and would prefer to be locked down for ever than engage in whatever the hell Conservatives do for party games. But I am quite worried about how they’re all going to conduct their government business without a passport. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistJosé Mourinho cancelled his press conference before Roma’s match against Inter on Saturday, denying us a window into his emotions as he prepared to face his former club in Serie A for the first time. Eleven years had passed since he left the Nerazzurri in floods of tears, hugging Marco Materazzi before disappearing into a Madrid night after completing an unprecedented Treble win. He skipped the celebrations in Milan – fearing he could get caught up in a moment and make a commitment that he would regret. Real Madrid were ready to hire him and Mourinho now had his eyes on a different kind of treble, adding a La Liga title to his personal collection after conquering the Premier League and Serie A. For the next decade, he would profess enduring affection for Inter whenever the opportunity arose. Yet when he took the Roma job this summer, he was quick to throw a few jabs. His former club had just won the league for the first time since he departed. “An isolated success is easy,” reflected Mourinho, “if you win and then don’t have the money to pay the wages.” His story alone ought to have guaranteed us an engrossing spectacle at the Stadio Olimpico. Before kick-off, travelling Inter fans hung a banner in the Curva Nord swearing Mourinho “eternal gratitude”. Whatever nostalgia they might hold for that treble-winning side, however, none could have wished that Mourinho was back in their team’s dugout as they watched his current team take the field. Materazzi predicted the match would be “a battle”. Instead, it turned out to be a slaughter. Inter arrived in confident mood, having closed the gap on Milan and Napoli at the top of the table in recent weeks. They tore into Roma immediately, opening the scoring when Hakan Calhanoglu’s corner snuck in at the near post in the 15th minute. The Turkey international later confessed that he had been “a bit fortunate”, simply aiming for the near post as usual. There was nothing lucky about Inter’s second goal, arriving at the end of a 19-pass move that culminated with Calhanoglu feeding Edin Dzeko to score after a mesmerising one-touch exchange on the edge of the area. Denzel Dumfries made it 3-0 to Inter before half-time, heading home at the back post. It was the first time in 21 years of management that a Mourinho side had trailed by such a margin at the interval. There was no fightback, nor even a hint of one. Roma fell to their seventh defeat of this season – more than they have had at such an early stage in any campaign since 2008-09 – yet it was the total absence of character from their performance that felt most damning of all. This ought to have been thrilling theatre. Inter are the reigning champions and Roma were supposed to be fighting this season to get back into the top four. Francesco Totti was back at the Stadio Olimpico for only the second time since he retired. Mourinho’s history at Inter was just one of several juicy subplots. Dzeko declined to celebrate his goal against a club where he scored more than 100 of them. Nicolò Zaniolo, starting up front for Roma, had a point to prove against the club whose academy nurtured him before throwing him too cheaply into a part-exchange deal for Radja Nainggolan. Yet the most damning indictment of Mourinho might be that a manager with a box-office reputation could not even make a game with all these threads into the most interesting of the night. It was overshadowed thoroughly by a spectacular encounter between Napoli and Atalanta. Where Mourinho lamented that his team had “no attacking potential” due to the absences of Tammy Abraham and Lorenzo Pellegrini – all while leaving last season’s top scorer, Borja Mayoral, on the bench – Napoli’s Luciano Spalletti surveyed a ruinous injury list and refused to be deterred. The Partenopei were without Victor Osimhen, André-Frank Zambo Anguissa, Kalidou Koulibaly, Fabián Ruiz and Lorenzo Insigne but their manager concocted a brand new 3-4-3. His idea was to mirror Atalanta, daring his remaining players to show him their quality against opponents whose entire system is founded on a willingness to trust individuals to follow their instincts and embrace the one-on-ones. That is why Atalanta wind up so often in situations like we saw in the 66th minute, with one centre-back – Rafael Toloi – threading a through-ball down the right channel for another – Merih Demiral – to score emphatically at the near post. This was a chaotic, spectacular, and joyous game of football, in which momentum see-sawed back and forth. Atalanta were first off the mark when Duván Zapata cut the ball back for Ruslan Malinovskyi to score but Napoli responded with fine goals from Piotr Zielinski and Dries Mertens. Then came Demiral’s equaliser, before Remo Freuler swept home an Atalanta winner at the end of another all-out attack. In the 71st-minute of a game away to the team that had led the league at the start of the weekend, Atalanta had five players flooding the opposition box. Even Napoli’s supporters offered an ovation to Gasperini and his team at full time. “Tonight’s game, with even defenders scoring goals and offering assists, that’s my football,” he reflected. “The kind that I always thought I could create, and which Atalanta allow me to realise.” Napoli could feel optimistic in defeat, Spalletti proving his team can be dynamic and brilliant even without half of their starting XI. They suffered defensively but could have scored more and perhaps would have won were it not for a further injury at 2-1 to Stanislav Lobotka, whose nimble distribution had been an important counter to Atalanta’s high press. They remain title contenders. Do Atalanta, who finished the weekend four points off first place but seven above fifth, also belong in that conversation? “This is a narrative people keep on pushing on us – a bit because they believe it and a bit because they want to put pressure on,” said Gasperini. “But there is a reality: we have never been top of the table in these last few years. I will be able to say that we are in the running when we are top at least one time.” A reasonable argument, and a realistic target for a team who had already won away to Juventus and drawn at Inter this season. Inter look increasingly like favourites, hitting new levels under Simone Inzaghi and boasting greater depth than most rivals, but this race has a long way to run. Any notion that Mourinho’s Roma could be part of it, though, does seem to be fading. During terse post-game press interviews he responded to a question about his team’s passivity by telling a journalist: “It’s easy to ask questions like this, your job is much easier than ours, and that’s why we get paid a lot more money than you.” Mourinho is indeed, well remunerated – his €7m net salary placing him alongside Juventus’s Massimiliano Allegri as the best-paid managers in Serie A. Reminding us of that detail may only encourage his critics to ask whether he is offering value for money, with Roma eight points worse off than they were at the corresponding point in the previous campaign.China has launched a campaign to discredit what it calls US-style democracy in advance of the first of Joe Biden’s two “summits of democracy” later this week. Over recent days, official Chinese media outlets and diplomats have made a string of scathing attacks on the US governing system, calling it “a game of money politics” and “rule of the few over the many”. They also touted China’s one-party governing model, calling it “socialist democracy with Chinese characteristics” and “a whole-process democracy”. On 4 December, Beijing issued a lengthy paper entitled “China: Democracy That Works”. The paper was dismissed by many western China watchers, who pointed out that under China’s system of government, political opposition to the ruling Communist party is not allowed. Citizens can vote in local elections, but candidates are vetted by the authorities. Independent candidates who are perceived not to align with the ruling party’s political agenda are often harassed or arrested. “Xi has long used the claim that the party’s governance is superior to that of the west, in order to legitimise the party’s monopoly of power,” Charles Parton, a former British diplomat and a senior associate fellow at the Royal United Services Institute, told Reuters news agency. Invited attendees to the first summit on 9 and 10 December at a virtual meeting include Taiwan, an island Beijing claims as its own. On Sunday, China’s foreign ministry released a report on the state of democracy in the US. The state-owned Xinhua news agency accompanied the release with a series of cartoons that mocked the US system. Global Times said the report “[exposed] the deficiencies and abuse of democracy in the US”, as well as the “harm of it exporting such democracy”. “The US is far from a ‘beacon of democracy’ and has nothing worth showing off given the chaotic American society,” Global Times quoted a Chinese academic as saying. Events in the past week intended to highlight the shortcomings of US democracy also included a high-profile forum attended by the British political commentator Martin Jacques and John Ross, who was an economic and business policy director for the former mayor of London, Ken Livingstone. Le Yucheng, China’s vice-foreign minister and also the forum’s keynote speaker, described Washington’s democracy summit as the “very opposite of democracy” because, he said, it would “do no good to global solidarity; no good to cooperation, and no good to development”. “China’s whole-process people’s democracy is not the kind that wakes up at the time of voting and goes back to dormant afterwards,” he said. But when asked by a foreign journalist why China seemed keen to compare itself with the United States, Eric Li, another speaker and a Chinese businessman, joked: “We are just unhappy we didn’t get invited to the party next week.”Is there an act anywhere in comedy as machine-tooled to make us laugh as Nina Conti’s? I don’t mean her ventriloquism with her sidekick Monkey, which is excellent, and which she’s always experimenting with – as with tonight’s closer, when she and the puppet swap voices. I mean that trusty routine in which she slaps masks on the faces of her audience volunteers, and gives voice to them in loopy dialogues and scenes. For me, it never stops being joyfully funny – and generous, too, because the eye is drawn to how comical her stooges are being, whereas, off the ball, it’s Conti who’s pulling off several difficult tricks at a time. Her current tour finds a (slightly) new context for the act. The Dating Show is in Southend to help its audience find love – or escape it, in the case of one volunteer who touts for a new boyfriend, and rejects her existing one, in song. (“Rescue me from Sean!”) Kicking off to an initially timid audience, it opens by recreating one couple’s first meeting at a Manchester chocolate workshop. In a later skit, Conti pounces on a schoolteacher’s expressive hand gestures, and has him yearn in song (guitar stage-right by Dan Attfield) for a girlfriend who will “squeeze him by the balls”. That’s an improviser’s skill, and Conti has it in abundance – that alertness to the potentially fruitful detail, which she’ll pick up on and work into scenes of unexpected delight. There’s an interlude post-interval in which Conti appears in lifesize Monkey costume to speed-date members of the audience – and it’s the weakest section, partly because the cumbersome suit cramps her light-on-the-feet style. But the final set-piece is a masterful 20 minutes of organised chaos, as Conti plays all the voice parts in a six-person scene set in an erotic fire station. Her human dummies, liberated from self-consciousness by their cartoonish face masks, pitch in gamely as Conti matchmakes, spins vocal plates, and orchestrates inappropriately saucy interactions between the mum and two grownup kids, among others, assembled onstage. Timidity overcome, all is laughter in the stalls: Conti’s great act has worked its magic again. Nina Conti: The Dating Show is touring until 28 February.“We have lost Gucci!! The Gucci store is down.” That’s an art gallery owner’s lament as anti-lockdown protesters rampage through New York’s chichi SoHo in this microbudget indie directed by Michael M Bilandic. It’s a cheeky satire poking fun at art world pretention, and there’s a reasonable strike rate of digs here. That said, accusing modern art of being all hype and no substance is not exactly a case of picking a tough target. Keith Poulson plays an obnoxious performance artist, Nate, an ageing enfant terrible whose career has nosedived. Now he’s attempting to claw his way back with a cheap stunt. Nate intends to remain locked inside a metal cage for 120 days in a Manhattan gallery living on a diet of creepy crawlies. His only company is a cute-looking robot, which has been programmed to taser him with electric shocks several times a day. Alas for Nate’s comeback plans, lockdown and riots have forced the gallery to close. Nate refuses to quit, so his flamboyant gallerist (Jason Grisell, laying it on a bit heavy) sends in two private security guards to protect him from the mob. There’s Covid-denying Gulf war veteran Ace (Theodore Bouloukos) and earnest student Evan (Hunter Zimny), who reminded me of dim cousin Greg in Succession. For the rest of the film we’re locked in the gallery, shutters down, listening to the three bickering about everything from gun control to modern art. Nate is infuriatingly patronising; and the more he talks the more he exposes himself as a fame-hungry mediocre talent. The best moment comes when the power goes out. Surely, says student Evan, Nate can fix the electric circuitry – after all, he’s built a robot. Er, no. Nate didn’t actually make the robot – a team of 50 guys in Japan did the engineering. “But intellectually, I built it,” Nates sniffs arrogantly. It’s a very funny scene. • Project Space 13 is on Mubi from 10 December.The Bank of England’s monetary policy chief has said inflation is likely to soar “comfortably” above 5% next spring when the energy regulator Ofgem raises a price cap affecting millions of households. Record high levels of vacancies are also likely to persist for longer than previously expected as the jobs market adjusts to changes in the economy brought on by the pandemic, said Ben Broadbent, the central bank’s deputy governor with responsibility for monetary policy. The uncertainty surrounding the impact of rising wage demands by workers seeking to protect themselves against falling living standards meant that he was continuing to watch for signs of a wage/price spiral. “If wage earners’ expectations of future inflation rise in response, or if they seek compensation for the rises in the costs of living that have already occurred, wages could also accelerate further, even without any additional decline in unemployment,” Broadbent said. Speaking to Leeds University Business School, he said inflation was on course to increase until at least April next year, when the price cap is due to be raised. “The aggregate rate of inflation is likely to rise further over the next few months and the chances are that it will comfortably exceed 5% when the Ofgem cap on retail energy prices is next adjusted,” he said. He said the recent jump in inflation for goods, especially cars, driven partly by a global supply chain squeeze, was likely to fade and in some cases reverse, before a Bank rate rise would have an impact. He said: “I still think it’s more likely than not – looking a couple of years ahead as we should – that these pressures on traded goods prices are more likely to subside than intensify.” In the only reference to the newly identified coronavirus variant in his speech, Broadbent added: “Obviously the new Omicron variant might interrupt that process, depending on the effectiveness of existing vaccines against it and the severity of its health effects. Those we don’t yet know.” Broadbent was one of the seven members of the Bank’s nine-strong monetary policy committee (MPC) to wrongfoot financial markets by voting to keep interest rates on hold last month. Signals from the governor, Andrew Bailey, and the MPC members Michael Saunders and Sir Dave Ramsden convinced investors that the central bank was poised to tighten policy. Ahead of a meeting on 16 December, investors are pricing less than a 50% chance on the Bank of England raising rates from 0.1% to 0.25%, mainly due to the emergence of the Omicron variant and uncertainty about how long energy prices will remain high. Last week Saunders hinted that he would vote to maintain the base rate at 0.1%, when he said: “There could be particular advantages in waiting to see more evidence on its possible effects on public health outcomes and hence on the economy.” Brian Hilliard, an economist at Société Générale, said: “If even the most hawkish member of the MPC is signalling that there might be some value to waiting to see how serious the emergence of Omicron turns out to be then we should expect the other members to have similar concerns.”The owner of the Real Greek and Franco Manca restaurant chains has said that business is booming and is ahead of pre-pandemic levels as office workers and theatregoers return to city centres. Parent company the Fulham Shore reported a doubling of revenues and a return to profit in the six months to 26 September, with many of its 75 restaurants “continuing to break weekly trading records”. “We have seen continued trading momentum in recent weeks, with revenues in October and November ahead of 2019 comparatives,” said David Page, chairman of the Fulham Shore. “This includes our office and theatre district-located restaurants, which are continuing to trade positively over the four weeks in November, achieving revenues ahead of the same weeks in 2019.” The company said the spread of Omicron has so far failed to deter restaurant-goers, reporting “no impact” on trading from the emergence of the new coronavirus variant. “With strong revenue growth in the half year and continued buoyant current trading, Fulham Shore is performing ahead of management’s expectations,” said Page. “This augurs well for the group’s full year performance, which we expect to be now ahead of market expectations, and our UK-wide expansion plans.” The company intends to open 10 new restaurants in its current financial year and is assessing 21 more locations. The company reported revenues of £39.4m in its half-year, double the same period last year and on a par with the £40m generated the entire year to 28 March. Page hailed the achievement highlighting that the restaurants were only able to trade without restrictions for dine-in customers for 10 of the 26 weeks of its half-year. The Fulham Shore reported a £3m pre-tax profit in the half year to the end of September, compared with a £4.3m loss in the same period last year, and a £7.5m loss in its financial year to the end of March. Looking ahead, Page said he expected the business to strengthen as more workers returned to the office and international tourism picked up next year. “Over the next 12 months we expect footfall in these office-centric sites to continue to increase,” said Page. “Tourists from abroad have still to return in a meaningful way, but when they do this should provide further impetus to these city centre and the West End of London restaurants.”A military court in Myanmar has found Aung San Suu Kyi guilty of incitement and breaking Covid restrictions, drawing condemnation from the US, United Nations, European Union and others, who described the verdicts as politically motivated. The 76-year-old, who was deposed in a coup in February, is set to serve two years in detention at an undisclosed location, a sentence reduced from four years after a partial pardon from the country’s military chief, state TV reported. The court in the capital Naypyidaw was delivering its first verdicts in numerous cases brought against Aung San Suu Kyi that have previously been described by her lawyer as absurd. On Monday evening residents in parts of commercial capital Yangon banged pots and pans - a practice traditionally associated with driving out evil spirits but which has been used since February to show dissent against the military. The United States led international condemnation of the sentences, with Secretary of State Antony Blinken calling the convictions “unjust” and “affronts to democracy and justice”. “We urge the regime to release Aung San Suu Kyi and all those unjustly detained,” he said in a statement. “The conviction of the state counsellor following a sham trial in secretive proceedings before a military-controlled court is nothing but politically motivated,” UN human rights chief, Michelle Bachelet, said. The EU’s top diplomat also condemned the verdict as politically motivated and called for the immediate release of all political prisoners in Myanmar. Liz Truss, the foreign minister of former colonial power Britain, said the sentencing was “another appalling attempt by Myanmar’s military regime to stifle opposition and suppress freedom and democracy”. Little is known about the proceedings in any of the legal cases. Aung San Suu Kyi has been tried in a closed court, with no access for observers, and her lawyer has been prevented from speaking to journalists. Aung San Suu Kyi has been held at an unknown location since February. The incitement case reportedly centred on a statement, published online following the February coup, which had urged international organisations not to cooperate with the junta. The second case alleged that she had broken Covid rules while campaigning before last year’s election. The former president Win Myint was sentenced to four years on the same charges. Myo Aung, the former mayor of Naypyidaw, was sentenced to two years for incitement. Charles Santiago, the chair of the group Asean Parliamentarians for Human Rights, said Monday’s ruling was “a travesty of justice” that demonstrated the junta’s contempt for regional efforts to find a resolution to the country’s crisis. “No one is fooled by today’s sentencing,” he said in a statement. “Since the day of the coup, it’s been clear that the charges against Aung San Suu Kyi, and the dozens of other detained MPs, have been nothing more than an excuse by the junta to justify their illegal power grab.” Analysts have described the charges against the ousted leader, which have continued to grow in number since February, as a transparent attempt to remove her as a political threat. Her National League for Democracy party won a thumping victory in last year’s election but the military refused to accept the result. Aung San Suu Kyi, who previously spent a total of 15 years in detention campaigning against the military, could be held by the junta for the rest of her life if found guilty on all charges. Ming Yu Hah, Amnesty International’s deputy regional director for campaigns, said the sentences were “the latest example of the military’s determination to eliminate all opposition and suffocate freedoms in Myanmar”. According to the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners, she is one of more than 10,600 people to have been arrested by the junta since February, as it has sought to crush any form of opposition. At least 1,303 have been killed. “As violence escalates, displacing tens of thousands of people and setting up a humanitarian crisis in the middle of an ongoing pandemic, the situation in Myanmar today is alarming in the extreme. Without a decisive, unified and swift international response this can and will get worse,” said Ming Yu Hah. Almost one year on since the coup, the military has struggled to impose order. The economy is failing, health and education systems have collapsed, poverty rates have soared and conflict has escalated. Last month, the Special Advisory Council for Myanmar, which includes experts such as Yanghee Lee, the former UN special rapporteur on human rights in Myanmar, warned military offensives were cutting off communities’ food and medical supplies, forcing people to the brink of starvation. The junta faces both a peaceful resistance movement and an armed opposition formed of people’s defence forces allied with various ethnic armed groups. In September, the National Unity Government, a shadow government formed by elected officials, declared a “defensive war” against the junta, calling for civilian armed groups to target the military and its assets. Joshua Kurlantzick, senior fellow for south-east Asia at the Council on Foreign Relations, said that the NUG, which is seeking international recognition, is making headway in securing major meetings with officials internationally. “The continued success of the people’s defence forces may also have some impact on how other governments view the situation in Myanmar,” he said, in comments given prior to Monday’s verdict. A special envoy from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which has led diplomatic efforts to solve the crisis, has been refused permission to meet Aung San Suu Kyi. In response, the bloc took the unusually tough step of barring the junta chief from its meetings. Richard Horsey, the International Crisis Group’s senior adviser on Myanmar, said that despite such action, Asean appeared to lack the leverage to force the junta to change course. While other countries have supported the Asean approach “this has been mostly a way of outsourcing the problem to Asean rather than any conviction that the regional bloc could make progress”, he added, in comments prior to Monday’s sentencing. “Myanmar needs to be a much higher diplomatic priority for the major powers and the UN.”The value of bitcoin has suffered a “thumping”, losing more than one-fifth of its value at at one point over the weekend before settling below $50,000 (£37,720), only a month after reaching a record high. The value of the cryptocurrency rose above $68,000 in November and had been predicted to move even higher by the end of the year, amid concern about the value of traditional assets such as gold and government debt. Some investors and analysts, including the Wall Street bank JP Morgan, have also seen bitcoin as a hedge against inflation, which has begun to take off in large economies including the UK and the US. But the world’s largest digital currency, which had reached a total market value of $1.1tn before the weekend’s fall, has struggled to maintain momentum since reaching last month’s all-time high. Bitcoin began to slump markedly on Saturday, falling 22% from $53,890 to a temporary intraday low of $41,967 before recovering ground. On Monday, it was trading at $48,600, its lowest level since October. The cryptocurrency has been volatile in recent months but remains many times more valuable than it was five years ago, when investors could pick up a single coin for $700. Analysts at UBS bank blamed the weekend’s slump on various factors including uncertainty before the bosses of cryptocurrency exchanges are due to face questioning from a US congressional committee on Wednesday. “Crypto is often held up by proponents as a useful portfolio inflation hedge, but wild swings like what we saw this weekend back our view that is more akin to a highly speculative risk asset,” the analysts said. “Regulation remains a key overhang, and this unruly unwind and its impact on retail participants may add to the regulatory conversation.” Analysts at AJ Bell said bitcoin had endured its “latest thumping”. As bitcoin fell, so did other “altcoins” such as Ethereum, worth more than $4,600 on Friday evening but down to just above $4,000 on Monday afternoon. Bitcoin emerged after the 2008 financial crisis, allowing people to bypass banks and traditional payment methods. It has become the most prominent among thousands of cryptocurrencies. It relies on “blockchain” technology, which is a shared database of transactions with entries that must be confirmed and encrypted. The network is secured by individuals called “miners” who use high-powered computers to verify transactions, with bitcoins offered as a reward. There are more than 18m bitcoins, and the mathematical system controlling the generation of new coins – which is decentralised and therefore has no overarching institution such as a central bank – has a hardwired maximum of 21m coins.Neneh Cherry, singer and songwriter I was seeing Cameron McVey [producer and now husband] and one day he suddenly asked me: “Why are you not writing songs? You could totally write songs!” I’d been in Rip Rig + Panic, whose songwriter Gareth Sager had such an inventive way of writing about everyday stuff. Manchild was one of the first things I came up with. The first verse came to me as I was going up the stairs of a doubledecker bus. “Is it the pain of the drinking / Or the Sunday sinking feeling?” I think I had a hangover. When I got home, I started to work out the music on a little Casio keyboard using the “auto chord” setting. I didn’t know what I was doing. When my dad [late jazz trumpeter Don Cherry] heard it, he went: “Wow, that’s kinda jazz. You’ve got seven chords in the verse!” The person in the song exists, but it isn’t about them as such. “The car never seems to work / When it’s late your girlfriend’s on a date.” I just imagined a guy that worked nine to five in a garage or something, but had dreams and feelings, and an unfaithful girlfriend. I was exploring the more vulnerable aspects of manhood from a woman’s perspective, the way some men are OK with sensitivity while others put up three layers of front. Manchild was a very important song for me: it was where I found my style. I liked the simplicity of a raw hip-hop beat with orchestrations. When we’d finished recording it at Eastcote Studios, Tim Simenon from Bomb the Bass did the scratching and came up with a really great electronic hook. The way we worked was very domestic: a lot of work at home, kids in the studio, a baby under my arm. We walked into radio stations like that. Before we talked about ideas for the video, the director Jean-Baptiste Mondino sat outside our house in our little Fiat Panda listening to Manchild while watching my fabulous Jamaican neighbour sweeping the front of the house wearing gold chains. My other neighbour was hanging out the laundry. Then I answered the door with a towel on my head and a baby under my arm. And Jean-Baptiste was like: “That’s it! That’s the video.” Cameron ‘Booga Bear’ McVey, producer I’d come up through punk but ended up working with Stock, Aitken and Waterman at the PWL label. We’d play Trivial Pursuit with Kylie and people like that. All the PWL artists were nice, but none of them were really musicians – unlike Stock, Aitken and Waterman, who really knew their shit. The music press saw them as the enemy but they were more punk than the punks. My mate Jamie Morgan and I did an embarrassing single as Morgan McVey, called Looking Good Diving. I’d just met Neneh, so on the B-side was an early version of Buffalo Stance, with a different title and Neneh rapping. A year later, a proper version became her first single. It was a really iconic track. The easy thing would have been to then do five more Buffalo Stances but that would have been despicable, so Neneh did something completely different with Manchild. That’s why her career really took off. I remember transcribing her chords from the Casio. It turned out she’d used every available chord on the machine. The producer Nellee Hooper had just taught me how to sample, so I added a snare drum. Nellee then got 3D from Massive Attack to write Manchild’s rap part. Will Malone did all the strings on a Fairlight but we left the Casio on the finished recording. It made a sound like having your leg sawn off, but it was really good in the background. Everyone loved Manchild – except Neneh’s American record company, who refused to release it. They wanted another Buffalo Stance, which had reached No 3 in the US. They said Manchild wasn’t white enough to be white, or black enough to be black, and not left field enough to be left field. We met all these corporate tossers who were so heavy with us, because if you fuck up in America they declare war on you. When I was on the plane for the first meeting, the plane developed a fault over Greenland and we had to turn around. I took that as a sign. Manchild was a huge hit everywhere except America. • Like Trying to Catch Lightning in a Bottle, 40 Years of Making Music at Eastcote Studios by Martin Terefe is published by Thames &amp; Hudson. A limited edition of 550 signed copies are available from eastcotestudios.comIt’s time to celebrate the best theatre shows of 2021. Which play captured your heart? Did a Zoom production connect with you? Maybe a dance company moved you? Please briefly explain why (250 words max) by filling in the form below and we will feature a selection of them. You have until midnight on Sunday 12 December to submit your suggestions. Share your favourite show You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.For years, Helen Butler has been on a mission to increase voter turnout, especially among Black voters, in Georgia and across the south. She’s used to the skepticism. People she meets wonder why they should bother, because their vote won’t matter. No matter who’s in office, longstanding problems won’t get solved. More recently, she’s pushed back on efforts by Georgia Republicans to make it harder to vote. She’s seen things like overly aggressive efforts to remove people from the voter rolls and the rapid consolidation of polling places. Last year, she listened as Joe Biden promised he would protect the right to vote if he was elected president. “One thing the Senate and the president can do right away is pass the bill to restore the Voting Rights Act … it’s one of the first things I’ll do as president if elected. We can’t let the fundamental right to vote be denied,” he said in July last year. Months later, Butler and other organizers had a breakthrough that had been years in the making. After years of investing in voter mobilization, turnout among Black voters surged in the November election, helping Joe Biden win a state long seen as a Republican stronghold. In January, Black voters came out again and helped Jon Ossoff and Raphael Warnock win two upset Senate bids, giving Democrats control of the US Senate. On the night he was elected president, Biden called out the Black voters who helped him capture the presidency, saying: “When this campaign was at its lowest – the African American community stood up again for me. They always have my back, and I’ll have yours.” And so, after Biden was inaugurated, Butler and many others expected that voting rights would be one of the first things the president and Democrats addressed. Instead, during the president’s first year in office, Butler has watched with dismay as Biden and Democrats have failed to pass any voting rights legislation. Meanwhile, Republicans in Georgia passed sweeping new voting restrictions, one of several places across the country that made it harder to vote. “It is disheartening, I can tell you, out of all the work we’ve put in to have fair elections, to get people engaged, and to have the Senate that will not act to protect the most sacred right, the right to vote, is unheard of,” Butler said. “[It] makes voters say ‘Did I vote for the right people? … you haven’t fought for me. Why should I fight to keep you in office in 2022?’” Democrats have been stymied by the filibuster, the Senate rule that requires 60 votes to advance most legislation. Republicans have used the rule to successfully block voting rights bills on four different occasions this year. Democrats need the support of all 50 senators to get rid of the rule, and two Democrats, Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, are strongly opposed. Both senators have argued the rule forges bipartisan compromise, but many believe Republicans have weaponized it into a tool of obstruction and that protecting voting rights is an urgent enough issue to justify getting rid of the rule. There was already simmering frustration from voting advocateswho believe Biden has not taken strong action, especially as several states enacted sweeping new voting restrictions. That frustration is now turning into escalating alarm that time is running out to pass meaningful voting rights legislation ahead of the 2022 midterm elections, amid a crammed congressional agenda that is already backed up for December. More than 200 civic action groups urged Congress on Thursday to postpone its December recess until it passes voting rights legislation. “All of the experts and lawyers are telling us the same thing: time is running out. We are not out of time yet, but we are running out of runway to get this bill passed, get it signed into law, be able to clear any legal challenges and actually get it implemented for 2022,” said Tiffany Muller, the president and executive director of End Citizens United/Let America Vote, which strongly supports both bills. Senate Democrats are searching for a path forward around the filibuster, but appear increasingly likely to finish Biden’s first year in office without passing a voting rights bill. “If Congress doesn’t get this done by the end of the year, it’s hard to see why the political will will be there later. What will have changed in January in February?” said Ezra Levin, a co-executive director of Indivisible, a grassroots groups that supports the bills. Distress is surging as Republicans in several states, including Texas, North Carolina, Georgia and Ohio, have passed distorted electoral maps that will lock in Republican advantages in Congress for the next decade. Many of the new districts blunt the voting power of rapid population growth among Hispanic, Asian and Black voters, who tend to back Democrats, by grouping them into non-competitive districts. The voting rights bills stalled in Congress contain provisions that would limit, and in some cases halt, that kind of severe distortion, called gerrymandering. The bills would also stop many of the new restrictions states have passed this year and guard against similar restrictions in the future. Even if Democrats somehow find a way to pass a voting rights bill, they would face an uphill battle in trying to block already-enacted maps – as primary elections for those congressional seats up for grabs in next year’s midterms. The candidate filing period has already opened in Texas and is set to begin soon in North Carolina, noted Michael Li, a redistricting expert at the Brennan Center for Justice, making courts more reluctant to step in. Congress has made things “messier”, Li said, because it is harder to challenge maps after they go into effect and the electoral calendar is under way. “If the goal is to fix maps for 2022 … it’s becoming dangerously late in the game,” he said. Several provisions in the Freedom to Vote Act, one of the voting rights bills in limbo on Capitol Hill, also would require some states to make significant changes to the way elections are run. It requires states to offer same-day registration (not currently offered in 30 states), online voter registration (not offered in eight states). Election officials need time to implement those changes, and it will be harder on the eve of elections. If the legislation were enacted, states could probably pivot to implement changes and the more time they have , the smoother that will be, said Tammy Patrick, a senior adviser at the Democracy Fund, who specializes in election administration. “I think that it’s doable. But if we want to ensure that it’s done correctly and well, it’s going to take some time and definitely some resources. So the sands in the hourglass are slipping away,” she said. As the window to pass legislation closes, some voting rights activists say the White House is too passive. After Biden made his strongest signal to date of altering the filibuster, activists had high hopes for getting details on strategy during a 15 November meeting with Kamala Harris, whom Biden asked to lead the White House’s voting rights effort. Instead, Harris gave six minutes of remarks and then left staff to answer questions. Some attendees were upset and one, Cliff Albright, a co-founder of Black Voters Matter, told the Guardian of the meeting: “Nothing substantive came out of it, it was very frustrating.” Like Butler, Albright said he was concerned about the message to Black voters who turned out and helped elect Biden and Harris. “You’ve got people in the White House and friends of the White House that believe ‘if we get it done, people don’t care how long it took.’ I think that they’re dangerously mistaken,” he said. “People remember that you prioritized everything else above our interests.”This time, at least, there were grounds for debate. Der Klassiker has become the showpiece that retains attention but equally fuels the barbs of the critics, a symptom of Bayern Munich’s indefatigable dominance to pessimists and Bundesliga detractors. This time, the fixture’s usual chaotic energy synced with genuine jeopardy. Even if the current run was extended to Borussia Dortmund beating Bayern just once in their last 10 Bundesliga meetings (with six straight wins for the champions), Saturday’s latest edition oscillated wildly. Maybe slightly too much so for BVB tastes – do they occasionally, secretly yearn for a professionally seen-out 1-0 win like November 2016’s vintage, scraped and scrapped for with an early Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang goal and 33% possession? – and certainly too much so for Bayern’s. Paradoxically when one acknowledges another almost-but-not-quite moment, maybe Dortmund will even take almost as much satisfaction from the game as the victors after prolonged analysis and once the dust has settled. It will take time for that dust to settle, though. In time BVB can retain a glow of pride that it was close enough to make it worth getting mad at the officiating, but that’s what they did, and the anger has still not yet subsided. It was led by Marco Rose, whose frustration was such that he ended up being sent off for a second booking after Robert Lewandowski’s winner from the penalty spot, despite the apparent inevitability of it – the Polish phenomenon’s second goal of the game was his 26th in 25 games against his old club since leaving in 2014, and he was always destined to take any suppressed ire from the Ballon d’Or farrago out on them. Whereas the nature of Mats Hummels’ handball which led to Lewandowski’s opportunity for the winner was worthy of referee Felix Zwayer’s examination – and it was hard to argue too vehemently with the call – it was the neglect to do likewise with an apparent earlier hand by Alphonso Davies and especially for a Lucas Hernández push on Marco Reus that brought the home side to boiling point. “Overall, it was a very good game between two very strong teams,” sporting director Michael Zorc told Kicker on Sunday. “Unfortunately, the referee was not of the same level.” His midfielder Jude Bellingham, speaking directly after the game, put forth his complaints in rather more explicit terms, speaking to Norwegian channel Viaplay’s Jan Aage Fjortoft. “You give a referee that’s match-fixed before the biggest game in Germany – what do you expect?” asked the young Englishman. Zwayer was banned for six months after being embroiled in a match-fixing scandal in 2005. Though Zorc stood firm in defence of Bellingham (“you can argue whether he should say that, but maybe you have to have some understanding for an 18-year-old in a highly emotional situation”), the DFB seem unlikely to be lenient. The governing body has asked Bellingham for an explanation and, according to Bild, Marco Haase, a referee observer for the DFB, is already filing a libel complaint on their behalf, and a ban and fine could follow. Zwayer has always denied being in on Robert Hoyzer’s fix of Wuppertal’s game with Werder Bremen B in 2004, though a DFB investigation found the junior Zwayer to have accepted a €300 payment from Hoyzer – and the DFB’s subsequent ban of Zwayer was not public knowledge until a report by Die Zeit 10 years later (Bellingham’s awareness of the story seems to have come from recently retired referee Manuel Gräfe’s criticism of the authorities’ decision to allow Zwayer to continue his officiating career and, according to Bild, Gräfe is equally the subject of Haase’s libel action). Presumably all this being dragged up again is the last thing they want. Given that they can’t allow an environment in which players openly question the honesty of match officials, it is a more than tricky disciplinary line to tread. In the game, Bellingham had again underlined his value to and leadership of Dortmund, creating goals at the beginning of each half; Julian Brandt’s marvellously-taken opener, and Erling Haaland’s precise finish to bring the scores level at the beginning of the second half. There were chances and there were moments, such as Bellingham’s late header over, the opportunities in stoppage time for Donyell Malen and crucially, Raphaël Guerreiro’s botched clearance that paved the way for Kingsley Coman to give Bayern the lead when we looked to be heading into half-time all square. They were all reminders of Dortmund’s potential and their limits. Rose’s team are built to attack, but not to defend, frequently leaving themselves threadbare and ponderous in central areas. Hummels did not have a good day, even outside the penalty, and he appears to be having less and less of them. It is increasingly harder to draw focus from the failings of BVB’s experienced players. Even without Joshua Kimmich, Bayern were (and are) set fair to exploit them via Leon Goretzka and Thomas Müller, in brilliant and contrasting ways. This is before we even get to Lewandowski, who deserved to savour a big moment after the dignity he showed throughout the Paris dog and pony show earlier in the week. Yet with a global audience yearning for a title race, most of it was viewed through a prism of what could have been for Dortmund. What if Guerreiro had more minutes in his legs of late, and what if the management team had felt comfortable leaving the recently-returned Haaland on for the final stages (with the delay after Brandt’s head injury, the last few minutes that the Norwegian missed turned into 18 minutes)? These felt more like reasons than excuses, and BVB’s season is by no means a write-off. Despite their deeply disappointing Champions League exit, they have the Europa League to legitimately pursue and the DFB Pokal to defend. That, for now, until they can gradually evolve, is what they appear limited to. Talking points • A plus for Dortmund is the failings of their real rivals – and RB Leipzig parted ways with Jesse Marsch after what CEO Oliver Mintzlaff described as a “catastrophic performance” in Friday’s defeat at Union, though the isolating coach was physically absent. The club’s statement said the decision was “the result of an in-depth analysis and intensive discussions” after the game, and there is no argument that domestic and continental performances have fallen way short of the mark. Ultimately Marsch has carried the can for expectations – fuelled by signings including André Silva, who he has struggled to integrate – outstripping the reality of losing their central defence (Dayot Upamecano and Ibrahima Konaté), not to mention a coach adapting to the sharp end of the Bundesliga. Assistant Achim Beierlorzer will fill in on an interim basis. • After a summer in which seven of the top eight changed coach it feels like we could be on the brink of another (mid-season) merry-go-round, with Leipzig and Wolfsburg having already ditched their new men and Adi Hütter’s Borussia Mönchengladbach humiliated 6-0 at home by Freiburg in Sunday’s late game. “It is absurd that I have to talk about it,” said Max Eberl of Hütter’s position, but the result and performance – they trailed 3-0 after 12 minutes – were alarming, hot on the heels of a derby hammering at Köln. • Speaking of hammerings, at least Leverkusen are looking good. Patrik Schick scored four as Die Werkself dismantled Greuther Fürth 7-1 – the bottom side still have just a single point.A couple whose daughter died before birth after failings by maternity staff have received a £2.8m payout from the NHS in what is believed to be the largest settlement for a stillbirth clinical negligence case. Sarah Hawkins was in labour for six days before Harriet was stillborn, almost nine hours after dying, at Nottingham City hospital in April 2016. Sarah and her husband, Jack Hawkins, who both worked for the NHS trust at the time, were initially told by hospital staff that Harriet had died of an infection, but successfully pushed for an independent investigation. An external review of the case, published in 2018, found 13 failures on the part of maternity staff, including a delay in appropriate foetal monitoring and omission of antenatal advice, and concluded the death was “almost certainly preventable”. “The fight for justice has worsened our PTSD and depression, so we’re unable to return to our careers. This settlement is basically payment for our career loss and for the psychiatric injury. We wouldn’t have been here if they’d listened,” said Sarah, who previously worked as a senior physiotherapist. “All we wanted was for them to listen and to improve the maternity care, but they didn’t, so we had to keep fighting.” Jack, who was a hospital consultant at Queen’s Medical Centre (QMC) in Nottingham, had his contract terminated at the end of 2018. “It plunged us into financial insecurity, in the midst of this trauma, and we had to borrow a lot of money,” he said. Janet Baker, from Switalskis Solicitors, who represented the couple, said the award was the highest for a stillbirth case and that along with legal fees was likely to cost the NHS more than £3.5m. “[Sarah and Jack] don’t see this as a victory,” she said. “No amount of money could ever compensate for the loss of Harriet or for the way they were treated afterwards.” An investigation by Channel 4 News and the Independent earlier this year found 46 babies suffered brain damage and 19 were stillborn at hospitals in Nottingham between 2010 and 2020, while the BBC found there had been 34 maternity investigations after adverse incidents at Nottingham University hospitals trust (NUH) since 2018. In 2020, the Care Quality Commission found that the maternity units at QMC and Nottingham City hospital were “inadequate” and highlighted serious concerns including staffing, poor leadership and a culture that did not learn lessons. Last year an inquest found a baby girl who died 23 minutes after being born may have survived if “multiple missed opportunities” were spotted by staff at QMC, in a “a clear and obvious case of neglect”. Sarah and Jack Hawkins said that while they were relieved that an independent review of their case had helped them get the answers they needed, there were many other families still fighting for justice. “This is just the start, because every month we have other parents contact us via social media saying: ‘This has happened to me, can you help?’ Because there’s no support for those parents,” said Sarah. “We’d like other families to come forward, so we can ensure change and there’s got to be a public inquiry as well.” A spokesperson at NUH said: “We would like to reiterate our sincere apologies to Mr and Mrs Hawkins for failures in the care around the delivery of baby Harriet. “Our maternity improvement programme has introduced a number of improvements, including better training and monitoring with renewed focus on the recruitment and retention of midwives and maternity teams to ensure that we offer the best services possible to every family in our care.”Boris Johnson is planning to let ministers throw out legal rulings they disagree with, according to a report that has increased fears that the government is determined to weaken judicial scrutiny after a series of defeats in court. An ally of the prime minister told the Times that the judicial review and courts bill going through parliament “doesn’t go far enough” for the prime minister, who is considering an option, drawn up by the lord chancellor, Dominic Raab, and the attorney general, Suella Braverman, which would enable it to strike out findings from judicial reviews with which the government does not agree. A judicial review is a court proceeding where a judge examines the lawfulness of an action or a decision of a public body. It looks at the way a decision has been reached, rather than the rights and wrongs of that decision, but some Conservatives have accused judges of overreach. On Monday, No 10 denied it was planning any significant changes beyond what had been already proposed. “The prime minister is not looking to take this approach. You can see which actions we are taking which we believe strike the right balance, maintaining the important independence of the judiciary in these sorts of issues.” The government’s complaints date back to two Brexit-related government defeats in the supreme court on whether ministers or parliament had the right to trigger Brexit and the prorogation of parliament. The Conservative election manifesto subsequently pledged to end “abuse” of judicial review. However, the judicial review bill, while placing some new restrictions on use of the process, including in immigration cases, did not go as far as some feared. Many saw this as a result of the then justice secretary, Robert Buckland, resisting further curbs on judicial powers. Buckland was sacked and replaced by Raab in September’s cabinet reshuffle. The Times, citing sources close to Raab, reports that Johnson is unhappy with the bill, but as the proposed changes come too late for inclusion in it, they will be included in legislation next year. Critics warned that such a move would prevent the government being rightfully held to account when it acted unlawfully. Stephanie Boyce, the president of the Law Society of England and Wales, said: “If the government wants to avoid losing court cases, it should ensure decisions are made within the law of the land. “This sounds like the government wants to retrofit the law to its bad decisions. Something so vital to the character of our nation and our standing in the world should not be debated via lobby briefing and anonymous ‘Whitehall sources’.” Joanna Cherry QC, a senior lawyer and SNP MP, tweeted: “So now we know why Robert Buckland got the push for Dominic Raab. ⁦Clearly [Buckland’s] approach to judicial review and human rights ‘reform’ was too vanilla. These proposals are an affront to democracy and the rule of law.” Adam Wagner, a leading human rights lawyer, tweeted: “The fact that a judgment has political ramifications doesn’t mean judges engage in politics. Inevitably, if the govt messes up and acts outside the law, a judgment concluding that will have political impact. That doesn’t justify messing with separation of powers.” The government has also faced a number of challenges over its handling of the coronavirus pandemic. In February, a high court judge ruled that the then health secretary, Matt Hancock, acted unlawfully by failing to publish multibillion-pound Covid-19 government contracts within the 30-day period required by law. Last month, in a speech to the Public Law Project conference, Braverman claimed there had been a “huge increase in political litigation” and said judges should not be asked “to answer inherently political questions”. At present, the only option if the government is dissatisfied with a judicial decision is to legislate accordingly, but the suggestion is that it is determined to give itself greater powers. Speaking on Times Radio on Sunday, Raab also outlined plans to reform the Human Rights Act to “correct” the balance between freedom of speech and privacy. In the wake of the Mail on Sunday’s failed appeal over its publication of a letter written by Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, to her estranged father, Raab said he wanted to rectify “the drift towards continental-style privacy laws, innovated in the courtroom, not by elected lawmakers in the House of Commons”. The prime minister’s spokesperson said having an annual vote to strike out judicial review was “not an accurate characterisation of the action we are taking”.Netflix’s Christmas universe is an inescapable one, and two of its most successful franchises are The Princess Switch – which recently saw the release of the series’ third film – and A Christmas Prince. Both these franchises take place in a particularly interesting non-place: their American heroines travel to a made-up country which is a perfect synthesis of a certain Europe as seen through certain eyes. This territory – whether it’s named Belgravia, Montanero or Aldovia – does not exist on the map, and yet gets built again and again. It is a curious mishmash of Romania, Switzerland, Italy and everything in between, topped off with a healthy dose of bad British accent. What are the characteristics of this strange enclave? Does it have national ambitions, and if so, of what nature? Can we understand its people? In investigating this potpourri Europeland it’s best to shift away from Netflix and turn to another blockbuster franchise, The Princess Diaries. Based on a YA book series, the two Princess Diaries movies have introduced us to Genovia and its capital Pyrus. Anne Hathaway plays American commoner Mia Thermopolis, who, in Europelandish dialect, becomes princess Amelia Mignonette Thermopolis Renaldi. The name alone distils a funky mixture of France, Greece and Monaco. “Whatever, it’s Europe!” – we can almost hear the Hollywood executive growling in the back. From the get go, Genovia presents itself as esoteric. “You’ve got pears in your flowers,” remarks young Hathaway when she first enters the Genovian consulate in her home town. “Genovian pears, we’re famous for them,” replies the Genovian attache. Later in the film, more general-Europe characteristics pop up: Genovians, it appears, are famous for their cheese, and for their excellent taste in art. When Mia learns the traditional Genovian dance, her instructor explicitly explains that the dance is “between a waltz and a tango”. Hathaway replies: “So, it’s a wango?” Julie Andrews does a desperate facepalm, in her role as the Genovian queen grandmother. But what the hell, Mia is right! It is indeed called a “wango”. When a journalist waiting for the would-be-princess asks his peers if anyone knows where Genovia actually is, he is hushed with a quick “it’s a country between France and Spain, it was a question on Jeopardy”. This between-ism is a skill that the continent offers Hollywood, as it rolls its eyes and admits: OK, you won’t be interested in us as separate entities, even if we are the ones who invented the concept of a separate entity – ie nation – in the first place, but as a general ‘foreign’ buffet, we might still be able to temporarily hold your attention – and production crews. Of course, Europe is not the only hybridised foreign buffet on offer to the US market; the same is true for Russia, the Middle East and elsewhere. But Europelandia is sufficiently familiar or attractive to the American eye to be treated as mainstream enough for Christmas. These Netflix and Disney franchises, though, will find it hard to compete with one of the grooviest whatever-it’s-Europe movies ever made, The Beautician and the Beast (1997), starring none other than Fran Drescher. Again, the name of the made up country tells us much of what we need to know. This time, we’re travelling to Slovetzia. Decidedly eastern European – thus less mainstream and less desirable – Slovetzia doesn’t have the sunbaked beaches of The Princess Diaries, and not a drop of the magical snow that lavishly decorates all three of the Princess Switch movies. Also, unlike the others, The Beautician and the Beast goes as far as showing us an “actual” map. The Slovetzian borders are squeezed between those of Hungary, Romania and Ukraine. Drescher plays a flashy New York beautician, accidentally hired as a science teacher to the children of Slovetzia’s ruler, tasked with “exposing them to western thought”. Will any of the kids in the elite families of Genovia or Belgravia ever need such lessons? It’s highly unlikely. Even in non-places, as much as real ones, hierarchy is as an essential ingredient of power as gravity itself.The vice-chair of Yorkshire Building Society is facing a call to resign over her role pushing through the sale of the fellow member-owned firm LV= to a US private equity buyer, amid concerns that it could kickstart a wave of demutualisation. Gareth Thomas, chair of the all-party parliamentary group for mutuals, said there were serious questions over Alison Hutchinson’s position on the board of the building society while pursuing the sale of another big customer-owned firm. As well as her role as vice-chair of Yorkshire, Hutchinson is a non-executive director of LV=, which has backed the sale of the 178-year-old firm owned by its members to Bain Capital for £530m. The 1.1 million members of the insurer, formerly known as Liverpool Victoria, will vote on Friday on whether to back the deal. Thomas said it was unacceptable for Hutchinson to sit on the board of one mutual while telling members of another that customer-owned status was not in their best interests. “She’s got a private equity background, she’s backed strongly the demutualisation of LV, and Yorkshire customers would have reason to worry if she stays on their board and becomes chair. So I think she should quit, step down and let somebody who is genuinely committed to the mutual sector step up instead,” he said. Yorkshire is one of Britain’s biggest financial mutuals with nearly 3 million customers and assets of almost £50bn, including ownership of Norwich &amp; Peterborough and Chelsea building societies. The firm proudly promotes its mutual status, arguing that unlike major banks it does not have shareholders to satisfy and is run for the benefit of its members. Hutchinson joined the board in 2015 and became vice-chair and senior independent director in October 2020. She is chief executive of Pennies, a charity which provides technology for rounding-up retail sales for donating to good causes. She was previously chief executive of the specialist mortgage provider Kensington Group and is an independent director of the private equity firm Foresight Group. A spokesperson for Yorkshire said it valued Hutchinson’s role on the board for her commercial insights. “The proposals for LV do not impact our business – these are changes that are being voted on later this week. When it comes to our own status as a building society we are absolutely clear that we are not going to demutualise under any circumstance. This is simply not on our agenda as a business.” Thomas said he was concerned that the sale of LV= could trigger a wave of demutualisation similar to that seen in the 1990s, when building societies scrapped deeper links with their customers in pursuit of growth. This culminated in the 2008 financial crisis, when debt-laded ex-mutuals such as HBOS and Northern Rock collapsed or were rescued with multi-billion pound taxpayer bailouts. “The crisis showed [demutualisation] wasn’t in customers’ long-term interests,” he said. “It helped to make banks too big and more vulnerable. One hopes this isn’t another round of demutualisation as customers and the British economy would lose out again.” The Labour and Co-operative MP for Harrow West said the board of LV= had been “far from transparent” about their plans, warning that its sale would make the market for pensions and insurance much less diverse. “LV= are one of the biggest players in the market and [the sale to Bain Capital] will be an open invitation to private equity companies to target other mutuals,” he said. An LV= spokesperson provided the Guardian with an extract from a letter sent to the MP in July: “The decision to recommend the transaction with Bain Capital was the unanimous conclusion of the board and was driven by our primary focus which has always been to do what is in the best interests of all members. It followed a comprehensive and rigorous strategic review, supported by financial, legal and actuarial advisers. The process and criteria used were shared with the regulators.”After months of sadness and uncertainty, there is pure enchantment to be found in the year’s best children’s books. For picture-book lovers, Scissorella: The Paper Princess by Clare Helen Welsh, illustrated by Laura Barrett (Andersen), is an extra-special story full of delicate filigree art. Mill worker Lotte, scorned by her siblings, cuts elegant puppets out of paper, trusting hard work over happy endings – until she’s invited to a ball, and meets a prince who loves puppets too. In the luminous fairytale Frindleswylde by Natalia O’Hara, illustrated by Lauren O’Hara (Walker), a capricious winter spirit steals the light from Grandma’s lamp, and Cora must go to his icy kingdom to retrieve it – but will Frindleswylde freeze her heart first? Filled with pastel sweetness and frosty aquamarine light, this has a flavour of Hans Christian Andersen. There is rousing inspiration for all ages in Change Sings: A Children’s Anthem by Amanda Gorman, illustrated by Loren Long (Puffin), as a girl urges her community to action via small kindnesses and courageous words (“I can hear change humming / In its loudest, proudest song …”). Lyrical text from the presidential inaugural poet marries thrillingly with Long’s rich paintings. For five-plus, Once Upon a Tune: Stories from the Orchestra by James Mayhew (Otter-Barry) contains six absorbing tales, each the source of wonderful music, all brought to life by Mayhew’s compelling storytelling and exquisitely textured pictures. This gorgeous introduction to works such as Peer Gynt and Scheherazade explores musical context, and provides links to recommended recordings. Fact fans of seven-plus will adore Listified!: Britannica’s 300 Lists That Will Blow Your Mind by Andrew Pettie, illustrated by Andrés Lozano (Britannica), a treasury featuring the fastest dinosaurs, the cleverest dog breeds and the sneakiest spy gadgets (including a microphone disguised as an olive). Funny and thought-provoking, with pages full of enticingly blocky illustrations. In Every Leaf a Hallelujah by Ben Okri, illustrated by Diana Ejaita (Head of Zeus) and also for seven-plus readers, Mangoshi’s mother is ill, but there’s a flower in the forest that can save her – if Mangoshi can only find it … This meditative environmental fairytale conveys a sense of humanity’s deep reliance on the natural world. For eight-plus readers, Utterly Dark and the Face of the Deep by Philip Reeve (David Fickling) is a superbly weird tale of wonder, peril, tragedy and the thin places between worlds. Washed up on shore as a baby, Utterly Dark is adopted by the Watcher of Wildsea, who keeps a lookout for the strange, threatening forces of the sea. But when Utterly’s guardian is drowned, who will keep watch – and keep the island safe? There are more seaborne thrills for eight-to-12 years in The False Rose by Jakob Wegelius (translated by Peter Graves, Pushkin), as the gorilla hero of The Murderer’s Ape returns in a sequel as intricately illustrated and adventurous as her first appearance. Finding a rose-shaped necklace hidden aboard their beloved steamer, Sally Jones and The Chief are swept off on a voyage from Lisbon to Glasgow and even further afield, falling foul of a terrifying gang and a smuggler determined to own the mysterious pendant. Meanwhile, the acclaimed author of the Seeing Stone trilogy returns to the bloody, fertile ground of Arthurian legend in Arthur: The Always King by Kevin Crossley-Holland, illustrated by Chris Riddell (Walker). This spectacular collection of stories for 10-plus moves enthrallingly from Arthur’s boyhood to the trials of his kingship, betrayal and death; Riddell’s intoxicating illustrations, full of golden light, glinting mail and memorable gore, elevate it to the sublime. For 14-plus, Medusa by Jessie Burton, illustrated by Olivia Lomenech Gill (Bloomsbury), is utterly transporting. Violated and cursed, Medusa lives on a remote island with only her sisters, her dog and the snakes of her hair for company. When a handsome boy arrives on the shore, Medusa refuses to show her face – but as they exchange stories from either side of a great rock, friendship slowly flowers between them. How will Perseus react, though, to Medusa’s entire truth? This dynamic feminist retelling is illustrated with stunning, polychromatic power. Twenty years after Noughts and Crosses’s first publication, Malorie Blackman brings her unforgettable YA series to a tragic, triumphant close in Endgame (Penguin). In a world where black Crosses control most wealth and power, Britain’s first Nought prime minister is about to go on trial for the murder of gang lord Dan Jeavons. Sephy Hadley was also present when Jeavons was killed; now she’s under suspicion too, and her children are threatened. How will the weave of plotting and corruption unravel – and who will emerge unscathed? Finally, When Shadows Fall by Sita Brahmachari, illustrated by Natalie Sirett (Stripes), follows Kai, Orla and Zak, who love the wild green patch in the centre of the concrete sprawl they live in: it’s their den, their garden, their refuge. But when Kai suffers a great loss, he no longer wants his friends’ company – or to safeguard their secret place. A moving, hard-hitting journey for teens through grief and acceptance, interwoven with powerful illustration and viscerally vivid verse. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has warned that mumps continues to circulate in the US and that pediatricians should remain vigilant, even though spread remains low. Mumps was nearly eliminated under routine childhood vaccinations, as part of the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine, or MMR. Most doctors have never seen a mumps case, researchers noted. But epidemiologists said doctors should continue to test for mumps, because recent outbreaks have occurred in vaccinated adolescents and some children. “The key takeaway from our report is it is important for all clinicians to suspect mumps in all patients with parotitis or other mumps complications, regardless of a patient’s age, vaccination status or lack of travel outside the US,” said Mariel Marlow, a CDC epidemiologist and head of the agency’s mumps program, in a video for the journal Pediatrics. The prevalence of mumps declined more than 99% since 1967, from more than 150,000 cases per year to about 200 in 2003, after a vaccine for the disease was introduced. In 1977, it became a routine part of childhood immunizations. The median annual number of recent mumps cases is still less than 1% of the figure for 1967, before a vaccine was introduced. However, researchers said there have been two distinct peaks, in 2006 and 2016. Between 85% and 93% of infected children in the outbreaks were fully vaccinated against the disease. That suggests the disease, unlike measles and rubella, is endemic in the US. Some recent research has theorized that vaccine-conferred immunity to mumps may wane by early adulthood. Mumps spreads in ways similar to coronavirus, through respiratory droplets. In 2020 there were just 142 US cases of mumps, compared with a median of 1,328. However, the disease was still widespread geographically, and delays in routine childhood immunization caused by the pandemic could create the conditions for larger mumps outbreaks in the future, researchers said. Mumps is typically mild, and is best known for the swelling it causes in the parotid gland, near the jaw. However, it can result in serious complications such as brain swelling or hearing loss, complications which occur in less than 1% of cases in the post-vaccine era.More than 850 calls, many alleging sexual abuse and harassment in schools, have been made to a national helpline set up after the Everyone’s Invited website revealed widespread sexism, misogyny and abuse in education. A total of 150 were so serious that they have been referred to police and other agencies for further investigation, according to the NSPCC children’s charity, which runs the helpline. The incidents reported include sexual name-calling, unwanted sexual touching, sexual assault and rape by other pupils, as well as online abuse such as sharing nude images without consent. The helpline was launched in April and was due to run until the end of December, but the time limit has been extended in response to continuing demand. It will continue to operate “for the foreseeable future”, according to the NSPCC. Kam Thandi, the head of the NSPCC helpline, said: “This helpline has been a lifeline for hundreds of people, many of whom had previously felt unable to reach out for help and support.” According to the NSPCC, the helpline has handled a total of 861 contacts and, where information about the caller is known, 142 were from an adult or child victim, of whom 85 were female, 50 male, two transgender and five unknown. A further 81 contacts were from a parent concerned about their child. The Report Abuse in Education helpline, funded by the Department for Education, was launched after thousands of anonymous testimonies of sexual abuse and harassment, mostly perpetrated by other young people, were posted on the Everyone’s Invited site. There are now more than 50,000 testimonies on the website. Helpline staff have dealt with calls from victims of recent and historical abuse, helping them to report allegations to the authorities, signposting them to recovery services and supporting concerned parents. The NSPCC said many victims who reported non-recent abuse said they felt they could not report it at the time, or they had tried and were not listened to. Concerned parents have also complained about the way some schools have handled safeguarding incidents, discouraging victims from taking action against a perpetrator out of fear it would ruin their education and life prospects. Sandra Robinson, the NSPCC’s helpline manager, urged people to get in touch if they had concerns about the welfare of a young person in school or had experienced abuse themselves in the past. “It has become clear through contacts to our dedicated helpline that many young people have endured abuse in schools over the decades and it is sadly a normalised part of everyday school life which has even evolved to include online abuse,” said Robinson. The school standards minister, Baroness Barran, said the government had increased core funding to the NSPCC to £2.6m and had continued to remind schools of the importance of the relationships, sex and health education curriculum. “The NSPCC’S Reporting Abuse in Education helpline has provided a vital service for children and adults affected by sexual abuse. That’s why I’m pleased to hear that the NSPCC has chosen to extend this service into the new year so more people can access that support.” Young people and adults can contact Report Abuse in Education on 0800 136 663 or email help@nspcc.org.uk The NSPCC also offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331.French prosecutors have opened an investigation into violence that erupted at the first major campaign rally held by the far-right French presidential candidate Éric Zemmour. Shortly after Zemmour began speaking on Sunday evening, some of his supporters attacked a group of protesters from the campaign group SOS-Racism who had entered the rear of the venue wearing T-shirts reading “No to Racism”. The prosecutors’ office said police detained about 60 people after the brawl at a meeting hall in Villepinte, in a north-eastern suburb of Paris. One man was filmed repeatedly punching a female protester, and another woman was led out with blood running down her face. Five protesters were injured in total. “We didn’t imagine it would get this out of hand,” Dominique Sopo, the president of SOS Racisme, told France Info radio on Monday “The fact of going to a meeting in the French republic with T-shirts bearing the phrase “No to Racism” is now a provocation? I’d like to remind people that we’re a republic and in a republic, normally, you are able to say “No to Racism” everywhere.” He added: “You either have to be drunk with racism or be certain of your omnipotence to be able to act like that in front of cameras. It’s absolutely astonishing and it shows what this candidate is and what the public he draws is and who the militants who gathered there are.” Sopo said his organisation would also be lodging a police complaint. As well as the violence targeting SOS Racisme campaigners, the prosecutors’ office said it was also investigating a fracas that involved Zemmour himself. Video images showed a man surging out of the crowd with arms outstretched as the candidate walked through throngs at the rally. The man appeared to briefly lock arms around Zemmour’s neck before he was pulled away. Zemmour suffered an injury to his wrist and a doctor signed him off work for nine days. A Zemmour campaign spokesperson, Antoine Diers, told BFM-TV the acts of violence “did not matter” and that the anti-racism protesters had come looking for trouble. He also praised Zemmour’s “bravery”. Two journalists from the investigative online media outlet Mediapart said they also received punches at the rally. Eliot Blondet, a photographer from the AbacaPhoto agency, who was at the rally, tweeted that the press came under a hail of projectiles and that in the melée he had photographic equipment stolen. One Zemmour supporter, he wrote, had looked him in the eye, pushed him and said: “I forgive no more. I kill.” In his speech, Zemmour, who has been described as France’s Donald Trump, railed against “elites”, whom he pitted against “the French people who have been here for a thousand years and wish to remain masters in their own country”. Judges, he said, were “under the orders of militant journalists” who “want to steal democracy … we won’t let them”. References to the media were greeted with boos from the crowd, some of whom aggressively jostled journalists and photographers present. A far-right former television pundit and journalist, Zemmour declared last week he would be standing for the two-round presidential election next April. On Sunday, he announced the name of his party Reconquête (Reconquest), and on Monday his team said he had picked the former army general Bertrand de la Chesnais as his campaign manager. Zemmour is standing on an anti-immigration, anti-Islam programme and has announced he will stop benefits for non-Europeans and foreigners who remain unemployed for more than six months. He has set up his campaign headquarters in the smart 8th arrondissement of Paris. Among his election team is Michel Loussouarn, a former soldier, who is in charge of setting up the new party and organising local groups across the country. Polls show the most likely election scenario next year is a second round run-off vote between the far-right Rassemblement Nationale leader, Marine Le Pen, and Emmanuel Macron, a repeat of 2017, with Zemmour being knocked out in the first round. However, four months from the poll, the outcome remains uncertain. Sunday’s meeting was seen as an occasion for Zemmour to rally his troops after opinion polls showed support for him falling off last month. The social scientist Antoine Bristielle, of the prestigious Jean-Jaurès Foundation, suggested Zemmour’s populist agenda was not high on the list of French people’s priorities, which he said were spending power and the environment. “The real worry is the inability of other political parties to show a more attractive future and to reassure the population,” Bristielle said. “This pessimism is central to building the combat in the extreme right. It’s like Make America Great Again. We can see clear parallels between Zemmour and Trump. And at the moment, this message from the right is all we are hearing.” Zemmour saved his most caustic vitriol for Macron, launching into a brutal and contemptuous tirade against the president, whom he described as a “plastic mannequin”, a “ghost”, an “automaton who wanders a labyrinth of mirrors”, a “mask without a face” and an “adolescent”. “Find me a single French person who can explain what Emmanuel Macron is. There isn’t one, not even him. Nobody knows who he is because he is nobody. Emmanuel Macron doesn’t interest us because he is fundamentally uninteresting,” Zemmour said. Gabriel Attal, the government’s spokesperson, dismissed the attack. “While he’s [Zemmour] giving people the finger in the street, Emmanuel Macron is overseeing Josephine Baker’s entry into the Panthéon,” Attal said.Chanel has denied deleting its TikTok account, after a beauty influencer made fun of the fashion brand’s advent calendar on its site. The calendar – its first, produced to celebrate the 100-year anniversary of the Chanel No 5 fragrance – features 27 numbered boxes with luxury items inside, including lipstick, nail lacquer, hand cream and - of course – perfume. But some of the items were, according to TikTok user Elise Harmon, a beauty influencer, less than what one would expect from the $800 (£604) price tag. In Harmon’s unboxing videos, she exclaims “this is a joke” when she opens one of the boxes to find some Chanel stickers, and “I’m done” when she finds some temporary tattoos. Harmon is similarly underwhelmed when she finds a number of Chanel-branded items (a money clip, a keychain, a badge, a magnet and a plastic snowglobe). “I’m feeling optimistic. Even though we know how this is going to end,” she proclaims, halfway through opening one of the boxes. The initial video has been seen 14.5m times. Subsequent TikTok users then claimed Chanel had deleted its official account in reaction to Harmon’s video. They claimed that all content from Chanel’s TikTok page had been wiped and set to private, with users having to send a request to follow the page. But the brand told the Guardian this was not the case. “It has never been activated, no content has ever been published, it has no subscriber and no subscription. The page therefore appears empty to anyone who visits it,” said an official spokesperson. Chanel said it was aware of the comments regarding the advent calendar: “We are sorry that this calendar may have disappointed some people,” it said. “The exclusive content of the calendar has always been fully detailed on our website chanel.com as well as on the packaging of the product: 27 boxes numbered from 5 to 31, containing full-size perfume and makeup products, miniatures and souvenirs all stamped with Gabrielle Chanel’s lucky number.” On Sunday, Harmon posted a video entitled “When you accidentally cancel Chanel.”Fifa has been urged to intervene in the case of Abdullah Ibhais, a former employee of Qatar’s World Cup committee, who is on a 21-day hunger strike after being detained by police in Doha, otherwise its human rights policy will not be “worth the paper it is written on”. The warning comes from Human Rights Watch and FairSquare, who have written to Fifa for a second time to say they believe Ibhais’s confession was coerced and that he has been singled out because of his support for migrant workers in Qatar. Ibhais, who held the position of deputy communications director for the Supreme Committee before being removed from the role in 2019, was sentenced to five years on fraud charges relating to a contract to produce social media content for the 2022 World Cup. However, Human Rights Watch and Fair Square say Ibhais alleges he was told by public prosecutors “either you sign a confession here or we send you to state security, where they know how to get a confession out of you”. The letter to Fifa also says: “It bears repeating that the only evidence presented in court against Mr Ibhais was this confession.” Nick McGeehan, a director of FairSquare, said Ibhais has retracted his confession and is appealing against his sentence. “Increasingly it appears that Abdullah Ibhais is in jail because of suspicion and paranoia, not any evidence of wrongdoing,” he said. “It is probable he will remain there until Fifa accepts a basic level of responsibility for his wellbeing and demands that he gets the fair trial he deserves.” Human Rights Watch and FairSquare first wrote to Fifa on 4 October, noting that Ibhais believes it was his internal criticism of the Supreme Committee’s handling of a strike by migrant workers in August 2019 that led to his prosecution and conviction. That, though, is disputed by the Supreme Committee for Delivery &amp; Legacy. In a statement last month it said: “Abdullah Ibhais’s claim that he was targeted for taking a position on a labour-related matter is a fabrication and a lie. “The allegations presented by Ibhais have no credibility. The case against Ibhais is rooted in evidence [of alleged manipulation and misuse of state funds], and has absolutely nothing to do with personal opinions or actions on labour-related matters.” A Fifa spokesperson told the Guardian: “The letter from FairSquare was acknowledged and a reply sent on 19 November saying that efforts aimed at ensuring Mr Ibhais receives a fair trial are ongoing, and that Fifa has taken note of their recommendations in that respect. Please also note that Fifa has said any person deserves a trial that is fair and where due process is observed and respected. In the case of Mr Ibhais, we will continue to follow this matter closely.” Human rights groups believe that is not nearly good enough, given the severity of the punishment Ibhais faces and the influence they have on the Qataris with 11 months to go before the 2022 World Cup. “If Fifa refuses to step in and advocate for Ibhais to receive a fair trial not based on a coerced confession, it appears that its human rights policy isn’t worth the paper it’s written on,” said Michael Page, deputy Middle East director at Human Rights Watch.Cities around the world have been inspired by the #MeToo movement to rename their streets after women, correcting an imbalance that had favoured great and not so great men of the past. In Brussels, Madrid and Geneva, such figures as the Belgian singer Annie Cordy, the Spanish civil war hero Dolores Ibárruri and the Jamaican writer Una Marson have belatedly received acknowledgment. But in the Flemish village of Moorsele, there is despair. While the residents have been enthused by five new street names – Marie Curiestraat, Augustina Peutermanstraat, Heilige Theresiastraat, Koningin Fabiolastraat and Maria Rosseelsstraat – a sixth, Marie Cornilliestraat, has prompted howls of protest. Cornillie, a landowner known as the “castle lady of Moorsele” who lived there between 1793 and 1867, may have been wealthy, but the people of the village have a long memory. They say she was no role model but a haughty figure who loved her dog more than the locals and had a tendency to urinate in the street. Her coachman had to clean up. “It’s a real shame”, said Lut Vanoverberghe and Lothair Vanoverbeke, who lead the local history club. Vanoverberghe, who wrote a 170-page book about Cornillie three decades ago, said she was despondent about the lack of care shown by the council in choosing to honour the landowner. “She never meant anything to Moorsele,” she told Het Nieuwsblad. “If she did anything it was because she could spin her own yarn. She threw small change around from her carriage in a big gesture and then you heard the pastor cursing because there were men who stood in the front row to pick up the money and get drunk with it in the local bars. “If she had to take a pee on the way somewhere, she just did it next to the carriage,” she added. “And no, I’m not talking about her dog, I’m talking about Cornillie herself.” So well known was Cornillie’s preference for her dog over her tenants that an enterprising thief got ideas, Vanoverbeke said. “While the inhabitants of Moorselen had to fight for survival as weavers, she offered large sums of money if her dog went missing. It didn’t take long before her dog was kidnapped to collect the reward. Cornillie preferred her dog to her fellow villagers.” Kevin Defieuw, an alderman from the Wevelgem municipality, said the cultural committee’s decision to honour Cornillie had been unanimous. “Cornillie certainly has her merits: she donated the land on which our school was built,” he said. The history club has proposed that the council instead name the new street Sara Nieulantstraat, after the woman who was first to lead the Cistercian Guldenberg Abbey that existed in the 13th and 14th century. The municipality has said the name is too difficult to pronounce.While the British Horseracing Authority’s disciplinary panel considered whether Robbie Dunne had subjected fellow rider Bryony Frost to a lengthy campaign of bullying and harassment last week, the life-changing impact of a few seconds at Kempton Park in October 2016 was the subject of intense scrutiny less than a mile away at the High Court on the Strand. Both cases raise issues which could reverberate through racing, and perhaps also the wider sporting world, for years to come. The BHA panel on the Dunne-Frost case – Dunne has denied all but one of the allegations – will continue to hear evidence on Tuesday. But the High Court case in which former jockey Freddy Tylicki is claiming £6m in damages from Graham Gibbons, as the result of a fall which left him confined to a wheelchair five years ago, closed on Friday, with a verdict expected before Christmas. The current rider Jim Crowley, who also suffered a fall in the same incident when Tylicki, on Nellie Deen, clipped heels with Gibbons’s mount Madame Butterfly on the home turn, was among those to give evidence on Tylicki’s behalf in the case, along with another former champion, Ryan Moore, and the veteran TV pundit and race-reader, Jim McGrath. Crowley told the court that he had smelt alcohol on Gibbons’s breath on the day of the incident, a claim questioned by Gibbons. Moore, brought in as an expert witness, insisted that the rider had been negligent in failing to ensure Nellie Deen had enough room to negotiate the turn. McGrath, meanwhile, told the court that the incident was “easily avoidable”, and that Gibbons should have been found guilty of dangerous riding by the race day stewards. Instead, the officials decided that Tylicki’s fall was “accidental” and took no further action. The two riders directly involved in the case gave very different accounts of the incident to the court. Tylicki said that he uttered a “shout for survival”, yelling “Gibbo!”, as he felt Madame Butterfly squeeze him up against the rail. “I knew what was going to happen next,” he said, “but there was no response”. Gibbons, meanwhile, insisted that his mount had been no more than half-a-horse’s width from the rail going around the turn, denying room for Tylicki to make a move up the inner, and that he had no idea his fellow rider was on his inside until he heard his shout. For the claim to succeed, Tylicki and his legal team must satisfy Judge Karen Walden-Smith that Gibbons neglected his duty of care to fellow riders. The obvious precedent for the judge to consider as she weighs up the evidence is a case from 2001, in which a former jump jockey, Peter Caldwell, sued Adrian Maguire and Mick Fitzgerald over a fall at Hexham in 1994 which left him with career-ending spinal and head injuries. At the time, the case was believed to be the first of its kind. Caldwell’s claim was rejected after the judge decided that the incident “reflected the cut and thrust of serious horse racing … in theory avoidable but in practice, something that is bound to occur from time to time, no matter how careful is the standard of riding.” The judge in the Caldwell case also decided that “the relevant circumstances in many sports … mean that a mere error of judgment or skill will not suffice” to prove negligence, and that a case could require evidence of “reckless disregard” for the claimant’s safety to succeed. The decision was upheld on appeal, apparently setting what Patrick Lawrence QC, for Gibbons, suggested last week is a “high bar” for a rider seeking to show negligence by a fellow jockey. A potentially significant difference between the Caldwell and Tylicki cases, meanwhile, is that while the Hexham stewards found Fitzgerald and Maguire guilty of careless riding, the officials at Kempton decided that Tylicki’s fall was the result of “accidental” interference and took no further action. In terms of the wider implications of the case, and whatever its outcome might be, it seems inevitable that the decision of the stewards at Kempton will be closely scrutinised. They did not hear Tylicki’s account of events before deciding that the incident – in which four horses fell - was an accident, and more generally it remains the case that the last finding of dangerous riding by a jockey in the UK was in 2009. Has the standard of riding improved so much over the last dozen years that dangerous riding is now a thing of the past? Or have racecourse stewards gradually adopted what the trainer John Berry recently suggested is “an unwritten policy that everything is just classified as careless riding, without thinking”? Just two of the many questions for racing to ponder when Judge Walden-Smith hands down her decision later this month.The government may be guilty of a “deliberate cover-up” over the dangers posed by combustible materials before the Grenfell Tower fire and of allowing private companies to exploit building regulations in “one of the greatest scandals of our time”, the public inquiry has heard. Successive administrations were responsible for “collusion” with the construction industry to suppress the results of investigations into earlier cladding fires, including at Lakanal House in south London in 2009 where six people died, said Stephanie Barwise QC, representing the bereaved and survivors at the opening of the final stage of the inquiry into the June 2017 Grenfell disaster. Central government displayed “concealment instead of candour” and regarded fires “as something to be covered up” so building regulations allowing combustible materials to be used would not be scrutinised. She said the disaster was a “predictable yet unintended consequence of a combination of the laudable desire to reduce carbon emissions [by encouraging more insulating materials] coupled with an unbridled passion for deregulation”. Michael Mansfield QC, representing other bereaved and survivors, told the inquiry the evidence would show “there was a deliberate policy by the government … to facilitate a hostile environment in which health and safety is diminished … and is seen as an obstruction to business”. The claims came at the start of five months of hearings that will take evidence from former ministers including Eric Pickles and Gavin Barwell, who were in charge during the David Cameron and Theresa May governments. Mansfield told the inquiry it needed to cross-examine David Cameron in person because of his policy of deregulation. Cameron gave a 2012 speech in which he said he would “kill off the health and safety culture for good”, describing it as “an albatross around the neck of British businesses”. The inquiry has already heard allegations of how builders and designers failed to meet building regulations at Grenfell and allegations of how manufacturers manipulated certification systems to sell combustible materials. Counsel to the inquiry, Richard Millett QC, used his opening remarks to warn that the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, led by Michael Gove, was trying to play “cat and mouse” with its evidence so far. He questioned whether the written admissions by Gove’s department and the Home Office had been “drafted with fingers crossed” and suggested they were trying to “smuggle something past counsel to the inquiry, or counsel to the inquiry might miss a trick”. Gove last month admitted to MPs that his department “will be seen to have, on a couple of occasions, not necessarily appreciated the importance of fire safety and not necessarily done everything in the wake of the Lakanal House tragedy that it should have done”. Barwise said the evidence would show “wilful blindness” in government as ministers pushing for faster housebuilding and less regulation became a “junior partner [with the construction sector] … thereby permitting industry’s exploitation of the regulations”. And she said that since at least 2014, the communities department “was fully on notice of both the widespread use of combustible insulation and the dangers and extensive use of aluminium composite materials”. A key witness is likely to be Brian Martin, a senior government fire expert. Martin, who had been in charge of the fire regulations for 20 years by the time of Grenfell, had become “untouchable”, the inquiry heard. He has since been promoted to head of technical policy, “despite presiding over one of the major scandals of our time”, said Barwise. Mansfield showed correspondence from 2014 in which Martin told a government minister not to meet with the late Sir David Amess, the MP who chaired the all-party fire safety group. It had written to the government 21 times, pressing it to tighten building regulations following Lakanal. In early 2015, Amess wrote again to ministers, complaining of “continuous frustration over dismissive responses to its well-founded and justifiable concerns”. He was “whistling in the wind”, said Mansfield. The inquiry continues.The Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 must be the worst law ever passed by a modern parliament. Its purpose was “to prevent the misuse of controlled drugs” by means of “a complete ban on their possession, supply, manufacture, import and export”. It has plainly failed. Fifty years on, the act is variously credited with a soaring prison population, the devastation of working-class communities and creating hundreds of thousands of hardened addicts. British deaths from drug misuse are at record levels, having nearly doubled in a quarter of a century. Cocaine deaths have risen five-fold in 10 years. Fatalities per million are three times the EU rate. Narcotics are found in the lavatories of parliament, in Her Majesty’s prisons and in virtually every pub and nightclub in Britain. Of the many conclusions that can be drawn from this, the most glaring is that ever fiercer punishment is no deterrent and no solution. Yet no politician, certainly no prime minister, dares open their mouth on the subject without pledging tougher penalties. This week, a Boris Johnson aching for a headline proposes yet another war on drugs in which a modest increase in “treatment and rehabilitation” for those who “repent” is accompanied by a blood-curdling crackdown. He promises to “dismantle” 2,000 county lines drug networks, without explaining whether the 1,500 he says they have already shut down have staunched the flow of drugs into communities. The policing minister, Kit Malthouse, says that drugs lead to “murder, mayhem and degradation”. He omitted to say it was not consumption but his continued outlawing of the drugs market that is the principal cause of such outcomes. Meanwhile, Johnson will expand police testing for drugs, taking away driving licences and passports and imprisoning reoffenders. There is no evidence that such draconian measures ever work. Britain is currently addicted to media-driven retribution, nearing mob rule in certain high-profile cases. The clang of prison gates is seen in Victorian terms as the answer to every social evil. This makes it difficult for those supposedly enforcing the 1971 act at the frontline to seek new remedies and reforms. Police forces such as the West Midlands have been trying – in the face of Home Office opposition – to decriminalise possession, if only to concentrate on more serious crime. But such responses do nothing to mitigate the criminal consequences of drug supply remaining illegal and unregulated. While California’s cannabis sellers are going on sommelier courses and those in the Netherlands are relieving epilepsy and depression, Britain’s are sent to jail. Staggering sums are traded for drugs in Britain, and staggering sums are wasted on failed suppression. The British market, reputedly worth £9.4bn, is effectively fully deregulated. Nothing in Johnson’s proposals indicates any attempt to curb, let alone license and tax, this market. He is the dealers’ fairy godmother. No route from the drugs problem emerges from the growing movement to put various narcotics on a par with alcohol. But with New York joining several other US states in decriminalising cannabis, and Oregon recently decriminalising possession of harder drugs, the time has surely come for research and piloting, not a retreat into yet more tabloid authoritarianism. Drugs produce an irrational reaction in Britain’s political community. Deep-seated prejudices and taboos are evoked, with responses dominated by a manic groping for ever more severe punishments. After 50 years of costly failure, a reasonable politician might advocate at least an open mind. In most democracies that is happening. Not in Britain. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistThis year is on course to be the strongest for home-buying activity since 2006, according to the main trade body for UK banks. UK Finance said while the first few months of the pandemic, during which the property market shut down for a time, led to predictions that sales would slump, the reality was very different, with “Covid-era activity set to eclipse everything since the credit crunch”. The figures come hard on the heels of forecasts from the property website Zoopla and other commentators that 2021 would be the UK’s busiest year for the housing market since 2007. While official figures have shown that the number of house sales tumbled in the weeks immediately after the end of the stamp duty holiday in England and Northern Ireland, which finished on 30 September, this followed a record surge in activity during the latter half of 2020 and earlier this year. Alongside the stamp duty holiday, the market was also boosted by a range of factors including government guarantees for mortgages and a desire for a new lifestyle prompted by the pandemic that has led many homebuyers to relocate and prioritise properties with bigger gardens and more room for working from home. The most recent house price surveys from the UK’s biggest mortgage lenders depict a property market that is continuing to defy many experts’ expectations. Nationwide said average UK house prices continued their upwards climb in November and were now 10% higher than a year earlier, while Halifax’s latest price data is due to be issued on Tuesday 7 December. In its latest household finance review, covering July to September, UK Finance said: “Barring a complete reversal of the current picture, purchase transactions in 2021 will reach their highest level seen since the peak in 2006, just before the global financial crisis [of 2007–08].” The figures indicated that “the combined boost to demand from stimulus measures and societal changes has more than offset any dampening effects from Covid-19 and wider adverse economic factors”, it added. However, with a few weeks still to go until the end of the year, and house purchase activity less frenzied than it was earlier on in the year, the final outcome is not guaranteed. Interest rate rises – the first could come this month – could put a brake on the market, as could the new Omicron variant of coronavirus. Looking at other aspects of people’s finances, the trade body said levels of unsecured debt had increased in line with spending, but it added that in the main, customers were continuing to pay off their card bills on time each month. Meanwhile, mortgage arrears ticked down overall but what were described as “heavier arrears” continued to rise.The upcoming Hollywood blockbuster Spider-Man: No Way Home is set to be a box office hit after breaking the UK record for advance ticket sales, which are being snapped up at three times the rate of those for the James Bond movie No Time to Die. Odeon, the biggest operator in the UK and Ireland with more than 120 cinemas, said it had sold many more than 200,000 tickets for the film in the first seven days since release. The rate of ticket sales to see the film, which stars British actor Tom Holland as Peter Parker, has broken the presale record set by 2019’s Avengers: Endgame. Odeon also said that the Spider-Man presales rate in the first seven days was three times that amassed by Daniel Craig’s eagerly anticipated, much delayed and final outing as James Bond. “As we head into the festive period, we are really pleased with the advance booking numbers for Spider-Man: No Way Home,” said Carol Welch, the managing director of Odeon Cinemas UK and Ireland. “It shows guests are loving being back at cinemas and are excited about the magic that our big screen experience brings to movies.” The premiere of the new Bond film, which has made $763m (£576m) in global ticket sales to date, helped to reignite cinemagoing in the UK with the strongest October attendance in a decade. This week, the film, which is the third-highest grossing movie of all time in the UK and Ireland behind Skyfall and Star Wars: The Force Awakens, will crack the £100m mark domestically, cementing its position as the biggest hit of the year. As Bond is a particular favourite of audiences in the UK and Ireland, it performs disproportionately well at the box office, making it a tall order for Spider-Man to eclipse its popularity. Nevertheless, on the global stage the superhero movie is on track to become one of the biggest films since the pandemic hit. AMC, the world’s largest cinema operator and owner of Odeon, said that in the US it had generated the second-busiest ticket sales day ever, after Avengers: Endgame. US analysts estimate that its opening weekend is likely to gross at least $150m at the North American box office, which if it does will make it the first film since pre-pandemic 2019 to do so. To date, the top two highest grossing films of the year are both Chinese – The Battle at Lake Changjin ($896m) and Hi, Mom ($822m) – with the third and fourth spots taken by No Time To Die ($763m) and F9: The Fast Saga ($726m).This time last year, writer-director Prano Bailey-Bond was finishing work on her feature Censor and looking forward to 2021. Her unnerving film about horror – rather than a horror film per se – had been invited to the Sundance film festival. But then Covid restrictions stopped her attending. “Normally,” she says, “you’d get to go to the premiere of your debut feature. I slept through mine because it was on in the middle of the night on the other side of the world.” Since then, however, she has been able to bask in the film’s glory. Released in the UK in August, Censor has earned her serious plaudits, including the Screen FrightFest genre rising star award and being included in Variety magazine’s list of directors to watch. When we spoke last week, Bailey-Bond was a few days away from attending tonight’s Bifas (British independent film awards), where Censor has nominations in nine categories including debut director and debut screenwriter. At a time when horror cinema is very much in the limelight, Censor comes across as a vividly imaginative inquiry into the genre that Bailey-Bond loves – both lurid and lucid. Set in the 1980s, during the widespread panic over “video nasties”, it stars an extraordinary Niamh Algar as Enid, who works for a thinly disguised version of the UK classification board, the BBFC. Employed to trim horror content in the name of the public good, she finds herself responding drastically to her own deep-rooted trauma. “I wanted to explore a character who was having a conversation with their shadow self,” says Bailey-Bond, “and that – in relation to the moral panic around VHS horror – was what was happening to society in this period.” How did people at the BBFC respond to Censor when they saw it? “I actually went out for lunch with them – they said it was the most meta experience they’d ever had, examining a film about examining a film. They felt it was truthful to them, which was lovely for me to hear.” Censor received a 15 certificate; wouldn’t Bailey-Bond have preferred an 18, purely as a badge of honour? “We have clips from real video nasties in the title sequence, but they said the context meant that it didn’t warrant an 18. They said ‘the film doesn’t dwell in gore’. So if I want an 18 in future,” she laughs, “I have to dwell in gore.” The film also made its way on to the front cover of the BFI’s film magazine, Sight &amp; Sound, the centrepiece of a discussion of the video nasty era – to the delight of genre connoisseurs. “People were saying, ‘I never thought I’d see the day – Sight &amp; Sound celebrating this period that has been named as a trashy, terrible time for film.’” Censor has also connected with non-initiates. “People have somehow found their way to it thinking they don’t like horror – then realise it’s a character study and maybe start to see that horror can be something different. People think that horror is just exploding heads and decapitations – of which we have a few in the film.” When I ask why horror is undergoing a boom, Bailey-Bond eschews the sociological explanation and says that it’s simply the industry responding to the success of certain risk-taking titles: The Babadook, Get Out, Raw. As for her own horror tastes, “For me it’s all about character and story, like it is with any film. Or it could be just pure thrill.” This year, she found that thrill in Rob Savage’s computer screen chiller Dashcam – “an absolutely wild rollercoaster ride – but then you have a film like [Rose Glass’s] Saint Maud, which is a slower burn but you’re absolutely drawn in by the character. At one point, all the hairs on my arms stood on end.” Bailey-Bond was born in 1982. Her parents had worked in drama and art before becoming Hindu sannyasin (hence her name, from prem prano, meaning lover of life) and moving to rural Wales. “It was an amazing place to grow up – when I was little, we had no running water, no electricity. You get to spend a lot of time with your own imagination, and that was really good for me. I would draw a lot of pictures, go for walks in the woods and imagine magical things that could happen – and when I was older and we had electricity I’d watch a lot of my parents’ video collection.” She is currently very busy, writing new scripts, discussing TV projects and working with Censor co-writer Anthony Fletcher on her forthcoming feature – an adaptation of Things We Lost in the Fire, a story by the Argentinian writer Mariana Enríquez about a group of women and their extreme response to domestic violence. Bailey-Bond’s future is bright – one suspects, bright red. Long may she dwell in gore.All coral reefs in the western Indian Ocean are at high risk of collapse in the next 50 years due to global heating and overfishing, according to a new assessment. From Seychelles to the Delagoa region off the coast of Mozambique and South Africa, the reef systems are at risk of becoming functionally extinct by the 2070s, with a huge loss of biodiversity, and threatening the livelihoods and food sources for hundreds of thousands of people. The study, published today in the journal Nature Sustainability, examined coral reefs in 10 countries around the western Indian ocean. It analysed the health of 11 sub-regions using the International Union for the Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN) red list of ecosystems framework, akin to the method used to examine a plant or animal’s risk of extinction. The assessment found reefs in island nations in particular were highly threatened due to rising water temperatures driven by global heating, which is making bleaching events – when corals expel algae living in their tissue, causing them to turn completely white – more common. Reefs in eastern and southern Madagascar, the Comoros and Mascarene Islands were all classified as critically endangered. Reefs in north Seychelles and along the entire east African coast were classified as vulnerable to collapse due to overfishing – especially of top predators – which is altering their ecology and promoting a build-up of different algae that can smother coral. David Obura, chair of the IUCN corals group, who led the study, said that while the global decline of coral reefs has been established for some time, region-specific assessments of specific regions provided greater clarity about the causes and the extent of the damage. “The most urgent threat is from climate change up to 50 years from now. But while we estimate 50 years into the future, whether we can meet the 1.5C [rise] future or not depends on what we do in the next 10 years. So, it’s really a 10-year horizon that we have to be concerned about,” he said. “The collapse of a reef means it becomes functionally extinct as a reef system. You might still find some species there but they won’t be able to construct a reef any more. All of the services we get – coastal protection from sea-level rise, tourism, fisheries, especially for low-income households and communities – are at risk. The tourism sector is huge in east Africa and it depends on heathy reefs.” Since the 1950s, the world’s coral reef cover has halved due to global heating, overfishing, pollution and habitat destruction. The decline of the ecosystems, which are vital nurseries for juvenile fish globally, is expected to continue as the climate continues to heat. Mishal Gudka, a senior scientist at Cordio East Africa and a co-author of the study, said their assessment detected overfishing of top predators on all the reefs from which there was data. “These results highlight the need to improve local fisheries management to ensure the health of reef systems and secure sustainable fish stocks, which support jobs for a quarter of a million people in the region,” Gudka said. Alongside cuts to greenhouse gas emissions, Obura said better enforcement of fishery regulations and greater involvement of local communities in reef management could help maintain their survival. “This assessment reaffirms the urgency of the interlinked climate and biodiversity crises addressed by Cop26 last month in Glasgow, and Cop15 [biodiversity summit] in a few months in Kunming. We need to take decisive action to address both global threats to corals from climate change, and local ones, such as overfishing,” he said. Find more Age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresKarim Benzema was down on one knee which meant Real Madrid were down on theirs, or so it goes. Saturday had been good to them until then – Barcelona had lost at home to Real Betis and Atlético Madrid had been beaten by Real Mallorca with on-loan Take Kubo slipping past Jan Oblak in the last minute at the Metropolitano – but this was bad news, its significance expressed simply. A couple of words and a couple of explanation marks would do: Benzema and off. It was cold, wet, noisy and 0-0 at Real Sociedad where no one had won and only one team had even scored, and that was because of a 90th minute mistake that left goalkeeper Alex Remiro in tears. Now the visitors’ top scorer, the man who is irreplaceable, had to be replaced. He had lasted 15 minutes. As he went, pointing at his left leg, Benzema threw his shirt into the crowd where it was grabbed by a man it wasn’t meant for. He headed up the stairs past the glass-fronted VIP boxes built into the tunnel – “the zoo,” some call it – and turned left towards the dressing room. He took 17 goals and eight assists with him, 12 and seven in the league. When he first glanced to the bench, Carlo Ancelotti had signalled to stay calm, which he could have directed at everyone else as much as at his captain and which wasn’t easy to do. No one has more goals or assists than Benzema; the man unexpectedly taking his place didn’t have any at all. Luka Jovic hadn’t played a game’s worth of football let alone produced a goal or an assist: 81 minutes he had been on the pitch all season. He hadn’t scored for Madrid in 664 days. Forty-one minutes later, he had both and Madrid had the title tied up. Jovic’s neat lay off supplied Vinícius to open the scoring, then he dived in to head a second, taking Madrid eight points clear. It wasn’t supposed to be this way. When Benzema had pulled up, Carlos Martínez, the commentator on Spanish television, had insisted: “this is no joke.” Alongside him, former Madrid player, academy coach, lead singer in rock band Pig Noise and one of the media’s most astute analysts, Álvaro Benito, said: “The difference between what you have on the pitch and on the bench is gigantic.” Recently debate has turned to why Ancelotti doesn’t rotate, especially with the run Madrid were embarking upon: Sevilla, Athletic, Real Sociedad, Inter and Atlético in 14 days. In the three played so far, nine of the 11 players have started every game and putting Lucas Vázquez in for Dani Carvajal against Athletic was forced. When it comes to choosing a team, 10 are virtually guaranteed and the 11th is a choice between Rodrygo and Marco Asensio. Saturday was Vinicius’s 20th consecutive start. Six players have over 1,000 league minutes, and that would probably be nine had Dani Carvajal, Ferland Mendy and Toni Kroos been fit at the beginning: Mendy has started seven of the last eight in La Liga, Carvajal five of seven, Kroos eight of 10. If the idea to begin with was to rotate that has been left aside, at least for now. Ancelotti doesn’t see the need to rest players on the assumption of a tiredness he doesn’t see – “I don’t want to change what’s going well for a supposition”– or why decisions made now should depend on hypothetical fatigue in April. Rather than rotate during this run, the idea appears to be to get through it, gathering points that can’t be taken off you and resting after if needs be. That idea is applied within games: “you can play 60 minutes with players with more quality then use players with more energy in the remaining 30,” Ancelotti says. Madrid’s coach has been constrained by injuries: Fede Valverde’s absence in particular denied room for manoeuvre. Players prefer not to sit out: “I feel better when I play than when I rest,” 36-year-old Luka Modric said. And at heart there’s something simple expressed in Ancelotti’s comments: some players are better than others. Implicit in that is there are footballers you’re unconvinced by, squad members you don’t entirely trust, a suspicion that you don’t have anyone to rotate with. While there’s an element of Catch 22 to confront – footballer doesn’t get more opportunities because he’s not good enough, footballer isn’t good enough because he doesn’t get more opportunities – the bottom line is: you want your good players on the pitch. And that’s Benzema, not Jovic. Only six players have ever cost Madrid more than Jovic – Zinedine Zidane, Kaká, Ronaldo, Gareth Bale, James Rodríguez and Edin Hazard. But a little out of place, still young, undemonstrative, he had not really settled or integrated since joining the club for €60m, considered perhaps the outstanding striker in Europe at the time. He got injured a bit, he got Covid, he got in trouble for breaking lockdown back in Serbia – they said he was out celebrating his girlfriend’s birthday, he said he was popping to the pharmacy – got injured training at home, and he went back to Germany on loan seeking chances he wasn’t getting in Spain, immediately scoring twice in 28 minutes. And that was pretty much that. It’s not so much that he had been bad as that he just hadn’t been at all; it’s not just that he had not scored for Madrid since February 2020, during which time Benzema has 54, it’s that he had only scored twice in his career there and neither had mattered much. One was a late fifth in a 5-0 win over Leganés, the other a late fourth in a 4-1 win against Osasuna. The most significant thing he had done in Spain was get away with a handball that would have saved Leganés on the final day of the 2019-20 season. Until now. Now he had only gone and won them the league. Well, sort of. Madrid had not had a day as good as this for 79 years: according to Marca, that was the last time they had won and Barcelona and Atlético had both lost. “We knew the scores and that gave us a boost,” Modric said. Jovic’s goal and assist put Madrid eight points ahead of Sevilla, having played a game more. They’re nine points above Betis, 10 ahead of Atlético and Real Sociedad, 16 in front of Barcelona. No team has ever been eight or more points clear this late and not won the league. “If they beat Atlético next weekend, there’s no point in the league,” former Rayo Vallecano coach Paco Jémez claimed. When it mattered most, Madrid had done it, Carlo Ancelotti quietly leading his team to eight wins a row. They have started this defining run with nine points from nine. No rotation, just results. It might not always have convinced and it has not always gone exactly as planned – Sevilla were the better side last weekend and after they somehow defeated Athletic 1-0 in midweek, Marcelino García Toral insisted: “I’ve been in football a long time and I have never seen anything like it” – but it worked. This time it did convince, Madrid preventing la Real from having a shot on target and scoring twice as many as la Real had let in all season at home. Which is not to say it was planned, exactly. “Who the hell would have bet a single cent on Jovic being Benzema for the night?” asked El País. Had it gone wrong, there might have been criticism for pushing Benzema or not giving Jovic minutes sooner. And yet the Frenchman’s injury does not look serious and this served as another reminder that there is no such thing as a bad footballer at Madrid. The last time Benzema was forced to miss a game Mariano made his only appearance all year and produced a neat backheel for Vinicius to score against Elche. This time, it was Jovic providing. “It hasn’t been easy season for him but we are trying to give him to confidence to wait for his time,” Modric said. “He showed we can count on him.” Doing so is not so easy, still less when you haven’t done so before. Ancelotti recently revealed that a player told him that the footballer who is not pissed off at being left out is no footballer at all. Nor can you necessarily count on teammates to support their claim for a place. “You have to say that, but I know, I was a player: the player just wants to play. He wants you to put them on the pitch, that’s it,” Ancelotti said on Saturday. “The most difficult part of my job is this. If the player who doesn’t play suffers, they are not happy, and for me it is impossible. Only 11 play, but the performance of Jovic means the atmosphere is good. You know that on the bench there are players who can play, who deserve to play, because they are serious and motivated in training and Luka Jovic is one of them.”Michael Crawford is far from the only person from the world of musical theatre … … to have expressed this thought lately. The same goes, in a quieter way, for the world of crosswords. Crosswords, that is, of a particular kind. Stephen Sondheim – playful, intelligently demotic – was no fan of the American-style puzzle, despite its being playful and intelligently demotic at its best. This may or may not be because he had a puzzle rejected by the New York Times when he was “14 or 15”; the reply letter described him as “obviously precocious”, which is how he learned that adjective. In 1968, he urged readers of the New York magazine to instead seek the British-style cryptic: A good clue can give you all the pleasures of being duped that a mystery story can. It has surface innocence, surprise, the revelation of a concealed meaning, and the catharsis of solution. Let’s be a little more precise. During the pandemic, we have discussed in these pages a particular kind of cryptic crossword: the kind you notice at weekends that lacks black squares and repeatedly sends the solver to the dictionary, where the filled grid may be no more than the starting point for a startling endgame. We could euphemistically call these beasts “the engrossing puzzles” – it was to these that Sondheim was addicted in the 1950s. Is “addicted” too strong a word? No: Sondheim’s habit was to buy (or, as he otherwise told it, retrieve from an inbound steamship) a copy of the BBC’s Listener magazine on a Thursday on the way to meet up with a colleague to write a musical, and the Listener’s puzzle (now adopted by the Saturday Times) is perhaps the most engrossing of all. “I got Leonard Bernstein hooked,” he recalled in 2004. “Thursday afternoons, no work got done on West Side Story. We were doing the puzzle.” They may even have managed to rationalise this as not bunking off, given Sondheim’s description of composition: “You make a pattern out of a series of discrete bits of information and try to make it graceful so you won’t feel the effort behind it. In that sense, lyric writing is a puzzle.” Here he is explaining what he thinks is the “nice thing about doing a crossword puzzle”: Bernstein and Sondheim were among the lucky few to receive the privately circulated Apex (“a puzzle every Xmas”), also from the engrossing end of the crosswording spectrum. It was set by retired carpenter Eric Chalkley and is now the purview of another setter (“a Phi every Xmas”). Phi (who you can get to know here) has shared the 2010 Apex for those not in the distribution list. You can surely guess its theme, and you can read Sondheim’s letter in reply to Phi here. On the topic of puzzles about Sondheim, his 85th birthday in 2015 was well celebrated by Guardian setters. Arachne (who you can get to know here) set a wonderful prize puzzle (with annotated solutions) … 19a Two idiots stripped Mini’s bumpers off (9) [ definition: ones who bump off ] [ wordplay: synonym for ‘idiot’, repeated + MINI without first &amp; last letters (“stripped”) + S ] [ ASS &amp; ASS + IN + S ] … to which Sondheim replied: I look forward to avoiding work in order to solve it. Steve S Sondheim signed off as Steve! I did not see that coming. At the same time, the Sondheim Society commissioned Enigmatist (who you can get to know here) to create a custom puzzle. The society’s generous Craig Glenday has allowed us to share the extraordinary puzzle here. Craig also shared a titbit: he discussed with Sondheim a puzzle/musical/video game hybrid, but it did not come to be. Of Enigmatist’s tribute, Sondheim said: “I’m determined not to tackle the puzzle until I finish the opening number of the new show, but it will be hard to resist (particularly since it looks moderately easy.)” He will have found later that it is not easy. I’ll also mention an Enigmatic Variations puzzle from July by Sea-Kale titled The North American One, which I hope reached its subject, and an earlier entry in the same series: Resident Jokers by Owzat. I’ve enjoyed all these immensely and will be spending Christmas finally going through all of the puzzles that resulted when Sondheim put his money where his mouth was, and set puzzles for the rest of us to solve. This was, he said later, to help a new publication to which his friend, Gloria Steinem, was a contributor. As illustrated by the giddying grid accompanying this paragraph, they too are … engrossing. Forty-two of the beasts appeared in the New York magazine until his other job (specifically Company) diverted him from public setting, though I understand his party guests tended to be regaled with other kinds of puzzle. Here’s a sample, an example of New York content in a British kind of clue: 5. Mixtures of completely Yiddish sighs? (6) [ definition: mixtures ] [ wordplay: synonym of “completely” + Yiddish expressions of woe ] [ ALL + OYS ] The magazine celebrated its 40th birthday by reprinting the first three; the others have been digitised by Google Books. Animator Galen Fott has assiduously collated the relevant links in a blogpost and composer Colm Molloy has done likewise in a Twitter thread. I’m not alone in diving into Sondheim’s puzzles as this wretched year ends. We can hope that the swell of enthusiasm might prompt whomever owns the relevant rights to republish the hens’-teeth collection in book form. Let’s finish by making a mental note to watch the whodunnit Sondheim co-wrote with Anthony Perkins – and returning to Company with an addition to our collaborative playlist, Healing Music Recorded in 2020-21 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen To: • Here’s a collection of all our explainers, interviews and other helpful bits and bobs. • The Shipping Forecast Puzzle Book by Alan Connor, which is partly but not predominantly cryptic, can be ordered from the Guardian Bookshop. • Crossword blog will resume on 13 December.The man who will spend the next four years trying to bring about a green transformation of Germany’s coal-hungry industry once faced another daunting challenge in a previous, less publicly exposed career: translating the most controversial poems in recent British history from English into German. As Germany’s next vice-chancellor and minister for economy and climate, Green party co-leader Robert Habeck will be one of the most powerful politicians not just in Germany but Europe, overseeing a new super-ministry that will span general economic policy, renewable energy and the expansion of the country’s electricity grid, with a mooted budget upwards of €10bn. The final names were announced on Monday in Scholz’s cabinet, which will be gender-balanced and have the country’s first female interior minister in Social Democrat Nancy Faeser and first female foreign minister in Annalena Baerbock, co-leader of the Greens alongside Habeck. It also includes the first German minister with Turkish roots, in new agriculture minister Cem Özdemir. Yet 25 years ago, Habeck and his wife, Andrea Paluch, both literature graduates, still worked as jobbing translators specialising in contemporary English verse. After winning a prestigious translation prize for their rendering into German of the work of the Merseyside poet Roger McGough in 1997, the pair were commissioned a year later to translate Ted Hughes’ newly published Birthday Letters: the collection in which the then British poet laureate for the first time broke his silence about his tumultuous relationship to his former wife, the poet Sylvia Plath, with whom he led the literati set of 1950s Britain. Hughes had largely withdrawn from public life at this point, following the publication of books and articles that largely held him responsible for Plath’s suicide 35 years earlier. In a 2005 article for Süddeutsche Zeitung, Habeck and Paluch recalled how they communicated with Hughes by faxing his agent pages of multiple choices for difficult-to-translate passages. “He would have only needed to tick the right solution, we didn’t expect more of him in his tragic state of solitude,” they wrote. Instead, Hughes sent Habeck and Paluch a series of long letters expanding not just on linguistic nuance but the British landscapes he was writing from (the Outer Hebrides was “very nice for bicycles”), his belief in the existence of “a population of mountain lions, some of them black” in East Anglia, and his ouija board, which not only helped him write some of his verse but nearly won him “about £2m” in betting on football matches. In the letters, which Habeck shared with the Guardian following an interview in 2019, Hughes apologised that some of his poetic references to other esoteric practices like telepathic communication and extrasensory perception may go over his translators’ heads: “I’m not sure my careful description makes things clear even to an English reader,” he wrote. After Hughes death from a heart attack on 28 October 1998, shortly after what would have been Plath’s 66th birthday, his second wife, Carol, sent Habeck and Paluch a note thanking them for their work, saying the British poet had “felt you were on the same wavelength”. Habeck would join the Green party four years later, eventually attaining his first high-ranking political office as minister for energy, agriculture, environment and rural areas in the northern state of Schleswig-Holstein in 2012. He will be sworn in to his first ministerial post at national level this Thursday, after his Green party, the Social Democratic party (SPD) and the liberal Free Democratic party (FDP) backed a coalition agreement.The world is hostage to what’s been called “a cycle of panic and neglect”. The Omicron variant, while we wait for clarification on its many unknowns, has sparked the latest bout of that panic. But it is a panic born directly of selfish insularity: as wealthy nations have amassed enough surplus vaccines to inoculate their entire populations many times over, in low-income countries just a small percentage have received even a single dose. Even with the ambitious booster programmes, there are still plenty of unused doses sitting in the warehouses of western nations. So there’s no need to make a choice between vaccinating low-income countries or offering boosters in wealthy nations: we can still do both. New analysis from the data company Airfinity finds that, even with booster policies taken into account, in the G7 and EU there will still be close to 1.4bn surplus doses by the end of March 2022. It’s bordering on criminal that these are not being urgently airlifted to countries in need. Three brief bursts of leadership by the leading economies this year have amounted to vanishingly little: in June the G7 summit in Cornwall pledged 1bn doses (far fewer than needed and still undelivered six months on); then in September, Joe Biden’s “global” vaccines summit proved a one-man press conference to announce a 500m deal of Pfizer vaccines, with Boris Johnson skipping the event entirely; and in October the Rome G20 ended with no solution for the crippling inequality of access. Britain must shoulder a large portion of the blame. In the space of six months, the prime minister has gone from urging other G7 leaders to “vaccinate the world” in Cornwall, to delivering a lower proportion of promised doses than any of them (just 10% of the 100m doses have been delivered). What’s more, government and corporate leaders – Johnson among them – are seeking shelter behind a dangerous falsehood: that the principal factor driving low vaccination rates isn’t one of supply, but hesitancy. Last week, Johnson said the spread of Omicron was in countries “where the problem has not been supply of vaccines but has been really to do with hesitancy and lack of take-up”. But South Africa, like many African countries, has been a victim of unpredictable supply, along with excessively burdensome manufacturer negotiations – and only recently reached adequate vaccine numbers. When 90% of Africa’s health workers are unprotected, for most African countries supply is still the issue. And as Bruce Aylward, a senior adviser to the World Health Organization, told the Today programme on Friday, even when they hit the tarmac, dose deliveries too often arrive unexpectedly, or less than three months from expiry. “We’ve made a simple issue complex,” he said, and distributing these doses would be a challenge for any country. The WHO also estimates that there will be a shortage of between 1bn and 2bn syringes next year. And the White House has already warned that the US’s donation of Pfizer doses requires specialised syringes that are in short supply – which means many could yet expire in warehouses. Between 18 and 25 countries worldwide are now struggling to distribute doses, Seth Berkley, the chief executive of the vaccine alliance Gavi, has said. Make no mistake: the failure to share vaccines amounts to a choice to roll the dice again and again on variants, as the emergence of Omicron makes clear. Vaccines stem transmission and reduce the number of host bodies available for further mutations. As Gordon Brown wrote in the Guardian recently: “We were forewarned – and yet here we are.” Whatever Omicron’s fate, failing to vaccinate the world leaves the possibility of further new variants emerging – and then spreading rapidly through the unprotected and possibly the vaccinated too. And as billions were wiped off share prices as soon as news of Omicron broke, it was clearer than ever that hoarding vaccines in the west didn’t make economic sense either. It didn’t have to be this way. Around 12bn doses are forecast to be produced by the end of this year. Had a principle of vaccine equity governed the global rollout, this could have comfortably vaccinated every adult in the world. The WHO is right that, if we are fortunate enough to be offered a booster, those of us in the west should take it. But as a healthy 24-year-old, I’ll be getting my third (and possibly fourth) shot before many healthcare workers in the developing world get theirs. That’s wrong. We must find a way to care about both boosters and the primary doses of others, at equal speed, before inaction in the western world creates a completely avoidable catastrophe. • Lara Spirit is a reporter at Tortoise MediaOne by one, the brightly coloured helium balloons floated up into the wintry sky. They were released at the weekend outside the house in which six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes was murdered, as a way of trying to show that he had been loved. Of all the harrowing details to emerge from the trial of his stepmother, Emma Tustin, and his natural father, Thomas Hughes, the one that many parents will have found unbearable was a film of Arthur sobbing, “No one loves me.” He had been brave enough to try to tell grownups he trusted that something was wrong, and yet nobody came to save him. He must have felt, at the end, so abandoned. What makes this awful case so haunting is that it reminds us of what too many other children will have experienced when lockdown sealed them off from the outside world. Arthur’s complex tragedy is not, it should be said, a simple story of cruelty hidden under cover of a pandemic. His social workers didn’t, unlike some, have the door slammed in their faces by abusive parents pretending to be frightened of catching the virus. And Arthur himself wasn’t invisible to people who loved and cared about him, even after his school closed and his relatives were confined to their homes. His grandmother, a retired teacher, raised the alarm in the middle of the first lockdown after Arthur confided in her. His teachers also passed on concerns flagged up by relatives, and Arthur’s uncle also contacted the police. Lockdown itself cannot satisfactorily explain why social workers who actually visited the house in which he was being tormented went away convinced this was a “happy household”; the single biggest question facing Solihull’s social services department now is how it came to be fobbed off so easily. Yet all that said, the England children’s commissioner, Rachel de Souza, is right that this case raises wider questions about what happened to vulnerable children during lockdown – when, she has said, serious safeguarding incidents rose by a nearly third. The national inquiry announced into Arthur’s case must now be fearless in seeking answers. De Souza told the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show that lockdown had been “such a shock to the whole nation that it weakened the system of support”, but that system has been perilously weak for years. Social services were overstretched and underfunded long before the pandemic hit, which brought with it a surge in reports of domestic violence as families were trapped indoors. The reopening of schools and nurseries will have triggered another rush of new referrals as children came back under the watchful eye of professionals. Like the NHS, social services are now running to catch up with a terrifying backlog, but without the same injection of extra cash and public clamour for something to be done. Everyone sympathises with the need for children who missed school during the pandemic to catch up on what they’ve missed academically. But there is no such national outcry over what might be called social recovery, or the urgent need to help children horribly damaged by being trapped at home with abusive or neglectful parents, even though bringing their maths back up to scratch looks positively easy by comparison. There is growing concern too within children’s services over a minority of families who seem to have fallen off the radar during the pandemic and not come back. With health visitors and GPs still conducting appointments over the phone, some babies born during the pandemic may not have been seen face to face by professionals for nearly two years. To recognise this long tail of risk is not to say that lockdowns themselves were a mistake. In the spring of 2020, and again that winter, the virus trapped Britain between a rock and an impossibly hard place, forcing ministers to balance the hundreds of thousands of lives potentially saved by shutting down the country against what everyone feared at the time could be a heavy price paid by women and children at risk of violence in the home. But it is to say that we now have a moral obligation both to protect those children better in future waves of the virus – one reason ministers are now so determined to keep schools and nurseries open, come what may – and to stop them becoming scarred for life by their pandemic experiences. It’s too late, sadly, to save Arthur Labinjo-Hughes. But it’s not too late to invest in services that will help countless other children growing up in less murderous but still miserable circumstances, and we owe it to them to do better. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistBRANDS AWARENESS “It costs a lot of money to look this cheap,” Dolly Parton once said, and it is a quotation that may resonate with Everton fans as they click through the Goodison Park turnstiles tonight before their team’s match against Arsenal. Since Farhad Moshiri took control of the club five years ago, the thick end of £500m has been spent on players, who between them have somehow combined to make the grand old team demonstrably worse. Despite the best attempts of five different managers, two of them highly decorated and among the best in the business, the seventh-place Premier League finish Everton once considered their birthright in the pre-Moshiri era is currently little more than a pipe dream. As for delusions of Big Cup or Euro Vase grandeur? Well, they’ve been quietly shelved as Rafa Benítez’s side try to arrest their inexorable slide towards the drop. Yes siree, as Dolly might say, it has cost Everton an eye-watering sum of money to become the fifth-worst team in the league and last night the first lamb was sacrificed at the metaphorical altar as their director of football, Marcel Brands, left the club. “The board and I agreed that there is a clear difference in the vision and direction for this beautiful club and, with that in mind, the decision was taken,” said Brands, who had inked a new three-year deal just seven months ago. “I want to wish all of the squad every success, and I am convinced that there is enough quality to improve the current situation quickly.” Everton fans are unconvinced and some supporter groups are planning a protest at tonight’s game, although it remains to be seen how many will take part or what exactly it is about their free-spending owners, proven trophy-winner of a manager and array of very expensive players they are protesting. Entitled #27minutesfor27years, the planned protest references the number of years Everton will have gone without a trophy come the end of this season and fans are encouraged to walk out of Goodison Park in the 27th minute, a full eight minutes later than it took many of them to abandon ship during their recent drubbing at the hands of Liverpool. Tired of the chaotic behind-the-scenes activities they believe to be to blame for the current on-field shambles, those behind #27minutesfor27years want Moshiri to keep spending money but instigate a boardroom cull, stop communicating club business through favoured Scottish talk radio presenters and give them some face time so they can voice their concerns in the hope all concerned can get more bang for their emotional and financial buck. Fan reaction to the planned protest has been predictably mixed and if the current squabbling on various social media websites is anything to go by, those behind the #27minutesfor27years show of dissent may discover their fans are no better at singing from the same hymn sheet than the very people they are railing against. QUOTE OF THE DAY “How many human rights violations will it take before the football community unites to demand better protection for migrant workers?” – Tromsø ask a question that shouldn’t have to be asked as they release a kit featuring a QR code that takes those who scan it to a page of information listing concerns about the Human Rights World Cup. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Rob Smyth from 7pm for hot updates of the FA Cup third-round draw before he slides smoothly across his home office for MBM coverage of Everton 1-2 Arsenal from 8pm. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your ears around Football Weekly, here. FIVER LETTERS “The way Antonio Conte so powerfully hugs Tottenham players worries me. I don’t know if he realizes that a great number of them can be, mentally and physically, as easily burst as egg yolks, and that a better strategy might be patting them delicately on the head, duck-duck-goose style” – Seth Kleinschmidt. “I am hoping for some first-half capitulations by Manchester United followed by incredible second-half performances so we can enjoy headlines like: ‘Rangnick rang necks’ or ‘Rangnecks’ etc, etc. Of course, with no second-half revival it could just be ‘Rang out of ideas’” – Andrew Want. “I had the radio on yesterday afternoon while doing the Sunday dinner dishes and it struck me that Leicester’s Dewsbury-Hall has to the Premier League footballer who sounds most like a northern tourist attraction” – Daniel Kennedy. “So drunken and drugged-up drunks tried to storm Wembley? Good thing you have better security on a football arena than we have on our Capitol building here in the States! You know, the one that you guys burned down once” – Pat Condreay. “I was watching Man City. Of course, they are brilliant. But are they the smallest side in the PL era? Does anyone know? Does anyone care?” – Jonathan Tasker. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’ the day is … Seth Kleinschmidt, who bags a revised and updated version of Richard Foster’s Premier League Nuggets. We’ll give a copy away every day this week, and it is available to buy here. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Joey Barton has been found not guilty of assaulting former Barnsley manager Daniel Stendel, who was left bloodied and with a broken tooth after an incident at Oakwell in April 2019. Fifa has been urged to intervene in the case of Abdullah Ibhais, a former employee of Qatar’s World Cup committee who is on a 21-day hunger strike after being detained by police in Doha, otherwise its human rights policy will not be “worth the paper it is written on”. Emma Hayes praised two-goal Sam Kerr for powering Chelsea to Women’s FA Cup glory and a domestic treble, to boot. “There was no way she was going to be on the losing team,” cheered Hayes. “She sets that tone in such a way that I’ve rarely seen.” Ralf Rangnick was pleasantly surprised by how useful his Manchester United side were against Crystal Palace. “What they showed was more than I expected,” he honked. “I was positively surprised by the physical state and intensity.” $tevie Mbe says he won’t be making his return to Anfield as Aston Villa boss all about him. “If other people choose to, that’s their business,” he blabbed, teeing Friday’s Fiver up nicely, “but for me, it’s about getting the team prepared.” Leeds director of football Victor Orta’s lid almost rattled off his head as he flicked interesting signs and yelped fruity language at a fan following Patrick Bamford’s late equaliser in the 2-2 draw with Brentford. And John McGreal has taken Rangnick-style interim charge of Ipswich after Paul Cook was mutually consented out of the door marked Do One at the weekend. RECOMMENDED LOOKING Get your eyes on this fantastic gallery of pictures from the master sports photographer Gerry Cranham. STILL WANT MORE? The critically acclaimed Guardian top 100 is back, and Rich Laverty has everything you need to know about how we ranked the 100 best female footballers in the world. Dortmund and Jude Bellingham cried foul in Der Klassiker but old failings remain, reports Andy Brassell. Things are turning sour for José Mourinho at Roma, and Nicky Bandini points out that reminding everyone of his €7m net salary after the defeat to Inter may only encourage his critics to ask whether he is offering value for money. Fred might have delivered what looked like a fresh start for both him and Manchester United, but don’t read too much into the 1-0 win over Crystal Palace, writes Jonathan Liew. Brest have been the best in their past six matches after an incroyable run of wins, yelps Ligue Urrrrn aficionado Eric Devin. Chelsea’s ‘Kerrby’ combination set standards Arsenal could not match in the Women’s FA Cup final, so says Louise Taylor. Divock Origi being the man for the big occasion, Leicester’s problems and Oliver Skipp’s growing importance are just three of these 10 talking points from the Premier League’s weekend action. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! GIFT IDEAS THAT ARE TOO PRICEY FOR OUR WEIRD UNCLEAs Christmas rapidly approaches, many who spent the holiday without family and friends last year are looking forward to celebrating. But news of the Omicron variant offers a harsh reminder that the pandemic is not over. While the variant’s emergence does not seem to have moved England’s views on lockdown restrictions – 68% are against closing pubs and 56% against the return of limited numbers at gatherings – health chiefs have warned that a surge in hospital admissions could be disastrous for the NHS. With some firms going beyond official guidance to cancel their Christmas parties, the next few weeks remain uncertain. We’d like to hear about how you’re staying festive and cheerful this December – particularly if you’re doing something different to previous years. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.With Australia’s Test XI for Brisbane named four days in advance, it shows that some clarity of thought has been retained within the camp after a turbulent couple of weeks. As with any home contest, the Ashes series is Australia’s to lose, and even more so given how ropey England’s 2021 has been. But expectations exist to be upset, and this is largely the same Australian side soundly beaten last season by India after dominating the first Test, and that hasn’t played since. Starting at the top, no one manifests being unproven like Marcus Harris. He has earned his spot in the manner always prescribed: 5,001 runs averaging 51 in first-class cricket outside Tests in the past five years before this season, which he started with another Sheffield Shield ton. If anyone will be sympathetic to the domestic haymaker it will be selector George Bailey, with the grass from his playing days still lodged in his spikes. But while Harris can boss Junction Oval, he hasn’t clicked in his 10 Test appearances. He topped the team for runs in his first series in 2018-19, but it was a modest tally in another loss to India. He was poor against a mild Sri Lankan attack to follow that, gave barely a whimper in England for the 2019 Ashes, lost his place, then returned for one match without impressing least season. It’s up to him to disprove the impression that the domestic lion is an international lamb. His opening partner does have a commanding record, but David Warner will be a bit of an unknown quantity to start this series. When he and Steve Smith received their long suspensions in Cape Town in 2018, a year without a Test match sounded like a lot. Tack it on to the pandemic era though, and there is a gouge out of each of their careers. In not much less than four years since his ban began, Warner has played 12 times. Smith has played 14. Both are certainly good enough to pick up after the latest delay, but it does increase the degree of difficulty. Perhaps this will be the summer that establishes Marnus Labuschagne for good. His breakout period in 2019-20 was exceptional – no Australian has scored more across five home Tests than his 896 runs. His sophomore year against India was solid, though at times when he could have taken charge he didn’t convert good scores to great ones. That said, he twice did enough to set up what should have been wins, only for India’s fifth-day batting to thwart him. His lead-up domestically has been full of confidence. At some stage someone needs to take the mantle from Smith. Like Harris, Travis Head is a left-hander with a compulsive looseness outside his off stump. But there is something about his returns that makes selectors stay interested. Head might always look like his wicket is imminent, but he almost always manages to put a score together first. Only five times in 31 innings has he been out in single figures. In between times, his 20s, 30s and 50s have helped form important partnerships more than once. If England’s bowlers can work their way this far down the order in good time, they will fancy themselves to apply pressure. All-rounder Cameron Green is a towering talent, but only played four Tests for Australia before having to wait a year. He’ll almost be starting afresh, is yet to score key runs in a match and is still waiting for his first Test wicket. Alex Carey will be keeping wicket on debut, with all the attendant pressure that brings. Both have a task ahead of them. And so Australia will be hoping to gather enough runs, while relying in large part on their old firm of bowlers. Patrick Cummins, Nathan Lyon, Josh Hazlewood, Mitchell Starc, the four who authored the 4-0 result last time England visited. They will be trying to recreate history, though the world has changed. Cummins is captain now. Hazlewood is bowling as well as ever. Starc and Lyon sputtered last season as the wickets ran out, but again the long layoff means there is no form line. In the end, all involved will hope that the occasion of the Ashes will be enough to bring out anything in them that may have retreated to latency. The alternative, that the occasion overwhelms them, does not bear thinking about. But if anyone is having a poor run, those on the sidelines will be just as keen to enter the fray. Things can change quickly in a series like this, and no one can be sure of much. To name your team without waiting until the coin toss is surety enough.Women were doing 21 hours more unpaid work than men a week and experiencing higher levels of psychological distress in the year before the pandemic, a new report has found. The annual Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (Hilda) survey is a nationally representative study involving interviews with 17,500 people in 9,500 households. This year’s report, released on Tuesday and compiled by the University of Melbourne’s Melbourne Institute, covers data from 2019, before the massive social and economic upheaval caused by Covid-19. While household incomes were rising again after years of stagnation, the national snapshot shows poverty was also increasing, and two groups that would be hit hard by the pandemic were already disadvantaged. Women and young people both reported poorer mental health, while the former were lumped with more of the burden of unpaid work, and younger people were already finding it harder to crack into the labour market. Unpaid labour In 2019, women were doing far more unpaid work than men, the study found, with the gap being particularly large in heterosexual couples with dependent children. Over the life of the Hilda survey that gap has narrowed, from women doing 28.8 hours a week more unpaid labour than men in 2002 to 20.9 hours in 2019. That’s partly due to men picking up slightly more of the load – they reported 27.8 hours in 2019 up from 24.7 hours in 2002. But researchers say it’s mostly due to women doing slightly less: 48.7 hours in 2019, down from 53.5 hours in 2002. Housework was found to be the largest form of unpaid work, followed by caring for children, with the amount of unpaid work escalating sharply after the birth of a first child. Women also felt more time-stressed than men, with 38% of women saying they were time-stressed “often” or “almost always” – a constant from 2001 – while the proportion of men who report the same level of time-stress has fallen from 34% to 29% since then. “Women with young children are the most time-stressed and you can see why,” said the report’s author Prof Roger Wilkins. Mental health The report also paints a worrying picture of Australians’ mental health, with 23% of women and 19% of men reporting psychological distress in 2019. This is about 40% higher since 2007, when 18% and 15% of women and men reported experiencing psychological distress. It is also affecting more young people than ever before: 30% of people between the age of 15 and 24 experienced psychological distress in 2019 compared to 21% in 2007. Indigenous women were slightly more likely than non-Indigenous women to grapple with it. In the study, participants were asked a series of questions including whether they had felt tired out for no good reason, nervous, restless, depressed or worthless, among other things. Dr Ferdi Botha, one of the authors of the report, said that while some of the increase may be attributed to a better general understanding of mental health, it was still a “surprisingly large” jump in prevalence. “Definitely the stigma around mental illness has declined a lot, so we think there’s a greater tendency for people to be willing to report that they are struggling,” Botha said. “However, social contact frequency was one of the strongest predictors of distress by far. People are becoming more socially isolated, and we do know there are increasing trends in loneliness. It’s a known predictor of anxiety and depression.” It was important to look at the relationship between economic circumstances and mental health, too, said Botha, with the study showing a correlation between higher income and lower likelihood of psychological distress. Incomes, inequality and poverty Overall, median household disposable incomes have increased by $2,116 since 2017, reaching $84,243 in 2019 – the first time median disposable incomes have exceeded 2009 levels. Wilkins said one of the most concerning economic trends emerging from the latest survey was a reduction in income mobility, which refers to one’s ability to improve their economic position relative to others. On a year-to-year basis, Hilda found 32.2% of those in the lowest income quintile were likely to move up in economic position between 2001 and 2006, compared with 30.9% between 2013 and 18. “People are increasingly finding themselves stuck in a poverty trap,” Wilkins said, blaming the rate of welfare payments. At the same time, those in the top bracket were more likely to remain in the highest income quintile: the proportion who remained there rose from 70.% in 2001-2006 to 74% in 2013-2018. This reflected a lack of “dynamism” in the economy, Wilkins said. Over the life of the study, relative poverty rates have fluctuated, from a peak of 13.2% in 2007 to 9.8% in 2016. But since then they have increased again each year, hitting 11.3% in 2019. Poverty levels are expected to fall in next year’s survey, given the federal government briefly doubled unemployment benefits during the pandemic. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Households and families Hilda also found young people are living at home for longer, with a rise in the number of women between the ages of 18 to 25 still living with their parents. In 2019, 72% of women aged 18 to 21 and 50% of women aged 22 to 25 lived with their parents, up from 67.7% and 32.3% respectively in 2001. “The transition to adulthood has been getting more difficult over the last 15 years,” Wilkins said. “That’s becoming economically independent, starting families, having a career, moving into homeownership – these are traditional markers of moving into adulthood.” Wilkins said that in general young people were less likely to be in full-time work, while university graduates were finding their incomes remaining stagnant when they did enter the workforce. The survey also found Australians are more likely to be living with a partner as they age, though a large proportion of people – 37% – are in “intimate, ongoing” relationships with someone who does not live with them. Only 2% of people in a relationship with someone after eight years do not live together.Rado Vidošić pauses to adjust his glasses, the Melbourne City coach trying to buy himself a bit of time as he searches for the words to best articulate what’s running through his head. A day before his team open their season against Canberra United, he is conducting media duties via Zoom before he puts his side through one final training session prior to heading to the airport. Nominally, this is a pre-match press conference open to all but, as was frequently the case during the 2020-21 season, it has turned into a one-on-one between the pair of us; it’s difficult to draw a crowd when you no longer have half the Matildas squad in your starting XI. Nonetheless, such circumstances do allow for a more in-depth conversation; giving the 60-year-old time to engage in some introspection before answering the question on Rebekah Stott, whose start against Canberra on Friday marked her first professional football match since her diagnosis with Hodgkin’s lymphoma in early 2021. “Rebekah Stott… that is the highlight of my coaching career,” Vidošić says. “I’ve had 36 undefeated games with Brisbane [Roar] and I’ve worked with Ange [Postecoglou]. Coached [Alessandro] Del Piero. I’ve won the FFA Cup with Melbourne Victory and now, here with City, I’m a part of a fantastic organisation. “But to be part of someone’s life journey to defeat the illness that she has had, to come back and to see her – how dedicated she is to the sport, to the women’s game, and how much following she has got and how much people adore her… I think, for us, that is the winning season. “If we don’t achieve anything else this year, just by helping her to get back on her feet and to achieve whatever dreams that she has in front of her. I think that is the winning right here.” Fortunately for Vidošić and the rest of City’s A-League Women side, they did not have to wait long to ensure that the 71-cap New Zealand international’s return was not the only win of 2021-22: they downed Canberra 1-0 at Viking Park thanks to an 80th-minute strike from 18-year-old debutant Holly Mcnamara. After initially anticipating playing around 45 minutes as a holding midfielder, Stott ended up getting through an hour of football and, as her side began to take control of the game in the second half, was unlucky not to grab an assist or even a goal. It had been 135 days since she received the welcome news that she was in remission, 294 days her initial diagnosis was confirmed, 348 days since she last appeared in a professional football match with WSL side Brighton and 622 days since she played for Melbourne City, but she was back doing what she loved. Stepping back for a moment, it must be reinforced that beyond its undoubted inspirational aspects, Stott’s comeback is one that carries very real footballing implications for the current ALW season and beyond. Now the record holder for appearances at City, her form, whether it be delivered as a screener in front of the defence or after a shift into centre-back, will be key in determining if her club is able to return to finals after a disappointing 2020-21. And as she progresses and builds form and fitness, she is likely to return to the international fold with the Football Fern. Though her comeback is a triumph of spirit and she has gone above and beyond in her efforts to serve as a figure of hope and support through her work with ‘beat it. by Stotty’, it should not be lost that it is one that has required just as significant a physical commitment as a mental one. Unless one has actually gone through chemotherapy, it’s difficult to properly articulate how physically draining its lingering effects can be, the haze that can descend upon one’s thoughts, or the sapping effect it can have on motivation in regular life – let alone during attempts to get to the physical level required to play professional football. She has worked bloody hard. “There were a few setbacks when she couldn’t do much,” Vidošić said. “We had to look after her. I think this is her 11th week. We [at first] worked with a smaller group with her, four or five players, and you could see that she is working hard but still struggling.” Through all the challenges – the early starts, long days on the track, doctors’ visits and even days where simply getting up and going for a walk feels like climbing Kilimanjaro – Stott has persisted. And in doing so, she has achieved something that is simultaneously an intensely personal triumph and one that can be shared in a manner that’s meaning, again, is difficult to comprehend unless you have experienced it. Upon my own diagnosis with Hodgkin’s lymphoma in 2008, there were two terms I distinctly remember Google searching for while I lay in my hospital bed. The first was “Hodgkin’s lymphoma mortality rates”. No surprises for guessing why. But the second was a more personal search – “athletes with lymphoma”. At just 16 years of age, I wanted to find stories of others that had not only survived the journey that I was about to commence, but that had been able to return to sport in the aftermath. I wanted reassurance that my body wasn’t going to be destroyed by what it was about to be put through. I wanted something, anything, that I could use not just as a goal but, in working to stay healthy, take any small control I could against a cancer that for the most part would be fought on my behalf by doctors, nurses, chemotherapy, and radiation. So when I discovered that Mario Lemieux and Jon Lester had both overcome the disease and returned to play it came as a welcome relief – despite my lack of interest in ice hockey or baseball. I could do it. Now, Stott can be that figure for a new cohort of those diagnosed with lymphoma, a disease that commonly occurs in adolescents and young adults. Every kick of the ball, tackle made, and minute played can demonstrate that not only can you survive, but you can also thrive.NAB staff say they are suffering from depression, self-harm, physical health problems and relationship breakdowns over unpaid, onerous overtime that in some cases can amount to an extra three days a week of work. A survey of current and former bank staff, prepared by the Finance Sector Union (FSU) in support of federal court action it plans to take against the bank over the issue, found that 93% of mid-tier and above bankers surveyed were working more than the standard 38 hours a week, and paints a grim picture of life at the bank. “I drove my car off the road deliberately to try and have a serious enough accident to stop the insanity, but not so much to die,” one bank worker surveyed by the union said. “My relationship at that time ended, I think largely because I had lost the essence of me.” Staff reported that if they did not work additional unpaid hours they faced retribution from bank management that included being sacked, bullied and being stripped of bonuses. I was … terminated,” one banker said. “I was totally helpless.” In its report, Working for Nothing, the FSU said working excessive unpaid overtime had become normalised within the bank and there was a “culture of fatalism”, where employees were resigned to the practice. “Management turns a blind eye, so they don’t have to address workloads,” one of the workers surveyed said. Another said: “I was constantly shocked at the toxic culture and the deceitful way that senior leaders deflected any culpability for pushing staff to mental breakdown.” The FSU national secretary, Julia Angrisano, said that working extra hours could be described as “another version of wage theft”. “A large proportion of staff have reported that they are pressured into working long hours every week by managers who themselves are also required to work excessive hours,” she said. “These demands are unjust, coerced and dehumanising.” The FSU surveyed more than 1,200 current and former NAB employees who worked at grade 3 or above – ranks that include senior frontline staff and managers. Under the enterprise agreement between the bank and the union, these staff are required to work additional overtime as long as it is reasonable. Of those surveyed, 93% said NAB required them to work more than 38 hours a week to perform their ordinary duties. Two thirds of respondents said the demand for extra hours had been going on for more than three years. Four out of five said the extra work caused physical or mental health problems, including stress, loss of sleep and back or neck pain. “Like many NAB employees I broke down – hospitalised at my own expense in a mental health ward,” one respondent said. Another was “so stressed that I was taken to hospital in ICU where I spent one week, and two months to recover at home from major stress and physical breakdown”. More than three quarters of respondents said overtime ate into their weekends and more than half said they had worked while on annual leave. More than half also reported work overload caused relationship trouble, with many also saying they had missed family and school events. “They stole my time from my family,” one respondent said. Several blamed NAB for the end of their marriages. “Marriage broke down,” one said. “Husband said I work too much.” More than 900 of NAB’s 32,000 employees also kept a diary of their work hours for four weeks. While about three quarters of staff said they were rostered to work between 38 and 40 hours a week, just 11% to 12% worked that little over the four-week period. Over that time, the proportion working 60 hours or more varied between 9% and 10%. “Seventy hours a week is almost double the time I am expected to work and paid to work,” one respondent said. “I have lost financially, including super.” A NAB spokesperson said the bank “does not expect colleagues to be working unreasonable additional hours.” “We take seriously any instance where workload impacts a colleague’s health and life outside work. If this is the case, we encourage colleagues to raise their concerns with their leader, or to report any concerns via our confidential whistleblower line.” Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636 24.Legal experts have labelled Scott Morrison’s latest attacks on the New South Wales corruption watchdog “disgraceful” and “stupid”, as the Liberal party ramps up efforts to have Gladys Berejiklian contest the federal seat of Warringah. On Monday, the prime minister doubled down on his previous comments in parliament last week when he called the Independent Commission Against Corruption a “kangaroo court,” and accused it of trying to “publicly humiliate” the former NSW premier. “Gladys was put in a position of actually having to stand down and there was no findings of anything,” Morrison said on Monday, in advance of any possible findings by Icac. Berejiklian resigned voluntarily in September, in line with her own ruling that an MP who is a substantial subject of an investigation must stand aside. “I don’t call that justice. What I saw was a pile on,” Morrison said. Icac is investigating whether Berejiklian failed to declare a conflict of interest due to her secret relationship with the then MP for Wagga, Daryl Maguire, when she was involved in awarding lucrative grants to Maguire’s electorate as treasurer and later as premier. Berejiklian has denied any wrongdoing and Icac is yet to hand down its findings. There’s growing speculation the former NSW premier will put her hand up for Liberal preselection to run against Zali Steggall in the northern Sydney electorate, after the independent won it from former prime minister Tony Abbott in 2019. The chair of the Centre for Public Integrity and former NSW supreme court judge, Anthony Whealy, criticised Morrison for dismissing the serious issues raised by the Icac inquiry. “Even those who admire Berejiklian for many of her qualities when she was premier, realise there has to be a serious inquiry into the situation that arose … in unloading millions of dollars of public money into the Wagga electorate at the same time she was in a relationship with the member for Wagga,” he said. “For Morrison to dismiss that as being of no significance, is to trash integrity and accountability in the most terrible fashion,” he said. For her part, Berejiklian insisted before Icac that Maguire was treated just like any other MP and that she did not consider she needed to disclose the relationship, which was a personal matter. Whealy said calling it a kangaroo court showed the prime minister “had no idea what NSW Icac legislation says, because it is not a court at all.” “It’s an investigative body that is precisely the same as a royal commission. No one suggested that the royal commissions into banking or trade unions, or aged care were kangaroos courts and they were conducted in public,” he said. “To accuse Icac in this way, is to blatantly misunderstand its nature or it’s a wilful refusal to acknowledge what its true function is,” he said. Former judge of the Victorian court of appeal Stephen Charles SC said Morrison’s comments were “disgraceful”. “I thought that what they indicated that he was hoping the former premier would stand against Zali Steggall and that Icac’s activities were interfering with his wishes.” Barrister Geoffrey Watson, who was counsel assisting Icac in its investigation of Labor MP, Eddie Obeid, said Morrison was “trivialising” Icac’s investigation when he accused it of simply investigating her personal relationship. “It’s not that he’s said it’s a kangaroo court, that’s just stupid. It’s that he said it was an investigation into who was her boyfriend. That’s a trivialisation of an investigation into whether there had been compliance at the highest level with a code of conduct. You set the standards from the top,” he said. “But what I found really awful was he suggested that Icac had pursued this as a politically motivated agenda – and that was quite improper, and he should apologise to the people and Icac for that remark,” he said. The Law Council of Australia has called for “moderation in the debate over the proposed federal anti-corruption commission” after Morrison’s “kangaroo court” comment last week. “Respect for legal institutions underpins the administration of justice in Australia. The structure and powers of any commission are important topics for discussion, but any commentary must be tempered by fairness and balance,” Law Council of Australia president, Dr Jacoba Brasch QC, said. Morrison has made much of the fact that Berejiklian has not been accused of criminal conduct. But University of Sydney professor of constitutional law, Anne Twomey said the definition of corrupt conduct was much broader in NSW than that of criminality. “So you can be found to have engaged in corrupt conduct if you have misused your public office by acting in a manner that is dishonest or partial, by misusing public information or those sorts of things she said.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “I have noted what they are trying to do is to redefine the meaning of corruption so that corruption is only when you have committed a criminal offence,” she said of the federal government. Twomey said that there was no legal bar to Berejiklian running for federal parliament while an investigation by Icac was yet to make findings. Section 44 of the constitution prevents a person holding public office if they have been convicted of a criminal offence that carries a sentence of one year or more. “She hasn’t been convicted of anything and as far as I know Icac is not contemplating that,” she said. Charles agreed there was nothing stopping her from standing for federal office. “However, it is dangerous for those who choose to put her forward for election because there is always the prospect that she might get an adverse finding and that would be seriously disadvantageous.” Berejiklian has not yet declared any intention to run for the Federal seat. However Whealy said it would be hard to see the consistency between Berejiklian deciding she should step down of her own volition because of an ongoing inquiry into her integrity and then immediately stand as the member for Warringah. “There is no imperative from a legal point of view not to stand, but politically it would be damaging for the Liberal party and for her personally because of the outstanding conclusion of the investigation, which on its face is quite a serious matter,” he said.An alliance of legal services have urged the New South Wales government to to stop chasing people to pay Covid fines, saying have been issued incorrectly and have disproportionately hurt Indigenous Australians, homeless groups and people living with a disability. The Redfern Legal Centre, Public Interest Advocacy Centre, and Aboriginal Legal Service are among 33 groups who have written to NSW finance minister Damien Tudehope, calling for him to take “urgent action” to address the hardship and unfairness caused by Covid fines. The groups say their experience in assisting NSW residents with fines show that a “significant” number were issued either incorrectly or unfairly. They say enforcement action is having a disproportionate impact on disadvantaged and marginalised groups, who have the least capacity to pay. Data obtained by the Redfern Legal Centre shows that in July, August, and September this year, 47,414 fines were issued for breaches of public health orders, creating $43,234,340 in debt. The legal services say almost 18,000 fines are still unpaid and 99% have been escalated to enforcement. “The data RLC uncovered clearly shows that a significant number of people are struggling to resolve their fines, many of which we believe have been wrongly issued,” Redfern Legal Centre chief executive, Joanna Shulman, said. “We are asking for a reprieve over the holiday period to give people additional time needed to seek advice and obtain a fair and just resolution of their fines.” Adjusting for population size, the local government areas with the largest volume of fines are Brewarrina, Coonamble, Gilgandra, Moree Plains, Walgett, Bourke and Gunnedah. Those LGAs all have significant Indigenous populations. “We are very concerned about the disproportionate impact of PHO fines on groups already experiencing hardship,” the 33 groups said in their open letter to Tudehope. “The experience of legal services also suggests that marginalised and disadvantaged groups such as people experiencing homelessness and people with psychosocial disability have been disproportionately issued PHO fines.” The groups say they are being inundated with requests for help, and want the NSW government to pause the enforcement program for four months. “We are concerned that people who are unable to engage legal help because of their circumstances will be left with an unjust fine debt,” the letter says. Piac chief executive Jonathon Hunyor described the police approach to issuing fines as “heavy-handed and inflexible”. “We now have many people who will struggle to pay fines and need time to get help and consider their options,” he said. Homelessness NSW, one of the signatories to the letter, has warned fines are hurting those experiencing homelessness disproportionately. The impact was particularly pronounced for Aboriginal people experiencing homelessness, according to the organisation’s chief executive, Katherine McKernan. “During the Covid lockdown, people experiencing homelessness were also less able to adhere to the stay at home orders and needed support to stay safe from Covid rather than being fined simply because they had nowhere to go,” she said. Tudehope said the government’s highest priority has always been to “ensure the health and safety of the people of NSW”. He said the community would expect that NSW is taking steps to ensure fines are collected. “The public health orders have been in place for a reason, to ensure as many people as possible are protected from serious illness or even death while we were battling this global health pandemic,” he said. “If you think you’ve been incorrectly issued a fine, there are options for you to have that reviewed. If you have difficulty paying the fine there are payment plans available.” The overwhelming majority of fines are issued by NSW police, though a tiny amount are issued by other agencies. Revenue NSW is responsible for collecting the fines. The agency allows customers to set up manageable payment plans, assists Centrelink customers using Centrepay arrangements, and resolves fines through work and development orders. It also refers some customers to the National Debt Helpline. In rare cases, it can also write off or stay the fine. “My message is this – don’t put it off for tomorrow, don’t leave it in the too hard basket,” Tudehope said. “Get in contact with us and work with us to resolve your fine.” The Redfern Legal Centre data further highlights a trend revealed by similar statistics on Covid fine enforcement. In a report released in October, the NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research found police disproportionately fined residents of western Sydney for Covid-19 breaches during the Delta outbreak, despite surveys suggesting its residents were among the most compliant in the state. The crime statistics agency has warned the high volume of fines issued to residents in Sydney’s areas of concern would pose a “significant burden for some sections of the community who are already vulnerable” and urged the government to monitor the longer-term impact of the police response. Samantha Lee, a police accountability solicitor at Redfern Legal Centre, has previously told the Guardian that “the majority” of cases the organisation is dealing with should arguably be withdrawn. “We are of the view that in the majority of the cases coming to us, the police have applied the law incorrectly,” she said. “I believe that we’re not even at the tip of the iceberg. I think we’re looking at a systemic failure by the police. There will be I think thousands more fines that have potentially been issued incorrectly.”Any swimmer will tell you that once the weather warms up, their exercise routine becomes subject to disruptions from fair weather swimmers: people who haven’t learnt the politics of lap swimming. Things like not pushing off ahead of someone about to tumble turn; no board shorts in the fast lane; if someone is overtaking you it’s not an invitation to speed up; and only jerks do butterfly in a public pool. Now that summer is here, hopefully we’ll all find ourselves beside a pool or at the beach in the coming months, so we thought it was a good moment remember swimwear can benefit from good manners too. This week, we asked swimwear experts for advice on how to keep bathers in great shape. Rinse after every wear When you get out of the pool or the ocean, it’s tempting to remove wet swimwear, wrap it in a towel and leave it at the bottom of your bag. Instead, Araks Yeramyan the designer of Araks, says it’s really important to rinse the salt and chlorine off your swimsuit immediately. She says doing so “will save your suit from everything” and prevent sagging caused by damaged fibres. Carolina Quintero Rodriguez, a fashion lecturer at RMIT University, says this is because tap water or any water with neutral to basic pH levels will remove any salts or chemicals on the suit that can weaken the elastic and material over time. Hang to dry in shade Richard Jarman is the creative director of Commas and an avid swimmer. He says after you’ve washed your swimwear in freshwater, leave it to dry in the shade. “But don’t forget them!” “I’ve had countless holidays where I’ve left swimwear anywhere from beach change rooms to hotel balconies.” To ensure your swimwear keeps its shape, Yeramyan says not to wring swimwear and to let it air-dry on a flat surface. Direct sunlight can cause the fabric to fade, she says, so when you’re not wearing your bathers sunbaking or swimming, keep them away from it. Machine wash after a few wears Every so often, swimwear can benefit from a cold machine wash. Jarman does this once a week. He says, “I swim everyday, so I like to wash my swimwear with detergent every week on a gentle cycle.” Quintero Rodriguez says most swimsuits are made from polyester, polyamides or nylon, which are machine washable. She recommends washing them on “gentle agitations and gentle spin cycles”. Yeramyan says hand washing is better for your swimsuit, but it’s a good idea to occasionally use a mild soap or detergent like Dr. Bronner’s. When machine washing she says to use a Guppyfriend washing bag to prevent the pollution caused by the shedding of microfibres from synthetic materials. Avoid high heats Quintero Rodriguez says there are studies that show polyester and polyamides are affected by the temperature of the water, she says, “It is very important that the garments are washed in cold or warm water, as heat can damage the fibers and cause wrinkles in the garment.” Yeramyan agrees, she says “direct or high heat will ruin the integrity of the swimsuit over time. Never tumble dry, iron, or dry clean a swimsuit.” Parting tips Be sure your swimsuit is completely dry before you store it to prevent mildew and smells. Be careful when using sunscreen and tanning products or when getting into mineral baths or hot springs because these can mark your swimsuit. If you stain your suit, Yeramyan says to “try using a chemical free dish soap to remove the stain” she also suggests “a foam makeup wedge can be a good tool to remove stains and marks”.Booming housing wealth, unspent superannuation and lower fertility are increasing the size of Australians’ inheritances, according to the Productivity Commission. Despite helping the rich get richer, inheritances are nevertheless shrinking relative inequality by giving a bigger boost to poorer households’ wealth, the government thinktank found in a report released on Tuesday. In 2018, Australians passed on $120bn to their nearest and dearest – 90% as inheritances and the rest as gifts – with an average inheritance netting the recipient $125,000. The report found older Australians’ wealth is booming due to “strong real growth in house prices and almost three decades of growth in superannuation balances”. It projects a fourfold increase in the total value of inheritances between 2020 and 2050 “partly driven by rising wealth among older age groups” with housing wealth a “significant factor”, followed by unspent super. “Older age groups own more housing wealth, they draw down on housing wealth slowly, and inherit large housing wealth from their partners in old age,” it said. Housing wealth represents about half the wealth of people aged 30 to 59, but 54% for those aged 60 to 99 in 2018, set to increase to 66% by 2048. The ageing population will see the number of deaths double by 2050, with older people making up a larger share, and falling fertility rates mean “fewer children to leave their wealth to in the future”, it said. Inheritance of real estate is tipped to reach about $100bn in 2019 dollars in the year 2035, assuming house prices rise in line with inflation. The report found that wealth transfers “reduced relative wealth inequality, because wealthier people received less in wealth transfers as a share of their existing wealth than poorer people”. “For example, as a share of their existing wealth, transfers boosted the wealth of the bottom 20% [of households by wealth] by about 30 times more than for those in the top 20%.” The report found that asset price growth itself, particularly for housing, has a much greater impact on wealth inequality than inheritances. Although it noted that parents lending or giving money to their children to buy houses – dubbed the bank of Mum and Dad – could have “broader effects on future house prices and affordability that could affect wealth inequality”, it said there was a lack of data to study the impact. The Productivity Commission found that a high rate of “precautionary saving” among the elderly in anticipation of aged care and medical expenses is leaving many retirees with lower consumption and standard of living than they can afford, with many reluctant to draw down on their housing wealth. The productivity commissioner, Lisa Gropp, said Australians are “[giving] tremendous sums of wealth during and at the end of their lives”. “Over the past two decades, the total value of wealth transferred was about $1.5 trillion,” she said. Gropp said inherited wealth is “only a modest contributor to intergenerational wealth persistence”, accounting for about one third. “The rest comes from all the other things parents give to their children – education, networks, values and other opportunities. “By the time people receive inheritances, they’ll usually be well into middle age — about 50 years old on average. This limits the impact inheritances have on opening up lifetime choices and opportunities about career and family.” Australia has experienced a boom in house prices, with double-digit annual growth in many cities in the past two years, only expected to contract in 2023 with rising interest rates. Australia’s taxation system is geared towards encouraging intergenerational transfers of housing wealth, as the family home is exempt from the pension assets test. Labor lost the 2019 election in part on its proposals to change negative gearing and capital gains property taxes, and the misconception that ending excess franking credit rebates amounted to a “death tax”.The latest Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (Hilda) survey, released on Tuesday, shows that while incomes received a boost prior to the pandemic, inequality remains little changed, poverty is on the rise and the casualisation of work is becoming endemic. The Hilda survey tracks more than 17,500 people in 9,500 households and has been running since 2001. It provides a unique insight into how lives have changed over the course of this century across a wide range of social and economic factors. The survey, importantly, gives us an annual figure for median household income (as well as the wealthy in the 90th percentile and those in the 10th percentile). This is valuable to counter the times when politicians seek to suggest “average income” is somehow “middle Australia”. If you want to talk about middle Australia, you need to talk about the median household income – ie the level at which half earn more and half earn less. In 2019, median household income grew quite strongly compared with the lean years after the GFC: If the graph does not display please click here As I observed at the time this is largely because that was the year of the government’s first lot of tax cuts. The latest survey estimates that in 2019 the median “equivalised” household income was $52,900. This figure is the income of a single-person household at the median level of living standards. To adjust this amount for different household sizes we add an extra 50% per adult and 30% per child. Thus in 2019 the median disposable income for a family of four was $111,090: If the graph does not display please click here Because this is after tax, it is tough to estimate the median gross income for households. But if we assume a 60:40 income split for couples, we can estimate that a median income family of four needed a gross household income of $136,400, while a single person needed to earn $64,300: If the graph does not display please click here It is worth noting that in 2019 average male weekly full-time earnings was equivalent to $95,732 annual income, and for women it was $79,554. So a couple on average full-time earnings in 2019 would have had a pre-tax income of $175,286 – well above the median level for all families of up to three children. But while these numbers are helpful for fact-checking politicians talking about “middle Australia”, where the Hilda survey really comes into its own is looking at changes over time. The survey finds that in each of the three years from 2017 to 2019 the percentage of households in poverty rose. The survey notes that poverty levels fell “between 2007 and 2016, from 13.2% of the population to 9.8%, but by 2019 it had risen to 11.3%. The survey also found a significant increase in the casualisation of labour. While the overall percentage of workers who are casual has actually fallen, this is mostly because older workers make up a greater share of the workforce than in the past and they are less likely to be casual. But workers under 35 are more likely to be casually employed than earlier this century: If the graph does not display please click here The survey also finds that the average hourly rate for casual workers has risen much more slowly than for other workers: If the graph does not display please click here But as employers have shifted to employing these (cheaper) casual workers, the average hours worked by casuals has increased, while the average hours worked by others has fallen: If the graph does not display please click here What this also reflects is that casual work is becoming more ingrained than in the past. At the beginning of this century, around 42% of casual workers would be in a permanent job within four years. Now it is down to 36%: If the graph does not display please click here Similarly, while new young entrants into the workforce are on average older and more educated than in the past, they are also less likely to be entering into a full-time job – regardless of their qualifications: If the graph does not display please click here The survey also finds that individual contracts are now more common than they were in 2008 under WorkChoices: If the graph does not display please click here Both the government and the opposition will find things in the Hilda survey to trumpet and to use in an election. The government will argue its tax cuts increased household incomes, but the figures also show that the next stage of cuts will overwhelmingly favour the wealthy. Labor, on the other hand, can point to the change in how casual work is being used and how people are more and more stuck in work with little security and less opportunity to move to full-time and permanent arrangements.A fee-paying school in Bristol named after the slave trader Edward Colston is to change its name after a consultation attracted thousands of responses from the school and wider community. Colston’s school was set up by the Bristol-born merchant in 1710 as Colston’s hospital and has retained his name. Present and former pupils, parents and staff at the private school will now help choose a new name, to be announced next summer. Colston’s school is the last educational institution in Bristol to bear Edward Colston’s name. Colston primary school changed its name in 2018 after a consultation with parents and children, and Colston’s girls’ school decided this year to change its name to Montpelier high school. In June 2020 Colston’s statue was pushed into Bristol harbour during a Black Lives Matter protest. It was recovered by the council and is now on display at the city’s M Shed museum while its future is determined. A consultation on the school’s name attracted more than 2,500 responses, including 1,000 from members of the public with no connection to the school, which were overwhelmingly (81%) in favour of retaining the Colston name. Responses from those in the school community were “more inclined” to see a name change as a positive step, the school said. Nick Baker, chair of the school’s governors, said: “After a lengthy period of consultation, consideration and reflection, it became clear that those with a closer connection to the school would prefer to have a name that was more relevant for the pupils and staff of today and tomorrow. “It is hoped that a new identity will do more to reflect the values and ethos that the school stands for today and to make it even more welcoming to the local community it serves.” The governors said the move would not erase the school’s history, and teaching of the transatlantic slave trade and the role of Colston in Bristol’s history would remain a key part of the curriculum. The headteacher, Jeremy McCullough, said: “Changing the name will not change the nature of our happy, diverse and forward-looking school. It is an exciting new chapter for the school, and I am proud of our pupils and staff for engaging in this complex discussion and for being a part of the future they want to see.”A sheriff’s office in Colorado faced outrage after it posted a picture of a man dressed as Santa Claus applying for permit to carry a concealed handgun. “Guess who came in to receive his concealed handgun permit today?” the El Paso county sheriff’s office tweeted on Friday, adding a Santa Claus emoji. It added: “Did you know the El Paso county sheriff’s office has issued 49,750 concealed handgun permits with another 2,560 awaiting to be issued?” The office also linked to instructions to its website about how to apply for a concealed handgun permit. By Monday, the post had been commented on and shared more than 5,000 times. Many condemned the insensitivity of such a post so soon after the deadliest US high school shooting this year, in which in Oxford, Michigan last Tuesday a 15-year-old killed four students and injured seven people including a teacher. “I’m sitting here in downtown Oxford, MI, waiting for the candlelight vigil to start to pay tribute to four students who were murdered by a handgun smuggled into the school. But by all means, tell kids Santa carries a concealed weapon,” one person replied. Another wrote: “The families of the kids slaughtered in Oxford, MI would like a word. My daughter, who’s best friend is fighting for his life due to a self-inflicted gunshot wound, would like one as well. This is a reason this keeps happening.” Another wrote: “I don’t think the idea of Santa needing a handgun is as uplifting as you think it is.” The El Paso sheriff’s office said that it had “intended to highlight our staff in the concealed handgun permit office, not to be insensitive. “Santa correlates to the month of December and we thought he would help to recognize our hard working staff.” A day after the post from the El Paso sheriff’s office, the Kentucky Republican congressman Thomas Massie posted a picture of himself and what appeared to be his family, smiling and posing with various guns. “Merry Christmas! ps. Santa, please bring ammo,” Massie tweeted. The post met with criticism from Democratic and Republican politicians alike, for being insensitive so soon after the Oxford High School shooting.Pep Guardiola has urged Kevin De Bruyne to show his best form for Manchester City, with the playmaker to start at RB Leipzig on Tuesday as he returns following coronavirus. Before the illness the Belgian believed he was finding his rhythm after sustaining a serious facial injury in the Champions League final defeat to Chelsea in May and damaging ankle ligaments at Euro 2020. De Bruyne’s substitute appearance in the 3-1 victory at Watford on Saturday was his first for City since 6 November. Guardiola confirmed the 30-year-old will start the final Champions League group game at Leipzig, with City already through as group winners. Guardiola said: “Now he has to come back and fight for a position like everyone else. But Kevin doesn’t have to show absolutely anything to me. He has to show himself he’s back, and do what he has to do, like he has done the last five or six years.” De Bruyne is competing for a place in midfield with Bernardo Silva, Phil Foden, Jack Grealish, Cole Palmer, Raheem Sterling, Ilkay Gündogan, Gabriel Jesus and Ferran Torres, though the last two are injured. Guardiola said: “Of course the competition is necessary in the team and he knows it, but Bernardo knows it and Gündogan knows it, and all the wingers and strikers know it. They know they have to play good, playing five minutes, 10 minutes or 90 minutes. I know all of them, they don’t have to show me anything. “Kevin got corona – he was growing in his physical condition and then it was a setback. It’s normal because the people who suffer corona in the next days, they feel so empty. So now it is step-by-step – he played the first 30 minutes [at Watford]. On Tuesday he will start and we’ll see how many minutes he can play.” Guardiola has selected five development squad players for Leipzig – Palmer, James McAtee, Conrad Egan-Riley, Josh Wilson-Ebrand and Roméo Lavia.Booksellers have kept readers around the UK going throughout a series of lockdowns. Now the reading community is coming together to back their local bookshops, with tens of thousands of pounds donated to support stores in Crickhowell, Brighton and Buckley. The Booksellers Association said that independent bookshop numbers have actually grown over the past 22 months, with its independent membership up by 12% since the pandemic started to 1,026 stores, the highest since 2012. Fifty-two new bookshops, including chain branches, opened last year, and 57 have opened this year to date. In Crickhowell in Wales, Emma Corfield-Walters found herself wondering what to do when her landlord said he would be selling the building which housed her bookshop, Book-ish, by the end of the year. She couldn’t borrow enough money to buy it. “We were given the first opportunity to buy it, but we had a shortfall,” she said. “One night, it was looking really impossible. I had a bit of a cry, and then I had a bit of a panic. And then I did what I’ve done for the past two years when I’m having a difficult time – I just put it all out there on Twitter. Everyone said I should do a GoFundMe page, but I didn’t really feel comfortable doing that for myself. I’ve done it for authors, and to get books to schools and things, but it felt really weird doing it for me.” She couldn’t think of another way of keeping the shop and its 22 staff going, however. “I’d got to think of the town and what would happen if we didn’t have the bookshop there, so I kind of managed to sort out my brain and make it OK with me.” Corfield-Walters’ fundraiser has now raised £26,855 of her £25,000 goal via GoFundMe, with donations from names ranging from Michael Sheen – “I’ve never met Michael Sheen but someone just tweeted it to him and said ‘Welsh bookshop’ – to authors including Jane Fallon, Katie Fforde and Kiran Millwood Hargrave. She has exchanged contracts on the shop, and is hoping the rest of the funding, in the form of loans and mortgages, will arrive before Christmas so she can complete the sale. “There’s been a groundswell of support for indie bookshops,” said Corfield-Walters. “I’m very open and honest online about what it is like to run a bookshop and going through the pandemic, and I think they feel a little bit of ownership. They feel part of a community, and that community has helped us.” At the other end of Wales, a fire at Berwyn Books in Buckley, Flintshire last month saw over 400,000 books destroyed. “The fire spread across the whole premises. We don’t really know what to say, except everything’s gone,” said staff at the time. But thousands of books have been donated to the bookshop since, and a fundraiser launched by customer Lauren Simcott “to help the staff get through this trying time, especially before Christmas” has already raised £2,800. Staff said they had been “overwhelmed with messages of love and condolences”, which had made them “realise how important this place was to so many people, and to know what an impact we have made to so many lives has given us some light in such a dark time”. Afrori Books, the first Black-owned bookshop in Brighton, meanwhile, opened in October after a crowdfunding campaign raised more than £12,000. Specialising in books by black authors, owner Carolynn Bain told supporters that “you’re the reason we’re here”, and “because of you, we get to make history”. “It’s really heartening to see the love and support from local communities for their bookshops, recognising the tremendous creativity and resilience of booksellers during the challenges of the past two years”, said Meryl Halls, managing director of the Booksellers Association of the UK &amp; Ireland. “Bookshops have long been leaders on their own high streets and as they have reopened, they are continuing to provide for book lovers to come together and share their passion for reading. It is likely that Brexit, supply chain issues and COVID will provide further challenges in 2022, but with the support of their communities – and with an enlightened and creative approach to high streets and town centres by national and local government - there is reason to believe that the future of bookshops is bright.”A woman who won more than £5m on the national lottery was stabbed in the face seven times by her partner after she told him she planned to leave him, a court has been told. Emma Brown, 50, lost 75% of her vision in her right eye after the attack by Stephen Gibbs, 45, who has been sentenced to 18 years for attempted murder. The pair had been in a relationship for more than 10 years but the “dynamics changed” after Brown’s win, with Gibbs unable to deal with his partner having more control of her life. Ieuan Bennett, prosecuting, said Gibbs accused Brown of cheating on him shortly before the attack and fitted a tracker to her car so that he could spy on her. Bennett said: “The dynamics of the relationship were changed in 2017 when she had the good fortune of winning the national lottery. She became financially independent of the defendant.” Merthyr Tydfil crown court heard Brown bought a string of properties after her win and wanted to travel around the world. But on 30 January she returned home at 7.30pm to find Gibbs drunk in the kitchen of their £700,000 home in Barry, south Wales. He questioned her about where she had been and accused her of having an affair with a schoolfriend. Bennett said: “She informed him their relationship was at an end. She told him she had seen the relationship falling apart for a number of months. She remembers him losing his temper and grabbing her by the throat.” The court heard Gibbs slammed his partner into a wall and put her in a headlock. Brown tried to escape by running to the front of the house but Gibbs caught up. The prosecutor said: “She must have gone to the ground. She remembers him going into the kitchen and taking a large kitchen knife.” He began to repeatedly stab her. Bennett said: “She remembers the sight of a knife she thought was going into one of her eyes.” Brown pleaded with Gibbs to stop and, thinking she would die, asked him to tell her mother she loved her. She was left face down in a pool of blood and a neighbour heard her calling for help. Police found Gibbs in his Mercedes with a knife with a long, blood-stained blade on the passenger seat. As well as suffering impaired vision, Brown was left scarred and lost movement in her right arm. In a victim impact statement, Brown said she felt “completely numb to everything” after the attack. “I can’t even begin to contemplate opening myself up again,” she said. “I used to be the life and soul of the party but now I don’t want to be in a large group. I will carry this with me for the rest of my life. I struggle to deal with the fact that we were together for 12 years and we were happy.” Gibbs was previously jailed for six years for stabbing a former partner’s 11-year-old son six times with a kitchen knife. Judge Richard Twomlow told Gibbs he posed “a significant risk” to the public. He will serve 13 years of his sentence in prison and five years on licence, meaning he will receive supervision in the community.More than 300 branches of the convenience store chain Spar in the north of England have been hit by a cyberattack, forcing many of them to close. The attack hit the company’s computer systems, causing a “total IT outage” that has prevented staff from taking card payments and locked them out of emails. Some branches of the chain, one of the few places to buy groceries in many remote communities, are accepting cash but the rest have been forced to close entirely. The IT outage first hit on Sunday and technicians worked through the night to try to fix the problems. According to the Twitter account of one Spar branch on Monday afternoon, there was “no time set to be back online”. “We apologise for the inconvenience this is causing our customers and we are working as quickly as possible to resolve the situation,” an official Twitter account for Spar in the north of England told shoppers. “It is currently impacting stores’ ability to process card payments meaning that a number of SPAR stores are currently closed to shoppers or only taking cash payments.” Distribution partner James Hall &amp; Company, which provides food to nearly 600 Spar sites across the north of England, has also been hit, and its website is down. Earlier this year, Tesco was hit by hackers, leaving thousands of frustrated shoppers unable to buy groceries online at Britain’s biggest supermarket. The attack took Tesco’s online systems out for two days, leaving shoppers unable to book deliveries or amend existing orders. Tesco receives 1.3m online orders every week. The National Cyber Security Centre, which monitors computer-based threats to the public and private sector, said it was aware of the attack.The act of chasing rainbows is a childish one. There’s little time in adulthood to stare wistfully out of the window, wondering what magnificent world exists where those glittering colours touch the ground. Betsy Bradley – the 29-year-old artist from the Midlands who is currently enjoying her first solo exhibition at Ikon Gallery – is on a quest to find out. Or, at least, she’d like us to approach her paintings with the same wide-eyed wonder. This isn’t hard when you are faced with canvases of swooping neons, swirling pastels and thick slashes of International Klein Blue. Something instinctive happens before a painting of such energy; it is loud, so we are quiet. The worries of the day fizzle away before the cacophony of shades. There is thought behind these splashy paintings – Bradley is informed by Buddhist rainbow theory, arte povera and the ability of certain conditions to arise and disperse out of nowhere – but these ideas aren’t plastered all over the gallery walls. In fact, there isn’t any text in the show at all, not even title cards. Bradley is primarily concerned with the present moment; she’s not trying to teach us about art, but inviting us to experience it. So, I step into Chasing Rainbows with eyes wide and mind silent. Alongside the dancing canvases, sculptural pieces of translucent material covered in paint drape from the ceiling, cascading into the space like a morning breeze. In the central gallery, a thin sheet of dusty greens, blues and pink is suspended above a box-shaped room with colourful swirls of sand creeping out of the corners. Pausing beneath the fabric, I look up and spot the high ceilings of the gallery just beyond it, and I hide in this alternate reality where the sky is a medley of rolling tones and the ground is a dazzling, dusty palette. This exhibition encourages many moments of pause. In the first gallery a dividing wall has been removed and replaced by a screen of voile, adorned with thick, lush greens and dashing squiggles of neon orange. Entitled Boogie Wall, it interrupts the cold white walls and passive concrete floors, punctuating the mundanity of the day with a riotous celebration of colour and movement. It also initiates a small, contemplative space at the end of the gallery. There are no windows in here, but the energetic presence of Bradley’s marks creates the sense of looking out across a dazzling summer’s day. Mimicking the rainbow’s ability to appear and disappear, Bradley’s painting sculptures respond to Ikon’s architecture. In the first gallery a swing hangs from a beam and in the final gallery, a lengthy train of voile hangs from a wooden loop in the ceiling, allowing Bradley’s hectic hues to flood the space. It hangs centrally before a 19th-century neo-gothic window, enabling light to pass through it and generate its own temporary pool of rainbows. Opposite is an imposing dust sheet canvas that is the same size as the window. Encased by the arched ceiling, the huge work is the crescendo of the exhibition. Blacks, greys, pinks, greens and an intense royal blue fight it out to form an arresting dreamscape that demands attention. Like an stained-glass window in a church, the canvas enforces reverence and stillness. Once I have regained my senses, I slowly approach and clumps of acrylic and brushstrokes become apparent. There is vulnerability in the detail and the tussle between dark shades and bright flashes makes it feel immensely personal, exposing the contradictory ideologies and characteristics present at the heart of each one of us. Bradley’s artistic process involves a mixture of focused, productive outbursts and slower, thoughtful moments. Using homemade brushes, sponges and other found objects, she only paints “when the energy is right”, perceiving each work as a surprising discovery rather than a pre-planned masterpiece. This organic energy is all over Chasing Rainbows, in every twist of the brush or strike of the paint, but there are times when it is a little muted. The smaller works struggle to embody the same boundless passion – they cannot hold my gaze when I am entranced by a nearby wall of jumping colours. Likewise, a sculpture of two planks of wood holding up a folded dust sheet stuffed in an awkward corner looks like someone forgot to tidy away the remnants of the installation. Describing herself as a goldfish who will only keep making bigger works if placed in a bigger bowl, Bradley truly shines when casting paint across a large surface area. Put her in the Tate Modern Turbine Hall with a few pots of paint, a warehouse worth of voile and an old sweeping brush, and whatever we find the next day, we won’t be disappointed. Betsy Bradley: Chasing Rainbows is on at the Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, until 13 February.I am writing this on day zero, having arrived at my government-designated quarantine hotel after 24 hours of travel. I need to isolate in my room for 10 days and 11 nights. It is, to put it mildly, a bit of a dump: a tired, chipped Formica table, sagging curtains, freezing cold. For this, I paid £2,285. So what is that like? Sitting in this room, I just want to burst into tears. My despair is exacerbated by the knowledge that my suitcase was filled with sleeveless summer clothes suitable for the South African summer, not Birmingham in the bleak midwinter. I phone reception, who tell me that they have only just put the heating on; I should be patient, they say. The room will be warm in 20 minutes. Half an hour later my teeth are still chattering so I phone again, demanding a heater. Another phone call and, half an hour later, a heater is produced. I am forced to perch it on the table because the power socket on the floor is broken. I’m not that fussy about food, though I do long to eat off an actual ceramic plate – everything turns up in those little aeroplane-style packages, with wooden cutlery to boot. This is what £2,285 gets you right now. How did it come to this? My recent trip to South Africa had already been postponed three times, so when the dreaded red-list status was lifted I seized the chance to visit my birthplace of Cape Town, where my family lives (including my parents, who are in their 90s). On Friday 26 November, the final day of my trip, I got the news that South Africa had re-joined the red list, its reward for informing the world about the Omicron variant. Flights were rapidly cancelled, including my own. I needed to get back so I booked through Ethiopian Airlines, via Addis Ababa, and took a pre-flight PCR test. No problem: done and dusted. It was navigating the UK’s passenger locator form maze that would be the problem – and the lottery. I had to book and pay for a quarantine package without knowing where I would be sent. My first hope was for a nice hotel in Gatwick, and I waited ages for the confirmation. I phoned up the company organising it, was put on hold and then told I would be called back. I wasn’t. Soon after that came confirmation that I wouldn’t be staying in Gatwick: “Unfortunately, due to customer demand there is no availability for the dates selected.” Eventually I managed to book another hotel: I was heading for Birmingham. The departure from Cape Town went smoothly. All seemed normal, apart from one thing: all the flight attendants wore visors, masks and long-sleeved paper disposable gowns, full PPE. Heathrow was also surreal, with passengers travelling from red-listed countries ushered to one side but separated from other passengers by no more than barrier tape. There must have been a thousand people in that arrivals hall, all tightly packed, some wearing masks, some not, many wearing them incorrectly. It might as well have been a super-spreader event; there was no enforcement. And so here I am in Birmingham. I understand that people need to be isolated, and we need to take precautions: we are still living in a pandemic. But it’s the mismanaged way that the UK goes about it that vexes me – especially since someone is certainly making money off this racket. It all makes little sense. If, by the fifth day, I’ve received a negative PCR result and have no symptoms, why do I have to stay another five days? Then there’s the financial impact: I work at a school through an agency, and at this rate I won’t be back there until January – I’m losing income I can’t afford, especially now I have this bill of £2,285. For that money, some get the sumptuous Sofitel in London. I get this. Still, there’s nothing to do but take each day as it comes: I’ve ordered one of those streaming USB devices to plug into the television. Count the hours, watch Netflix. Carla Stout is a music teacher who lives near StainesAt least 46 PPE deals were awarded to firms put in a special “VIP lane” by Conservative ministers, MPs and officials during the Covid pandemic before a formal due diligence process was put in place, it has emerged. Ministers had claimed all PPE contracts were put through a rigorous “eight-stage process” for assuring quality and value for money, when criticised over the “VIP lane” via which contracts worth £5bn were handed to companies with political or Whitehall connections. However, a parliamentary answer obtained by Labour’s Angela Rayner reveals that 46 out of the 111 contracts awarded through the “high priority” lane did not go through the formal eight-stage process, which was only brought in on 4 May 2020. Last year, the National Audit Office found that 71 PPE contracts overall were awarded before the eight-stage checking process was created. It said: “The Department for Health and Social Care, supported by other departments, established an eight-stage process to assess and process offers of support to supply PPE. “It set up processes to rapidly check suppliers’ equipment against government’s PPE specifications and to undertake due diligence on the suppliers. Contracts were awarded to 71 suppliers, worth £1.5bn in total, before this process was standardised.” The parliamentary answer to Rayner demonstrates that almost two-thirds of these 71 contracts awarded before the formal due diligence process were given out after referrals from the “VIP lane”. The revelation contradicts claims by Michael Gove, then a senior Cabinet Office minster, who said in the House of Commons earlier this year that “every single procurement decision went through an eight-stage process”. Rayner said the formal process was not in place for many of the companies awarded VIP contracts and accused Gove of misleading people. “It appears that ministers have misled parliament and the public as part of their cover-up of the VIP lane,” she said. “It’s clear that we can’t trust a word of what ministers say about these dealings – that is why we need the publication of all meeting minutes, documents and correspondence related to every contract awarded through the VIP lane. “The PPE fast-track VIP lane could well be just the tip of the iceberg. We need a full independent investigation to get to the bottom of the £3.5bn of contracts handed out [through the fast track].” Lobby Akinnola, spokesperson for Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice, said her father, a Mencap support care worker, had to wear “makeshift PPE fashioned from his scarf and gloves … which is likely how he caught Covid-19 and died”. “It’s hard to put into words how horrifying it is to think that if he’d had access to PPE, he might still be with us today,” she added. “This is why we need the full story on PPE procurement immediately.” It emerged last month that Gove had personally referred David Meller, a Tory donor who supported his leadership bid, through the fast track. Meller’s company later won £164m in Covid PPE contracts. One of the six contracts awarded to Meller Design appears to have been concluded in late April, before the formal eight-stage process was set up. The disclosure drew Gove into a furore over alleged cronyism that has led critics to accuse the government of running a “chumocracy” where MPs’ friends, contacts or acquaintances have won huge contracts without proper process or transparency. Jo Maugham, the director of the Good Law Project, which mounted a legal challenge against the government over the PPE contracts, said: “Once you look at the facts for the government’s VIPs – who were more likely to get a contract – it’s pretty evident they got red carpet treatment. “Indeed, you need look no further than government’s description of them as ‘VIPs’. But still, it’s good of the minister to confirm they were treated differently.” In his answer to Rayner, Edward Argar, a health minister, said: “The ‘eight-stage process’ refers to the introduction of a central clearance board on 4 May 2020. Of the contracts for personal protective equipment, 46 were awarded before that date. “However, all suppliers who were evaluated by officials prior to the introduction of the central board were evaluated on the same criteria for financial standing, technical compliance, price and ability to perform the contract as those who were evaluated after the introduction of the central board.” A government spokesperson said: “At the height of the pandemic, there was a desperate need for PPE to protect health and social care staff and the government rightly took swift and decisive action to secure it. “All contracts underwent rigorous financial, commercial, legal and policy assessment. Ministers were not involved in awarding contracts.” When the list of VIP lane contracts was published, Gove denied that the referral involved any impropriety, saying he passed on offers to supply PPE. “The former minister for the Cabinet Office played no role in the decision to award any PPE contract, and all ministerial interests were properly declared to officials,” they said. A spokesperson for David Meller pointed to a previous statement provided by Meller Designs, which said it had approached the government offering to supply equipment and was “extremely proud” of the role it played in supplying “more than 100m items of PPE”.Facebook’s negligence facilitated the genocide of Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar after the social media network’s algorithms amplified hate speech and the platform failed to take down inflammatory posts, according to legal action launched in the US and the UK. The platform faces compensation claims worth more than £150bn under the coordinated move on both sides of the Atlantic. A class action complaint lodged with the northern district court in San Francisco says Facebook was “willing to trade the lives of the Rohingya people for better market penetration in a small country in south-east Asia.” It adds: “In the end, there was so little for Facebook to gain from its continued presence in Burma, and the consequences for the Rohingya people could not have been more dire. Yet, in the face of this knowledge, and possessing the tools to stop it, it simply kept marching forward.” A letter submitted by lawyers to Facebook’s UK office on Monday says clients and their family members have been subjected to acts of “serious violence, murder and/or other grave human rights abuses” as part of a campaign of genocide conducted by the ruling regime and civilian extremists in Myanmar. It adds that the social media platform, which launched in Myanmar in 2011 and quickly became ubiquitous, aided the process. Lawyers in Britain expect to lodge a claim in the high court, representing Rohingya in the UK and refugees in camps in Bangladesh, in the new year. “As has been widely recognised and reported, this campaign was fomented by extensive material published on and amplified by the Facebook platform,” says the letter from the law firm McCue Jury &amp; Partners. Facebook admitted in 2018 that it had not done enough to prevent the incitement of violence and hate speech against the Rohingya, the Muslim minority in Myanmar. An independent report commissioned by the company found that “Facebook has become a means for those seeking to spread hate and cause harm, and posts have been linked to offline violence”. The McCue letter says: “Despite Facebook’s recognition of its culpability and its pronouncements about its role in the world, there has not been a single penny of compensation, nor any other form of reparations or support, offered to any survivor.” In the US and UK, the allegations against Facebook include: Facebook’s algorithms amplified hate speech against the Rohingya people; it failed to invest in local moderators and fact checkers; it failed to take down specific posts inciting violence against Rohingya people; and it did not shut down specific accounts or delete groups and pages that were encouraging ethnic violence. The US complaint cites Facebook posts that appeared in a Reuters report, with one in 2013 stating: “We must fight them the way Hitler did the Jews, damn Kalars [a derogatory term for Rohingya people].” Another post in 2018, showing a photograph of a boatload of Rohingya refugees, says: “Pour fuel and set fire so that they can meet Allah faster.” The number of Rohingya killed in 2017, during the Myanmar military’s “clearance operations”, is likely to be more than 10,000, according to the medical charity Médicins sans Frontières. About 1 million Rohingyas live in Cox’s Bazar refugee camp, in south-eastern Bangladesh, where McCue and Mishcon de Reya, which is also working on the UK-based case, expect to recruit more claimants. The UK case has about 20 claimants so far, while in the US the class action suit hopes to act on behalf of an estimated 10,000 Rohingya in the country. The Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen has alleged the platform is fanning ethnic violence in countries including Ethiopia and is not doing enough to stop it. She said 87% of the spending on combating misinformation at Facebook is spent on English content, while only 9% of users are English speakers. Responding to Haugen’s revelations, Facebook has said it had a “comprehensive strategy” in place for countries at risk of conflict and violence, including use of native speakers and third-party fact checkers. Facebook’s owner, Meta, has been approached for comment.When I was on the Ashes tour in 1998-99 we had three four-day games against state opposition before the Test series started, tough games against sides packed with big-name players where you had to be absolutely at your best. When I went back to Australia as batting coach four years ago there were three four-day games but against weaker opposition and on pitches that tended to be slow. This time England’s players have had two full days’ play, against their own second-string side, and it is not the best preparation for what they are about to walk into. A noisy crowd at the Gabba, Pat Cummins bowling a bit of nose and toes, a few words flying around – it is the ultimate test and, while it is not easy to recreate that sort of pressure, it doesn’t hurt to try. I remember having a chat with Trevor Bayliss and Paul Farbrace in 2017 about how the players had to prepare themselves for what was coming, the storm of Cummins, Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc. And not just the top order – we found out in the first Test at Brisbane what Australia had planned for our lower order and it was very, very nasty: leg-side theory, coming round the wicket with lots of short balls. So we scheduled practice using a special yellow ball that behaves like a red ball but is not as hard, which allowed me to ramp up the pace. The training was deliberately very challenging and sometimes players did get hit. As a coach you walk a delicate line between trying to upskill players but also wanting to build their confidence. This was designed to be challenging but by training hard and coming through it – and by learning to think clearly and control their emotions – the confidence eventually came. Last week Ollie Pope told me England had been doing a lot of work in the indoor nets and they had again been using these yellow balls. The delicate thing is trying to coax the middle and lower order to do this work, knowing full well they will probably cop it. Player buy-in is important. Four years ago some of the bowlers seemed to feel they had to give it a go for five or 10 minutes rather than they wanted to embrace it, but I remember Craig Overton in particular understood the importance of it and we saw the result with his bravery on debut in Adelaide, when he scored an unbeaten 41. I became a big fan of his as a result and, though he’s perhaps not kicked on as I had hoped, that kind of character and heart in the face of great hostility could come in handy again. I thought we were reasonably well prepared four years ago but after losing the first game at the Gabba we found it hard to come back and Australia went on to win the series 4-0. When I look at the balance of the two sides now I don’t think much has changed. Australia’s bowling attack is virtually the same and they showed then, and have since, the ability to penetrate on hard surfaces, which we found very difficult. England’s bowlers will need to come together quickly and, given I don’t see any individual taking 30 wickets, they will have to hunt as a pack, backing each other up. But if England are to do well, they need a few key players to excel. Ben Stokes will of course be one and Mark Wood’s pace could be the X-factor the attack really needs, but I will be focusing on two batters I enjoyed watching this year. I saw Haseeb Hameed in the nets during the lunch break when New Zealand played at Lord’s and he was hugely impressive. I was batting coach when he played in India in 2016 but he was hitting the ball a lot harder than I remembered and he has very good orthodox basics. He has to be strong enough to go out and play his game. If he occupies the crease for long periods and forges a good opening partnership with Rory Burns, it will help hugely. Then there’s Pope; I saw him bat at the Oval against India, when he scored an excellent 81, and I can’t speak highly enough of how well he played against an outstanding attack. It was very convincing and I was really disappointed to hear he was going to be dropped for the next game at Old Trafford had it gone ahead. I thought that was a huge mistake. He has an all-round game against pace and spin and is someone England need to have faith in. He has played successfully in Australian club cricket, is comfortable there and, if selected, could truly establish himself during the series. Another big memory from 2017 is an interview Nathan Lyon gave in the buildup where he spoke about finishing careers. You could argue it was just part of the hype, something Australia aren’t afraid of throwing into the mixto spice things up, but it certainly irked me and some of the England players. It felt a pretty crass thing to say and I hope this England side remember it, just in case they need a little extra motivation.Two Metropolitan police officers who “dehumanised” two black murder victims “for their own amusement” by taking and sharing photos from the scene where they lay murdered have each been jailed for two years and nine months. Deniz Jaffer, 47, and Jamie Lewis, 33, were ordered to guard the scene in a London park where two sisters, Nicole Smallman, 27, and Bibaa Henry, 46, were found stabbed to death in June 2020. The Old Bailey in London heard that instead they took photos, some showing the bodies, and shared them in two WhatsApp groups, calling the victims “dead birds”. One – a group “called the A team” – contained 41 police officers and the other contained friends of Jaffer and was entitled “Covid cunts”. The sentencing followed a criminal trial in which the two pleaded guilty to misconduct in public office after the Guardian last year revealed the scandal that rocked Britain’s largest force. The court heard the actions of the two officers amounted to a gross breach of trust, stripped the two women of dignity in death and intensified the agony of their mother and their family, some of whom served in the Met. Their actions helped the defence of the murderer of the two women, Danyal Hussein, whose defence team tried to claim possible contamination by the two officers entering the crime scene. Joel Smith, prosecuting, told the Old Bailey: “The bodies of the women would not have been visible from the path adjacent to the large bush where they were found. Nor would it have been possible to take the photographs taken by the defendants from their position on the cordon. “Accordingly, to take the photos found on their phones, the officers would have had to enter the bush itself, thus risking contamination of the crime scene.” Smith added: “The offending stripped Ms Henry and Ms Smallman of dignity in death. That factor is more weighty given that the offenders were charged with protecting their bodies.” The judge, Mark Lucraft QC, described the offences as “appalling” and done for a “cheap thrill”. Both former officers will serve half their sentence before being released on licence. The mother of the two sisters, Mina Smallman, described their actions as a “betrayal of such catastrophic proportion”, “sacrilegious”, and carried out “for their own amusement”. Smallman, in her victim impact statement, said: “It made me think of the lynchings in the Deep South of the USA where you would see smiling faces around a hanging dead body. Those police officers felt so safe, so untouchable, that they felt they would take photographs with our murdered daughters. Those police officers dehumanised our children.” She believed police racism was a factor in the Met’s initial bungling of the search for her daughters when they were reported missing. Speaking outside court after the sentencing, Smallman said she was “thrilled” the officers had been jailed and not received suspended sentences. “We’ve been to hell and back again,” she said. “There is more work to be done. The most important thing [is], because of the sentencing, we are part of the change that’s going to come in the culture of the police force.” Jaffer left the post he had been assigned to and went into bushes where the women had been left by their killer. The officer took out a mobile phone and took pictures of the bodies from around 12 feet away. He sent four images to Lewis, who edited one of the photos and superimposed his face on to it with the two murdered women visible in the background, to produce a “selfie-style” image. Jaffer’s barrister said the former officer only sent the photos to selected members of the Covid WhatsApp group, which consisted of couples he and his wife had holidayed with. Lewis, who sent one picture to fellow officers with the text: “Unfortunately I’m sat next to two dead birds full of stab wounds.” Jaffer resigned from the Met in August, whilst Lewis was sacked by a disciplinary tribunal. Henry, a senior social worker, and Smallman, a photographer, had been celebrating their elder sister’s birthday in Fryent Country Park in Wembley, north-west London. They were stabbed to death by Hussein, now 19, who was obsessed with Satan and was jailed for life for the murders.“Lifestyle” users of class A drugs will be targeted as part of the government’s strategy as it argues that their demand for drugs fuels exploitation. The proposal to target “middle-class” drug users by taking away their passports or driving licences has been met with criticism by campaigners, who view the focus on punitive sentences as regressive. Six readers share their views on the measures, with many arguing that the proposal is outdated, while others welcome the focus on casual drug use. ‘We need to draw attention to lifestyle users’ It’s important to address the idea of a lifestyle user consciously and I think any conversation about deterring them is valuable. I work with a lot of middle-class young people, the vast majority of whom use drugs relatively safely. But I also work with young people at the bottom of the ladder: people without the safety net of supportive family relationships and a secure family income. Those young people are exposed to the same culture of normalised drug use but without any protection. We need to recognise that this attitude is only functional in a very specific, secure socioeconomic bubble, and that this bubble heavily influences the culture of the rest of society. While drugs are “cool” for the privileged, they will continue to be dangerous for the rest. Rebecca, 36, East Sussex, teacher ‘Illegal drugs result in a long supply chain of human misery and suffering’ I would err on the liberal side in terms of whether people choose to use drugs or not. I think that legalising less harmful drugs, like cannabis, would have a net benefit for humanity. However, what I would like to see change more broadly is taking greater responsibility for the environmental and social impacts of our consumption. Illegal drugs result in a long supply chain of human misery and suffering. For that reason I’m in favour of the legislation. I favour the view of collective responsibility – think about the effect your actions have on other people, whether that’s kids getting pulled into county lines or what’s happening in Colombia. It should be a reason not to be involved over your kind of personal gratification for a short period of time. Cherie, 49, London, works in fashion ‘The government is driven by outdated attitudes’ Every time in the last 20 or 30 years that there’s been any kind of step towards changing drugs policy, in anything other than a punitive sense, there is massive backlash from backbenchers and from the more narrow-minded “let’s lock them up” brigade. This proposal will have a pitiful effect on changing the problems with illegal drugs in the UK. Many countries around the world are legalising cannabis for recreational use. The fact that we are wasting millions of pounds prosecuting teenagers for the use/sale of the same substance and ruining their lives and future prospects by throwing them into a broken prison system, underlines how closed-minded and ridiculous our current laws are. James, 41, Reading, works in heritage ‘It’s pretty extreme to make anybody lose their passport or driving licence’ Whilst I think that it’s good that drug policy shouldn’t be unfairly aimed at the working class, I still think it’s pretty extreme to make anybody lose their passports or driving licences. This “war on drugs” approach has shown itself again and again to just create more problems. If decriminalisation can work for Portugal to reduce drug usage, then it can work for the UK. It’s time to stop treating it as a crime and as a public health problem. I think more money needs to spent on drug education instead, for example highlighting the number of deaths from the global trade of cocaine for just gram or kilo sold. Public health messages can be extremely effective, perhaps more so than even advertising when done well. If we refuse to learn from history then we are simply doomed to repeat it. Joe, 28, designer, London ‘I have seen how the the drug trade devastates entire communities’ I broadly agree with it but would maybe make exceptions for people that are young and still “experimenting” or those who have an addiction. But I see a lot of middle-aged, educated and wealthy people that should know better. I was born in a European country and grew up in a poor area. I have seen first hand how the the drug trade devastates entire communities, and it exists because some middle-aged idiots in London want to have “a bit of fun”. I think confiscating passports could be impactful on that category of people, but I think three months in jail, followed by community service in places and with people affected by the drug trade could also help them “see the light”. Anonymous, 57, management consultant, London ‘I think money should be used on rehabilitation for drug users’ It’s stupid, won’t work, is unenforceable and a tragic waste of money. Being ‘tough on drugs’ has been the stance for so long and it’s obviously not worked, and never will. I think money should be used on opening up more needle sharing centres and rehabilitation for drug users with problems of addiction etc. Or on social workers, or anything but more police overtime so they can door knock someone to disrupt the flow of drugs into a regional town for four hours. It’s just yet another policy brought to us by the bright sparks who are as far away from real life as possible. Ed, 25, sales account manager, ManchesterIn 1959 Martin Wood asked his boss at the Clarendon Laboratory, Oxford University, if he could start a company making specialist magnets for research. At that time the concept of a spinout was unheard of in that university, but the easy-going Hungarian physicist Nicholas Kurti offered every support. He asked only that Martin, the physics department’s resident engineer, remain in the lab for another 10 years. Working out of a shed in his back garden, Martin, who has died aged 94, laid the foundations of the global business Oxford Instruments, his wife, Audrey, taking on the administration. Martin’s role in the Clarendon Laboratory was to manage the high magnetic fields facility, designing and making powerful electromagnets that Kurti and his colleagues used to investigate materials at very low temperatures. The generators to power the magnets ran only at night, as they required a substantial fraction of the local power station’s output. As former students left to continue their work elsewhere, they would ask Martin to make magnets for their new labs. Starting a company was the realisation of his long-held ambition to create a productive and rewarding working environment. Two years after he founded Oxford Instruments, the advent of superconducting materials meant that he could run an extremely powerful magnet from a car battery. Martin seized the opportunity and his company grew rapidly to become a global leader in designing and making superconducting magnets. They made it possible to realise the vision of Peter Mansfield at the University of Nottingham and others, to create images of slices through the living body using the phenomenon of magnetic resonance. Oxford Instruments supplied superconducting magnets designed by Martin for the first whole-body MRI scanners in 1980. He was knighted in 1986. In 1983 the company was floated on the stock exchange with an initial valuation of £126m. By this time the Woods had had ample time to reflect on the obstacles facing entrepreneurs wanting to start new technology-based businesses: finding affordable premises, obtaining start-up capital, getting business advice and recruiting skilled employees. Applying his engineer’s mind and his unique network of contacts in academia, business, and local and national government, Martin set about fixing these problems. He and Audrey endowed a charity, the Oxford Trust, which converted a disused builder’s yard in the city into a set of small units for start-ups, one of the first business incubators in the country. This has now grown into an independent national network of innovation centres, Oxford Innovation. Other pioneering initiatives started by the Oxford Trust (through which I got to know Martin as a trustee for 10 years) included a venture capital network of small investors, and a programme of educational outreach to engage the next generation of scientists and engineers. It acted as the catalyst for an ecosystem of entrepreneurs and academics across the region. The Oxford Trust continues to operate from a science education centre and centre for innovation (named in honour of the Woods), both opened on a new site in 2019. Martin had avoided square-bashing in his school’s cadet corps by volunteering to manage some local woodland. He retained his love of woods, endowing another charity, the Northmoor Trust, in 1967 to provide education in wildlife and countryside management. Now known as the Earth Trust, today it owns 1,200 acres on the banks of the Thames near the village of Little Wittenham, all managed as regenerative farming and high-quality wildlife habitat and open to the public. Following a project to review the nation’s forestry that Martin undertook with the forest scientist Gabriel Hemery, in 2009 the Woods endowed a further charity, the Sylva Foundation, to promote stewardship of woodland and the sustainable use of timber. Martin was born in Great Milton, Oxfordshire, the youngest of five children of Arthur Wood, a civil servant at the Board of Education, and his wife, Katharine (nee Cumberlege). He had a much older half-sister. He attended Gresham’s school in Norfolk. Turning 18 just as the second world war ended, he was offered a choice between the three armed services for his national service, but turned them all down in favour of becoming a miner – a “Bevin boy” – for three years in the South Wales coalfields. The Coal Board sponsored his engineering degree at Cambridge, and a further two years at the Royal School of Mines (now Imperial College) in London. In 1954 he went back to the mines as a management trainee, but was disheartened by the lack of interest in his ideas for increasing efficiency. He left the industry and in 1955 took the job in Oxford University’s department of physics that would lead to his work on magnets. He met Audrey Buxton, a Cambridge graduate in natural sciences and English, just before he made the move. She was a young widow with two small children, one of whom, Robin, had to wear callipers because of a polio infection. Martin and Audrey together set about solving the problem of designing callipers hinged at the knee that would allow Robin to ride a tricycle, and they married soon afterwards, in 1955. Audrey and Martin shared a delight in combining ingenuity with practical good sense, and a commitment to making things better for people. Whether the problem was making a commercial body scanner, developing a regional innovation ecosystem or conserving the countryside, Martin quietly got on with the job of solving it, with a total lack of self-regard. Audrey survives him, along with his son, Jonny, his stepchildren, Robin and Sarah, six grandchildren and stepgrandchildren, and a step-great-grandchild. A daughter, Patsy, died in 2007. • Martin Francis Wood, engineer, born 19 April 1927; died 23 November 2021There are warnings of dangerous coastal waves, atrocious driving conditions, travel delays, flooding and potential damage to buildings for when Storm Barra sweeps across Ireland and the UK. Engineers were engaged in a race against time to restore power to about 1,600 homes in north-east England still cut off after the havoc wreaked by Storm Arwen 10 days ago. A rare red alert was issued for Cork and Kerry in the Republic of Ireland ahead of Storm Barra, which is due to make landfall on Tuesday and Wednesday, with gusts of more than 80mph forecast. In the UK yellow warnings have been issued. The Met Office meteorologist Annie Shuttleworth said the storm would bring windy weather to all parts of the UK as well as snow to northern England and parts of Scotland. Barra will arrive in the early hours of Tuesday with gusts of up to 80mph expected on the western coasts of England and Wales coinciding with high tides. “That means that we’ll have especially large waves so there is a potential risk to life in these areas,” said Shuttleworth. Gusts of up to 50mph are expected in inland areas, and are “likely to cause quite widespread travel disruption and potential road closures, delays to rail and ferries and so on. There is a chance of damage to buildings too,” she added. There was a separate warning of strong winds and heavy rain for Northern Ireland from 6am Tuesday until 9am Wednesday. The storm could lead to flooding, unpleasant driving conditions, building damage and power cuts. Driving conditions on Tuesday could be atrocious, forecasters warn, with heavy rain in the south of England and sleet and snow in the north of England and into Scotland. Blizzards and snowfall as deep as 20cm are expected at higher levels. The saving grace is that Barra is not expected to be as strong as Arwen, which brought gusts up to 98mph that led to the worst damage to the electricity network in a generation and power cuts for more than 1m homes. By Monday, the number without power was about 1,600 and Northern Power Grid said it expected power to be returned to those homes by Tuesday. Some residents were not holding their breath. Stewart Sexton, who lives in Alnwick, said he had been promised a return of power every day since it went off. “It’s exhausting, it’s wearing us down, and it’s a constant worry,” he said. “Every day seems to bring a new problem.” In the Commons, Labour accused the government of treating people in the north of England and Scotland as second-class citizens. The shadow climate change secretary, Ed Miliband, quoted a Conservative councillor. “‘If this happened in London or in the south-east everything would have got thrown at it’. They are his words,” said Miliband. “Aren’t people in the north entitled to think he is right? They have been treated as second-class citizens.” Miliband said lessons had not been learned from previous storms. “We have been here before. After the 2013 storms, multiple reports were produced. I have got them here … and they identify problems of communication, the vulnerability of the network, complacency of the companies. “Isn’t the only conclusion that the government has been asleep at the wheel, not just in the last 10 days but for the best part of a decade?” The energy minister, Greg Hands, said it was “completely unacceptable” that 1,600 homes were still without power on Monday, but added: “The situation is improving each hour.”Ralf Rangnick is expected to make his first coaching appointment as Manchester United interim manager, with Chris Armas set to join after the departure of Michael Carrick. Armas, 49, was the New York Red Bulls head coach from 2018-20. In 2019 Rangnick became head of sport and development for Red Bull, the MLS franchise owner, having been football director at RB Leipzig and RB Salzburg, so he is familiar with the American’s work. Carrick, United’s caretaker manager for three matches until Rangnick was recruited, had been first-team coach under Ole Gunnar Solskjær before the Norwegian was sacked last month. Prior to joining New York Red Bulls as an assistant coach in 2015, Armas was assistant coach at Chicago Fire and then head coach of Adelphi Panthers women’s team. In his first two years at New York Red Bulls the franchise won the Supporters’ Shield for the best regular-season record but were eliminated in the opening round of the play-offs. They finished sixth in the Eastern Conference the following season but were again knocked out in the first play-off round. Armas, a former Puerto Rico and US international midfielder, took over at Toronto FC in January 2021 but was sacked in July after a 7-1 defeat by DC United. Meanwhile Diogo Dalot believes United can do a “fantastic job” if everyone buys into the interim manager’s approach after securing victory over Crystal Palace in Rangnick’s first match in charge on Sunday. “It’s difficult to have an opinion in a few days,” the Portugal right-back said. “But I’m sure that, if everybody’s together, everybody’s into it, we’re going to do a fantastic job. We’re going to help him and he’s going to help us as well. “There’s no secret that he’s a very good manager with very good ideas to play football. Hopefully we can help him to give us the best that he can give and vice versa.”George Clooney on Friday, Mel Brooks on Saturday, Chris Noth on Monday – this series of interviews by Hadley Freeman is almost as life-enhancing as our street’s advent windows. Claudia Jones Oxford • In the mid-1960s, when I was a student, I took my landlady, who was in her 70s, to the cinema to see a new film, The Sound of Music. Afterwards she was ecstatic, and on the bus home she entertained all the passengers with her enthusiasm. This, considering her family’s war history, meant so much. Now I’m in my 70s, and each Christmas I look forward to seeing the film. Musicals are indeed “an important source of joy” (Editorial, 5 December). Jean Jackson Seer Green, Buckinghamshire • Michael Rosen’s excellent letter (Dear Nadhim Zahawi, please sort out Ofsted’s lack of humanity, 4 December) reminds me of another instance of the fear aroused by school inspection. It comes from a 1940 logbook entry from a London school: “Monday am: bomb dropped on the field next door, children and staff calm. Monday pm: inspector visited, staff and children very agitated.” Prof Colin Richards Spark Bridge, Cumbria • Your article on deterring burglars at Christmas suggests leaving a radio on and playing barking dog noises (Money hacks, 6 December). It then suggests asking a friend or neighbour to put your bins out and back while you are away. But how many neighbours would stay friends if deafened for days by a non-stop blaring radio and intermittent mechanical barking? Marcia Wheeler Barnes, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your editorial on Barbados again recognises the true horror of slavery (3 December). But Britain can only move on when the vast majority of its inhabitants share this recognition. In Berlin, the people of Germany are continually reminded of the horrors committed in their name by the Holocaust memorial, a truly heartbreaking experience for this Englishman. Britain needs a similar memorial to the victims of slavery. I don’t support the wholesale removal of images from the past, but I do support statues and the like being properly labelled in a balanced way. A slavery memorial would be a permanent sign of regret and a tangible tribute to those on whom much of our prosperity is based. Steve Barrass Ticehurst, East Sussex • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Hollywood star Michael Sheen has said he is now a “not-for-profit actor” after selling his houses and giving the proceeds to charity. The actor and activist, 52, said organising the 2019 Homeless World Cup in Cardiff was a turning point for him. When funding for the £2m project fell through at the last moment, Sheen sold his own houses to bankroll it. “I had a house in America and a house here and I put those up and just did whatever it took,” he told the Big Issue for their Letter to My Younger Self. “It was scary and incredibly stressful. I’ll be paying for it for a long time.” Sheen said that when he “came out the other side”, he realised he could do these kinds of things and, if he could keep earning money, “it’s not going to ruin me”. He’s pledged to carry on using the money he earns from acting to fund more projects. “There was something quite liberating about going, all right, I’ll put large amounts of money into this or that, because I’ll be able to earn it back again. I’ve essentially turned myself into a social enterprise, a not-for-profit actor.” Throughout his career Sheen has worked with a number of social enterprise organisations. In 2017, he set up the End High Cost Credit Alliance to help people find more affordable ways of borrowing money, and he has pledged £50,000 over five years to fund a bursary to help Welsh students go to Oxford University. He’s a patron of a number of British charities and was a vocal supporter of the Labour party and Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership. Sheen, star of Twilight, Good Omens and Frost/Nixon, revealed the first “turning point” in his life was after a 72-hour production of The Passion through the streets of his hometown Port Talbot in 2011. “I got to know people and organisations within my hometown that I didn’t know existed. Little groups who were trying to help young carers, who had just enough funding to make a tiny difference to a kid’s life by putting on one night a week where they could get out and go bowling or watch a film and just be a kid. “I would come back to visit three or four months later, and find out that funding had gone and that organisation didn’t exist anymore.” He said he realised the difference between that child’s life being a little bit better or not was ultimately a small amount of funding. “And I wanted to help those people. I didn’t just want to be a patron or a supportive voice, I wanted to actually do more than that. That’s when I thought, I need to go back and live in Wales again.” Last year, Sheen said he had handed back his 2009 OBE after taking a “crash course” in Welsh history, stating that he didn’t want to be a “hypocrite”.You rightly focus on the poor state of our rivers in terms of nitrates, phosphate and sediment pollution, and the resulting damage to ecology, blaming it on livestock and chicken farming (UK farmers may have to cut livestock count to save rivers, says expert, 29 November). This rather ignores the impact of arable farming over wide swathes of southern Britain. The announcement of funding for conservation measures is to be welcomed, although widely criticised for being insufficient (Farmers in England to be paid for looking after soil health from next year, 2 December). However, a fundamental question is how will compliance with the measures be enforced? The poor condition of our rivers is partly the result of lack of monitoring and enforcement by a hugely overworked and underresourced Environment Agency. Will it be expected to ensure that farmers adhere to the rules associated with the new subsidies? For successful models, the UK has only to look to Flanders in Belgium, where flood protection and soil conservation has been taken seriously. Prof John Boardman OxfordA film of nothing but a static blue, haunted by voices and a tale of a man going blind, and thinking of buying shoes he will never get a chance to wear – his own will see him through. Self-portraits of a young man, anxious but done with the lightness of Matisse, and another, sullen and glowering, seeing himself as Wyndham Lewis. While you look, Pet Shop Boys are singing It’s a Sin, staged for a decadent pop video over the wall, vying with the industrial electronic noise of Throbbing Gristle leaking from another room. Creativity is not a fashionable word. But you can’t think about Derek Jarman, painter, sometime theatre designer, film-maker, gay activist, writer and gardener, without recognising his multifarious and sometimes contradictory talents. He was both the most public and outspoken of artists, a hedonist and city dweller, and an introspective observer of nature, of birdsong and sunsets. Jarman’s enthusiasm and energy, his outspokenness and curiosity saw him through to the end. He died at 52 from an Aids-related illness, in 1994. After his diagnosis as HIV-positive in 1986 Jarman made the decision to be open about his illness which, at that time, was invariably fatal. He had and would continue to lose many friends to Aids, and there is a thread of commemoration running through his later work. Jarman counted the losses. In life, Jarman achieved a secular sainthood, canonised by the Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence, a group of gay male nuns. Since his death, he has become more than an artist of his time. A quarter of a century on, a blue plaque now commemorates what was once his studio on the Thames, and the Art Fund has purchased his black-tarred cottage, with its canary yellow windows, perched on the shingle of the Dungeness headland, for the nation. Jarman’s seaside garden drifts into the no-man’s land of the surrounding landscape. It has no discernible boundaries. Neither did its maker. Currently, there is a show of Jarman’s work in Paris, for the city’s Festival d’Automne, and a large overview exhibition has just opened at Manchester Art Gallery, travelling from the Irish Museum of Modern Art in Dublin. A season of Jarman’s feature films and shorts at Manchester’s Home opens at the end of January, and another, smaller exhibition is now at the John Hansard Gallery in Southampton. Exhibitions that attempt an overview of Jarman’s life and work face the difficulty of his creativity. He did so much, in so many different ways, always going his own way. The variety of his approaches, and the shuttle between introspection and outrage, and the radical shifts in his tempo and method over the 40 or so years of his career don’t make life easy either for his curators or viewers. There’s too much to take in, so many different ways you have to look. Derek Jarman: Protest! at Manchester Art Gallery dramatises these difficulties, which are in effect the difficulties of the artist himself. Curators Jon Savage and Fiona Corridan have met Jarman’s complexity head-on in a theatrical installation in which paintings from the 1950s to the early 90s collide with photography and film, theatre design and pictures of the set he devised for Ken Russell’s movie The Devils. Here’s Margaret Thatcher’s Lunch, the place-setting stuck in black paint, the cutlery oozing red, and there’s the prize he won at the Alternative Miss World competition in 1979, a shapely leg covered in shards of broken mirror. Wall-sized blow-ups of Prospect Cottage and small driftwood and stone sculptures vie with songs by the Smiths. This exhibition, like its lavish accompanying publication, and despite interesting essays, makes Jarman hard to read coherently. Coherence is probably overrated, and in any case, lives aren’t lived that way. Jarman was, I think, a reactive rather than programmatic artist, responding to the things and situations around him and the opportunities and challenges they presented – whether it was a sense of space in a painting or a landscape, an attractive personality, the larky, party atmosphere of his film sets or the flare of the gorse flowering near Dungeness’s nuclear power station. Everywhere, there were miracles – human, botanical, literary, meteorological – and matters of geology, theology or poetry or sex. An atheist, Jarman had an almost gnostic sense of the spiritual. He could find it anywhere, especially perhaps in the profane, the transient, in the vitality of a dancing body or in the tenacity of plant life growing in the unlikely and hostile conditions of the shingle he tended. Words, sometimes scrawled in thick paint, sometimes rendered in his distinctive, highly tuned calligraphy, were as important for Jarman as the mise-en-scène, the spectacle and the tableau. His writing is wonderful, and I keep returning to Modern Nature, his day-by-day journal of 1989 and 1990. It keeps me grounded. His later, small agglutinative paintings and assemblages have a similar brevity to his journal entries, with their daily reflections on weather, local incidents, politics, things found and seen and discovered on the foreshore. Always alert to the things around him, the world adheres to them, they rail against darkness. His Super 8 shorts often capture the same fleeting world, of people and moments and light. They are all a kind of bricolage. With their broken glass and their morbid black surfaces, their confected agglomerations of spent bullets and seeds, unrolled condoms decaying under glass, a scatter of pills mired in paint, nasty, black tarry canvasses with medical bags and tubes, toy skeletons, rosary beads and crosses, and a grim, symmetrical arrangement of pharmaceutical bottles and packages called One Day’s Medications, these all become reliquaries of a life lived. Upping the scale, he also made two series of seething, bitter, large-scale abstractions, the paint spattered and smeared across their clotted, coagulated surfaces. They heave and drag, shout and repulse, without a moment of respite. Queer, they say. Blood. Infection. Disease. Weak and half-blind, Jarman was as much director as painter of these images, and couldn’t make them alone. They were deliberately confrontational. Jarman the painter takes centre stage in Manchester, though he is constantly interrupted, not least by himself. His earlier paintings are filled with the ghosts of other painters, including Paul Nash, perhaps inevitably, and David Hockney. The mix is eclectic. The suave quasi-minimalism of his 70s landscape paintings are a kind of premonition of Dungeness, that great flat expanse poking into the English Channel. Jarman’s landscape paintings have a receding flatness and emptiness. You can imagine the lighthouse foghorn and the ominous klaxon from the power station filling these empty painted spaces with sound. For me, Jarman’s best works are his books, his garden and his last film, Blue, a work that, broaching the sublime, is simplicity itself, a screen on which nothing happens, but the static blueness. Your ears do all the visualising, and all the projecting is your own. The blue is filled with voices, memories and tart, wistful and mordant observations. Whatever the difficulties and inconsistencies, it is good to return to Jarman, an exemplary artist and man, and a model of the creative life. Derek Jarman: Protest! is at Manchester Art Gallery until 10 April 2022 This article was corrected on 7 December; the exhibition is curated by Jon Savage and Fiona Corridan.It was disappointing to read Jonathan Jones’s patronising pat on the head for the Array Collective after their Turner prize win (‘If only it actually served pints’: our critic on the pub that took the Turner prize, 1 December). Not the first time unconscious colonialism has been evident in metropolitan responses to things Northern Irish. In effect, he was saying “good for you, but this is not good for art” – as if art is an antidote to life, when the real question is about what art can do in life. The Array Collective and their peers address this question. Their efforts to create a participatory art process should be judged against their intentions, and not simply as a reiteration of the signature art process so valued by the market and by some critics. If a urinal can be exhibited as a provocation to a normalised aesthetic in the early 20th century, and Marcel Duchamp’s strategy can become celebrated and influential, then Array can also challenge normalised expectations in a museum setting in the early 21st century. Jones doesn’t seem to get this inheritance, nor that the shared practice of Array is a social as well as an aesthetic proposition. He fails to recognise the turn that is taking place in the art process generally, towards a societal momentum and another aesthetic altogether. This constitutes a refusal to engage with the metrics that a longer reading of art history and of participatory art practice requires, and would sustain aesthetics as a sort of walled garden in which art’s exchange value is privileged over its use value. Declan McGonagle Redcastle, County Donegal, Ireland • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As a retired child protection social worker, I’ve long thought that the link between obesity and socioeconomic status would benefit from a somewhat blunter analysis (‘We need to break the junk food cycle’: how to fix Britain’s failing food system, 30 November). Sometimes it’s not about being too poor to buy nutritious food; it’s far more about subcultures – more of the socio and less of the economic. So, what have I experienced? I have looked in clients’ kitchen cupboards to see what they are feeding their children, and a lot of it is indeed junk. I have placed working-class children in middle-class foster homes where they have complained bitterly about being fed organic fruit, and not crisps and fizzy pop. I’ve watched contact centres fail to prevent visiting parents from bringing their kids the least nutritious food imaginable. This is not about income; it is indeed often about working-class food cultures and middle-class “do-gooders”, in time-honoured fashion, trying but failing to tell them what to do, and meeting entrenched resistance. In part, it’s historical: manual labourers, post-Industrial Revolution, cramming in as many cheap calories as possible – white bread, sugar, jam. In part, it’s the misery of being poor or marginalised, of needing a little something to cheer you up, to blunt the edge of it all, be it biscuits or cigarettes. In part, I’m not sure everyone knows how to cook from scratch any more, how to make cheap ingredients attractive. There’s also something about the thought: “Why should I have to when I can get stuff ready-made?” Even food banks report that people like to be given tea, coffee and sugar because it makes them feel cared for, while malnutrition rises. These are not easy factors to undo, and will maybe call for generational shifts and a less unequal society. But let’s start with clear-sighted scrutiny of what the multiple causes are. Sylvia Rose Totnes, Devon • Your article says Tim Lang, emeritus professor of food policy at City, University of London, has suggested that the Food Standards Agency was unfit to deliver the National Food Strategy because, as a non-ministerial government department, it “lacked the power to get anything meaningful done”. I would argue that being an independent government department is advantageous to the FSA, which was set up in 2000 to protect public health and consumers’ wider interests in relation to food. The agency’s website states that its “policies, decisions and advice are based on the best available scientific evidence and analysis, including independent expert advice”. Crucially, it operates in a transparent way, with board meetings held in public, and is committed to publish its advice to ministers. Consequently, the government would have to be more open than usual and explain precisely why it was minded to disregard or overrule the FSA’s considered and impartial recommendations. I think most of us would prefer to see any debate about the implementation of the National Food Strategy to be carried out openly, in public, rather than behind the closed doors of an anonymous government department. Mike Pender Former head of agriculture, Food Standards Agency Wales • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Jürgen Klopp has said Liverpool need time to finalise new contract terms with Mohamed Salah and the current impasse is “completely normal” for a player of his stature. Salah reiterated his desire to extend his Liverpool contract beyond 2023 in an interview with Egypt’s MBC Masr TV last week. But he also said it was up to the club’s owners, Fenway Sports Group, to “solve this issue”. The 29-year-old added: “Your financial value shows how much the club appreciates you and that they are ready to do anything for you to stay.” Liverpool have extended the contracts of several players in recent months and know they will have to make Salah the highest-paid player in the club’s history for him to commit long-term. Klopp said: “Extending a contract with a player like Mo is not something where you meet for a cup of tea in the afternoon and find an agreement. That’s completely normal. “He speaks about it and I can only say a few things because all the rest is not for the public. I’m not sure if he gave the interview in English or if it was translated from Arabic and that is a message issue. A lot of things can happen when someone tries to do that. Mo is fine, I am fine. What we all want is clear and things like this need time.” Salah could set a record for the most goals scored by a Liverpool player in the group stage of a European competition – seven – should he register against Milan in the Champions League on Tuesday. He needs one goal to reach 20 for the season in all competitions but, with the group already won, Klopp will rotate on his first visit to the San Siro. “The medical department would smash me if I played the lineup again, so we will make changes,” he said “We’ve had five games in the last 14 or 15 days and, after the Milan game, it’s pretty much the same. So we have to make the right decisions.” Divock Origi is expected to start against the Serie A leaders after his matchwinning substitute’s appearance at Wolves on Saturday. “If you are not a starter for Liverpool, you can still be a world-class player,” said Klopp. “I know people see it slightly different from time to time but it’s possible. And in specific moments Div is absolutely outstanding.”Here are today’s main stories: The Bank of England’s monetary policy chief has said inflation is likely to soar “comfortably” above 5% next spring when the energy regulator Ofgem raises a price cap affecting millions of households. Record high levels of vacancies are also likely to persist for longer than previously expected as the jobs market adjusts to changes in the economy brought on by the pandemic, said Ben Broadbent, the central bank’s deputy governor with responsibility for monetary policy. Economists have cut their forecasts for the UK economy, warning that the Omicron variant and supply chain disruption will weigh on growth. Growth at UK construction companies has hit a four-month high, as builders report that supply chain problems have eased. UK car sales grew in November, led by rising demand for electric vehicles, but were still nearly a third below their pre-pandemic levels. But German factories have suffered a sharp fall in orders, down 6.9%, driven by a tumble in overseas demand. Markets have rallied, with investors hopeful that the Omicron variant will not be severe enough to derail the recovery. But Tesla shares were hit by a report that the SEC has opened a probe into whether it properly disclosed fire risks with its solar power systems. Strike action at Tesco could lead to empty shelves in the run-up to Christmas, the Unite trade union has said, after its members voted to walk out unless they are offered a pay deal that keeps pace with inflation. Tributes have poured in for John Barton, the chairman of the fashion chain Ted Baker and the former chair of easyJet and Next, after his death was announced this morning. As Helena Feltham, the senior independent director at Ted Baker, put it: John combined a generosity of spirit with insight, humility and humour, and we will all miss him. He led the board with great skill and it was a privilege to have worked with him. Our hearts go out to his family. The vice-chair of Yorkshire Building Society is facing a call to resign over her role pushing through the sale of the fellow member-owned firm LV= to a US private equity buyer, amid concerns that it could kickstart a wave of demutualisation. This year is on course to be the strongest for home-buying activity since 2006, according to the main trade body for UK banks. UK Finance said while the first few months of the pandemic, during which the property market shut down for a time, led to predictions that sales would slump, the reality was very different, with “Covid-era activity set to eclipse everything since the credit crunch”. Despite worries about the pandemic, the owner of the Real Greek and Franco Manca restaurant chains has said that business is booming … … as is demand for Hollywood blockbuster Spider-Man: No Way Home. Goodnight. GW European stock markets have ended the day sharply higher, as investors hope that Omicron will not be as severe a threat as feared. The UK’s FTSE 100 index has closed nearly 110 points higher, or 1.5% up, at 7,232, its highest level since the market tumbles over a week ago. Airline group IAG jumped 8%, with gambling group Flutter gaining 6%, and jet engine maker Rolls-Royce finishing 3.8% higher. Investors were cheered by the White House’s chief medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, who said on Sunday that preliminary data about the severity of the Covid omicron variant is “a bit encouraging”. Europe’s Stoxx 600 gained around 1.4%. Oil had a strong day too, with Brent crude up almost 3% tonight. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says: It’s been a positive start to the week for the FTSE 100, and European markets more generally as concerns over the Omicron variant continue to diminish on further evidence of mild symptoms and so far, no deaths reported because of getting the virus. The biggest beneficiaries are in travel and leisure with British Airways owner IAG shrugging off the tighter rules around testing and quarantine, on reports that the EU could consider easing Omicron travel restrictions to South Africa in the next week or so. BP and Shell are seeing decent gains on the back of the recovery in the oil price, as both approach three-week highs. Shares in electric carmaker Tesla have fallen 3.5% today, following a report that the SEC has opened an inquiry into whether it properly disclosed fire risks with its solar power systems. Reuters has the story: The US securities regulator has opened an investigation into Tesla Inc (TSLA.O) over a whistleblower complaint that the company failed to properly notify its shareholders and the public of fire risks associated with solar panel system defects over several years, according to a letter from the agency. The probe raises regulatory pressure on the world’s most valuable automaker, which already faces a federal safety probe into accidents involving its driver assistant systems. Concerns about fires from Tesla solar systems have been published previously, but this is the first report of investigation by the securities regulator. The US Securities and Exchange Commission disclosed the Tesla probe in response to a Freedom of Information Act request by Steven Henkes, a former Tesla field quality manager, who filed a whistleblower complaint on the solar systems in 2019 and asked the agency for information about the report. “We have confirmed with Division of Enforcement staff that the investigation from which you seek records is still active and ongoing,” the SEC said in a response on 24 September to Henkes, declining his request to provide its records. The SEC official said the letter should not be taken as an indication by the agency that violations of law had occurred. Reuters independently confirmed the SEC letter was legitimate. Henkes, a former Toyota Motor quality division manager, was fired from Tesla in August 2020 and he sued Tesla claiming the dismissal was in retaliation for raising safety concerns. Tesla did not respond to Reuters’ emailed questions, while the SEC declined to comment. More here: Exclusive: SEC probes Tesla over whistleblower claims on solar panel defects Shares in Tesla have fallen to around $979 today, or roughly 20% off their record high last month, putting them into a bear market. Just last week, Tesla’s Elon Musk appeared to joke about whistleblowers on Twitter with the launch of a $50 (£38) stainless steel whistle … The upcoming Hollywood blockbuster Spider-Man: No Way Home is set to be a box office hit after breaking the UK record for advance ticket sales, which are being snapped up at three times the rate of those for the James Bond movie No Time to Die. Odeon, the biggest operator in the UK and Ireland with more than 120 cinemas, said it had sold many more than 200,000 tickets for the film in the first seven days since release. The rate of ticket sales to see the film, which stars British actor Tom Holland as Peter Parker, has broken the presale record set by 2019’s Avengers: Endgame. Odeon also said that the Spider-Man presales rate in the first seven days was three times that amassed by Daniel Craig’s eagerly anticipated, much delayed and final outing as James Bond. Carol Welch, the managing director of Odeon Cinemas UK and Ireland, said: As we head into the festive period, we are really pleased with the advance booking numbers for Spider-Man: No Way Home. It shows guests are loving being back at cinemas and are excited about the magic that our big screen experience brings to movies. Back in the UK, the owner of the Real Greek and Franco Manca restaurant chains has said business is booming and is ahead of pre-pandemic levels as office workers and theatregoers return to city centres. Parent company the Fulham Shore reported a doubling of revenues and a return to profit in the six months to 26 September, with many of its 75 restaurants “continuing to break weekly trading records”. “We have seen continued trading momentum in recent weeks, with revenues in October and November ahead of 2019 comparatives,” said David Page, chairman of the Fulham Shore. This includes our office and theatre district-located restaurants, which are continuing to trade positively over the four weeks in November, achieving revenues ahead of the same weeks in 2019. Speculation that the European Commission is set to propose stricter labour rules to regulate the gig economy have sent shares of companies in the sector sharply lower today. Investors fear the business models of these companies might be jeopardized should the EU’s executive arm require them to directly employ drivers and riders, Reuters reports. Danni Hewson, a financial analyst at AJ Bell, explained: The thorny question of whether or not delivery drivers are employees is about to be answered by the EU Commission later this week and reports suggest the answer will be yes. For food delivery businesses like Deliveroo and Just Eat that could mean a huge spike in costs, costs which many expect will be passed on to consumers across central Europe. Shares in Deliveroo are down 3%, with Just Eat Takeaway diving 6.6% and Delivery Hero losing 5.5% The regulatory uncertainty about gig economy stocks was illustrated last March when a number of investment funds declined to participate in Deliveroo’s initial public offering adding pressure to the stock which plunged when it made its London debut. Deliveroo floated at 330p, but are now changing hands at just 233.50p. The New York stock exchange has made a mixed start to trading. The Dow Jones industrial average has jumped by 325 points, or 0.95%, to 34,906 points. The index of 30 large US firms is rallying after posting its fourth straight weekly loss last week, for the first time since September 2020. But technology stocks are under pressure again, pulling the tech-focused Nasdaq index down by 0.5%. Fiona Cincotta, senior financial market analyst at City Index, says the prospect of higher interest rates and inflation are weighing on tech stocks [because they make the future earnings of growth stocks less valuable today] US stocks are set for a mixed start with the high tech Nasdaq under performing as Treasury yields rise. Easing Omicron fears are making way for investors to position for a more hawkish Fed. The markets are dialing back on the potential economic damage that Omicron could cause as initial reports suggest that the new Covid variant is less severe. US medical advisor Anthony Fauci said that the early signs suggest that Omicron doesn’t have a great degree of severity. His comments came as Omicron spread to around one-third of US states. Strike action at Tesco could lead to empty shelves in the run-up to Christmas, the Unite trade union has said, after its members voted to walk out unless they are offered a pay deal that keeps pace with inflation. The supermarket chain has offered staff a pay rise of 4%, which Unite has said is “offensive” given that the retail price index rate of inflation stands at 6%. The offer is also below the more commonly used consumer price index, which is at a 10-year high of 4.2%. Discussions are understood to be taking place in an effort to avert action that would add to the countrywide supply chain disruption that has already triggered warnings of shortages of food and drink at Christmas. If the company does not improve its offer, Unite said warehouse workers and HGV drivers at depots in Doncaster, Didcot, Belfast and Antrim would start a series of rolling strikes from 16 December Deutsche Bank predicts that the UK economy is slowing this quarter, as the Omicron variant hits the recovery. Sanjay Raja, Deutsche’s senior economist, predicts that October’s GDP report, due on Friday, will show growth slowed to 0.3%, from 0.6% in September Risks to the projection are finely balanced, if slightly tilted to the downside, Raja says, adding: Looking ahead, Q4 GDP growth should more clearly signal an even slower quarter after growth disappointed in Q3 (1.3% q-o-q). With supply constraints lingering, household spending easing, fiscal support waning, and the labour force remaining smaller than its pre-pandemic level, the recovery should slow further, impacted further by news of Omicron and some modest disruption from Storm Arwen. Bank of England deputy governor Ben Broadbent doesn’t know how the Omicron variant will affect his vote on UK interest rates later this month. Asked how Omicron will influence his thinking, Broadbent told his audience at Leeds University that: I go into these meetings not knowing very often what I’m going to vote myself. I think the best way to look at it is to look at our last set of forecasts, think about the economics of this, think about the data we’ve had since then. Last month Broadbent voted to leave interest rates at record lows of 0.1% - along with six other policymakers, while just two voted to hike to 0.25%. One of the latter two, Michael Saunders, suggested last week that Omicron could delay a rise in borrowing costs. Bank of England deputy governor Ben Broadbent has warned that UK inflation could be ‘comfortably’ over 5% next spring, when energy bills rise again. In a speech in Leeds, Broadbent says the UK is in an “extremely challenging period for monetary policy”. Inflation is already more than double the Monetary Policy Committee’s target, and heading higher - as regulator Ofgem is likely to lift the UK’s price cap sharply higher next April. Broadbent says: Despite relatively weak growth over the past two years as a whole, domestically and globally, inflation has risen very significantly. In this country it was over 4% in October. In the spring of next year, when the next rise in the Ofgem cap on gas and electricity bills comes through, it will probably climb comfortably through 5%, a long way north of the MPC’s 2% target. Broadbent also explains that rising goods prices, driven up by supply chain problems and high demand in the lockdown, have pushed inflation over target. He argues that those pressures on traded goods are ‘more likely to subside than intensify’ over the next couple of years. So if they are transitory, they would dissipate before any rise in interest rates (to dampen demand) had taken effect. Indeed it’s quite possible that, in a couple of years, some of these tradable goods prices will be falling, pulling down on inflation, Broadbent says. Instead, a tight labour market could be a bigger driver of inflation, if wages keep rising as firms compete for workers. Broadbent says: Although it’s possible that these strains too could pass – there’s a chance these frictions are simply the result of the sheer speed of hiring, and will ease of their own accord – there’s also an upside risk to wage costs from currently high inflation. If wage earners’ expectations of future inflation rise in response, of if they seek compensation for the rises in the costs of living that have already occurred, wages could also accelerate further, even without any additional decline in unemployment. The emergence of the new coronavirus Omicron variant is starting to impact UK shopper behaviour and deter some people from returning to the office. Researcher Springboard has reported there was a 3.8% drop in footfall in regional cities outside of London last week. And while footfall in the capital rose by +0.5%, Springboard’s “Central London Back to the Office” index dropped by 2%, suggesting some commuters have return to home working. Overall, footfall in UK retail destinations rose by +0.7% last week. Visits rose 2.3% at shopping centres and 1.3% at retail parks, but were down 0.4% at high streets. Diane Wehrle, Insights Director at Springboard, says the data provide “the first evidence of an early impact on footfall of the Omicron variant” Springboard’s Central London Back to the Office benchmark (comprising only those areas in close proximity to offices) declined last week from the week before, whilst footfall across Central London as a whole - which is clearly being supported by the Christmas trading period – increased, rising by even more in those areas with a predominance of retail stores. China’s central bank has cut the amount that banks must hold in reserve in an attempt to support its economy, as the threat of a possible Evergrande default looms. The People’s Bank of China (PBOC) is lowering the reserve requirement ratio (RRR) for banks by 50 basis points (bps), from December 15th, which will release 1.2 trillion yuan (£140bn) in long-term liquidity to bolster lending, and stimulate growth. China’s economy has already lost momentum in recent months, hit by Covid-19 outbreaks, pandemic restrictions, and a slowdown in its factory sector - as well as debt problems in the property market. Elsewhere in the markets, bitcoin is under pressure after a volatile weekend. The largest cryptocurrency has dropped to around $47,500, over 11% down on Friday’s $53,595, at its lowest since early October. The slump is being blamed on the broader move away from riskier assets, due to concerns over Omicron, a weak US jobs report on Friday, and the prospect that America’s central bank ends its stimulus package earlier due to worries about inflation. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, explains: The crypto currency is highly sensitive to the fortunes of the stock market and traders were spooked by a stock sell off in the US, following some disappointing jobs figures. The sharp fall erased the last two months of gains, yet more evidence of the highly volatile nature of the asset. Crypto coins and tokens have been propelled higher in this era of ultra cheap money and as speculation swirls about just when central banks will start further tightening mass bond buying programmes and start raising interest rates, they are likely to continue to be highly volatile. The president of El Salvador may have proudly stated his country was buying on the dip, but the perturbations at work in the crypto stratosphere, means investing in Bitcoin is not for the faint hearted or for those with no money to lose. Other crypto assets, such as ethereum, are also weaker, flags interactive investor’s Victoria Scholar: Update: Shares in China’s troubled, indebted property giant Evergrande Group closed at a record low in Hong Kong after it lurched to the brink of default (see earlier post). They finished at just $1.81 Hong Kong dollars, after warning that it cannot guarantee funds for a looming $260m guarantee obligation. That’s down from around HK$15 at the start of the year, before fears over its debt mountain grew. Growth in Britain’s construction industry hit its strongest pace in four months in November, as delays obtaining materials such as timber eased. Data firm IHS Markit reports there was a sharp increase in business activity at building firms last month. It was led by an upturn in commercial work, as the economic recovery led to new projects and infrastructure work. Encouragingly, the proportion of firms reporting longer delivery times fell to 47% in November, from a peak of 77% in June, according to Markit’s latest survey of purchasing managers. Port delays and a severe lack of transport availability due to haulage driver shortages did still hold back suppliers, but firms noted an improvement in the availability of specific items (especially timber). Prices kept rising, although at the slowest rate since April with 72% of firms reporting an increase in purchase prices in November, while only 3% a decline. Tim Moore, director at IHS Markit, says UK builders saw a welcome combination of faster output growth and softer price inflation last month. “Input price inflation remains extremely strong by any measure, but it has started to trend downwards after hitting multi-decade peaks this summer. The latest rise in purchasing costs was the slowest since April, helped by a gradual turnaround in supply chain disruption and a slight slowdown in input buying. Port congestion and severe shortages of haulage capacity were again the most commonly cited reasons for longer lead times for construction products and materials.” Duncan Brock, Group Director at the Chartered Institute of Procurement &amp; Supply, says supply chains seem to be improving, given the fall in companies reporting longer waiting times. Even with this glimmer of hope that the pressure on deliveries was easing, purchasing remained at higher level to counteract disruptions from ongoing driver shortages and port delays as supply chain managers bought more than their immediate need. Job hiring growth was still maintained in November but was the weakest since March. Builder optimism was somewhat flat as the costs of building still remained high and firms struggled to stay competitive.” Britain is failing to roll out enough public charging points to match the growing demand for electric cars, the SMMT adds. The number of plug-in cars potentially sharing a public on-street charger jumped from 11 in 2019 to 16 in 2020. That 16:1 ratio is much worse than other major economies, such as South Korea (3:1), the Netherlands (5:1), China (9:1), France (10:1), Belgium and Japan (both 13:1). The situation hasn’t improved this year, with just one standard on-street public charger installed for every 52 new plug-in cars registered in the first nine month of the year. With plug-in vehicle uptake having grown by 86.6% in 2021, SMMT is calling on the government to take action to avoid the ratio deteriorating further, through binding targets to rollout more public charging points. SMMT CEO Mike Hawes says: The continued acceleration of electrified vehicle registrations is good for the industry, the consumer and the environment but, with the pace of public charging infrastructure struggling to keep up, we need swift action and binding public charger targets so that everyone can be part of the electric vehicle revolution, irrespective of where they live.” Shortages of semiconductors continue to hit UK car sales, industry body SMMT warns. It just reported that sales of new cars in the UK rose by 1.7% year-on-year in November to 115,706, the first monthly rise since June. That still left registrations nearly a third below their pre-pandemic five-year average, with chip shortages hampering the supply of new cars to forecourts. More motorists turned to electric cars last month; the number of battery electric vehicle registrations more than doubled year-on-year to 21,726. Overall, plug-in cars represented 28.1% of market in November, with 10,796 plug-in hybrids also sold. Sales to individuals jumped by 41.7% compared to November 2020, when England was entering its second lockdown. However, the number of new cars registered to large fleets declined by nearly a quarter. Mike Hawes, SMMT chief executive, said: “What looks like a positive performance belies the underlying weakness of the market. Demand is there, with a slew of new, increasingly electrified, models launched but the global shortage of semiconductors continues to bedevil production and therefore new car registrations. The industry is working flat out to overcome these issues and fulfil orders, but disruption is likely to last into next year, compounding the need for customers to place orders early. John Barton, the chairman of the fashion chain Ted Baker and the former chair of easyJet and Next, has died. Ted Baker said the veteran businessman, who was appointed non-executive chairman of the troubled fashion retailer last year, died suddenly. “John was a source of great wisdom for me and for so many of us at Ted Baker and we will hugely miss his support and guidance,” said Rachel Osborne, the chief executive of Ted Baker, who joined a month before Barton’s appointment in April 2020. “Our thoughts and deepest sympathies are with his wife, Anne, and their family.” Last week, the 77-year-old stood down as chairman of easyJet, ending a near nine-year stint during the most tumultuous period in the low-cost airline’s 26-year history. Barton last year weathered an attempted ousting by Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou, the airline’s founder and largest shareholder, who threatened to requisition a series of shareholder meetings after the coronavirus pandemic hit to force easyJet to abandon £4.5bn of planes from Airbus he believed would bankrupt the business. At an extraordinary general meeting, Barton came through an attempt to oust him, winning 58% of the vote. “I am truly shocked and extremely saddened to hear of John’s passing,” said Johan Lundgren, the chief executive of easyJet. “I was very fortunate to have worked closely with him over the years and benefited greatly from his wise counsel. He was a man of huge integrity who was very much liked and respected by everyone across the airline. On behalf of all of his former colleagues at easyJet, we send our heartfelt sympathies to John’s family at this time. He will be greatly missed.” Stephen Hester, the former boss of Royal Bank of Scotland who took over from Barton as the chairman of easyJet, said he was a “distinguished chair who made an outstanding contribution to the company” and was “also a wonderful human being”. The eurozone construction sector saw its fastest rise in activity in nearly four years in November, despite rising concerns over the pandemic. Output and new orders both increased during the month, according to the latest survey of building firms across the euro area from data firm IHS Markit, with construction activity rising at a series record pace in Italy. There was a sustained rise in home building activity, as well as a second successive rise in commercial construction, but civil engineering work fell again. However, the report also found that severe supply chain delays kept pushing up builders’ costs, while business confidence fell to a seven-month low. Usamah Bhatti, economist at IHS Markit, said: Notably, input costs continued to increase at a substantial pace amid ongoing severe supply chain disruption. These lingering issues weighed on business sentiment, with the degree of optimism regarding the year-ahead outlook easing to the softest since April. At the national level, Italian firms reported a tenth consecutive rise in activity that was the sharpest on record, while firms in France noted the quickest expansion since June 2020. At the same time, German firms signalled a sustained fall in activity, albeit one that was the softest for 15 months.” There are early signs the UK’s shortage of lorry drivers could improve, which could help with the supply chain crisis next year. Logistics UK, which represents freight and haulage businesses, said the number of drivers leaving the profession had begun to ease, and that more trainees are coming through the testing system. In a new report, Logistics UK shows that there were 44,000 fewer HGV drivers this autumn than in 2019, But, the number of HGV driver tests is up 25%, along with a three-fold increase in applications for vocational provisional licenses. Elizabeth de Jong, policy director at Logistics UK, said the sector was seeing “green shoots” of recovery, and that HGV driver numbers should improve as new trainees join the sector. “It is still a challenging time, there is still an acute shortage of drivers certainly but there a number of signs of improvement that could be coming.” “We’re seeing hope that more people are beginning to enter the industry, but we’ve got to keep attracting them by really improving the facilities.” Shares of China’s Evergrande Group have tumbled to a record low on Monday on fears that the property giant it is on the verge of a potentially disastrous default, and could be forced into a full-blown restructuring. Evergrande’s shares slumped by up to 19.5% in Hong Kong trading, after the firm said there was no guarantee it would have enough funds to meet debt repayments. My colleague Martin Farrer explains: The company has lurched from one crisis to another in recent months as it faced a series of repayments on debts – three times waiting until the last possible moment to stump up the cash needed to stay afloat. But a statement from the company over the weekend said that there was “no guarantee” that the group could meet its obligations and added that creditors had demanded immediate repayment of a total of $260m (£196m). Its most pressing problem is how to repay $82.5m due on Monday – a deadline pushed back 30 days when it failed to meet the obligation on the due date back in November. “Since September 2021, the group has been diligently reviewing its capital structure and liquidity condition with the help of its financial and legal advisors, evaluating all available strategic options, and maintaining ongoing dialogue with offshore creditors,” said the statement. Electricity prices are continuing to surge across Europe, as the colder weather drives up demand: Oil prices have jumped over 2% this morning, after top exporter Saudi Arabia raised some of its crude prices despite the threat of Omicron to the recovery. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, explains: “Brent crude and West Texas are both trading higher by more than 2% after Saudi Arabia increase its crude prices to Asia and the US over the weekend for the second month in a row. The global oil benchmark is trading back above $71 a barrel while WTI remains below $70, having broken below the threshold almost a week ago. Last week OPEC+ stuck with the plan to increase supplies by 400,00 barrels per day in January. After enjoying eight consecutive weeks of gains, the tide turned for oil in October with Brent crude suffering six straight weeks in the red. Investors are now digesting the threat of Omicron and the knock-on impact for oil demand. Monday’s bullish price action suggests that oil is attempting to rally off the lows with the potential for a more positive week ahead.” European stock markets have started the new week on the front foot, as investors try to shake off worries about Omicron. The UK’s FTSE 100 index has jumped by 45 points, or 0.65%, to 7168 points. Travel and hospitality firms are in the risers, with InterContinental Hotels gaining 1.6%, IAG, which owns British Airways, are up 1.75%. Primark owner AB Foods has gained 1.5%, while oil giants BP (+1.2%) and Royal Dutch Shell (+1.1%) are benefitting from a rise in crude prices this morning. The pan-European Stoxx 600 has gained 0.8%. Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst at OANDA, explains that hopes that omicron is a milder variant is boosting the markets. US equity index futures are performing another omicron U-turn this morning, limiting the fallout in Asian markets of another fairly gruesome Wall Street session on Friday. The driver of the whip-saw return of serve omicron headline tennis comes from South Africa, where an article from the South African Medical Research Council, suggests that omicron symptoms were milder than previous incarnations, with hospitalised patients mostly having comorbidities. Of course, the sample size is small, but markets never let “the data” these days get in the way of narrative. Omicron variant milder = U-turn = buy everything. But... South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, has warned today that hospitals are preparing for more admissions, as the Omicron variant pushes the country into a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections. Our Covid-19 liveblog has more details. Supply-chain problems, rising costs and on-going COVID-19 restrictions could lead to shortages of goods and services and higher prices over the Christmas trading period, UK businesses fear. New research from accountancy firm BDO found that 80% of medium-sized business leaders expect their end of year trading to be impacted by rising fuel prices, supply chain disruption or increasing energy costs (or a combination of these threats). Ed Dwan, partner at BDO, warned that Omicron could hinder firms’ recovery plans. “Following a year of disruption, many businesses will have been hoping for a strong finish to 2021 and a fresh start for 2022. The harsh reality is that continued supply chain issues, rising energy prices and increasing costs means that many are taking further drastic measures to stay afloat. These issues could also be further exacerbated by the new COVID-19 variant. The 6.9% slump in new order at German factories in October shows that supply chain woes are hitting industry, says Carsten Brzeski of ING: Today’s industrial orders data is a cold shower for German industry. When the global economy came out of the 2020/21 winter lockdown, German industrial orders jumped to unprecedented levels, growing on average by more than 2% per month. At the end of the summer, however, orders collapsed and dropped by more than 12% between July and October. The sharp collapse over the summer is increasingly leaving its mark on industry - a reflection perhaps of ongoing supply chain frictions and companies simply delaying new orders or, worse, cancelling orders, knowing that delivery times are long anyway. Oliver Rakau of Oxford Economics says October’s factory orders are terrible: We also have bad economic news from Germany this morning. Factory orders at Europe’s largest economy tumbled by 6.9% in October, much worse than expected, after a 1.8% rise in September. Orders were 1% lower than in October 2020, the first year-on-year drop since September 2020, in the latest sign that Germany’s recovery is faltering at the end of 2021. German manufacturers were hit by weaker overseas demand, figures from the Federal Statistics Office showed. Foreign orders slumped by 13.1% month-on-month, including a 3.2% drop in new orders from the euro area, while domestic orders rose by 3.4%. The CBI is also gloomier about the UK’s economic outlook. It has cut its growth forecasts for the UK’s growth this year to 6.9%, from 8.2% previously, and to 5.1% for 2022, down from 6.1%. The downgrade mostly reflected weaker growth since its last forecasts in June, with supply chain problems continuing to bite. With global supply chain problems hitting the economy, the CBI says the government must take fresh action to a steep fall in business investment in 2023, when temporary measures to help business are withdrawn CBI’s director general, Tony Danker, says: “We should be raising our sights on the economy’s potential and seizing the moment. I know from speaking with firms of all sizes that they have an ambitious investment mindset and are anxious to implement growth plans. “But while intentions have thawed, we’re coming up to a cliff edge in 2023.” Here’s the full story: Here are KPMG’s three scenarios for how Omicron could hit the recovery next year: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The UK’s economic outlook looks less bright this morning, as shortages, rising costs, and the possibility of more Covid restrictions all threaten growth. KPMG has warned that GDP growth could more than halve next year if more restrictions are introduced to combat Omicron, depending on the severity of the new variant. In its central scenario, the UK government would bring back social distancing restrictions in retail and hospitality venues, and encourages people to work from home if they can in January and February 2022. If that happened, the economy would contract around 2% in the first quarter of 2022, slowing overall growth next year to 2.6%, down from 6.7% this year. In KPMG’s downside scenario, the threat of a significant rise in acute Covid-19 cases triggers another lockdown in early 2022. That would trigger a sharp fall in GDP, around 4.2%, in January-March 2022, dragging growth next year down to just 1.8%. While growth momentum is expected to decelerate until a booster is rolled out to halt the rise in cases, the full impact of the new variant will depend on the rise in the number of acute Covid cases and any social distancing restrictions that are introduced, it explains. Yael Selfin, chief economist at KPMG UK, says: “The Omicron variant has elevated the level of uncertainty about the recovery path from the pandemic. While the impact is not expected to be as severe as at the start of the pandemic, or even the beginning of this year, increased uncertainty and the potential reintroduction of social distancing measures could see output fall this month and during the first quarter of 2022.” Some sectors may remain significantly impacted by the pandemic, compared with the overall economy, the report adds: Additional travel restrictions and new pandemic hot spots are expected to see a slower and more protracted recovery in the sector. Rail travel will also be affected by a slower return of commuters to their workplaces. Commuter footfall was still down by 22% in late November compared to pre-pandemic levels and is likely to fall as people are encouraged to work from home. KPMG also warns that supply chains would come under more pressure, if the pandemic again leads to more demand for goods from locked-down consumers. Labour shortages have become a significant impediment to growth, it adds, as well as pushing up wages. These concerns could deter the Bank of England from raising interest rates at its next monetary policy meeting later this month. Deputy governor Sir Ben Broadbent gives his view of the economic outlook this morning. We also find out how UK and eurozone builders fared last month. The agenda 7am GMT: German factory orders for October 8.30am GMT: Eurozone construction PMI for November 8.30am GMT: UK construction PMI for November 11.30am: Bank of England deputy governor Sir Ben Broadbent gives a speech at Leeds University on “Outlook for growth, inflation and monetary policy”A global investigative network intended to tackle sexual abuse across all sports is due to be established by Fifa and a United Nations agency next year in the wake of the scandals in Afghanistan and Haiti revealed by the Guardian. Details of the plans are contained in a report commissioned by Fifa and the UN Office on Drugs and Crime in response to what it described as “the challenging learnings of complex, devastating and serious sexual abuses in Afghanistan and Haitian football”. As well as providing “trusted and accessible reporting lines” to report abuse in sport, the new body would include the creation of a “global network of investigators” who would collaborate with local law enforcement and Interpol to bring perpetrators to justice. It has also proposed the introduction of improved integrity checks “to prevent perpetrators moving across jurisdictions and across sports” and the provision of “care support to victims, witnesses and whistleblowers”. But Human Rights Watch and the international players’ union Fifpro questioned if Fifa was the right body to set up the network and criticised its record in tackling abuse cases. The former Afghan FA president, Keramuddin Karim, was banned for life by Fifa’s ethics committee in June 2019 after he was found guilty of physically and sexually abusing several young female players from the national team. In Haiti Yves Jean‑Bart, president of the Haiti FA, was banned for life in November 2020 by the ethics committee for sexually harassing and abusing female players, including minors. Both scandals were exposed by the Guardian. A Fifa spokesperson said: “The objective is to establish an independent, multi-sports, multi-agency, international entity to help sports judicial bodies investigate and appropriately manage cases of abuse using a survivor-centred approach.” The final report was sent last month to more than 230 stakeholders, including the UK government and international sports federations. Fifa has since appointed an independent secretariat that a spokesperson told the Guardian had been “mandated to form a representative working group of experts from around the world with the different skill sets required to establish the new entity in the second half of 2022”. According to the report, which was prepared by the Swiss-based firm Beutler International Sports Advisory, the International Safe Sport Agency and the International Safe Sport Centre are the two names being considered. The report says possible locations for the new body could be the Netherlands, France, Nairobi, Middle East or Singapore but it leans towards Switzerland, noting: “Switzerland is where the headquarters are of 45 International Sports Federations (IFs) including Fifa, as well as the International Olympic Committee, United Nations agencies and numerous humanitarian organisations.” The report praises Fifa for its role “as a catalyst in the global discussions” over fighting sexual abuse, and for “the provision of specialist investigative and care support”, adding: “The commitment of the Fifa president, Gianni Infantino, to ensuring that this entity becomes a reality and truly serves the needs of victims/survivors has been unwavering throughout the consultation process. Leadership commitment will be fundamental to its success.” However, Minky Worden, who is director of global initiatives for Human Rights Watch and took part in the consultation process, has questioned Fifa’s suitability to lead the entity after its handling of the cases in Afghanistan and Haiti. “Although HRW certainly participated in the safe sport entity consultation report, the production of reports does not in any way mean that the underlying problems are being addressed,” she said. “The entity was a direct response to reporting of abuse by survivors in Afghanistan and Haiti but Fifa announced it was partnering with UNODC – and only afterwards consulted with those of us who are directly taking evidence of sexual abuse that is caused by the lack of safeguarding children and athletes and poor governance controls that already exist. “Fifa does not have a fit‑for‑purpose system that allows care and protection of survivors; even when given the chance to do things right, the system is still badly skewed against survivors.” A statement from Fifpro said: “It is positive that Fifa has initiated the process towards reaching such an objective. However, for any new entity to be an improvement, it must honestly and robustly tackle existing procedural flaws. In our overwhelming experience football players do not report abuse because the reporting mechanisms in the game are too closely linked with the power structures that enable abuse. Put simply, they don’t trust the process to be impartial and safe and they don’t believe it will rigorously investigate everyone who participated, facilitated or ignored abuse. “Therefore, any new safe sport entity must demonstrate its ability and willingness to hold both perpetrators and facilitators to account. It needs to prove that it is completely trustworthy and that it will ensure the painful reporting process is as manageable as possible for the courageous players who raise their voice.” Karim and Jean-Bart were also each fined 1m Swiss francs (£827,000) as part of their sanction, although Fifa’s chief education and social responsibility officer, Joyce Cook, told CNN in October that it has not “seen those fines being paid”. “And we have no way to enforce that because, you know, we have to sanction individuals,” she admitted. “We’re offering additional support to help to facilitate a judicial process to take place in Haiti. That’s another lesson we’ve learned from Afghanistan, which still remains an open challenge. We’ve banned the perpetrator for life but he’s still at large. There have been several attempts to arrest him. With sports we have a limit.” Last month, a report on European Union sports policy, prepared by MEP and former professional player Tomasz Frankowski called on “all relevant actors to prioritise policies that safeguard children, promote healthy and active lifestyles and ensure safe, inclusive and equal sport”. In the US the Center for SafeSport is an independent body that handles investigations and complaints into abuse and misconduct in Olympic sports and has the power to suspend and ban abusers. It is handling an investigation into allegations against the athletics coach Rana Reider of sexual misconduct, which he denies. The UK-based Safe Sport International – which has partners including the International Paralympic Committee and International Netball Federation – describes itself as “the international agency leading on the elimination, globally, of all forms of violence, abuse and harassment against athletes of all ages”. It provides victims with the opportunity to report alleged abuse but has no investigative powers.Joe Root has pledged to set the record straight in Australia and score the runs required to set up England’s first overseas Ashes win since the 2010-11 triumph under Andrew Strauss. Before the first Test starting on Wednesday at the Gabba, a match that Jimmy Anderson is unlikely to play due to caution over his fitness and sees England without their usual levels of support in the stands, the captain stressed that recent form in these parts meant the only way was up. The 30-year-old has failed to reach three figures on his two previous away Ashes tours, averaging 38 in the crushing 5-0 and 4-0 defeats. But Root is emboldened by a golden 2021 that has returned six of his 23 Test hundreds and noted Australia have not played a Test since a 2-1 home defeat against India in January. He said: “I’m absolutely determined to put the record straight. Look at the last two tours and in many respects we can only expect better. Performances weren’t good enough. We have to make sure we rectify that this time around. “If we go and approach things in the exact same manner, then we’re likely to get similar results. So it’s really important we are brave in that respect and look to take the game to Australia.” Though under a new captain in Pat Cummins, Australia remain odds-on favourites to claim a third successive series win on home soil. This reflects a batting lineup with fewer weak links and a bowling attack unchanged from four years ago when a collective relentlessness transcended the moribund pitches. This time England’s bowlers are hopeful of greater assistance from a revamped Kookaburra ball that aided India’s success 12 months ago – a campaign Root has studied meticulously – as well as greener pitches during what promises to be a cooler, damper summer than usual in the eastern states. Even so, Anderson is to be held back until the second Test where the swing under floodlights should encourage the 39-year-old further. Elsewhere there is a final call to be made between Jonny Bairstow and Ollie Pope at No 6 to be made by Root and the head coach, Chris Silverwood given the return of Ben Stokes to the middle order. England’s support staff have been staggered by how good Stokes has looked in training despite a four-month lay-off, not least with the bat after a second finger operation in October that addressed problems gripping the handle. Root also talked up his vice-captain’s appetite for the big occasion before his first away Ashes assignment since the 2013-14 whitewash when, despite it being Stokes’s maiden Test series, he proved one of the few players to push back against a rampant Australia side. Root said: “Ben is very much made for Ashes cricket. Everything he is about suits this environment, this arena. He is a natural leader. He’ll want to lead from the front with his performances, whether that be with ball in hand or bat in hand. “Off the back of the last series we played against Australia [in 2019], I’m sure they’ll be looking at him and fearing him slightly. And his last time playing in Australia, with a hundred and a five-for in his debut series, I do think the conditions suit his game and hopefully he can exploit that. “Ultimately this series is not going to be won by one player. It is going to be won by a collective effort and we’re all going to have to play our part in that. And if we play to our skill level, I believe we can absolutely pull off something very special.” On the prospect of a hostile Gabba crowd – a fitting scene for Stuart Broad’s 150th cap given his past history at the ground – Root said: “It’s an opportunity for us to get really tight and stand up to that. We’ll just embrace it, enjoy the atmosphere and try to thrive off that sort of arena as much as we can.”A former lover of the former king of Spain believes a book about the death of Diana, Princess of Wales was left in her home as part of a campaign of harassment directed by the monarch, the high court in London has been told. The former king Juan Carlos is seeking sovereign immunity at the court against claims he used Spain’s spy agency to harass a Danish businesswoman, Corinna zu Sayn-Wittgenstein. In a skeleton argument presented to the court, lawyers for Sayn-Wittgenstein said she was seeking damages for the “great mental pain, alarm, anxiety, distress, loss of wellbeing, humiliation and moral stigma she has suffered.” After her five-year affair with the king, his “associate” Gen Sanz Roldán, then head of the Spanish national intelligence agency, and his colleagues began “threatening her and her children”, the document claims. The threats began when Roldán met Sayn-Wittgenstein at London’s Connaught Rooms in 2012, two years before Juan Carlos abdicated the Spanish throne and his son Felipe became king. While the London meeting was taking place, Sayn-Wittgenstein’s apartments in Monaco and a villa in Switzerland were broken into, she claims. She later discovered a book about Diana’s death had been left on a coffee table at the Swiss villa, the document states. Papers at the apartment had allegedly been “disturbed”. Her lawyers argued that the harassment continued after the abdication, including a surveillance operation against her home in Shropshire. This involved drilling a hole into her bedroom window in June 2017, and gunshots being fired at CCTV cameras at the property in April 2020, the document says. Both incidents were reported to police. Sayn-Wittgenstein claims that at the time Juan Carlos was demanding the return of gifts he had given her when they were lovers, including art, jewellery and £65m in cash, the skeleton argument says. Her lawyers argued that sovereign immunity did not apply because much of the harassment occurred after the abdication, and in any case was “quintessentially private in nature”. Defending the former king, Daniel Bethlehem QC said in written arguments before the court that the former king “rejects the allegations made against him, and any alleged wrongdoing by the Spanish state is denied in the strongest of terms”. He argued sovereign immunity should apply because the only way Juan Carlos could have persuaded officials from Spain’s intelligence agency to act on his behalf was because he either was or had been king. Juan Carlos’s actions were “quintessentially public acts because of who the person is”, Bethlehem told the court. The former king’s defence, submitted to the court, said: “Many of the acts underlying the claim against His Majesty can be considered to have been done in his public capacity. The claimant refers to His Majesty using the head of the Spanish national intelligence agency, ‘agents and/or agents or contractors’ of the intelligence agency and other ‘operatives’ to conduct physical and digital surveillance and ‘trespass’ on her property. Such alleged conduct, even if abusive or unlawful, would have been in His Majesty’s official capacity.” Bethlehem also argued that immunity should continue to apply after his abdication because Juan Carlos remains part of the royal household and a key figurehead in the Spanish constitution. He told the court: “His majesty is an essential part of the constitutional fabric of Spain. This remains the case after his abdication. His majesty is not only the personal embodiment of the return to democracy in Spain, but also an unbroken connection to the past.” James Lewis, QC, for the claimant, said: “A former head of state has no immunity.” The hearing before Mr Justice Nicklin continues.Medina Spirit, the horse at the centre of a doping controversy at this year’s Kentucky Derby, has died during a workout. The colt suffered a suspected heart attack while working out at California’s Santa Anita track on Monday. “Near the end of his breeze this morning, he did not feel right and his rider tried to pull him up,” Jeff Blea, the equine medical director for the California Horse Racing Board, told the New York Times. “He went down. Our vet on the scene got there immediately and he was already expired.” Medina Spirit was a central character in one of US racing’s biggest controversies in decades. He crossed the line first in May’s race but failed a post-race drugs test. His trainer, Bob Baffert, was banned from entering horses at the Kentucky Derby for two years after the controversy. He denied deliberately doping the horse, which had been a 12-1 outsider to win the race, and blamed the failed test on an ointment used to treat a rash on Medina Spirit. Medina Spirit had enjoyed recent success, finishing second in the Breeders’ Cup Classic in November. Baffert has yet to comment on the death. An attorney for the horse’s owner, Amr Zedan, told the New York Times his client and Baffert were “wracked with grief” over the death.The government has outlined plans to crack down on middle class drug users, with potential penalties including the possibility of losing your passport or driving licence. Given polling shows one in nine Britons have taken cocaine – a proportion that rises to a third for cannabis – it is little surprise that a number of senior politicians have admitted prior drug taking. Boris Johnson The prime minister has admitted trying both cocaine and cannabis while at university. On cocaine, he told a GQ interview in 2007 that the substance “achieved no pharmacological, psychotropic or any other effect on me whatsoever”. Two years earlier, appearing on the BBC’s Have I Got News for You, Johnson had tried to divert the question with a joke, saying: “I think I was once given cocaine, but I sneezed and so it did not go up my nose. In fact, I may have been doing icing sugar.” Michael Gove The communities and levelling-up secretary has been one of the most open leading UK politicians about his drug use, saying in 2019 he had used cocaine it several times. “I took drugs on several occasions at social events more than 20 years ago,” he told the Daily Mail. “At the time I was a young journalist. It was a mistake. I look back and I think, I wish I hadn’t done that.” Dominic Raab The justice secretary, who is also deputy prime minister, has admitted using cannabis, but insisted he had “never taken cocaine or any class A drugs”. He said: “At university, I tried cannabis, not very often as I was into sport. It was a mistake, particularly the more I know now about the link between it and mental health issues.” Jeremy Hunt The former health and foreign secretary, who now chairs the Commons health committee, is another MP who has conceded cannabis use as a young person, telling the Times he had “a cannabis lassi when I went backpacking through India”. Rory Stewart While not a frontline politician any more, the former Tory MP and international development secretary, wins a space for the cosmopolitan nature of his drug use – smoking opium at an Afghan wedding. He told the Telegraph: “I was invited into the house, the opium pipe was passed around at a wedding.” Keir Starmer The Labour leader hasn’t admitted using drugs, but also has very much not denied, it. In a TV interview with Piers Morgan he batted away more than a dozen questions about drug use, saying only that he had “worked hard and played hard” at university. Lisa Nandy The shadow levelling up secretary was more candid, telling ITV, when asked about drug use at university: “I’ve engaged in all sorts of things over the years, but I do regret it actually. You take risks when you’re younger and you don’t understand the consequences. I certainly didn’t think through the consequences of the things that I was doing when I was 17 or 18 years old, but you learn from it.”Drugs ruin lives. The street where I grew up in Bristol was the centre of the local drugs trade, and I’ve seen first-hand the destructive impact they can have on people and the communities where they live. Addiction to drugs is thought to be linked to about half of all thefts, burglaries and robberies, and the use of powder cocaine alone drives a criminal market worth about £2bn. People having a line of cocaine may not think that they’re causing anyone harm, or that they’re playing a part in a criminal enterprise, but they are actually the final link in a chain that has suffering, violence and exploitation at every stage. Behind every illicit drug is a human cost: the “county lines” operations that increasingly involve young people, human trafficking and the use of “cuckooing”, where drug dealers target the most vulnerable and use their homes for criminal activity. It’s clear the sale and use of drugs is driving serious violence and I commissioned Prof Dame Carol Black to undertake independent reviews to better understand the drugs market and current treatment system, so we can take targeted action and improve the treatment available. The illuminating reviews clearly show how great the harm from drugs can be, including the link between drugs and serious violence. This week, we have shown how we are going to take action. I am glad to see the findings have shaped the new strategy to cut crime and reduce the demand for drugs by getting more people into treatment. Our 10-year drugs strategy, the most ambitious for a generation, sets out a bold long-term vision for how we’ll tackle drug crime, improve treatment and turn lives around. It looks at both sides of the coin, at how we will reduce both the supply and the demand for illicit drugs. It shows how we will come down hard on supply by breaking up the drug-supply chains that cause so much misery, and through tough enforcement. Crucially, we’ll do more to make sure this enforcement will apply equally. The Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities has already raised the disproportionate impact of possession laws on young black people. It is so important to me that we put this injustice right, and we have committed to making the system fairer across the board. But we will never solve this through enforcement alone. To reduce the misery drugs bring to communities and protect victims we have to also tackle the drivers of crime and get people off drugs for good. More than half of people dependent on the most harmful drugs – opiate and crack cocaine – are not engaged in treatment. So the strategy includes £780m of funding, the largest single increase ever, to give more people better quality treatment and more support to recover. We’re doing this because that is the only way we will cut crime and level up the poorest communities, which we know are disproportionately affected by drug-related crime. We will also prevent people from becoming drug users in the first place, by making sure that there is early intervention for young people and families at the greatest risk, and that all children are provided with high-quality education on health and relationships. This is the most ambitious strategy in a generation and will deliver 54,500 more treatment places, 24,000 more people into long-term drug-free recovery, and close 2,000 county lines. There is a huge opportunity to make a difference. One of my most pressing priorities in this role is tackling disparities of all kinds. Drug dependence often coexists with other health inequalities, such as poor mental health and homelessness, and sadly the most deprived areas face the most drug-driven crime and health harms. So putting this strategy into action won’t just save and transform lives, it will also help us in our mission to level up communities across the country. Today shows our commitment to getting it right, and tackling a trade that has brought pain and grief to so many. Sajid Javid is the secretary of state for health and social careThe risk that Tesco will be severely hit by strike action in the crucial pre-Christmas period has escalated dramatically, after the number of distribution centres facing staff walkouts more than tripled to 13 – more than half the total. Britain’s biggest supermarket chain had been facing the prospect of strikes at four depots after members of the trade union Unite voted for industrial action in protest at an “offensive” below-inflation pay offer. Members of the retail workers’ union Usdaw followed suit on Monday, adding a further nine sites to the list of those that could be affected unless a deal can be reached. The union warned that Tesco could face “stock shortages” as a result. In total, 13 out of 22 distribution centres at Tesco are now at risk of being disrupted by industrial action in the busy weeks either side of Christmas. Usdaw said it had given notice of a stoppage starting on 20 December and concluding on Christmas Eve, after two separate ballots supported action by 73% and 84%. “Our members have sent a clear message, with this high turnout and strong support for industrial action,” said its national officer, Joanne McGuinness. “We hope that the company is listening and that they will return to the negotiating table with a better deal that is acceptable to our members. “Retail distribution workers are key workers who delivered essential services throughout the pandemic, which in turn delivered a 16.5% increase in profit to Tesco for the first half of the year. “These workers deserve a decent pay rise as their reward for what they have done and continue to do day in, day out; couple that with the rising cost of living and inflation currently running at 6%, the company needs to do better.” The Usdaw vote affects sites at Daventry, Goole, Hinckley, Lichfield, Livingston, two at Magor, Peterborough and Southampton. On Sunday, Unite said warehouse workers and HGV drivers at depots in Antrim, Belfast, Didcot and Doncaster would start a series of rolling strikes from 16 December. The unions said members had rejected a 4% annual pay increase, pointing out that the retail price index measure of inflation is 6%. Responding to the Usdaw vote, Tesco reiterated its comment on the Unite strike, saying its pay offer was “fair”. The company is understood to be in ongoing talks with unions.Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has told MPs that there are now 336 confirmed Omicron cases in the UK and that there is there is “community transmission across multiple regions of England”. (See 5.34pm and 5.35pm.) Theresa May, the former prime minister, has joined the ranks of Conservative MPs expressing concern about the prospect of further Covid restrictions being introduced. (See 6.01pm.) Downing Street has denied that a party took place in Downing Street last December and said it was a “statement of fact” that no Covid rules were broken. (See 2pm.) For further coronavirus coverage, do read our global live blog. The Javid statement is now over. The Independent’s John Rentoul argued on Twitter earlier that MPs were missing an obvious line of attack. Asked by Labour’s Angela Eagle how much more he would be able to tell MPs in the update next week about the threat posed by Omicron, Javid said there would still be “many unanswered questions” at that point. He said: As each day goes by we are getting a little bit more information, but I do think by next week with the samples that have arrived at Porton Down and other labs across the world we will have more information. I will just caveat that by saying I can’t make any guarantee about how much information that we will have. I am sure there will still be many unanswered questions at that point. Andrew Bridgen (Con) said that he was glad to hear that no Omicron cases are in hospital (see 6.13pm) and that he thought Theresa May was right to say virus variants become more transmissible but less harmful. He said he hoped this meant all restrictions would be lifted next week. Javid replied: “Let’s wait and see what next week brings.” Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief adviser, who is now one of his fiercest critics, says that No 10 is now lying about the December party last year. He also suggests the government is being complacent about Omicron. Kate Osamor (Lab) says the Nigerial high commissioner has described his country’s inclusion on the red list as “travel apartheid”. She says Delta seems to lead to more serious illness, but European countries with high numbers of Delta cases are not on the red list. She urges the government to adopt an international approach, not a “discriminatory approach”. Javid says southern Africa is the epicentre of Omicron. He says at least 21 Omicron cases in the UK are linked to Nigeria. (See 5.43pm.) Sir Desmond Swayne (Con) asks how many of the infected cases are ill. Javid say, of the the 336 cases, some may be asymptomatic, some are ill, but none are in hospital, as far as he knows. Sir Graham Brady, chair of the Conservative backbench 1922 Committee, says the travel industry has been “devastated” by uncertainty and constantly changing Covid rules. He asks what criteria will be used by ministers to decide when the latest rules should be lifted. Javid says next week’s update will be an important moment. Mark Harper (Con) asks for an assurance that MPs will be recalled during the Christmas recess if the government needs to implement further measures during the holiday period. Javid says people would expect the government to take action over the recess if it has to. He says he will take back to colleagues the point Harper makes about parliament being recalled. In the Commons Theresa May, the former prime minister, said it would be a mistake for the government to respond to every new variant by closing down the economy. The early indications of Omicron are that it is more transmissible but potentially leads to less serious illness than other variants. I understand that would be the normal progress of a virus. Variants will continue to appear year after year. When is the government going to accept that learning to live with Covid, which we will all have to do, means we will almost certainly have an annual vaccine and that we cannot respond to new variants by stopping and starting sectors of our economy which leads to businesses going under and jobs being lost? Javid replied: In terms of the severity of this, I think we shouldn’t jump to any conclusion, we just don’t have enough data. It is not going away ... for many, many years and perhaps it will lead to annual vaccinations, but we have to find ways to continue with life as normal. In response to Streeting’s point about the No 10 party, Javid said the rules of course apply to everyone. Wes Streeting, the new shadow health secretary, is responding for Labour. He says, like his predecessor, Jonathan Ashworth, he wants to adopt a constructive approach. He says he is glad the government has implemented the pre-flight tests that Labour was calling for. He asks what is being done to tackle vaccine hesitancy. He says sick pay should be more generous for people who have to isolate. And he ends with a reference to the No 10 party last December. People need to have confidence in people setting the rules. He says two residents in Ilford (Streeting is MP for Ilford North) were punished for holding an indoor gathering against lockdown rules on 18 December last year. “And rightly so,” Streeting says. So will the government come clean about what happened, or is it one rule for them, and one rule for everyone else? Javid says new analysis suggests that the gap between being infected and being infectious may be shorted for Omicron than it is for the Delta variant. We are learning more about this new variant all the time. Recent analysis from the UK Health Security Agency suggests that the window between infection and infectiousness may be shorter for the Omicron variant than for the Delta variant, but we don’t yet have a complete picture of whether Omicron causes more severe disease or indeed how it interacts with the vaccines. We can’t say for certain at this point whether Omicron has the potential to knock us off our road to recovery. We are leaving nothing to chance. Our strategy is to buy ourselves times and to strengthen our defences while our world-leading scientists assess this new variant and what it means for our fight against Covid-19. He is now summing up the measures announced over the weekend. He says Nigeria has been added to the red list. He says at least 21 of the Omicron cases in England are linked to Nigeria. And he says there are strong travel links between Nigeria and South Africa. Analysis from UKHSA [Health Security Agency] shows that at least 21 Omicron cases in England alone are linked to travel from Nigeria, and there’s a strong indication that Omicron is present there. Nigeria also has very strong travel links with South Africa. He says more hotel rooms are being set aside for arrivals how have to go through hotel quarantine. I know that there has been a spike in demand for these facilities due to the rapid expansion of the red list and that some people have experienced issues returning home. However, we are ramping up this capacity as quickly as possible. We’ve already brought several new hotels on board in the past few days and we expect to double the number of rooms that are available this week. And because the gap between infection and infectiousness may be shorter with Omicron, pre-flight testing is being introduced for arrivals. He says these measures will be kept under review and MPs will get an update next week. And he confirms that the vaccination programme is being beefed up. Javid says the new figures mean there is “community transmission across multiple regions of England”. The Omicron variant is continuing to spread here and around the world. According to the latest data there are now 261 confirmed cases in England, 71 in Scotland and four in Wales, bringing the total number of confirmed cases across the UK to 336. This includes cases with no links to international travel. So, we can conclude that there is now community transmission across multiple regions of England. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, is making a Commons statement on Covid. He says there are now 261 confirmed Omicron cases in England, 71 in Scotland, and four in Wales. That makes 336 in the UK in total, he says. The UK has recorded 51,459 new coronavirus cases, the goverment has disclosed on its dashboard. The total number of new cases over the past seven days is up 9.1% on the previous seven days. But hospital admissions and deaths are still, only just, on a downward trend week on week, by 0.8% and 0.2% respectively. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, has confirmed that a review will be set up to investigate how child protection failures contributed to the death of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes. In a statement to MPs, he said the “whole nation is distraught” at the “tragic and horrific” death of Arthur. He went on: “We across this house and across this country find it impossible to imagine how any adult could commit such evil acts against a child.” Zahawi said that the national child safeguarding practice review panel was set up in 2017 to investigate cases like this and that Annie Hudson, its chair, will “work with leaders in Solihull to deliver a single, national, independent review of Arthur’s death to identify what we must learn from this terrible case”. He went on: I look forward to the review’s recommendations in due course, because in any complex system it is important - imperative in my view - to investigate thoroughly to learn and improve the system. My mantra continues to be that sunlight is the best possible disinfectant – because if we are to improve services where they need improving, we must share data and evidence ... As the court heard, Arthur’s tragic death is a result of the cruelty of his father and his father’s partner. No government anywhere in the world can legislate for evil. But we will take action wherever we can to stop this happening again, because we must do more, and to do more I would like to end my statement with a plea to everyone in our country. Zahawi also said that, because so many agencies were involved in Arthur’s case, he had asked Ofsted, the Care Quality Commission, HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire &amp; Rescue services and HM Inspectorate of Probation to carry out a joint targeted area inspection, looking at how they cooperate in the Solihull area. At the weekend the governmen briefed the punitive aspects of the 10-year drugs strategy. Boris Johnson gave an interview to the Sun on Sunday, which led to a story about how he was planning to unleash “an all-out war on drugs”, and it was announced that class A drug users could lose their passports or driving licences under the proposals. But the Department for Health and Social Care and the Home Office have now published a joint news release about the strategy and it implies that drug treament is getting more priority than the crackdown on drugs gangs, at least if spending is used as a yardstick. It says £300m is being spent on action against criminal gangs, but that £780m is being invested in drug treatment. These sums are part of a total spend of £3bn on drug enforcement and treatment over the next three years. The government says the money will fund various measures including better drug treatment generally, more offender drug treatment services, more housing support for those at risk of sleeping rough and employment support for people with a drug or alcohol addiction. It also says the role of healh and justice partnership coordinators will be extended. It explains: The role of dedicated health and justice partnership co-ordinators, who liaise between prisons, probation and treatment providers, will be expanded to cover every region in England and Wales. This will mean services in prison and the community are better joined up and offenders’ treatment plans remain consistent, helping them to stay on track and break the cycle of reoffending once and for all. A pilot will trial a new approach to how the courts deal with offenders with a history of drug abuse, where they will be seen regularly by the same judge, who has the power to order a number of sanctions and incentives, such as mandatory drug testing. Currently only offenders who agree to undergo treatment programmes can be subjected to regular testing. The announcement has been welcomed by Dame Carol Black, who led the independent review of drugs policy. (See 3.18pm.) In a statement quoted in the government’s news release, she said she was delighted by this “very significant investment in drug treatment and recovery services”. Reform UK has announced a defection to it ahead of the North Shropshire byelection on Thursday week. It says Mark Whittle, a town councillor in Market Drayton and a member of the local Conservative association’s executive, has joined the party. In a statement, Whittle suggests he is switching because the Tory byelection candidate, Neil Shastri-Hurst, is not sufficiently local. Reform UK, the new name for what was the Brexit party, has made very little impact since the 2019 general election. But the Tories cannot ignore it completely. It is trying to outflank the party on the libertarian right, and at the Old Bexley and Sidcup byelection last week it picked up 6.6% of the vote. The Welsh government has strongly criticised the UK government’s nationality and borders bill, claiming it will “exacerbate inequity and harm communities”. In a written statement, the social justice minister Jane Hutt and counsel general Mick Antoniw said: We believe many of the provisions in the bill will breach international conventions, violate basic principles of justice and will place ultimately extreme and insurmountable conditions on people who seek our protection. The pair said the bill proposes a new two-tier system to create “group one” and “group two” refugees. They said: Group two refugees may be prohibited from accessing public funds; prevented from being reunited with their family in the UK, and restricted to just 30 months refuge in the UK pending further reviews of their circumstances. This will cause unforeseen and unequal impacts on the people arriving ... It will exacerbate destitution and increase exploitation of migrants and illegal working in our communities – increasing vulnerability among an already vulnerable population. Dame Carol Black, who conducted a two-part review of drugs policy for the government that reported in the summer, told Radio 4’s World at One that the government’s drugs strategy should focus more on treatment than on law enforcement. Asked which approach would make the bigger difference, she replied: I’m going to say treatment and recovery because as long as there’s demand, you will have supply. Drug dealers are very, very good at just moving their operation, of doing different things, they’re good businessmen. So I think if you really want to get to grips with drugs and crime, you’ve got to be able to offer people high quality treatment and recovery. We know from research that that stops criminal activity. We know that if it’s high-quality treatment, people stay in it and do better. And we have at the moment a broken service ... I also want there to be, obviously, activity by the Home Office. Of course I want that. But we’ve been doing that for years. And we’ve been doing rather inadequate treatment and recovery now for many years, and in some places, extremely poor. At least they deserve 50-50. The number of Omicron cases detected in Scotland has more than doubled over the weekend to 71, with a new cluster reported in the Highlands town of Nairn, west of Inverness. NHS Highland said the “significant” outbreak had emerged after an event at a Royal British Legion hall in the town last week. It refused to say how many cases were involved but five new cases were reported for the Highland area on Monday, taking its total to eight. The latest provisional figures for Scotland showed the outbreak in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, with many linked to a Steps concert at the Hydro venue in Glasgow, had affected 27 people by 5pm yesterday, up from the 11 identified by Friday evening. The figures for NHS Lanarkshire had also jumped, from nine identified by Friday evening to 22 by late on Sunday. The data identifies Omicron cases confirmed by genomic sequencing, as health authorities in Scotland race to identity and track new cases, using advanced contact tracing where fresh clusters emerge. So far, confirmed Omicron cases are largely restricted to these NHS areas, with single cases also detected in Ayrshire and Arran, Fife, Lothian and Tayside. Two have been found in Grampian, and eight found in Forth Valley over the last four days. John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister, urged people to take a lateral flow test every day if they planned to leave the house, as new rules allowing negative tests to be used to enter venues came into force. Until now, the official advice in Scotland was to take a LFT twice a week, but Swinney told BBC Radio Scotland he used one every day he expected to leave home. He said: We want people to increase the frequency of the use of lateral flow tests, away from the two times per week to much more frequently when they are socialising and interacting with others. He said ministers in Edinburgh were considering adding proof of a booster jab to be added to the vaccination passports, which could be reinstated as necessary to enter large venues in future. Booster jabs will be added to vaccination passports for international travel from 9 December, he said. According to PA Media, Boris Johnson joined police in Liverpool for morning raids in the Kirkdale and Anfield areas of the city as part of an investigation into county lines dealing. Two people - a 34-year-old woman and a 27-year-old man - were arrested and taken to police stations in Merseyside for questioning following the execution of two warrants, police confirmed. And here is a full summary of the Downing Street lobby briefing. The PM’s spokesman confirmed a report by the Times’s Henry Zeffman at the weekend saying the levelling up white paper has been delayed until next year. It has been due before Christmas. Alain Tolhurst from Politics Homes says he thinks that the document is ready, but that the “pitch rolling” process is not yet complete. The spokesman played down claims that the government wants to give itself powers to easily overturn judicial review decisions by the courts. (See 11.58am.) Asked about the claim, made in the Times splash today, the spokesman said he was “not aware of any plans” to do this. He also said the report was “not an accurate characterisation of the action we are taking” - although the story is specifically about what Boris Johnson reportedly wants to do, because he apparently thinks the action that is being taken (in a bill going through parliament) leaves too much power with the courts. The spokesman denied that a party took place in Downing Street last December and said it was a “statement of fact” that no Covid rules were broken. (See 1.03pm.) The spokesman welcomed the high court ruling this morning rejecting a challenge to Johnson’s decision not to sack Priti Patel over bullying allegations. The spokesman said: The judgment affirms that appointment and dismissal of ministers is not judiciable and that questions of interpretation of the code, which are inextricably linked with that, may not be judiciable either. The judgment accepts that most of the code would not be judiciable. The spokesman said it was “unacceptable” for testing firms to exploit customers who need to pay for Covid tests. Asked about reports that firms have misleading consumers online about their prices, the spokesman said: It’s clearly unacceptable for any private testing company to take advantage of holidaymakers. He also said that, on average, a two-day PCR test costs less than £45. The spokesman defended what was being done to reconnect homes that lost power as a result of Storm Arwen. Energy companies were taking “every step possible”, he claimed. He said: It is worth remembering that 99.8% of households have power [restored]. As of 8am today, there were 1,600 homes currently without power in the north-east - that’s a reduction of 2,425 since yesterday. So there have been significant improvements but we recognise that for those homes still left without power, they will expect, rightly, more to be done. We continue to check in incredibly regularly with the power companies to make sure they have all the support needed, and we are assured they are taking every step possible. Obviously there are significant challenges following the storm, which was unusually strong and caused damage in particularly remote areas. The government is planning to block suppliers from winning public contracts if they have a record of poor delivery, fraud or corruption, PA Media reports. PA says: The Cabinet Office said the proposals were part of “wide ranging changes” taking advantage of “new powers” facilitated by Brexit. It said that under current rules, suppliers can only be excluded if there has been a “significant breach of contract”. But it said a set of “simpler, clearer and more flexible” rules, to be introduced now the country has left the EU, would give the government “more discretion” to block those that have under-performed. It would also be possible to ban suppliers which have undertaken unethical practices, such as a lax approach to safety, or where there are national security or environmental concerns, the Cabinet Office said. Meanwhile, the government is planning to introduce competition into emergency buying, meaning it “doesn’t need to wholly rely on direct awards in times of crisis”. New measures on transparency would also be implemented, with procurement data published in a “standard, open format” which would be “accessible to anyone”, the Cabinet Office said. It added that a “simplified bidding process” would make it easier for small and medium-size businesses to win Government contracts. And it said “more weight” would be given to bids with “social value”, to help level up the country. The plans are outlined in the government’s consultation response to its Transforming Public Procurement green paper. The Downing Street lobby briefing has finished. It lasted longer than usual, partly because of another fruitless quest for clarification as to what did or did not happen at No 10 last December when staff had a boozy get-together. Here are the key points on topic. The PM’s spokesman denied that a party took place in Downing Street last December. He said: As press secretary set out on a number of occasions when questioned about this originally, there was not a party and Covid rules have been followed at all times. This is a slightly firmer line than we have had before. Downing Street has not denied reports, that first appeared in the Daily Mirror, that an event that would meet any conventional definition of a party (a large number of people drinking booze in the same room, until late in the evening, with games too, just before a holiday) took place just before Christmas in No 10 last year. (There was also a separate one in November.) At PMQs last week Johnson did not deny that a Christmas party took place, and in subsequent interviews he has never said there was no party. Initially No 10 did not deny that there had been a party either, but at one briefing last week the PM’s press secretary (the party political spokesperson) said that what happened was not a party, and today the official spokesman (the civil service one) adopted that. The spokesman said it was a “statement of fact” that no Covid rules were broken. Asked how he could be sure that no regulations were broken at the December event, and what had been done to establish that, the spokesman said: I don’t need to get into the positions we’ve taken. It is simply just a statement of fact. Asked how it could be a statement of fact when this had not been investigate, the spokesman said he would not get into internal matters, but that guidance had been followed at all times. The spokesman said Downing Street will be having a staff party this Christmas. Other government departments have cut back or cancelled big gatherings. I will post more from the lobby briefing shortly. There are three ministerial statements and one urgent question in the Commons this afternoon. Here is the running order, with approximate timings. 3.30pm: Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, responds to an urgent question about Storm Arwen. After 4pm: Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, makes a statement about child safeguarding and the death of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes. After 5pm: Sajid Javid, the health secretary, makes a statement about Covid. After 6pm: Kit Malthouse, the policing minister, makes a statement about the 10-year drugs strategy. Amanda Pritchard, the NHS England chief executive, had her booster jab this morning. Afterwards she issued a statement saying: The booster jab was quick, easy and I now have extra protection against the virus ... When it’s your turn, please come forward - the vaccine will give you and your loved ones the protection I have received today. These are from Danny Shaw, the former BBC home affairs correspondent, on the 10-year drugs strategy announced by the government today. This morning the Times has splashed on a story (paywall) by Tom Newton Dunn and Jonathan Ames saying that Boris Johnson favours radical legislation to curtail the use of judicial review. They report: The prime minister has ordered Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, to toughen plans to reform judges’ powers to rule on the legality of ministerial decisions. An option drawn up by Raab and Suella Braverman, the attorney-general, that is liked by No 10 is for MPs to pass an annual “interpretation bill” to strike out findings from judicial reviews with which the government does not agree. Whitehall sources argue that the bills would reinforce the constitutional principle that parliament is sovereign over the unelected judiciary. The move has provoked uproar within the legal establishment, and Johnson was accused of trying to use his Commons majority to halt legitimate challenges. One senior QC said that the prime minister was secretly seeking “a more compliant judiciary”. The government has already introduced a judicial review and courts bill, which is close to completing its passage through the Commons. This was intended to implement a manifesto pledge to reform the judicial review so that “it is not used well into its passsage”. But Johnson reportedly believes this bill, which was drawn up by Robert Buckland, who was sacked as justice secretary in September, does not go far enough. Labour says the report shows minsters want the power “to ignore the courts altogether”. In a joint statement Steve Reed, the shadow justice secretary, and Emily Thornberry, the shadow attorney general, said: After a week when No 10 has behaved as though they are above the law when it comes to Covid regulations, we are now told they want to grant themselves the right to ignore the courts altogether. From the bedroom tax to the bombing of Yemen, the judicial review process exists so the public can challenge the government and other public bodies when it suspects they have broken the law. Incredibly, the government plans to subvert that process by taking on even more arbitrary powers, and in future change the law to comply with their decisions, rather than change their decisions to comply with the law. This is nothing to do with the sovereignty of parliament, but all about the Henry VIII fantasies of a prime minister who thinks none of the rules the rest of us have to live by should ever be applied to him. The mention of Henry VIII refers to so-called Henry VIII powers, clauses in bills allowing ministers to use secondary legislation (easy to pass, and subject to little scrutiny) to rewrite primary legislation (bills that only become law after extensive votes and debates in parliament). Speaking to reporters this morning as he received his booster jab (see 9.47am and 11.11am), Keir Starmer blamed government cuts for contributing to the drug problem that ministers are trying to address with their strategy announced today. Asked about the plan, he said: We need to look at the plans in detail when we see them in detail. But there’s no doubt that the drug problem has got a lot worse in the last 10 years, particularly issues like drug-related deaths and the county lines, which are destroying lives. The question for the government is not just over the plans today but the money that they have taken out of the system – millions and millions of pounds have been taken out of the system over the years and that has caused a lot of the problems. So I want to see the plans, I want to see the strategy, I want the prime minister to take responsibility for the money that’s been taken out of criminal justice in the last 10 years that’s caused many of these problems. However, as Boris Johnson made it clear in his own clip for broadcasters this morning (see 10.52am), taking responsibility for all government cuts since 2010 is one thing he is definitely not prepared to do. His argument is that the government only took power in 2019. Keir Starmer has urged the government to do more to cut the price of the Covid tests that people arriving in the UK need to pay for. In an interview this morning, he welcomed the government’s decision to make pre-departure tests (PCR or lateral flow) compulsory, as Labour had been calling for. He said: I would have liked to see the government act more quickly. As ever, they are behind the curve. As soon as we saw the scientific evidence saying that (there) should be pre-departure tests, we called on the government to do this last week. The government delayed, as they always do. They’ve done it now, that’s a good thing. But the government needs to get ahead instead of being behind. On the costs of tests, Starmer said: I also want to see the government doing whatever it can to bring the price of these tests down because lots of people ... [are] getting really hammered by prices that can’t be justified. Boris Johnson has successfully fought off a high court challenge over his decision to back the home secretary after accusations she had bullied civil servants, my colleague Rajeev Syal reports. Tristan Kirk, the Evening Standards’ court correspondent, has posted an interesting thread on Twitter on the lockdown breaches from last winter that are being prosecuted in London. And here are the main points Boris Johnson made in his morning TV interview about the 10-year drugs plan Johnson claimed that his was the first government for a long time to take class A drugs use seriously. Asked about new evidence of cocaine use at the Houses of Parliament, Johnson said: This government is absolutely determined to fight drugs. I take the view that it’s a long time really since you’ve heard a government say that drugs, class A drugs, are bad, bad for society, bad for opportunity, bad kids growing up in this country. That’s my view. That sounded like a dig at Johnson’s old rival, David Cameron, whose campaign for the Tory leadership in 2005 was undermined by claims - which he did not deny - that he had used cocaine before becoming an MP. Johnson has admitted taking cocaine himself when he was a student, but he implied it happened just once, and his student use of cannabis seems to have been limited too. Recreational drug use is one vice that he has never seriously been accused of. Johnson would not accept responsibility for cuts to police and drugs programmes since 2010. When it was put to him that Labour was saying that police and drug treatment programmes had been cut by the government over many years, he claimed that was not right. He went on: Since this government came in, we’ve not only put 11,000 more police on the streets, as part of our commitment to put another 20,000 more, but we’re announcing another £300m to tackle county lines gangs. This answer was interesting because it illustrates Johnson’s unwillingness to defend the record of the Cameron and May governments. At the next election Labour will be attacking what has happened under the Tories since 2010, but Johnson will be adopting a ‘Year zero’ approach, arguing the clock only started in 2019. To be fair, he never served in Cameron’s government, and was out of parliament for most of the time it was in office, but he was foreign secretary in May’s government for two years. He said the strategy being announced today combined tougher action against county lines drugs gangs with more emphasis on rehabilitation. He said: We want everybody to be able to grow up in safer streets, everybody to have the right to have a safe community to grow up in and too many people have their lives blighted by these county lines gangs, so you’ve got to do two things at once. You’ve got to be tougher on the county lines gangs, you’ve got to be tougher on the criminals who are doing it, but you’ve also got to make sure that you find those 300,000 people and you help them. You can’t simply arrest them time after time and put them back into prison again and again - you’ve got to do rehab as well. Yesterday Prof Mark Woolhouse, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (Spi-M), told The Andrew Marr Show that the government’s announcement of pre-departure testing for people arriving in the UK had come too late. “I think that may be a case of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted,” he said. This morning Boris Johnson, in an interview on a visit with police in Merseyside, primarily to promote the 10-year drugs strategy, was asked about specifically about this comment. Johnson said he did not accept it. He went on: I think what we’re doing is responding to the pandemic. We were the first country in the world to take decisive measures to tackle Omicron. We put about 10 countries automatically, immediately, on to the red list and we said that anybody coming from any country in the world would have to quarantine for a couple of days. We’re now going further and toughening those measures up as we see the spread of Omicron around the world. I don’t think we need to change the overall guidance and advice we’re giving about Omicron in this country. We’re still waiting to see exactly how dangerous it is, what sort of effect it has in terms of deaths and hospitalisations. Asked whether he was certain there would be no new social restrictions before Christmas, Johnson said, as he has said before, that “this Christmas will be considerably better than last Christmas, with the possibly exception for the country lines drug gangs that we intend to roll up”. Keir Starmer had his booster jab this morning, Sky News reports. Good morning. Kit Malthouse, the policing minister, was on the airwaves for the government today, primarily to talk about the government’s new 10-year drugs strategy. But he also became the latest minister to face the interview challenge from hell - defending Downing Street’s threadbare and incoherent line on the No 10 Christmas parties last year that appeared to break lockdown rules. On BBC News Malthouse said that he was not sure whether there was a party. But that did not stop him saying, if it did happen, it did not break the rules. On Sky News Malthouse said he took the reassurance he had had from Downing Street “at face value” (an unusual formula - he could have just said he believed them). And then, on the Today programme, Malthouse said that factors like social distancing, and the size of the room, might have been factors in whether or not the party was legal - even though these were not exemptions allowed in the guidance. Malthouse also said that it was right for the police to investigate allegations about offences committed in the past - at the end of last week the Met said it did not routinely “retrospectively” investigate breaches of Covid rules - but he said it was for the police to decide what they did in this case. The Met is under pressure to investigate. The Green MP Caroline Lucas suggests Malhouse’s failure to offer a proper defence of Downing Street strengthens the case for an investigation. The SNP MP John Nicolson has also described Malthouse’s Today interview as “excruciating”. Here is the agenda for the day. 10.30am: The high court gives its ruling in a case brought by the FDA, the senior civil servants’ union, challenging Boris Johnson’s decision to ignore the ruling that Priti Patel, the home secretary, broke the ministerial code by bullying civil servants. 11.30am: Downing Street holds its lobby briefing. 2.30pm: Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, takes questions in the Commons. He is also due to make a statement on an inquiry into the Arthur Labinjo-Hughes case. 3pm: Alister Jack, the Scottish secretary, gives evidence to the Commons Scottish affairs committee. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comVisitors to Tate Modern have been captivated in equal measure by Anicka Yi’s translucent squid-like “aerobe” machines, floating through the cavernous Turbine Hall, and Rodin’s exquisite plaster casts of arms, legs and bodies exhibited in the galleries upstairs. The curator Achim Borchardt-Hume, who has died unexpectedly aged 56, worked on both these recent projects in his role as Tate Modern’s director of exhibitions and programmes, demonstrating his scope in organising exhibitions that both introduced exciting contemporary artists to the general public, and illuminated the life and work of key historical figures. Achim was driven by the notion that through exhibitions it should be possible to get closer to the subject “as a living breathing artist, [a] human being. With everything that that means … ambition, doubts, happiness, sadness.” The Rodin exhibition was emblematic of this experiential approach: rather than present the sculptor’s greatest hits, he chose the medium of plaster to give us a route into an artist whose work we thought we knew. A scholar of art history as well as a museum professional, Achim presented ambitious exhibitions (in particular re-interpreting the modernist greats) that were always focused on a wish to tell a clearly presented story to the widest possible audience. Picasso 1932: Love, Fame, Tragedy, co-curated by Nancy Ireson in 2018, took the radical yet simple idea of exploring a single watershed year, when Picasso had turned 50 and produced an extraordinary number of key paintings. The exhibition’s concise, month-by-month narrative, combined with rich archive material, created an experience that was arguably Achim’s greatest critical success. It also drew in more than 520,000 people, making it Tate’s second most visited exhibition. Achim was born in Düren, Germany, to Günter Borchardt and Anna Maria Struck. After finishing an exchange scholarship at the Università La Sapienza, Rome, in 1990 he took an MA in art history, Italian literature, psychology and Christian archaeology at Bonn University. In 1992 he moved to the UK to undertake a PhD at the University of Essex, his thesis focusing on the art and politics of fascist Italy. Achim began his career in the public arts sector as an exhibition organiser at the Serpentine Gallery, in London (1999-2005). After a brief period at the Barbican art gallery, he joined Tate as a curator of modern and contemporary art in 2005, and over the following four years would curate several large-scale exhibitions at Tate Modern, including most notably Albers and Moholy-Nagy (2006) and Rothko: The Late Series (2008), as well as Doris Salcedo’s technically challenging installation, Shibboleth (2007), which required specialist engineering to construct a 167-metre-long crack in the floor of the Turbine Hall. The Rothko exhibition, the first in the UK dedicated to the artist’s late abstract paintings, aimed to capture, as Achim described it, “the extraordinary existential endeavour” that underpinned Rothko’s art. The highlight was the bringing together for the first time since their inception 16 Seagram murals, nine from Tate’s collection with those loaned from the US and Japan, seen alongside Rothko’s last series, Black on Grey, finished in the final year of his life. In 2009 Achim moved to the Whitechapel Gallery as chief curator, where exhibitions included those of artists Walid Raad (2010), Wilhelm Sasnal (2011), Thomas Struth (2011) and Zarina Bhimji (2012). Achim returned to Tate Modern in 2012 as head of exhibitions, becoming its director of exhibitions and programmes in 2017, working with the director, Frances Morris, to further shape the museum’s future, particularly as it grew in size and ambition with the opening of its extension in 2016. Malevich (co-curated by Iria Candela, 2014), introduced new research on the artist’s confrontation with the Stalinist regime as well as revealing the extent of his influence on contemporary artists, while the comprehensive survey of Robert Rauschenberg (co-curated by Catherine Wood, 2016) told the story of how the artist’s passion for collaboration encompassed not only painting and printmaking but also technology, stage design and performance. His belief in collective endeavour, empathy and sensitivity towards artists – both historical and contemporary – were his trademarks. Behind the scenes, he supported artists working on their own exhibitions, such as Olafur Eliasson, Steve McQueen and Lubaina Himid, shaped the experimental performance art programme BMW Tate Live, chaired the steering group for the Hyundai Tate Research Centre: Transnational, which explores interconnected global art histories, and was director champion of the staff BAME Network. Beyond Tate he was a regular conference panelist and speaker, and a trustee of several organisations, including the independent community arts organisation PEER, in east London. As I experienced when working with Achim at Tate, he liked to challenge art orthodoxy. With charm and wit, spoken in his Rhineland-German inflected accent, he always enjoyed persuading you to see a different point of view. Achim is survived by his wife, Laura (nee Hume), whom he married in 1995, their children, Saskia, Tom and Matti, and his sisters, Claudia and Rita. • Achim Borchardt-Hume, curator, born 25 September 1965; died 1 November 2021