Refugee charities are urging the government to open safe routes or risk a new wave of fatalities in the Channel after the number of people who travelled to the UK by small boats trebled last year. Data released on Tuesday shows that more than 28,300 people crossed the Channel in 2021, three times the number for 2020. The record number came despite tens of millions of pounds being spent by the home secretary, Priti Patel, on new measures to discourage the journeys. Organisations that help new arrivals said the figures showed that the government’s strategy risked more deaths at sea. In one incident in November, 27 people including a seven-year-old boy and a pregnant woman drowned in the worst tragedy of its kind. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, said he could envisage more deaths without a rethink. “This government must change its approach and instead of seeking to punish or push away people seeking safety because of the type of journey they have made to the UK, they must create and commit to safe routes,” he said. Clare Moseley, the founder of Care4Calais, which supports refugees living in northern France, said: “The government tells us that people should travel by legal means but if this were truly possible, why would so many be risking their lives in flimsy boats?” Minnie Rahman, the interim head of the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, said the government’s closure of safe routes had encouraged more dangerous journeys. “What’s changed is that safe routes to get here – like family reunion routes and the Syrian resettlement scheme – have completely shut down, forcing more people into the hands of people traffickers to get here,” she said. At least 28,395 people reached the UK on small boats in 2021, according to analysis by the Press Association. The number of arrivals peaked in November when at least 6,869 people reached the UK. Between 10 and 16 November more than 3,100 made the perilous crossing, the most in any seven-day stretch in the current crisis. The same month also saw a new record for a single day in the crisis, with 1,185 people reaching British shores onboard 33 boats on 11 November. Despite international efforts to crack down on people smugglers, organised criminal gangs charge thousands of pounds for a berth in flimsy inflatable boats. Dinghies seen leaving French shores and being towed into Dover have increased in size over the past year, with some carrying as many as 50 people. The data shows an average of about 28 people on each small boat that arrived in the UK in 2021, up from just over 13 in 2020. Analysis by Ferrari news agency said last week that 28,381 people had travelled by small boat in 2021. The Home Office collects its own small boat data but refuses to release annual figures, which instead are compiled daily by journalists. The Home Office minister Tom Pursglove said the government was reforming its approach to asylum through its new plan for immigration. “Seeking asylum for protection should not involve people asylum shopping country to country, or risking their lives by lining the pockets of criminal gangs to cross the Channel,” he said. “The nationality and borders bill will make it a criminal offence to knowingly arrive in the UK illegally and introduce life sentences for those who facilitate illegal entry into the country. It will also strengthen the powers of Border Force to stop and redirect vessels, while introducing new powers to remove asylum seekers to have their claims processed outside the UK.”Adele and Ed Sheeran may have topped the UK sales charts in 2021, but it was decades-old songs by “heritage acts” such as Queen and Fleetwood Mac that helped millions of Britons through the pandemic, music industry figures suggest. British artists accounted for eight of the top 10 albums listened to in the UK last year, and many will not be surprised to learn that the No 1 and No 2 spots were taken by Adele and Ed Sheeran respectively with their blockbuster releases 30 and =. Both achieved more than 500m streams in 2021 in the UK alone, plus billions more globally, according to data released by the record labels’ association the BPI on Tuesday. Adele’s album, her fourth, was released in November, and notched up first-week chart sales of 262,000. Sheeran also had the bestselling single of 2021 with Bad Habits. However, the list revealed that during troubled times many people reach for the familiarity and comfort provided by classic acts, many of which are being discovered by new generations of music fans thanks to streaming. At No 5 in the table of 2021’s bestselling and most streamed albums was a record originally released 40 years ago: Greatest Hits by Queen, featuring tracks including Bohemian Rhapsody and We Will Rock You. No 8 was Diamonds, a greatest hits album from Elton John. Originally issued in 2017 , it feature classic songs from 1970 to 2016. No 9 was 50 Years – Don’t Stop, a career-spanning collection from Fleetwood Mac that was released in 2018. In third place was another heritage act, albeit one releasing an album of new music. Abba staged pop’s biggest comeback with their new collection Voyage, which will be accompanied by a “digital avatar” concert residency in a London arena from May. Newcomers did manage a look-in, though, with the US singer Olivia Rodrigo and the UK rapper Dave featuring in the albums top 10. The BPI said streaming in particular was enabling a vast array of new British artists, from guitar bands such as the Lathums to soul singers including Joy Crookes, to break through. One-hundred and eighty artists achieved more than 100m streams in the UK over the past 12 months, while more than 1,900 acts had their songs streamed at least 10m times in Britain. While streaming continues to dominate the way we listen to music, the vinyl renaissance continued apace in 2021, with sales at their highest level in three decades. Another blast from the past – audio cassettes – enjoyed a resurgence, sales increased by a fifth to hit an 18-year high, providing fresh evidence of the collectible appeal of recorded music on physical formats. Overall, recorded music consumption in the UK rose by 2.5% in 2021, with 159m albums or their equivalent either streamed or bought across all formats. Streaming accounted for 83% of overall music consumption in the UK last year, when people listened to more than 147bn audio streams, up 5.7% on the 139bn in 2020, according to the BPI. However, the appetite among some music fans for vinyl shows no sign of waning. The format defied supply chain and production challenges in 2021 to rack up a total of 5.3m copies sold. That is 11% up on the previous and amounts to a fourteenth year of consecutive growth. One of the biggest hits was Abba’s Voyage, which was described as the “fastest-selling vinyl of the century”. Compact discs have been in decline since 2004, though in 2021 the rate of decrease slowed to 11%, said the BPI. Geoff Taylor, the BPI’s chief executive, said: “As our lives continue to be disrupted, the past 12 months have reminded us again of the important role that recorded music plays in our lives. At the same time, the rise of streaming has empowered more artists than ever – from all backgrounds and eras – to build new fanbases around the world and to forge successful careers in music.”Ministers have greater powers to block foreign takeovers of British firms after new rules came into effect on Tuesday giving them more scope to unpick deals that have the potential to harm national security. The National Security and Investment Act, which enhances existing powers, is described by the government as the “biggest shake-up of the UK’s national security regime for 20 years”. Ministers have already been able to intervene in deals where a foreign-led takeover could affect economic stability, media plurality, the UK’s pandemic response, or national security. However, the act builds on the government’s ability to deploy the national security rationale for “calling in” a takeover. It identifies 17 areas of the economy that warrant greater scrutiny when overseas investors seek to make an acquisition. In addition to defence and military technology, ministers will be able to examine deals in a wide range of sectors such as advanced robotics, artificial intelligence, the civil nuclear sector, transport and quantum technology. Officials will be notified that a deal is worthy of examination when a buyer takes its stake above three trigger points: 25%, 50% and 75%. The government can block these transactions and even unwind them restrospectively if they were completed on or after 12 November 2020, the day the bill was introduced to parliament. The business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, said: “The UK is world-renowned as an attractive place to invest but we have always been clear that we will not hesitate to step in where necessary to protect our national security. “The new investment screening process in place from today is simple and quick, giving investors and firms the certainty they need to do business, and giving everyone in the UK the peace of mind that their security remains our number one priority.” The act is viewed by some as a response to concern about Chinese takeovers of strategically important technology businesses, with some of the deals already being pored over by officials under existing rules. They include relatively small deals, such as the sale of the semiconductor manufacturer Newport Wafer Fab to a Dutch company owned by China’s Wingtech, which is partially backed by the state. Newport Wafer Fab has multiple contracts with the UK government, including defence-related projects. The government funding body UK Research and Innovation has suspended grants to the company, while a consortium of British investors is reportedly ready to submit a £300m bid if the deal is blocked. Much larger foreign buyouts by US companies also came under the microscope in 2021, owing to concerns about national security or intellectual property. Takeovers of the defence suppliers Ultra Electronics and Meggitt attracted government scrutiny, as did the $75bn (£56bn) takeover of the world-leading chipmaker Arm by its rival Nvidia – a deal that is the subject of competition investigations in the UK, US and Europe. Plans to expand the government’s remit to examine such deals have divided opinion. It will apply regardless of the size of a company by revenue, or where the prospective acquirer is based, even if it is in the UK. Business groups have warned that the breadth of criteria could result in unnecessary meddling in a large volume of deals, deterring investment in the UK and bogging down officials in needless paperwork. The government has said that while up to 1,800 deals a year would be notifiable under the new powers, fewer than 100 would be called in for a full review. Reviews are intended to last a maximum of 30 days, faster than is typical at the moment, thanks to a new investment screening unit. Kwarteng has also faced criticism, including from the Henry Jackson Society thinktank, for reducing the equity threshold at which deals can be examined from 25% to 15%. The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy has insisted that the act will not lead to ministers “arbitrarily” intervening in takeovers. “The vast majority of acquisitions will require no intervention and will be able to proceed quickly and with certainty in the knowledge that the government will not revisit a transaction once cleared unless false or misleading information was provided,” the department said on Tuesday.The number of UK first-time homebuyers has hit its highest level since 2002, according to a new estimate. Despite the uncertainty generated by the pandemic and strong house price growth, the number of first-time buyer transactions in 2021 is estimated to be 408,300, according to Yorkshire Building Society. That would be a 35% increase on the 303,000 transactions in 2020, and more than double the levels in the years following the global financial crisis of 2007-08. The previous first-time buyer peak was in 2002, when 531,800 households took their first step on to the housing ladder, and one would need to go back 15 years to see numbers similar to those being predicted for 2021, said the Yorkshire. In 2006, the number of first-time buyers was 400,900. “Clearly, new buyers have not been deterred by the price of a typical first-time buyer home, which has increased by 9% to £222,997 in the year to October,” the building society said. Average house prices have surged to record highs over the past year, presenting an obstacle to many trying to buy their first home. Meanwhile, the continuing pandemic – including a third national lockdown running from January until March last year – is likely to have caused some to put their home-buying plans on hold. However, a range of factors including low borrowing costs and government guarantees for mortgages arguably helped others to take their first step on to the property ladder. The stamp duty holiday – which ended on 30 September 2021 in England and Northern Ireland – has been credited with fuelling a boom in the market. First-time buyers already benefited from stamp duty relief on the first £300,000 of the purchase price, but the additional relief on the value between £300,000 and £500,000 will have led to savings – and reduced borrowing – in many cases, particularly benefiting new buyers in pricier areas such as London and the south-east, said the society. Meanwhile, many people’s spending plummeted during the lockdowns, which meant some would-be first-time buyers were able to save up a larger sum for a deposit more quickly than perhaps they had anticipated. The new figures are for first-time buyers purchasing with a mortgage. However, Yorkshire said it was unlikely that first-time buyer numbers would continue at this level during 2022 and beyond. First-time buyers accounted for half of house purchases with a mortgage in 2021, which is the same proportion as last year, though in the years between 2006 and 2011 the figure was below 40%. The analysis was based on lending figures up to October 2021 from the banking body UK Finance, with Yorkshire Building Society making estimates for November and December last year.The jury weighing fraud charges against Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes has told the court it is unable to reach a unanimous verdict on three of the 11 criminal counts she faces. Jurors in the high-profile Silicon Valley trial had been deliberating for seven days after a trial that chronicled the missteps of the now-defunct blood testing startup. Over the course of 15 weeks, federal prosecutors called 29 witnesses, outlining missteps and alleged fraud Holmes committed during her 15-year reign as CEO. In a dramatic turn of events, US jurors returned a note to the judge on Monday morning saying they were deadlocked on three charges. In response to the note, US district judge Edward Davila gave the jury what is called an Allen charge, encouraging them to deliberate further. But jurors returned to the court several hours later, saying they remained unable to move forward. Davila then sent jurors back to the jury room to fill out a verdict form. It’s not yet clear whether the jury will render its remaining verdicts on Monday. Holmes faces nine charges of fraud and two charges of conspiracy to commit fraud. It is not clear on which of those charges the jury was unable to come to an agreement. If the jury is unable to come to a conclusion, it may under federal rules deliver a partial verdict. Such a conclusion would, however, leave Holmes open to be re-charged with the remaining three charges at a later time. Holmes founded Theranos after dropping out of Stanford at the age of 19, promising a revolutionary technology that could run hundreds of health tests on just a drop of blood. A charismatic character known for her blonde hair, uniform of black turtlenecks and low voice, Holmes quickly rose to fame in and outside the tech world, gracing the covers of major magazines, headlining conferences, and drawing comparisons to Apple’s Steve Jobs. As Theranos grew, the company attracted big-name investors including the former secretaries of state George Schultz and Henry Kissinger. At its height, Theranos was valued at more than $9bn. But Theranos ultimately fell short of its ambitious pledge. Wall Street Journal reporting in 2015 revealed that the company’s in-house tests had massive inaccuracies, and that the company was performing other tests using traditional blood drawing methodology and outside labs. During the trial, prosecutors painted a picture of Holmes as a strict, power-hungry leader willing to go to any lengths to save her company’s image, repressing internal and external dissent and manipulating the press. Taking the stand in her own defense, Holmes argues she made decisions in good faith and did not knowingly commit fraud.Elizabeth Holmes, the founder of blood testing company Theranos, was found guilty of four charges of fraud on Monday, ending a closely followed saga that could have major implications for the tech world. Over the course of several months, federal prosecutors laid out a case to the jury that Holmes knowingly scammed investors and patients, artificially inflating the value of Theranos and lying about the capabilities of its technology. The trial has been nearly as spectacular as the rapid rise and fall of the company, which at its height was hailed as a game changer and attracted hundreds of millions in investment. Here are five key moments to remember in the case that shook Silicon Valley. High-profile investors takes the stand Holmes managed to woo billionaire investors and assemble a board of directors comprising former US cabinet members spanning from the Nixon to Trump administrations. While most of these early Theranos players did not appear in court, one did make an appearance: James Mattis was called to testify by the prosecution in the early days of the proceedings. He stated he personally invested $85,000 in the company, finding the technology “pretty breathtaking” but lost faith after the Wall Street Journal reporting. “There came a point where I didn’t know what to believe about Theranos any more,” he said. Former employees speak out The prosecution paraded a number of former Theranos employees as witnesses during the trial, including three different lab directors. Former Theranos lab director Kingshuk Das testified that Holmes seemed reluctant to acknowledge any criticisms of the Theranos technology, giving “implausible” excuses for apparent failures in the company’s tests. “I found these instruments to be unsuitable for clinical use,” he said of the company’s proprietary Edison devices. Other lab directors Lynette Sawyer and Sunil Dhawan said the job required “minimal” in-person work and that they spent the majority of their time doing paperwork, not testing the actual hardware used in blood analysis. More key testimony came from Erika Cheung, a former Theranos employee, who took the stand for three days to detail shortcomings of the company’s blood testing processes. She said she was very concerned about the accuracy of the technology and occasionally refused to run patient samples on the devices. Patients “don’t know the fact that behind closed doors we’re having all these problems and they think they’re getting correct results”, Cheung said. “It was starting to get very, very uncomfortable and very stressful for me working at the company.” Holmes defends herself, alleges abuse Perhaps the most shocking moment in the trial came when Holmes herself was called to the stand by her defense team to testify. The risky move allowed her to make her own case to the jury, potentially garnering more sympathy ahead of deliberations. But it also opened her to cross-examination from the prosecution, during which attorneys grilled her for several days about inconsistencies in her story. Holmes claimed on the stand that she trusted statements from her scientists that Theranos technology was working as planned and that she did not purposely mislead anyone. She also laid out bombshell allegations that her former business partner and lover, Sunny Balwani, abused her, influencing her to commit fraud. The two met when Balwani was 38 years old and Holmes was only 18. She said Balwani wanted her to “kill the old Elizabeth”, controlling what she ate and who she spent time with so that she could become a successful CEO. “He had taught me everything I thought I knew about business and he was the best business person that I knew,” Holmes said. “I didn’t question him in the way that I otherwise would have.” The ‘smoking gun’: pharmaceutical logos One integral piece of evidence prosecutors frequently returned to was that Holmes doctored documents sent to potential investors. The Walgreens CFO, Wade Miquelon, said during his testimony that Holmes had implied the pharmaceutical firms Pfizer and Schering-Plough had validated the company’s blood-testing technology. He said Holmes shared with investors and potential partners a document carrying the Pfizer logo, purportedly showing the drug company’s support. But the document had been forged, the prosecution claims. “Pfizer did not write this,” prosecutor Robert Leach said in opening arguments for the trial. “Pfizer did not put its logo on this. Pfizer did not give its permission to put its logo on this. Pfizer did not make the conclusions in this report.” In her testimony, Holmes admitted to personally manipulating those documents, saying she did so not to imply that the companies had vetted the technology but “because this work was done in partnership with those companies and I was trying to convey that”. “I wish I had done it differently,” Holmes told jurors. Evidence offers window into Holmes’s life Submitted into evidence, amid the thousands of pages of dense laboratory tests and scientific data, were a handful of documents that offered a window into Holmes’s mindset as she stood at the helm of one of Silicon Valley’s buzziest companies. “I do everything I say – word for word. I am never a minute late. I show no excitement,” one strict handwritten note to herself said. She obsessively tracked her food, drinking a daily green juice and avoiding sugar. “ALL ABOUT BUSINESS.” “I am not impulsive.” “I do not react.” “I am always proactive.” “I know the outcome of every encounter.” “I do not hesitate.” “I speak rarely. When I do – CRISP and CONCISE. I call bullshit immediately. My hands are always in my pockets or gesturing,” the note read. Also in evidence were hundreds of pages of text messages between Holmes and Balwani, many amorous and others business-like. In some they referenced a bird they owned together. Also in evidence: an aerial photo of a home they owned together in Atherton. “You are the breeze in desert [sic] for me – my water, and ocean,” she texted Balwani in May 2015, according to a recent court filing. “OK,” he replied. The two frequently used the phrase “hmfr” which Holmes said references an Arabic phrase that translates roughly to “this too is my God’s glory”. In her journals and texts with Balwani, Holmes referenced a spiritual connection and a belief that God put Balwani in her life for a higher purpose. “Love you,” one message from Balwani reads. “I prayed from the bottom of my heart for you. I have never prayed with this intensity in my life for anything.” “I love this,” Holmes replied. “My nirvana.”For Krisinda Merhi, recovering from Covid while isolating in her bedroom felt like “exhausting nothingness”. “You’re tired from doing nothing, because you both can’t and don’t have the energy to,” she says. The 25-year-old Sydneysider contracted Covid after a trip to Melbourne in November. It started with “slight congestion and a persistent cough”. After receiving a positive PCR result, Merhi instantly relocated to her bedroom, where she stayed isolated for a week. Luckily, her family of five, who isolated inside the home as close contacts, all remained negative. As daily Covid numbers surpass 21,000 in New South Wales, and “worst case” Covid modelling suggests 200,000 cases a day nationwide by late January, Prof Jayashra Kulkarni says isolation inside the home as either a Covid-positive person or close contact is becoming “a common experience now”. Kulkarni is a professor of psychiatry from Monash University, and has isolated in her home as a close contact of a Covid-positive family member. She says “it is helpful to know you are not alone”. “Once a family member is detected to be positive, the immediate response is to be anxious,” she says. But Kulkarni reminds us that “human beings are designed to cope with crises”. Here’s what to do if you test positive and need to isolate. The environment Once you receive a positive diagnosis, positive cases should “immediately isolate yourself at your home, or other accommodation”, according to Queensland Health. “Isolate means you need to stay away from other people as much as possible so you don’t give the virus to someone else. “People living in your house can quarantine at home in a separate area to you. It is still important that you isolate as much as possible from these people so that you don’t give them Covid-19 if they haven’t already caught it,” the advice states. If you cannot safely isolate in your home, public health departments in all states and territories offer special health accommodation in some circumstances. Health authorities advise Covid-positive cases to use a separate bathroom if available, or clean a shared bathroom after each use. Wearing a mask inside your home is also important, especially when entering a room you are sharing with others, according to NSW Health. Ventilating common spaces, such as by opening windows, can also reduce the risk of transmission. The rules On 30 December, national cabinet agreed to new isolation rules for positive Covid-19 cases. Under the new arrangement, a confirmed case must isolate for seven days from the date they took the test swab that confirmed their infection. They should not leave isolation if they are still symptomatic. The supplies Public health advice stresses the need to organise for your food and medication supplies to be delivered to you without contact, whether that be from a friend, family member or delivery service. The government recommends widely available painkillers for treating mild symptoms, such as paracetamol or ibuprofen. Kulkarni’s shopping list for a week of Covid isolation inside the home includes disposable gloves and surgical masks. She recalls “feeling really exhausted, and not knowing why you’re exhausted”. “So take hot showers, drink lots of tea, and get lots of rest.” Dr Jenny H Martin, a practising physician and clinical pharmacologist of the University of Newcastle, says “staying well hydrated” is helpful to manage symptoms and discomfort. “People find it difficult to drink water, so Hydralyte is helpful.” Kulkarni says organising the “bits and pieces” of receiving grocery deliveries, or care-packages dropped off by friends, is another consideration. Watching physical health Care guidelines are changing as states and territories respond to the Omicron outbreak, but public health advice is fairly consistent. According to Queensland Health, the general rule is that people who are well or have mild symptoms should stay at home for their illness. “Only call Triple Zero (000) or go to an emergency department if you have severe symptoms,” the authority recommends. In a person with underlying, compromising health conditions, symptoms may be more severe. According to the federal government’s healthdirect website, these are the more severe symptoms you should watch for, that indicate you need to go to the hospital: your oxygen level is 92% or less when you test using the pulse oximeter, even if you feel okay worsening shortness of breath or difficulty breathing blue lips or face pain or pressure in the chest cold and clammy, or pale and mottled, skin fainting or collapse being more confused becoming difficult to wake up little or no urine (wee) output – less urine than usual, even though you have been drinking lots of fluid coughing up blood Kulkarni also suggests close contacts who may share the home with a Covid-positive person “keep an eye on transmission” with rapid antigen tests “for peace of mind”. Remembering mental health “A person in isolation can feel totally cut off,” Kulkarni says. “The cleanliness factor gets hyped up, and it needs to be. But looking after mental health is important.” She says keeping up communication while in isolation is “really critical”. To feel connected to people while in isolation, Merhi video called with friends and watched movies over the phone with her partner. She says she was “lucky” to have a balcony. “It made it a lot easier to self-isolate. I could actually get fresh air. It was easier on my sanity.” Martin suggests making a list of friends and family to get in touch with, and “working through that list of people each day”. “Some people do yoga, others make at-home gyms with milk bottles filled with water,” she says. “The isolation seems like the hardest thing – just sitting in your room, counting down the hours. “So it doesn’t really matter, you just have to be engaging in something.” The aftermath After the infectious period has ended, “do not disturb the room or bathroom for a day”, Martin says. “Let it settle. Then wear a mask and gloves, and clean all surfaces with disinfectant.” Kulkarni says that, amid a time of “consideration and changes”, it is important to keep abreast of health rules in your state. “We are in some ways in a middle ground,” she says. “Omicron appears to be a milder illness, particularly in those vaccinated. That is encouraging.” At the same time, however, people remain concerned. “Particularly when you see stories from overseas of long Covid, and events need to be cancelled.” Critical to balancing this, she says, is getting “focused and practical” about a Covid positive result, and being prepared for isolation.This live blog is now closed but please join us on our new blog here to follow all the latest coronavirus developments. Here’s a quick rundown of the day’s key developments: Thousands of US schools delayed a scheduled return to classrooms following the holiday break or switched to remote learning as the Omicron variant pushes Covid-19 cases to record levels. In Florida, Covid-19 cases have risen by 948% in just two weeks. Mozambique’s president, Filipe Nyusi, and his wife, Isaura, have tested positive for Covid-19 and are isolating, the president’s office said on Monday. The UK reported 157,758 new Covid cases today and 42 additional deaths.Cases rose by 50% between 28 December and 3 January compared with the week before. Deaths rose 17% during the same period compared with the previous seven days. Multiple NHS trusts have declared “critical incidents” amid soaring staff absences caused by Covid. Parts of the health service are in “crisis”, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation said. Canada’s most populous province of Ontario announced new restrictions - including closing down schools and shops operating at 50% capacity - as officials warned of a “tsunami” of new Covid cases. The US food and drug administration (FDA) has authorised the use of a third dose of Pfizer and BioNTech’s Covid vaccine for children aged 12 to 15. Starbucks will require its US workers to be fully vaccinated against Covid-19 or undergo weekly testing in order to comply with new federal mandates, the company said in an update sent to employees on Monday. India vaccinated over 3.8 million 15- to 18-year-olds on Monday as the country expanded its vaccination drive. The Omicron variant is better at circumventing vaccinated people’s immunity than the Delta variant, but is very likely to be milder, according to a Danish study. Israel will allow foreigners with presumed Covid-19 immunity to enter from medium-risk countries from 9 January, the health ministry said on Monday. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has praised the team behind the Oxford/AstraZeneca Covid vaccine, a year to the day since it was first given to a non-trial patients. Brian Pinker, 82, received a dose of the vaccine at Oxford University Hospital at 7.30am on 4 January last year. Since then, about 50m doses of the vaccine have been given across the UK, with 2.5bn distributed to more than 170 countries. The vaccine had “played an absolutely crucial role in our fight against Covid-19, saving countless lives in the UK and around the world”, Javid said. I’m extremely proud of our world-leading researchers and scientists who are responsible for developing some of the most effective vaccines and treatments during the pandemic and the NHS for the incredible roll out.” Pinker’s jab came just under a month after the first Covid vaccination in the UK, which involved the Pfizer vaccine. The UK now uses three different types: AstraZeneca, Pfizer and the one made by Moderna. Javid was due to visit a vaccination centre in London later on Tuesday, as part of wider government efforts to encourage more people to have booster doses – which involve the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines only. Thousands of US schools delayed a scheduled return to classrooms following the holiday break or switched to remote learning as the Omicron variant pushes Covid-19 cases to record levels. Cities including Milwaukee, Cleveland and Detroit either implemented online instruction or cancelled school altogether this week for tens of thousands of students, citing both staff shortages and Omicron concerns. In New Jersey, which has seen some of the highest case rates in recent weeks, most urban school districts have implemented virtual classes to start the new year, including Newark, the state’s biggest city. Nationally, there are more than 2,750 school closures so far this week, according to Burbio, a website that tracks school disruptions, Reuters reports. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog reporting from sunny Sydney. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. NSW and Victoria have reported record daily Covid cases as the national tally since the pandemic began tops 500,000. NSW recorded 23,131 cases and two deaths with hospitalisations topping 1,300 and in Victoria cases surged to 14,020 with two deaths. In Australia, the New South Wales teachers’ union has called for an urgent meeting with health and education officials to discuss safety at the onset of the new school year amid the growing Covid-19 outbreak in the state. The NSW Teachers Federation president, Angelo Gavrielatos, warned absentee rates could cause chaos and said “serious questions” about safety needed to be answered before students return to classrooms in early February. He told Guardian Australia on Monday: The current plan is the plan we had when schools went into the vacation period. All that’s changed. We are now living in a very different context to what we were in the weeks prior to schools going into summer recess. In highly vaccinated NSW, case numbers have exceeded 20,000 on some days over the Christmas period. Gavrielatos said schools were already heavily disrupted in 2021, when far fewer cases circulated in the state, with an average of about 40 schools a day affected by staff or students testing positive. He said: That was at a time when numbers were but a fraction of what we’re seeing today. So clearly there’s a lot of concern. The union is seeking an “urgent meeting” with education and health officials this week to ensure a proper plan is in place. Gavrielatos said: Who knows what that plan might look like? Who knows how many cases we might have? There are a number of scenarios potentially at play here, including the possibility of remote learning in certain settings. Read more here: Covid-19 cases in Florida have risen by 948% in just two weeks, as the highly transmissible Omicron variant drives a huge wave of infections and hospitalisations across the US. Even as Dr Anthony Fauci – Joe Biden’s top medical adviser – cautioned the public to look at hospitalisations and not infections in order to gauge Omicron’s severity, the seven-day average for US patients hospitalised with Covid-19 increased by more than 40% during the week between Christmas and New Year’s Eve. Cases have risen by more than 100% nationally, despite tests being in short supply in many areas, and infections have doubled in the last seven days to an average of 418,000 a day, according to a Reuters tally. In Florida, local and state officials warned that residents were waiting for hours in sometimes miles-long queues just to get a test. Some accused the state health department and the governor, Ron DeSantis, of being missing in action. “It’s every man/woman for themselves, because leadership is MIA,” tweeted state senator Shevrin Jones. Evidence suggests Omicron is a more mild, if highly infectious, variant. But it “will still do terrible damage among the unvaccinated in both the US and worldwide”, according to the New York Times. Read more here: The family gatherings have disbanded, the new year’s hangovers have lifted. Despite record Covid infection figures over the holiday period, evidence that the rate of increase in cases may be slowing has prompted speculation that London, at least, may be close to reaching “peak Omicron”. Boris Johnson is said to be obsessed with this hypothetical time point, seeing it as crucial to how the Covid variant may play out nationwide. If hospitalisations follow the same trajectory and peak without the NHS being overwhelmed, the prime minister’s decision not to impose lockdown-style restrictions before the holiday period may be vindicated. Johnson is correct that peak Omicron, when it comes, will be an important moment. Dr Raghib Ali, a senior clinical research associate at the University of Cambridge’s MRC epidemiology unit said: The reason it matters when it peaks – and particularly when cases peak in the over-50s – is it’s likely that a week later we’ll see the peak in hospitalisations, and roughly two weeks later, we’ll see a peak in the number of deaths. It’s helpful, because it helps us to plan ahead. In London, cases appear to have stabilised, or even fallen during the past two weeks. New hospitalisations also appear to have stabilised in recent days, with 319 people admitted with Covid-19 on 31 December, compared with 450 the day before, and 511 the day before that. Ali said: We would guess, based on what case numbers are doing in London, that the peak in hospital admissions should be this week, and nationally, maybe a week later. This is roughly in line with the scenarios outlined in modelling studies, which suggest Omicron cases will peak in early-mid January. However, the magnitude of the peak appears to be significantly lower than some of the worst case scenarios predicted. For instance, according to modelling data published by the University of Warwick on 30 December, hospital admissions should by now be approaching about 5,000 a day in England. Yet, according to the latest figures, the number of Covid-19 patients admitted on 1 January was 1,819, down from 2,370 three days earlier. Read the full story here: Mozambique’s president, Filipe Nyusi, and his wife, Isaura, have tested positive for Covid-19 and are isolating, the president’s office said on Monday. Nyusi and his wife took rapid tests and were asymptomatic but immediately decided to isolate while awaiting their PCR results, the presidency statement said. In total, the country has recorded over 2,000 Covid-19 related deaths and 192,000 infections during the pandemic. Impoverished Mozambique is grappling with a debt crisis and an Islamist insurgency as well as the virus. Turkey recorded 44,869 new Covid-19 cases in the last 24 hours, the highest daily figure since late April, health ministry data showed on Monday. It also recorded 160 deaths due to Covid-19 in the same period, Reuters reports. Cases in Turkey have more than doubled in just over a week as the Omicron variant became dominant in the country. France reported on Monday 67,641 new confirmed coronavirus cases in a 24-hour period, a figure much lower than a couple of days ago, when daily additional infections were over 200,000. But reported cases always tend to dip on Monday and the 67,641 is a record for that day, and the tally is more than twice as high as one week ago, Reuters reports. The seven-day moving average of new cases in France, which smoothes out daily reporting irregularities, reached a new all-time high of 167,338, jumping almost fivefold in a month. Some 45 cruise ship passengers disembarked in the Italian port of Genoa on Monday after contracting coronavirus, while others who tested positive remained aboard to be let off later, the operator said. Media reports had suggested anywhere between 120 and 150 people were infected onboard MSC Grandiosa, which arrived in Genoa on Monday morning from the French port of Marseille. MSC denied “incorrect” media reports, but would not say how many cases had been picked up during routine testing. “Today we are disembarking 45 positive cases in Genoa,” it said in a statement. A spokesman later told AFP that an unspecified number of other passengers who tested positive were still onboard and would be let off at future stops. The company said most were asymptomatic and they and their close contacts were immediately isolated in cabins with balconies and provided with medical attention. Port authorities in Genoa confirmed to AFP news agency an unspecified number of passengers had been disembarked, with Italians from the north of the country to be taken to their homes and foreigners transferred to care facilities while they isolate. They said the cruise ship would continue its journey to the Italian port of Civitavecchia, where positive patients living in central or southern Italy would be disembarked and taken home to isolate. All transfers and stays in Covid facilities were being paid for by MSC Cruises, the authorities said. The cruise industry worldwide is struggling to get back on its feet after voyages were halted at the start of the pandemic and several vessels were hit by outbreaks. One of the UK’s biggest care home operators is calling on the government to lift visiting restrictions after it recorded one Covid death in the last fortnight. Four Seasons Healthcare, which operates 165 care homes, said close to 4,000 residents were living under strict lockdowns because of outbreaks, but the Omicron variant was proving so mild in a well-vaccinated population that limits on seeing family and friends were in “total imbalance” with the risk. Of 132 deaths among the chain’s residents in the last two weeks, just one was attributed to Covid, but because two or more staff or residents have tested positive in 86 homes, indoor visits are now largely banned. That is in step with government guidelines imposed before Christmas amid uncertainty about the danger of the latest coronavirus variant. Jeremy Richardson, the chief executive of the UK’s third largest care home provider, said: We are depriving people of their right to visitors, which is an absolute outrage. The government restrictions at the moment are making it very difficult to give people a quality of life. He added: We run care homes. We do not run prisons. Read the full story here: A total of 51,800,798 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine had been delivered in the UK by 2 January, government figures show. This is a rise of 12,121 on the previous day but does not include data for Wales, PA reports. Some 47,451,922 second doses have been delivered, an increase of 15,893, in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland. A combined total of 34,205,472 booster and third doses have also been given, a day-on-day rise of 106,665, also just in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland. Separate totals for booster and third doses are not available. The UK reported 157,758 new Covid cases today and 42 additional deaths. Cases rose by 50% between 28 December and 3 January compared with the week before. Deaths rose 17% during the same period compared with the previous seven days. On Wednesday there were 11,918 patients in hospital with Covid - 868 of whom were on beds with a mechanical ventilator. Schools in the Netherlands are set to reopen next week after an extended Christmas holiday due to Covid - despite rising infections. Last month, in response to Omicron, the government brought in some of the toughest restrictions in Europe - including closing schools for three weeks and shutting non-essential shops and cultural and entertainment venues until 14 January. But today the Dutch education ministry said schools would reopen as planned, reports AFP. Primary and high schools will reopen on 10 January, while higher education institutions will be restricted to online learning. From next week, teenagers aged 17 and under will be permitted to play sports outside until 8pm. The Dutch National Institute of Public Health said today that positive coronavirus cases were rising as 14,623 new people tested positive and the average rate of infection rose for a sixth consecutive day. Canada’s most populous province has announced new restrictions - including closing down schools and shops operating at 50% capacity - as officials warned of a “tsunami” of new Covid cases. Pupils in Ontario will move to online learning as all schools were ordered to shut down, while shops and indoor shopping malls were ordered to restrict operations to 50% capacity, reports Reuters, following record infections driven by Omicron. Outdoor services will be limited to a number where people can maintain 2 metres of physical distance. Meanwhile, the Associated Press reports that Ontario’s premier, Doug Ford, warned that Omicron “spreads like wildfire”. The reopening of schools has been delayed until at least 17 January. Hospitals have been instructed to pause all non-urgent surgeries and procedures to preserve critical care. Nicola Sturgeon is to give a fresh update on her government’s Covid strategy on Wednesday as she faces growing pressure to cut Scotland’s self-isolation rules. With Covid cases now hitting record levels, the Scottish parliament will meet in virtual session on Wednesday afternoon after being recalled for the second time during the Christmas recess. Scotland reported 20,217 new cases and a 35% positive results rate on Monday, fuelled by a surge in Omicron cases. Hospitalisations have nearly doubled in the past week, from 528 cases on Boxing Day to 1,031 on Monday. The numbers of people in intensive care, a marker for potential deaths, has remained broadly level since declining sharply in early December. No new deaths were reported on Monday, potentially due to the holiday weekend. Opposition parties and business leaders have been urging Sturgeon to cut Scotland’s self-isolation rules, which remain the toughest in the UK, to relieve staffing pressures on the NHS, businesses and essential services such as the rail network. Scots are expected to isolate for 10 days after contact with a positive case, even after a negative test. In England and Wales, the limit is now seven days provided people have negative lateral flow tests on days six and seven. Sturgeon told MSPs last week she feared relaxing restrictions too soon could provoke a steeper rise in Covid infections. There is also pressure on Sturgeon and the health secretary, Humza Yousaf, to provide evidence about the proportion of people in hospital with Covid who were admitted because they were ill with the virus, rather than another medical reason. Some English studies suggest around half of those with Covid in hospital did not know they had it, and were admitted for other reasons. Yousaf said that data was being assessed. It also remains unclear whether anyone has yet died from Omicron in Scotland; Yousaf claimed last week that disclosing that data could breach patient confidentiality. The UK’s daily Covid figures have been delayed today and are expected at around 5.30pm. A message on the government’s coronavirus dashboard read: “Because of a delay in receiving deaths data for England, today’s update is delayed. The current estimate for release is 5.30pm.” Italy reported 68,052 new Covid-19 cases on Monday, up from 61,046 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of coronavirus-related deaths rose to 140, up from 133. Italy has registered 137,786 deaths linked to the virus since the first outbreak emerged in February 2020, and has reported 6.4m cases to date, Reuters reports. The number of patients in hospital with Covid-19 – not including those in intensive care – was 12,333 on Monday, up from 11,756 a day earlier. There were 103 new admissions to intensive care units, one fewer than on Sunday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,351 from a previous 1,319. About 445,321 tests for Covid-19 were carried out in the last day, compared with a previous 278,654, the health ministry said. Covid-related staff shortages across England are causing “terrible” rubbish collection delays, local politicians have warned, with bins in some areas left “overflowing” with waste from the festive period. Councillors in London, Gloucestershire, Somerset and Buckinghamshire have said bin collection services have been scaled back as workers continue to fall sick with the virus, PA Media reports. Chelmsford city council confirmed 23 members of staff were absent and cancelled three days’ worth of food waste collections. North Somerset council said it had been unable to pick up 1,000 recycling bins on New Year’s Eve as crews remain “stretched due to staff sickness”. Multiple NHS trusts have declared “critical incidents” amid soaring staff absences caused by Covid, as health leaders warned pressure was increasingly spreading to hospitals outside London. More than half a dozen trusts in England have issued alerts over “internal critical incidents” in the last few days, it is understood, amid mounting concerns some may be unable to deliver vital care to patients. Health leaders said the “rapidly increasing” number of absent NHS staff was piling “very serious” pressure on hospitals already struggling to cope with increasing Covid admissions and wider pressure on urgent and emergency services. Hospitals in the north-east and Yorkshire have reported the most rapid growth in Covid patients in recent days. However, NHS chiefs also expressed cautious optimism that after weeks of rising hospitalisations in London – the centre of the Omicron outbreak – that the increases may have peaked and be starting to plateau. Parts of the health service are in “crisis”, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation has said. Matthew Taylor said: In many parts of the health service, we are currently in a state of crisis. In the face of high levels of demand and staff absence some hospitals are having to declare a ‘critical incident’. Some hospitals are making urgent calls to exhausted staff to give up rest days and leave to enable them to sustain core services. Many more hospitals are having to ban visitors to try to reduce the spread of infection. NHS England is continuing to plan for surge capacity. Community and social care services, which were already massively overstretched, are at breaking point. In many areas, ambulance services are unable to meet their target response times. Primary care is having to add caring for Covid-19 patients and trying to keep them out of hospitals to driving the booster programme and dealing with unprecedented underlying demand which is driven in part by the millions of unwell people waiting for appointments and operations. On Saturday, the United Lincolnshire hospitals NHS trust declared an internal critical incident “due to extreme and unprecedented workforce shortages”, meaning the trust was “unable to maintain safe staffing levels”, the Sunday Times reported. Kuwait has urged its citizens to leave several European countries including the UK, France and Germany because of rising cases of the Omicron variant in the region. AFP reports: In a series of statements overnight Sunday, the oil-rich Gulf state also warned Kuwaitis, often big spenders abroad, to avoid travelling to the countries. The foreign ministry said they should “delay their trips” generally and, in particular, to France, Germany, the United Kingdom, Spain and Italy. It said its citizens should leave those countries “considering the significant and unprecedented rise in the number of new cases” of Covid-19. Europe has in the past few months again become the centre of the pandemic and is battling an upsurge of cases spurred on by the highly transmissible Omicron strain. The countries with the highest ratio of infections per 100,000 inhabitants in the world were all in Europe, according to an AFP tally on Saturday. The count showed more than 4.9m infections reported in Europe over the seven days to 1 January. France alone recorded more than 1 million new cases during that one-week period. Kuwait’s foreign ministry also said on Monday that the country’s citizens should leave Morocco due to concerns over Covid-19. The number of recorded cases in Kuwait remains relatively low. But it jumped 20-fold in a month to reach around 600 cases on Sunday in the country of more than 4 million people. Elsewhere in the Gulf, cases have also surged. In the United Arab Emirates, infections have risen almost 40-fold since the beginning of December. Saudi Arabia announced 1,746 new cases on Monday, the most in six months and a leap of more than 700 from just a day earlier. Hello, this is Jedidajah Otte taking over again. If there’s anything you think is worth flagging, you can message me on Twitter @JedySays or drop me an email. The US food and drug administration (FDA) has authorised the use of a third dose of Pfizer and BioNTech’s Covid vaccine for children aged 12 to 15. It also shortened the time for all booster shots to five months from six months after primary doses, reports Reuters, and authorised a third dose for 5- to 11-year-olds who are immunocompromised. The FDA said it reviewed published data and evidence on the safety of booster doses provided by the Israeli Ministry of Health, including from over 6,300 12- to 15-year-olds who received a Pfizer vaccine. Passengers who were stranded on a cruise ship in Portugal for five days after a coronavirus outbreak started disembarking today. The AIDAnova was carrying 2,844 passengers and 1,353 crew members when it docked in Lisbon on Wednesday, reports Reuters. The ship had been on its way to Madeira for New Year’s Eve celebrations, but was cut short after coronavirus was detected among the crew. Between Wednesday and Friday, 52 crew members had tested positive. By Monday, there were 68 cases, including among some passengers. Passengers who tested negative in the last 48 hours started to disembarl before dawn and were transported by bus to the airport. “We’re living in this situation and it can always happen. Of course it’s not nice, we imagined something else,” one passenger told Reuters. Another added: “We all want this to end. We’re going home.” The ship’s operator, AIDA Cruises, said all those infected had mild symptoms or none at all and that all crew and guests over 12 had been fully vaccinated and showed a negative rapid antigen test before departure. It also said it adhered to “comprehensive health and safety protocols” on all its cruises. The US centers for disease control and prevention on Thursday advised people to avoid travelling on cruise ships, whatever their vaccination status. Scotland has reported another record number of Covid cases, with 20,217 cases reported on Monday, and with more than 1,000 people in hospital with Covid – the highest number since early October last year. The latest NHS Scotland data found that nearly 35% of Covid tests were positive over the past 24 hours – the highest proportion in recent months. The previous record daily figure was 17,065, reported on 1 January. Monday’s record figure is likely to include cases that emerged over the New Year’s holiday weekend: 14,080 cases were reported on Sunday, the day after a previous record high. Scotland has now recorded 105,390 positive cases over the last seven days. There were no further deaths reported – another possible effect of the holiday weekend preventing death registrations. While hospitalisations reached 1,031 – an increase of more than 150 since Friday, the numbers in intensive care has remained relatively stable, with 52 people with Covid in ITU, compared with 51 on 31 December. India vaccinated over 3.8 million 15- to 18-year-olds today as the country expanded its vaccination drive (see also 05:38). The teenagers, many wearing school uniforms, queued at schools and health centres across the country to be vaccinated with Bharat Biotech’s Covaxin, reports Reuters. Kishan Bhuyan, 17, queued with friends in the eastern city of Bhubaneswar after registering online. “I was waiting for this [vaccination] for so long,” the high school student told the news agency. “I am now protected.” Hi, it’s Miranda Bryant here covering for Jedidajah for the next hour or so. The Omicron variant is better at circumventing vaccinated people’s immunity than the Delta variant, but is very likely to be milder, according to a Danish study published last week, with one of the experts involved in the study saying intensive care hospitalisations were low enough to provide hope that this could be the pandemic’s last wave of infections. Reuters reports: A virus can be more transmissible due to a number of reasons, such as the time it lingers in the air, its ability to latch on to cells, or its evasion of the body’s immune system. Investigating nearly 12,000 Danish households in mid-December, the scientists found that Omicron was 2.7 to 3.7 times more infectious than the Delta variant among vaccinated Danes. The study, conducted by researchers at University of Copenhagen, Statistics Denmark and Statens Serum Institut (SSI), suggests the virus is mainly spreading more rapidly because it is better at evading immunity obtained from vaccines. “Our findings confirm that the rapid spread of the Omicron [variant] primarily can be ascribed to the immune evasiveness rather than an inherent increase in the basic transmissibility,” the researchers said. The study has yet to be peer-reviewed. Seventy-eight percent of Danes have been fully vaccinated, while nearly 48% of those have received a third “boosted” shot. More than eight out of 10 Danes have received Pfizer-BioNTech’s vaccine. The study also found that booster-vaccinated people are less likely to transmit the virus, regardless of the variant, than the unvaccinated. While more transmissible, the Omicron variant does seem to induce less serious disease, SSI’s technical director, Tyra Grove Krause, told local media on Monday. “While Omicron will still be able to put pressure on our healthcare system, everything indicates that it is milder than the Delta variant,” she said, adding the risk of being hospitalised with Omicron was half of that with Delta. That echoes the results of some other studies into Omicron. Out of a total of 93 people admitted to hospital due to Covid-19 from Omicron in late December, less than five were receiving intensive care, Danish data showed. “This may be what is going to lift us out of the pandemic, so that this becomes the last wave of corona,” Krause said. Pressure on the NHS for the “next couple of weeks and maybe more” is going to be “considerable”, UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, has said. Speaking on a visit to a vaccination hub in the Guttman Centre at Stoke Mandeville Stadium in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, Johnson said the Omicron variant of Covid-19 is “plainly milder” than other strains. However, he added “there’s no question Omicron continues to surge through the country”. He said: I think we’ve got to recognise that the pressure on our NHS, on our hospitals, is going to be considerable in the course the next couple of weeks, and maybe more. Johnson said the booster programme and plan B measures made a difference, but he said: There are still quite a lot of people who have had two jabs, but haven’t had the third. The third job really does make a big, big difference. It would be “absolute folly” to think the coronavirus pandemic was “all over”, the PM added. I would say to everybody looking at the pressures on the NHS in the next couple of weeks, and maybe longer, looking at the numbers of people who are going to be going into hospital, it will be absolute folly to say that this thing is all over now bar the shouting. We’ve got to remain cautious. We got to stick with plan B. We’ve got to get boosted. Johnson pledged to “make sure that we look after our NHS any way that we can”, and said he had spoken to NHS England chief executive, Amanda Pritchard, and its medical director, Prof Stephen Powis, about the pressures faced by healthcare staff. He told broadcasters: I appreciate the pressures that our hospitals are under, I think it’s vital that we make sure that we help them by trying to contain the pandemic in the ways that I’ve set out. So do all the things that I’ve said, make sure we follow a plan B, get boosted but also help the NHS with their staffing requirements, and we’re looking at what we can do to move people into those areas that are particularly badly affected. Don’t forget that... no matter how incredibly transmissible Omicron is - and there’s no question it really spreads very, very fast - it is different from previous variants. And it does seem pretty conclusively to be less severe than Delta or Alpha, and it is putting fewer people into ICU, and sadly the people who are getting into ICU are the people who aren’t boosted, so get boosted. Here is a video of the UK education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, telling people struggling to get lateral flow tests for Covid to “just refresh” their webpage, as concerns mount over the impact of the Omicron variant on the country’s workforce. Zahawi also repeated the government line that “there’s nothing in the data” to suggest further coronavirus measures will be needed later this week in England. Headteachers in England have warned that staff shortages in the new term caused by teachers isolating after testing positive for Covid will be “challenging” for some schools and could lead to more pupils learning online. Caroline Derbyshire, executive head at Saffron Walden County high school in Essex, and leader of Saffron academy trust, told PA Media: We know that (staff shortages) will be a factor and there will be schools in particular parts of the country where rates have been extremely high where staffing will be difficult. But this sort of mass of supply teachers that are supposed to be there – that’s not happened, has it, so if we have got shortages it’ll be colleagues who are in school who’ll be doing most of the covering. She said the idea of merging classes, as suggested by the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, in the event of shortages, had already been carried out by schools “all term last term”, but it was “not a long-term solution”. She said staff shortages would “absolutely” make remote learning more likely, adding: If you hit a certain point with staff absences in a big school you’re talking about maybe 10 members of staff being off. You’ve suddenly got the inability to run a year group – that’s when you start having either year groups or whole parts of schools having to go online, so that’s when you’re going to have that mixed economy of some students being in school and some at home. She said this would be “a feature of this half term that we will have to manage, I don’t think anyone’s looking forward to it at all”. Zahawi announced new Covid guidance for schools on the weekend, including the advice for secondary schools that all pupils should wear masks in classrooms. All secondaries were further asked to provide on-site testing for students ahead of their return to the classroom. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, told PA that school bosses had responded to the reintroduction of face coverings for an initial two-week period with a “kind of weary, pragmatic acceptance that if that’s what we need to do to try to reduce transmission then that’s what we shall do”. He added: I think most people will hope that that’s a price worth paying to keep more young people in school, but ultimately that will come down to whether we’ve got enough staff when term starts tomorrow. Barton said staff would have taken lateral flow tests over the weekend so there would be some waiting for PCR confirmation who would not be able to deliver face-to-face teaching. Six trade unions representing the majority of education staff issued a joint statement on Monday calling for more government support for the sector. The statement from ASCL, GMB, NAHT, NASUWT, NEU and Unison said: There has been much speculation about the possibility of more disruption to education over the next academic term as a result of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. As trade unions representing the vast majority of education staff, we wish to emphasise that teachers, leaders and support staff desperately want to be able to conduct face-to-face teaching for all children and young people on a consistent basis and without further interruption caused by the pandemic. Education staff have moved heaven and earth to support pupils and students throughout the course of the crisis and they remain committed to providing the best possible support for all children and young people. [...] But last term education staff were more likely than other workers to test positive and therefore to have to self-isolate, inevitably leading to disruption of education. Schools and colleges cannot on their own reduce the threat posed by the virus and they need from the Westminster government more than rhetoric about the importance of education. We need the minimum amount of educational disruption this term in order to avoid a third successive year where GCSEs, A-levels and other exams have to be cancelled, and thereby removing the uncertainty and additional workload for students and teachers. It is essential therefore that the government takes immediate and urgent steps to mitigate the risk of Covid transmission and that it provides more support to minimise disruption in schools and colleges [...]. Such steps, the statement continues, include the provision of government-funded air cleaning units to every school and college classroom that needs these devices, more resources for schools to facilitate on-site Covid testing, and improved financial support for the costs of supply staff to cover for Covid-related absence. France can make a decision in February or March on whether to recommend a fourth dose of Covid-19 vaccines once more scientific data has been gathered, the head of the French vaccination programme, Alain Fischer, said on Monday on BFM TV. On Sunday, the Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, announced that the country will offer a fourth dose of Covid-19 vaccine to people over 60 and to medical staff, as a wave of infections with the Omicron variant is creating fresh concern. Modellers have warned that up to 4 million people in Israel could be infected by the end of January, a surge that could see the country reach Covid herd immunity. Israel’s top health adviser, Nachman Ash, said the country would pay a price if infections climbed this high, adding he would prefer to see herd immunity achieved via vaccinations instead. The Pfizer chief executive, Albert Bourla, said in early December that people might need a fourth Covid shot sooner than expected after preliminary research showed the new Omicron variant can undermine protective antibodies generated by the vaccine the company developed with BioNTech. “When we see real-world data, we will determine if the Omicron is well covered by the third dose and for how long. And the second point, I think we will need a fourth dose,” Bourla told CNBC’s Squawk Box. Bourla previously projected that a fourth vaccine would be needed 12 months after the third jab. “With Omicron we need to wait and see because we have very little information. We may need it faster,” he said. Ryanair will cancel 28 of its 59 Danish routes in January, according to Danish aviation website Check In. The budget airline had already cancelled one third of its January flights due to restrictions. The cancellations will last for three weeks from 10 January, The Local reports. Denmark, which is among the countries with the most registered cases of the Omicron variant, recorded an all-time high in new infections last week amid increased demand for Covid testing during the Christmas holidays. Many airlines have reduced their flight schedule this winter due to staff absences, travel restrictions and a lack of consumer confidence. In early December, British Airways cancelled more than 2,000 flights from its schedule until March 2022. Belgium will buy 10,000 courses each of the Covid-19 antiviral oral treatments developed by Pfizer and Merck &amp; Co, a spokesman for the health ministry said in an emailed statement. Belgium’s health minister said in early December that the government was in talks with Merck for the purchase of molnupiravir, and Belgian health authorities had advised that both molnupiravir and Paxlovid, the drug developed by Pfizer, should be purchased. “Both talks are finalised and we will buy 10,000 of both,” Arne Brinckman, a spokesman for the Belgian health ministry told Reuters on Monday. Israel will allow foreigners with presumed Covid-19 immunity to enter from medium-risk countries from 9 January, the health ministry said on Monday, in a reversal of a ban on entry by foreigners imposed in late November in response to the Omicron variant. People seeking to travel from countries on Israel’s “orange” list would have to prove in advance that they are either vaccinated or have recovered from Covid-19 and would be subject to PCR testing before and after their arrival, Reuters reports. Italy’s manufacturing sector grew strongly in December, although at a slightly slower rate than in November, as the economy continued to bounce back despite rising Covid-19 infections, a survey showed on Monday. Reuters reports: The IHS Markit Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for Italian manufacturing came in at 62.0 in December against a record 62.8 registered in November. December’s reading, which was the 18th consecutive month above the 50 threshold that separates growth from contraction, beat the median forecast of 61.6 in a Reuters survey of 10 analysts. The new orders sub-index remained buoyant at 63.0 – the fourth-highest reading on record and only slightly down on the 63.7 registered in November. The economic outlook has been clouded recently by an increase in Covid-19 cases and the emergence of the Omicron variant, with Italy posting record numbers of new cases as it headed into the holiday season. Prime minister Mario Draghi says the Italian economy likely expanded in 2021 by more than the government’s official 6.0% forecast and is predicting growth of 4.7% in 2022. That follows the record 8.9% contraction registered in 2020, when the economy was crippled by coronavirus lockdowns. The train operator ScotRail has cut scores of services and introduced a reduced timetable until 28 January, in order to cope with significant staff shortages caused by Covid. The company said hundreds of employees were off work ill or self-isolating, so it had reorganised its timetable, particularly for services around the central belt from Glasgow and Edinburgh. Nine routes operating from Glasgow Central and Queen Street, including trains to Lanark, East Kilbride and Stranraer, and three from Edinburgh Waverley, including to Dunbar and Tweedbank, have been affected. The country’s busiest service, from Waverley to Queen Street via Falkirk High, has not been amended. David Simpson, ScotRail’s operations director, said: Like most businesses, ScotRail is not immune to the impact of coronavirus. We’ve been working flat out to run a safe and reliable railway in really difficult and rapidly changing circumstances. [We] have looked to spread these changes out across the day where possible to minimise the impact on our customers, but people should plan ahead and continue to check the train times right up until they arrive at the station. UK education secretary Nadhim Zahawi added “there’s nothing in the data” to suggest further coronavirus measures will be needed in England later this week. He told BBC Breakfast that the current plan B measures would be reviewed on Wednesday, but added: There’s nothing in the data that gives me any concern that we need to go beyond where we are at. There’s some really good data from London that it looks like the infection rates are plateauing, if not yet coming down. But we are seeing leakage into the over-50s in terms of infections, and it’s generally the over-50s who end up with severe infection and hospitalisation. The NHS, Zahawi suggested, should be able to cope with high staff absences as it is used to dealing with staff being off during “big flu viruses”. He added: The NHS is very good at being able to move staff around within the system. They have an infrastructure to do that. We now have 10,000 more nurses and 3,000 more doctors than we had last year working in the NHS. English secondary pupils are to be tested for Covid at least once before returning to school, the British government has said. In a statement announcing the measures, health secretary Sajid Javid said “regular testing is a key way to support schools and protect face-to-face teaching”. Ministers have assured schools that testing kits will be provided as needed and urged pupils to test twice weekly, the BBC reports. The new on-site testing rules will be limited to England, where pupils will begin returning to schools for the new term later this week. In Scotland and Northern Ireland, students are already being asked to test twice a week. The Welsh government has asked staff and students to test three times per week before returning to classrooms this term. Education secretary Nadhim Zahawi said people struggling to get lateral flow tests “should just refresh” their webpage, amid a national shortage of Covid test kits. He told Sky News he had organised a separate supply of tests for schools ahead of children’s return to the classrooms. Classes could be merged if the number of school staff off sick climbed too high, he added. Zahawi said: The priority is to keep schools open. The testing, the staffing support we’re putting in place, and of course the ventilation is going to make a big difference to schools this year. The most important thing is to keep them open. We monitor staff absenteeism, I just said to you we’re running at about 8% last year. If that rises further then we look at things like merging classes, teaching in bigger numbers. Zahawi added that “all exams are going ahead this year, this summer.” Hi all, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next few hours. Feel free to get in touch if you have anything to flag, I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. Poland may introduce new Covid restrictions if new infections continue to rise, health minister Adam Niedzielski told radio station RMF FM on Monday morning. Poland has been dealing with persistently high daily case numbers in a fourth wave that forced authorities to tighten restrictions in December. Niedzielski said: If we see this week that we have a continuation of the upward trend in infections, with roughly 20,000 hospital beds taken, which is still very high, yes, we will be making further aggravating decisions. We will talk about schools, the closure of shopping malls, for example, but I do not want to prejudge. Niedzielski said any decisions could be announced later this week, either on Wednesday or Friday. Poland reported another 7,179 coronavirus cases and 10 deaths in the last reporting period, according to an update from the ministry of health. However, Niedzielski told RMF FM that 6,422 new coronavirus infections were detected. While speaking on France Inter public radio, minister of health Olivier Véran said he was also discussing the possibility of an additional Covid booster jab in light of Israel pushing forward with a fourth dose. “We are discussing it with scientists,” Véran said, adding that January was going to be a particularly tough month for increasingly strained hospitals and healthcare providers. France’s minister of health, Olivier Véran, has addressed the new Covid curbs in an appearance on France Inter public radio this morning. Addressing critics he said: “It is never contradictory to protect the health of our society and the health of the French. One does not go without the other. The isolation rules which come into force respect this balance.” In England, masks return for secondary pupils in classrooms amid fears that the new term could trigger a huge spike in cases of the Omicron variant. In France, a raft of new Covid restrictions is set to take effect on Monday in the latest attempt to stem rising infections. On the other hand, fully vaccinated people who test positive will now have to isolate for only seven days, and can leave quarantine after five days if they show a negative test. India begins its vaccination drive for children aged 15 to 18. South Korea reported two deaths in connection with the Omicron variant. Québec, Canada, proceeded with the first of three planned closures of non-essential retail stores on Sunday. The province is also under a recently imposed curfew. US federal health officials are looking to add a negative test along with its five-day isolation restrictions for asymptomatic Americans with Covid. The US government’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, said the US had been seeing almost a “vertical increase” of new Covid cases, now averaging 400,000 cases a day, with hospitalisations also up. US defence secretary Lloyd Austin said he tested positive for Covid and was experiencing mild symptoms while quarantining at home. Local authorities in China’s locked-down city of Xi’an removed two senior officials on Sunday in a bid to “strengthen” their fight against Covid. Australia plans to push ahead with reopening the economy as new infections hit a daily record of more than 37,000 and the number of people hospitalised rose. Israel will offer a fourth dose of the Covid-19 vaccine to people over 60 and to medical staff. More than 4,000 flights were cancelled around the world on Sunday due to adverse weather and a surge in coronavirus cases caused by the Omicron variant. Here’s an unexpected outcome to emerge from lockdown. Popular lockdown pursuits such as cooking, DIY and buying pets led to thousands of people needing hospital care for injuries, figures suggest. Analysis of hospital admissions in England by the PA Media news agency showed that thousands were treated for injuries sustained as a result of activities that surged in popularity as people were confined to their homes. The data from NHS Digital for 2020-21 showed that more than 5,600 people attended hospital after coming into contact with a powered hand-tool, and more than 2,700 were admitted after an accident with a non-powered hand-tool such as a hammer or a saw. Figures also showed that 349 people were admitted after injuring themselves with lawnmowers. More than 5,300 people were admitted after falling from playground equipment, with the average age of patients being nine and a half years. Read the full story from Guardian reporter Jessica Murray here. Hello it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog today as we go through all the latest Covid developments. As students prepare to begin the new school term across the UK, masks will return for secondary pupils in England’s classrooms amid fears that the new term could trigger a huge spike in cases of the Omicron variant. The measure is already in place in other countries of the UK. Robert Halfon, the chair of the House of Commons education select committee, raised concerns saying there is limited evidence of the efficacy of masks in educational settings. However, others have backed the measure, pointing out that while masks are not perfect, and their effectiveness depends on their quality, a number of studies have suggested mask-wearing in schools is linked to smaller increases in case rates and a lower likelihood of outbreaks. Meanwhile in neighbouring France, a raft of new Covid restrictions is set to take affect today in the latest attempt to stem rising infections. Big events will be limited to 2,000 people indoors and 5,000 people outdoors and people will be requested to sit down during concerts. Customers will also not be allowed to stand up in bars. Working from home will be mandatory for at least three days per week where possible. The new rules will be in place for at least three weeks, prime minister Jean Castex indicated last week. France will implement new Covid restrictions today in the latest attempt to stem rising infections. Big events will be limited to 2,000 people indoors and 5,000 people outdoors and people will be requested to sit down during concerts from today. Customers will also not be allowed to stand up in bars. Eating and drinking will be banned in cinemas, theatres, sport facilities and public transportation, including on long-distance routes. Working from home will be mandatory at least three days per week for employees whose job makes it possible. The new rules will be in place for at least three weeks, prime minister Jean Castex said last week. Schools will also reopen as scheduled on Monday 3 January. As India begins vaccinating what Unicef believes to be the largest population of adolescents in the world (253 million), here are the latest Covid numbers. The nation recorded another 33,750 new coronavirus cases over the last 24-hour reporting period, its highest daily case load since 18 September. The country also reported another 123 deaths, according to a recently released statement from the ministry of health. India’s health minister, Dr Mansukh Mandaviya, has urged young people to get the Covid-19 vaccine as the nation begins its latest inoculation drive. Mandaviya shared a series of photos over Twitter on Monday alongside the caption: “Some glimpses of the #COVID19 Vaccination drive for children in the 15-18 age group.” He added: “I urge my young friends to get vaccinated at the earliest and further strengthen the world’s largest vaccination drive.” India begins its vaccination drive for children aged 15 to 18 today. The health ministry announced that Bharat Biotech’s Covaxin would be the vaccine administered in two doses 28 days apart. Health minister Dr Mansukh Mandaviya tweeted: “The world’s largest vaccination campaign has started for children in the age group of 15 to 18 across the country from today.” He added: “If the children are safe, then the future of the country is safe.” Private and public schools will double up as vaccination centres for children and school authorities have been ordered to report their daily vaccination data to state authorities. “Children are going to be given vaccines in their schools,” said Jai Prakash Shivahare, health commissioner in Gujarat state. “They can also go to vaccination centres and get the dose ... They can just walk in.” South Korea has reported two deaths in connection with the Omicron variant, Yonhap News reports. The deaths are believed to be the first in the country linked to the highly transmissible variant, officials said on Monday. Health authorities in Gwangju, 329km south of Seoul, said two recently deceased coronavirus patients in the city, both in their 90s, tested positive for the Omicron variant, according to the publication. The patients, who died last Monday and Wednesday respectively, both tested positive for Covid-19 at a senior care hospital in the city at an earlier date. Some updated Covid figures from South Korea have just been released. The nation has recorded another 3,129 new confirmed coronavirus cases and 36 deaths over the past 24-hour reporting period. A total of 1,015 people are currently in critical condition, with the country averaging 347 new admissions a day. Québec, Canada proceeded with the first of three planned closures of non-essential retail stores on Sunday as the provincial government attempts to curb a new Covid wave and strain on hospitals. Québec premier Francois Legault announced last week that the majority of the province’s stores would be closed for the next three Sundays, with the exception of pharmacies, convenience stores and petrol stations. Charles Milliard, president of the Québec Federation of Chambers of Commerce, urged the government to lift the measures as soon as possible. He said in a statement: The last thing businesses need during these difficult times is additional restrictions. We must leave the choice to businesses to open or close at the time that makes the most sense for them, their employees and their customers. The closures came as Québec reported 15,845 new Covid-19 cases, as well as 13 additional deaths linked to the virus. The jealth department said the number of Covid-related hospitalisations rose by 70 to 1,231, with 162 people in intensive care. Québec City’s main hospital network says it will postpone half of its surgeries and medical appointments starting on Wednesday due to the spike in Covid patients. The province is also under a recently imposed curfew where residents are unable to roam the streets, dine in restaurants or participate in indoor sports or gatherings in homes after 10pm, according to a government notice. The 10pm to 5am curfew was imposed from 31 December 2021. US federal health officials are looking to add a negative test along with its five-day isolation restrictions for asymptomatic Americans with Covid, the White House’s top medical adviser said on Sunday. Dr Anthony Fauci said the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was now considering including the negative test as part of its guidance after getting significant “pushback” on its updated recommendations last week, the Associated Press reports. Under that 27 December guidance, isolation restrictions for people infected with Covid-19 were shortened from 10 days to five days if they are no longer feeling symptoms or running a fever. After that period, they are asked to spend the following five days wearing a mask when around others. The guidelines have since received criticism from many health professionals for not specifying a negative antigen test as a requirement for leaving isolation. Fauci said: There has been some concern about why we don’t ask people at that five-day period to get tested. Looking at it again, there may be an option in that, that testing could be a part of that, and I think we’re going to be hearing more about that in the next day or so from the CDC. The US government’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, said the US had been seeing almost a “vertical increase” of new Covid cases, now averaging 400,000 cases a day, with hospitalisations also up, reports the Associated Press. He said: We are definitely in the middle of a very severe surge and uptick in cases. The acceleration of cases that we’ve seen is unprecedented, gone well beyond anything we’ve seen before. Fauci said he was concerned the omicron variant was causing “major disruption” on essential services. When I say major disruption, you’re certainly going to see stresses on the system, and the system being people with any kind of jobs ... particularly with critical jobs to keep society functioning normally. We already know that there are reports from fire departments, from police departments in different cities that 10, 20, 25 and sometimes 30% of the people are ill. And that’s something that we need to be concerned about because we want to make sure that we don’t have such an impact on society that there really is a disruption. I hope that doesn’t happen. Local authorities in China’s locked-down city of Xi’an removed two senior officials on Sunday in a bid to “strengthen” their fight against Covid. Authorities ordered all 13 million residents to stay home last month as Beijing continues to pursue a “zero Covid” approach. Two senior Communist party officials from the Yanta district were removed from their posts, according to local media and as reported by Agence France-Presse, in a bid to “strengthen the work of epidemic prevention and control” in the area. “We have entered a general state of attack,” said provincial official Liu Guozhong, according to an official notice. He added that it was necessary to achieve the goal of clearing society of coronavirus cases as soon as possible. Last month, China’s disciplinary body announced that dozens of officials were punished for “insufficient rigour in preventing and controlling the outbreak”. Local residents have said they were struggling to find enough food, despite Chinese authorities insisting they were working to ensure stable supplies. Xi’an reported 90 new local virus cases on Monday, down from 122 cases a day before. Australia plans to push ahead with reopening the economy as new infections hit a daily record of more than 37,000 and the number of people hospitalised rose. Record daily case numbers were reported on Monday in the states of Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania, as well as the Australian Capital Territory. In New South Wales there were 20,794 cases, higher than Sunday’s figure but below the daily record of 22,577 set on Saturday, with testing numbers lower over the New Year’s holiday weekend. However, the government insists that the milder impact of the Omicron variant will not deter plans to reopen. Prime minister Scott Morrison told broadcaster Channel Seven: We have to stop thinking about case numbers and think about serious illness, living with the virus, managing our own health and ensuring that we’re monitoring those symptoms and we keep our economy going. Federal health minister Greg Hunt said the advice to the government was that the Omicron strain was more transmissible but also milder than other variants, which reduced the risk to both individuals and the health system. Here’s a roundup of some Covid numbers across Asia. Thailand has reported 2,927 new Covid cases and 18 deaths over the last 24 hours, the Public Health Ministry announced on Monday morning. Singapore reported 429 new Covid cases on Sunday, including 297 imported infections. There were no deaths recorded, according to the ministry of health. Malaysia reported 40,606 active coronavirus cases, a reduction of 428 from the previous day, and 19 deaths. China reported another 161 coronavirus cases on Sunday, down from 191 a day earlier, the country’s health authority said on Monday. Of the new infections, 101 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by China’s national health commission, down from 131 a day earlier. Most of the new local cases were in the north-western province of Shanxi, where the capital city of Xian has been under a strict lockdown. South Korea also reported another 3,833 new confirmed cases, including 150 imported cases. A further 69 deaths were also recorded. Israel will offer a fourth dose of the Covid-19 vaccine to people over 60 and to medical staff. Prime minister Naftali Bennett made the announcement on Sunday amid a surge in Omicron variant infections, saying the country’s top medical officer had approved the shot. In a statement, Bennett said: Tonight, I can announce that Israel will also begin administering the fourth vaccine to all Israelis aged 60 and above, as well as our wonderful medical workers, four months after they’ve received their last dose — following the approval of Israel’s Ministry of Health. Israel will once again be pioneering the global vaccination effort. Omicron is not Delta — it’s a different ball-game altogether. We must keep our eye on the ball, act swiftly and decisively if we want to continue engaging and working with an open country as much as possible throughout this pandemic.” Israel on Thursday authorised a fourth Covid vaccine for those with weakened immunity, becoming one of the first countries to do so. Authorities on Sunday also reported 4,206 new Covid infections over the past 24 hours, and a 195% increase over the past week. Bennett warned that cases could surge to around “50,000 cases per day soon”, urging all adults and children to get vaccinated. More on the news from earlier regarding US defense secretary Lloyd Austin’s announcement he had tested positive for Covid. In a statement on Sunday night, Austin said he was experiencing mild symptoms while quarantining at home and planned to attend key meetings and discussions virtually in the coming week “to the degree possible”. He said deputy secretary Kathleen Hicks would represent him in appropriate matters. Austin said: I have informed my leadership team of my positive test result, as well as the president. My staff has begun contact tracing and testing of all those with whom I have come into contact over the last week. Austin, 68, said he was fully vaccinated and received a booster in October. He said he requested a test on Sunday morning after experiencing symptoms while at home on leave and, given the result, planned to remain in quarantine for five days, per guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The vaccines work and will remain a military medical requirement for our workforce. I continue to encourage everyone eligible for a booster shot to get one. This remains a readiness issue. More than 4,000 flights were cancelled around the world on Sunday due to adverse weather and a surge in coronavirus cases caused by the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The flights cancelled by 8pm GMT on Sunday included over 2,400 entering, departing from or within the United States, according to tracking website FlightAware.com. Globally, more than 11,200 flights were delayed. Among the airlines with most cancellations were SkyWest and SouthWest, with 510 and 419 cancellations respectively, FlightAware showed. The Christmas and New Year holidays are typically a peak time for air travel, but the rapid spread of the highly transmissible Omicron variant has led to a sharp increase in Covid infections, forcing airlines to cancel flights as pilots and cabin crew quarantine. US airline cabin crew, pilots and support staff were reluctant to work overtime during the holidays, despite offers of hefty financial incentives. Many feared contracting Covid and did not welcome the prospect of dealing with unruly passengers, some airline unions said. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog to kick off the new year. Omicron is continuing to unleash chaos around the world with more than 4,000 flights cancelled on Sunday, as the variant contributes to a surge in cases and quarantines flight crews. More than 11,200 flights were also delayed, according to tracking website FlightAware.com. The cancellations disrupted the busy Christmas and New Year period, with thousands forced to abandon plans. Israel is set to offer a fourth dose of the Covid-19 vaccine to people aged over 60 and to medical staff. Prime minister Naftali Bennett made the announcement on Sunday amid a surge in Omicron variant infections, saying the country’s top medical officer had approved the shot. “The Omicron wave is here and we must protect ourselves,” Bennett said. Here is a summary of developments so far: In England masks are returning to secondary school classrooms as Omicron continues to spread across the country. A further 137,583 new cases of Covid-19 and 73 deaths were reported in England and Wales. The government has told headteachers in England to start preparing for staff shortages by using support staff as fill-in teachers, combining classes or using hybrid learning. France has put the United States on its Covid-19 travel “red list”, meaning unvaccinated people coming into the country will have to quarantine for 10 days. France announced an easing of Covid restrictions from Monday. Fully vaccinated people in France who test positive will now have to isolate for only seven days, and can leave quarantine after five days if they show a negative test. The country also reported 58,432 new confirmed coronavirus cases in a 24-hour period – a record seven-day average for new Covid cases. Dutch police dispersed anti-lockdown protesters in Amsterdam on Sunday. India reported 27,553 new Covid-19 infections over the past 24 hours and Covid deaths rose by 284. Israel is to offer a fourth dose of the Covid vaccine for the over-60s and medical staff. The country reported 4,206 new daily Covid infections, marking a 195% increase over the past week. Twitter has permanently suspended the account of US congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene after the Republican repeatedly violated its policy on Covid misinformation. Wintry weather and the coronavirus pandemic caused more than 2,300 US flights and more than 3,900 worldwide to be cancelled. South Africa has recorded 4,379 new identified coronavirus cases and 30 deaths. The US government’s top medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, said the US had been seeing almost a “vertical increase” of new Covid cases, adding he was concerned the Omicron variant was causing “major disruption” on essential services. Dr Fauci said hospitalisation figures formed a better guide to the severity of the Omicron coronavirus variant than the traditional case-count of new infections. Argentine football star Lionel Messi was one of four Paris Saint-Germain players to test positive for coronavirus, the club announced shortly before a French Cup match.The surge in Covid cases linked to the Omicron variant is disrupting school reopening plans across the US. Several major districts have announced they would delay returning to the classroom after the winter break. LA Unified, the country’s second largest public school system, will require all students and staff to have proof of a negative test before classes resume on 11 January. The Biden administration has expanded enforcement of the controversial Remain in Mexico program originally crafted by the Trump administration, even as it seeks to terminate the program. Advocates have warned the policy will subject thousands more asylum seekers to “enormous suffering” and leave them vulnerable to violence. The first snowstorm of 2022 to hit Washington delayed the arrival of Joe Biden and Air Force One, resulted in the cancelation of the White House press briefing and delayed a Senate confirmation - and that’s on top of snarling up traffic, knocking out power to hundreds of thousands and causing the closure of Covid-19 testing and vaccination centers all along the eastern seaboard. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer announced that he planned to hold a vote to change the filibuster rules either before or by 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, the latest bid by the Democrats to advance national voting rights protection legislation. With the introduction of the Omicron variant, there’s been an unprecedented increase in Covid-19 cases on Capitol Hill. - Vivian Ho and Dani Anguiano The US, Russia, China, the UK and France have pledged to avoid nuclear war. In a rare joint pledge, the permanent members of the UN security council declared that “nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought” and that the spread of nuclear weapons must be prevented. “As nuclear use would have far-reaching consequences, we also affirm that nuclear weapons – for as long as they continue to exist – should serve defensive purposes, deter aggression, and prevent war,” the joint statement says. More from my colleague Julian Borger: The surge in Covid cases linked to the Omicron variant is disrupting school reopening plans across the US. Several major districts have announced they would delay returning to the classroom after the winter break due to outbreaks. Milwaukee public schools, which serve 75,000 students, announced Sunday it would return to virtual learning for at least a week because of an outbreak of Covid cases among district staff. Public school officials in Detroit said there would be no school Monday-Wednesday of this week as the city’s test positivity rate reached an all-time high of 36%. “This high rate of infection will inevitably mean that a return to in person learning on Monday, January 3, 2022, with nearly 8,000 employees and partners and nearly 50,000 students will lead to extensive Covid spread placing employees, students, and families at risk along with excessive staff shortages due to positive and close contact scenarios,” the district said. The Los Angeles unified school district, the country’s second largest public school system with more than 640,000 students, announced it would require all students and staff to have proof of a negative Covid-19 test, regardless of vaccination status, to return to school on 11 January. The Biden administration has expanded enforcement of the controversial Remain in Mexico program originally crafted by the Trump administration, even as it seeks to terminate the program. The program, known as Migrant Protection Protocols, forced asylum seekers to wait in Mexico, where they were routinely targeted for rape, robbery and abduction by organized crime groups, as their cases went through the US immigration system. A US human rights group documented more than 1,500 cases of kidnappings and attacks against migrants sent across the border to Mexico. The administration has asked the supreme court to allow it to end Remain in Mexico, Axios reports, but has also expanded the program into San Diego. The White House says it’s ensuring migrants have better access to legal counsel ahead of court hearings and that migrants will now be provided with transportation directly to shelters in Mexico. Meanwhile, the Mexican government has committed to improving security at local shelters, the administration said. Joe Biden repealed the policy after taking office, but a court ordered the administration to restart the program late last year, and since then more than 200 migrants have been forced to return to Mexico. Migration advocates have warned restarting the program would subject thousands of people to “enormous suffering” and leave them vulnerable to violence. Good afternoon. I’m Dani Anguiano and I’ll be taking over the Guardian’s live US politics coverage for the rest of the day. The highly transmissible Omicron variant is driving a huge wave of Covid-19 cases across the US, including an unprecedented rise at the US capitol. In Florida, cases have risen by 948% in just two weeks. My colleague Alexandra Villarreal reports: Even as Dr Anthony Fauci – Joe Biden’s top medical adviser – cautioned the public to look at hospitalizations and not infections in order to gauge Omicron’s severity, the seven-day average for US patients hospitalized with Covid-19 increased by more than 40% during the week between Christmas and New Year’s Eve. Cases have risen by more than 100% nationally, despite tests being in short supply in many areas, and infections have doubled in the last seven days to an average of 418,000 a day, according to a Reuters tally. In Florida, local and state officials warned that residents were waiting hours in sometimes miles-long lines just to get a test. Some accused the state health department and the governor, Ron DeSantis, of being missing in action. “It’s every man/woman for themselves, because leadership is MIA,” tweeted state senator Shevrin Jones. Evidence suggests Omicron is a more mild if highly infectious variant. But it “will still do terrible damage among the unvaccinated in both the US and worldwide”, according to the New York Times. The first snowstorm of 2022 to hit Washington delayed the arrival of Joe Biden and Air Force One, resulted in the cancelation of the White House press briefing and delayed a senate confirmation - and that’s on top of snarling up traffic, knocking out power to hundreds of thousands and causing the closure of Covid-19 testing and vaccination centers all along the eastern seaboard. But here’s a video of the National Zoo’s giant panda cub playing in the snowfall for the first time. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer announced that he planned to hold a vote to change the filibuster rules either before or by 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, the latest bid by the Democrats to advance national voting rights protection legislation. With the introduction of the Omicron variant, there’s been an unprecedented uptick in Covid-19 cases on Capitol Hill. US attorney general Merrick Garland will update justice department employees on Wednesday on department efforts to hold accountable those responsible for the 6 January attack on the US Capitol. Kathy Hochul, New York’s governor, will propose in her state of the state address this week a state constitutional amendment that would impose a term limit on governors and other high-ranking officials, Reuters is reporting. The proposal would limit governors to two four-year terms in office and would also apply to the offices of lieutenant governor, attorney general and comptroller. “I want people to believe in their government again. With these bold reforms, we will ensure New Yorkers know their leaders work for them and are focused on serving the people of this state,” Hochul said in a statement. This comes four months after the resignation of Andrew Cuomo, who was serving his third four-year term as governor when a report from state attorney general Letitia James accused him of sexual harassment and other transgressions. Congress is experiencing an unprecedented rise in Covid-19 cases, with the attending physician at the US Capitol saying today that the seven-day positivity rate at a congressional test site surging to 13% from just 1% in late November, Reuters is reporting. Dr Brian Monahan told lawmakers and staff in a letter that most of the infections have been occurring among the vaccinated with Omicron variant making up about 61% of the cases and the Delta variant making up 38%, according to a limited sample as of 15 December. The breakthrough infections among the vaccinated on Capitol Hill have not led fo hospitalizations, complications or deaths, as is the case with most breakthrough infections among the vaccinated. This uptick in cases on Capitol Hill comes amid a surge in new cases across the country, with the daily average doubling in the last seven days to an average of 418,000 a day. Though Monahan did not call for any changes in existing mask mandates at the Capitol, he advised members and staff to wear medical-grade masks rather than cloth ones. He also urged congressional offices, committees and agencies to immediately review operations and adopt “a maximal telework posture” to reduce in-person meetings and in-office activities. While on the topic of coronavirus and taking precautions, it appears far-right congresswoman Majorie Taylor Greene has been fined yet again for refusing to wear a mask on the House floor. When it comes to mask wearing in the House, first offenses merit a warning, second offenses attract a $500 fine and subsequent offenses are fined $2,500. It’s hard to keep track of Greene’s tab, but the Georgia Republican who famously had to apologize after mask-wearing to the Holocaust has racked up a number of offenses at this point in the pandemic. The New York Times is reporting that her office says she has racked up at least $80,000 in fines for more than 30 maskless instances, while the ethics committee has reported only 20 instances totalling nearly $50,000. The current surge in coronavirus infections may be having some effects on the Capitol soon: ....but not for everyone: An attorney for Andrew Cuomo, the former governor of New York, said today that he was contacted by the Manhattan District Attorney’s office and informed that the office has closed the investigation into Cuomo’s handling of nursing homes during the Covid-19 pandemic. To recap: Cuomo was once lauded for his handling of the crisis in New York, scoring a $5.1m book deal about his leadership during the state’s darkest hours. But as time went on, it became clear that all was not what it seemed: the New York state health department confirmed that Cuomo’s Covid-19 taskforce altered a report from that same health department that omitted 9,250 of the total nursing home patients killed by the coronavirus. Cuomo was ordered to return the $5.1m after it was discovered that he used state resources to write the book. And he later was forced to resign from his position as governor amid findings that he sexually harassed 11 women. On the nursing home front, however, his attorney says the investigation is closed: In light of the impending anniversary of 6 January 2021 and the US Capitol attack, and indeed in light of events in the Senate today, concerning voting rights reform, an esteemed legal scholar writes for Guardian US: Only free and fair elections in which the loser abides by the result stand between each of us and life at the mercy of a despotic regime – one we had no voice in choosing and one that can freely violate all our rights. So everything is at stake in the peaceful transfer of power from a government that has lost its people’s confidence to its victorious successor. It was that peaceful transfer that Donald Trump and his minions sought to obstruct and almost succeeded in overthrowing when Joe Biden was elected president. Here’s the full piece: Democrats are seizing on this week’s anniversary of the deadly US Capitol insurrection to renew a push for voting rights legislation to safeguard democracy. Majority leader Chuck Schumer announced on Monday that the body will vote on changing its own rules on or before 17 January, the federal Martin Luther King Jr Day holiday, if Republicans continue to obstruct election reform. The deadline appears part of a concerted effort to use Thursday’s commemorations, marking a year since a mob of Donald Trump supporters stormed the Capitol, seeking to overturn Joe Biden’s election win, to give fresh impetus to the long-stalled legislation. In a letter to Senate Democrats, Schumer argued that the events of 6 January 2021 are directly linked to a campaign by Republican-led state legislatures to impose voter restriction laws. “Let me be clear,” the New York senator wrote. “6 January was a symptom of a broader illness – an effort to delegitimise our election process, and the Senate must advance systemic democracy reforms to repair our republic or else the events of that day will not be an aberration – they will be the new norm. “Much like the violent insurrectionists who stormed the US Capitol nearly one year ago, Republican officials in states across the country have seized on the former president’s Big Lie about widespread voter fraud to enact anti-democratic legislation and seize control of typically non-partisan election administration functions.” Schumer’s announcement was welcomed by Martin Luther King III, son of the civil rights activist and chairman of the Drum Major Institute. “There is no better way to honor my father’s legacy than protecting the right to vote for all Americans,” he said. “The King holiday is historically a day of service, and we hope the United States Senate will serve our democracy by passing the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. “We applaud Senator Schumer for his commitment to expanding voting rights, but we won’t halt our plans for action until legislation has been signed.” Speaking of subpoenas in New York for Ivanka and Donald Trump Jr, as Viv was earlier, this piece from 2016 by Jon Swaine (late of this parish, now of the Washington Post) ought to be interesting secondary reading: John’s intro: “An attempt by Donald Trump to slash the property tax bill on a golf club outside New York City may be undermined by records indicating that he previously said the property was worth 35 times more than the value he is now trying to convince a judge to approve.” That sort of thing is what Letitia James, the New York attorney general, is looking into in an investigation which could result in a civil lawsuit. Such alleged practices at the Trump Organization are also part of a criminal inquiry run out of Manhattan. Here’s Jon’s story: Yesterday, Twitter permanently suspended the private account of Majorie Taylor Greene. Today, the far-right congresswoman said Facebook has suspended her account for 24 hours. The New York state attorney general’s office is now seeking to question Donald Trump Jr and Ivanka Trump in its inquiry into the Trump Organization and its business practices. Attorneys subpoened Donald Trump last month. According to the New York Times, Eric Trump was already questioned by the attorney general’s office in 2020. More than 140 mayors have asked the US Senate to act to pass two pieces of sweeping voting rights legislation. Both bills have been stalled for months because no Republicans support them. Senate Democrats are expected to make a new push in the coming days to do away with the filibuster, a senate rule that requires a 60-vote supermajority to advance legislation. Republicans used the rule to block the voting rights bills several times last year. One bill, the Freedom to Vote Act, would set sweeping national guarantees for voting access, including 15 days of early voting, as well as guaranteed automatic and same-day voter registration. The second measure, the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, would restore a critical provision of the Voting Rights Act that gives the federal government more oversight over US elections. The bills would neutralize many new voting restrictions Republicans enacted in the last year. “These bills would stop this voter suppression. They would create national standards for voting access in federal elections that would neutralize many of the restrictive voting laws passed in the states,” the group of 146 mayors wrote. “America’s mayors urge you to take whatever steps are necessary to assure that the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act can get a straight up or down vote.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has just announced plans to hold a vote before or on 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, to change the filibuster rules. But what that means all entails is still up in the air. To recap: the filibuster is an oft-used parliamentary tactic of the Republicans that requires a 60-vote majority to break. With voting rights, Republicans have used it repeatedly to either block passage of or debate on the For the People Act, now known as the Freedom to Vote Act. A change to the filibuster rules could mean any number of things. Some advocates have called for abolishing the filibuster all together, while others are calling for ways to make using the filibuster more difficult, like requiring senators who oppose a bill to actually be physically present in the chamber. The Wall Street Journal, for example, is reporting the option of changing the rules so that instead of requiring 60 votes to break a filibuster, the opponents of the bill - the ones calling for a filibuster - must have 41 senators who show up in person to block it. Meanwhile, the biggest obstacles for the Democrats at the moment remain moderate senators Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin, both of whom have staunchly thrown their support behind the filibuster and have stated on the record that they would be opposed to abolishing it. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer has announced plans to hold a vote to change filibuster rules to advance legislation on voting rights protections. The vote, he wrote in a Dear Colleague letter, will take place on or before 17 January, Martin Luther King Jr Day, “to protect the foundation of our democracy: fair and free elections.” In the letter, Schumer makes a connection between the anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol with the attack on voting rights. “As we are all witnessing, the attacks on our democracy have not ceased. In fact, they have only accelerated,” Schumer wrote. “Much like the violent insurrectionists who stormed the US Capitol nearly one year ago, Republican officials in states across the country have seized on the former president’s Big Lie about widespread voter fraud to enact anti-democratic legislation and seize control of typically nonpartisan election administration functions.” Read the letter in full here: Speaking of snow delays: It looks like Washington might be calling a snow day soon. The heavy snow is putting a damper on a number of plans today. The daily White House press briefing just got canceled because of the snow, even as Joe Biden is set to return to the White House today from Delaware. At the Capitol, the snow is expected to make the return of Congress particularly brief: A former US official archivist thinks Donald Trump is so desperate to stop the 6 January committee accessing records from his White House because he wants to avoid “prison time” as a result of any release. Trump’s fight to keep the records secret is on its way to the supreme court, after repeated losses for the former president. The House 6 January committee is preparing for televised hearings and in rounds of interviews on Sunday its Democratic chairman, Bennie Thompson, and senior Republican, Liz Cheney, said a criminal referral for Trump remains a possibility. “Given how frantic [Trump’s lawyers] are... there are things in those records that are going to make real trouble. I’m talking about prison time,” John W Carlin told the Daily Beast. “It reinforces the fact that they know they’re in real trouble if these things are released – particularly if they’re released soon.” Five people died around the attack on the US Capitol on 6 January, by supporters Trump told to “fight like hell” to overturn his election defeat by Joe Biden. On Sunday, Cheney said the House select committee investigating 6 January now had “first-hand testimony” confirming Trump was in his private dining room at the White House watching TV as the riot unfolded. Speaking to ABC’s This Week, Cheney said there were “potential criminal statutes at issue here, but I think that there’s absolutely no question that it was a dereliction of duty [by Trump in not trying to stop the attack]. And I think one of the things the committee needs to look at is … a legislative purpose, is whether we need enhanced penalties for that kind of dereliction of duty.” Carlin was one of two former US archivists who spoke to the Beast about Trump’s fight to keep records pertinent to 6 January away from the House committee. He said: “It’s important that records are used to get the truth out. Nothing highlights that more than the controversy we’re going through. Records are going to have a huge impact in determining who did what, particularly as you get to the justice department.” While all the politics and talks may be heating up behind office doors, outside, a snowstorm is sweeping across Washington. Former senate majority leader Harry Reid, who died last week at 82 after a four-year battle with pancreatic cancer, will lie in state in the Capitol Rotunda on 12 January. What with this being the week of the first anniversary of the US Capitol attack, a lot of US news organisations are out with polls on the state of US democracy. At the weekend, we had more than a third of Americans telling the Washington Post violence against government was sometimes justified; CBS finding that just over two thirds think US democracy is threatened; and ABC finding that a little more than half of Republicans thought the 6 January rioters were trying to protect democracy. This morning NPR has joined the rush, working with Ipsos to find that just under two-thirds of Americans, 64%, believe US democracy is “in crisis and at risk of failing”. They have a point: two-thirds of Republican respondents told NPR they agreed “with the verifiably false claim that ‘voter fraud helped Joe Biden win the 2020 election”, and fewer than half such Americans said they accepted the election result. Mallory Newall, a vice-president at Ipsos, told NPR: “There is really a sort of dual reality through which partisans are approaching not only what happened a year ago on 6 January, but also generally with our presidential election and our democracy. “It is Republicans that are driving this belief that there was major fraudulent voting, and it changed the results in the election,” Newall said. Here’s some further – and alarming – reading, from Richard Luscombe: Happy New Year, live blog readers. Welcome to 2022. We kick off the year with the Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, expected to lay out a plan to bring to the floor much-anticipated nationalized voting rights protections. A quick refresher on the battle: Democrats have repeatedly been trying to pass versions of the For the People Act in the Senate since it passed in the Democrat-majority House in 2019. Republicans have time and time again used the parliamentary tactic of the filibuster, which requires a 60-vote majority to break, to block debate or passage. The bill is now called the Freedom to Vote Act and is supported by all 50 Democrats including the moderate Joe Manchin, who wrote an oped opposing the original bill last year. The bill will likely be filibustered once again. But Schumer is entering the new year swinging, signalling that he will open a debate about changing filibuster rules. It will be an uphill battle. He will need everyone he can on his side, and two moderate Democrats – Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema – have been clear in their support of allowing the filibuster to remain as is. Punchbowl News is reporting that Democrats will likely try to use the emotionally charged one-year anniversary of the 6 January attack on the US Capitol to sway Manchin and Sinema. More to come. Stay tuned.Boxing Day Test hero Scott Boland has retained his place in Australia’s XI for the fourth Ashes Test in Sydney, after fellow paceman Josh Hazlewood was not deemed ready to return from injury. Captain Pat Cummins on Tuesday said there would be just the one enforced change to the side to play England at the SCG from Wednesday, with Usman Khawaja replacing Travis Head, who is unavailable after testing positive for Covid-19. Boland made a spectacular debut last week, taking 6-7 as Australia wrapped up the third Test on his home ground and won the player-of-the-match award. The Victorian retained his spot after Hazlewood, who has missed the past two Tests with a side strain, fell short of proving himself fully fit, as did fellow paceman Jhye Richardson, who has a leg problem. “Scotty gets a go, Joshy Hazlewood had a few bowls and with Jhye [Richardson] a bit similar,” Cummins said. “Just not quite up to 100%, we gave Joshy every chance we could. We just felt like he couldn’t quite bowl at full tilt yesterday. We’re still hoping that he will be right for [the fifth Test in] Hobart, just give him another week. “I think this wicket you’re not going to blast them out. There’s a little bit of grass on it but traditionally it’s hard work. It goes five days and you need that really physical and stump to stump bowler and that’s what Scotty brings to the table.” The Australians again opted for a four-man pace attack and one spinner. There had been talk uncapped spinner Mitchell Swepson might get the nod. However, Cummins suggested the Queensland leggie was likely to get a debut in one of Australia’s Tests on the subcontinent next year. He said the SCG had been hard work for bowlers in recent years and with rain forecast during the Test the pitch might not break up that much. Team: David Warner, Marcus Harris, Marnus Labuschagne, Steve Smith, Usman Khawaja, Cameron Green, Alex Carey, Pat Cummins (captain), Mitchell Starc, Nathan Lyon, Scott Boland. 12th man to be named.More than a dozen Queensland Covid-19 testing clinics were unexpectedly closed on Tuesday, creating chaos and waiting times of up to seven hours at other sites. In the 24 hours to 7pm on Monday, Queensland recorded 5,699 new Covid cases, another daily record and up by more than 1,000 on the previous day. The state’s chief health officer said he expected total cases “in the hundreds of thousands, if not more” by the end of the month, as the highly infectious Omicron variant circulates. Testing sites were thrown into chaos as people arrived to find private clinics shuttered, despite the Queensland Health website showing they were open. The health minister, Yvette D’ath, said 17 private pathology sites were initially shown as reopening on Tuesday, but had not done so. In some cases, that was due to staffing issues at those facilities. Several people who contacted Guardian Australia said there had been confusion at those sites around the scheduled opening time. People then flocked to public testing sites, where wait times of up to seven hours were estimated. People were turned away from an open drive-through testing site at Murrarie due to traffic congestion. “There [are] very long lines at our testing clinics across the state,” D’ath said. “This is happening across the country. We are as prepared as we can be. “We can’t direct a public pathologist to open up, we can’t force their staff to go to work if they’re positive, we just can’t ask that. “We are seeing lines all over the country of people trying to get tests, [and] we know there is not sufficient supply of rapid antigen tests at the moment.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Tuesday, authorities confirmed the outbreak had spread to Aboriginal communities at Northern Peninsula, Woorabinda and Mornington Island in addition to growing outbreaks at Cherbourg and Palm Island. The state’s chief health officer, John Gerrard, said that of the more than 25,000 active cases in Queensland only 11 people were in intensive care, with two on ventilators. “We know there are going to be more than that,” Gerrard said. “The percentage of tests that are coming back positive has increased substantially in the past few days, [and] this suggests there are more people in the community with Covid-19 yet to be picked up. “This is a clearly very contagious virus, but the news so far, the good news, is we still as of last night only had 11 patients in intensive care. “The disease we’re seeing at the moment bears no resemblance to the disease we saw last year, both here and overseas – largely because of vaccination but also because [of the Omicron variant]. “The number of cases we’re expecting to see through January will be very high. Certainly in the hundreds of thousands, if not more in Queensland.”The Australian Medical Association warned senior executives in the federal health department of the need to develop a national strategy for procuring rapid antigen tests (RATs) in September last year. But the AMA’s vice-president, Chris Moy, said that he was told in the meeting that the government did not want to intervene in the private market. “I asked the question of them because I knew what was happening in other countries, and we needed to transition, so what was the plan?” Moy told Guardian Australia. “We needed to get a lot of them [RATs], and we needed a really clear strategy to transition, it was so bloody obvious. “They have been caught short because of Omicron and the number of cases, but the bottom line is if you are going to rely on the private market in a health emergency you need to make pretty damn sure that they are ready.” The chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, Rod Sims, warned retailers on Tuesday the watchdog would not hesitate to “name and shame” companies engaging in “unconscionable conduct” over the pricing of the tests. “The ACCC is obviously acutely aware of the concern over the pricing of rapid antigen tests [and] we’re in the process of writing to both the suppliers and the retailers of these rapid antigen tests to find out what their stock levels are, their predictions of stock levels and most importantly what their costs are, what their pricing is and how that’s evolved over time,” he said. “I’d like to see, if any retailers are pricing as high as $45 for a test when they’re normally supposed to be a third of that, that they would immediately take notice of what we’re saying today and take those prices down.” Sims told reporters the ACCC had begun investigating reports of price gouging following a request from the federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, and had already seen reports of “excessive pricing” particularly on individual-sales sites such as Gumtree and Kogan. Sims said the watchdog had received more than 100 reports of potential “unconscionable” or misleading conduct over the products and he urged people to contact the ACCC if they encountered examples of the price of tests being unreasonably inflated. He said the ACCC would also be examining claims the current pricing levels of rapid antigen tests were due to challenges in obtaining supply of the tests. The government is under growing pressure to provide free rapid antigen tests across the community as case numbers in Australia reach record highs, while testing clinics remain overwhelmed. But Sims stopped short of criticising the federal government, saying that while “clearly demand is outstripping supply”, it was unclear what was causing the shortages. “The pricing of these is not something I’m going to comment on, obviously you can see both sides of that argument,” Sims said in response to questions about whether the tests should be provided free. On Tuesday, New South Wales and Victoria registered record daily case numbers. NSW had 23,131 new cases, while Victoria recorded 14,020. Queensland registered a record 5,699 cases, while South Australia had 3,246 new cases, the ACT 926, Tasmania 702 and the Northern Territory 75. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said the government will not make the rapid tests free for everyone, but is in the process of finalising concessional access with state and territory leaders. National cabinet is expected to sign off on the details in a meeting on Wednesday. Regardless of the cost, supplies remain constrained in the private market across the country, with frustration growing that the tests cannot be found on chemist and supermarket shelves. The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, said Queensland would distribute 500,000 RATs to public testing clinics from Wednesday, but supplies remain constrained across the country. “This is happening across the country. We are as prepared as we can be, but have a look at what is happening around the world,” she said. “This is not unique to Australia. There is not one country, there is not one state who can say that we don’t have lines, that you won’t have to wait for tests now.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She said RATs needed to be “heavily subsidised” or made free to ensure equity of access. “We do want to make sure they are affordable, we do want to make sure people have easy access to them and we don’t want to become a society where only those who can afford it get it.” She said she had also appealed to the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) to fast-track any outstanding approvals for test kits, including those made in Australia. The Queensland chief health officer, John Gerrard, said the Omicron virus had changed the pandemic landscape, with each infected person now infecting between seven and 10 people. “The Omicron strain really has changed everything – I know it sounds like a cliche, but that has completely changed all the planning,” Gerrard said. The federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said Morrison was ultimately responsible for the lack of supply. “It’s about time the prime minister took responsibility for something himself, for doing his job. And his job is to ensure supply, just like it was his job to secure supply of the vaccine,” Albanese said. But the opposition leader fell short of saying the tests should be made free. “We think that if someone needs a rapid antigen test, and they can’t afford it, they should get one. Everyone should have access to a rapid antigen test. It shouldn’t be dependent upon your income.” However his NSW counterpart, Chris Minns, went further, saying on Tuesday that the NSW Labor party believed the state was facing an “urgent situation” and that the tests “need to be free of charge”. “This is what is happening in other jurisdictions around the world. It’s happening in the UK, it’s happening in the USA, it works,” Minns said. “The minimum the government can do for the citizens of this state, is ensure that they’re providing the services so that they can test whether they’ve got Covid or not, that’s the smallest and minimum thing the government can do on behalf of the citizens of New South Wales. “Now, at the end of the day, it’s a difficult set of circumstances and we know that we have to live with Covid. But that doesn’t mean we can live without a government.” The Nationals senator Matt Canavan said the TGA was to blame for the hold-up, and said making the tests free would exacerbate demand. “The hold-up was at the feet of the TGA,” he told Sky News on Tuesday. “We should have been better prepared for this.”A list of “banished words”, published annually by Michigan’s Lake Superior State University, has this year included the unmistakably Australian “no worries”. LSSU’s tongue-in-cheek list has been compiled every year since 1976 from submissions on terms deemed “familiar but problematic”. This year’s list also includes, among others, “asking for a friend”, “circle back” and “wait, what?” for elimination. While the list takes submissions from around the world, executive director of marketing and communications at LSSU, Peter Szatmary, said “not a single of the many nominators of ‘no worries’ came from Australia. All nominators of ‘no worries’ listed their addresses as in the US”. But how did this Australianism get there? “The same way anything does: use, contact, and time,” says Tiger Webb, a language researcher and chair of the ABC’s English usage committee. The first use of “no worries” goes back to a 1965 edition of Sydney’s Oz magazine, according to the Oxford English dictionary. The expression probably received a boost in popularity from Australian cultural exports such as Crocodile Dundee, which Webb says contains six instances, as well as the Sydney Olympics and Steve Irwin. “‘No worries’ is a victim of its own success, and has since become naturalised in America, that is, stripped of specific Australian connotations.” Webb says one American lexicographer and writer on usage, Bryan Garner, dates the shift to naturalisation to about the year 2000. Examples of “no worries” in the wild, “with no accompanying Australiana”, begin to appear around then, such as this New York Times article from 2000, “No Goals, No Complaints, No Worries for US National Team”, or this 1999 Rolling Stone article, which begins: “No worries: Basement Jaxx makes the world’s happiest dance music.” Google’s Ngram viewer, which allows users to look at the frequency of a word or phrase’s occurrence in a corpus of books, also shows that beginning in the 90s, the term starts to become more frequent in American English, shooting up sharply after 2000. Lauren Sadow, a postdoctoral fellow at Macquarie University’s school of education who has a background in linguistics, guesses that more recent influences in popular and social media have likely helped to spread “no worries” even further, with Australians such as Margot Robbie, Rebel Wilson and the Hemsworths rising to fame. On top of this, the phrase has been popularly memed in recent times. It’s not the first time this little expression has been noticed, either: a 2014 Quartz article looks at how it might have “infected” US English. In the UK, decades of Neighbours have helped it to become commonplace – in a 2007 ninemsn article, linguist David Crystal said an uptick in “no worries” had been noticed in the preceding 10 to 15 years. Webb also mentions the phrase hakuna matata, from Disney’s 1994 movie The Lion King: “Hakuna matata is translated as meaning no worries, which suggests the phrase was not alien to US audiences.” As for why it’s been nominated for banishment this year, LSSU’s entry for the phrase says it “incorrectly substitutes for ‘You’re welcome’”. The list quotes one submission as saying: “If I’m not worried, I don’t want anyone telling me not to worry.” It adds: “If I am upset, I want to discuss being upset.” “The description given in the list misunderstands the phrase’s usage, at least in Australian English,” Sadow says. “In Australian English, although it is used in the same place as ‘you’re welcome’, the meaning is quite different.” “It is the speaker saying that they feel ‘no worries’, and that they think the listener should have ’no worries’.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Webb is a little less restrained. “In my view the compilers of the Banished Words list at LSSU are idiotically mistaken to view ‘no worries’ as misused, overused, or incorrect.” Those who object to being told not to worry are “misunderstanding on two fairly fundamental levels”, he says. “In this context, ‘no worries’ indicates that the person being thanked went through no trouble or difficulty; it is not an imperative from the person being thanked that the person doing the thanking should not worry. “Even if it were, that would still probably be fine: a lot of small talk is what’s known as phatic, that is, there for the purposes of social interaction rather than information transfer,” Webb says. Sadow says: “It wouldn’t be used in a situation (as one commenter said) where either party would actually have worries. It would be completely inappropriate to say ‘You broke my leg!’ ‘No worries’.” She points out that it is “very similar to the US English ‘no problem’”, another expression that might qualify as phatic. “I would say that its usage has been misunderstood by people who do not have it in their own idiolect,” Sadow says.One evening a week, Natasha Msweswe and Zanele Madasi leave their children at home and set out to patrol the streets of Thembokwezi. They return at midnight. This is potentially very dangerous but they feel they have little choice. “It can be scary but we want to protect our community,” said Madasi, 31. “We want to make a difference.” Thembokwezi is a neighbourhood of Khayelitsha, a sprawling, overcrowded township overlooked by Table Mountain that has long been infamous for high levels of gang violence, drug abuse and unemployment. South African police are stretched very thin and so a network of neighbourhood watch organisations play a key role in fighting crime here. Thembokwezi is more prosperous and safer than much of the rest of the township, and those who live here want to keep it that way. “We work with the police of course … but if we fold our arms as a community, the criminals will run amok,” said Phindile George, the leader of the Thembokwezi neighbourhood watch, which counts 50 volunteers including Msweswe and Madasi among its members. Across South Africa, tens of thousands of people are making similar resolutions. Some teach, secure reliable electricity supplies, organise vaccination drives, repair roads, deliver protective gear to hospitals or distribute water. Many work almost alone, others in NGOs or for wealthy businesses that are now setting aside large sums for philanthropic work. What all share is an almost total lack of faith in South Africa’s government to provide any kind of a solution for their problems. “People have given up on the state as a protector … There is a massive loss of faith. It’s a tragedy,” said William Gumede, a respected analyst and academic in Johannesburg. The retreat of the state from everyday life in the continent’s most developed country has widespread consequences, changing the way people think, behave and interact, especially in a time of crisis. The death of Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who was almost universally revered, provided a moment of paradoxical hope as well as grief: reminding many South Africans of what they have in common after many months where circumstances have conspired to drive them apart. Most South Africans were suffering even before Covid struck, and discontent with the ruling African National Congress (ANC), in power since the end of the racist, repressive apartheid regime in 1994, has been growing for years. Economic growth was already slowing even before the nine-year rule of Jacob Zuma, the populist president ousted in 2018 amid widespread corruption allegations. Despite the good intentions of the current president, Cyril Ramaphosa, a former labour activist turned tycoon, there has been little to celebrate since. The pandemic has delivered a series of crushing blows to the economy. Rolling power cuts shut down businesses and factories for weeks on end, while the public healthcare system has been lethally undermined by mismanagement and corruption. The government claims 90,000 South Africans have died from Covid, but reliable excess mortality figures suggest the real death toll is between two and three times higher. Depending on the definition, unemployment could be as high as 46.6%. In July, in the worst breakdown in public order for decades, hundreds of shopping malls were looted, warehouses torched and key infrastructure targeted across a swath of South Africa. Much of the violence appears to have been instigated by renegade factions within the ruling party, angered by the jailing of Zuma on contempt of court charges. This shook faith in the state too, and a few people turned to vigilante violence. The neighbourhood watch in Thembokwezi aims to reinforce official efforts, but in a rougher part of Khayelitsha a community has come together to confront local authorities. When a strict lockdown at the beginning of the pandemic in 2020 led to widespread illegal evictions, hundreds of homeless people occupied a patch of wasteland and built homes of tin and wood. “For years the politicians said they would use this land for homes for us. They failed to fulfil their promises … So we decided to take it over and do it ourselves,” said Mabhelandile Twani, 40, a community leader. Despite efforts to evict them anew, this neighbourhood has thrived. Now more than 15,000 people live in rows of shacks on the sandy soil. Electricity is diverted from better-supplied streets nearby. Twani calls it “people’s power”. The neighbourhood is known as Lockdown Village. There are many other such settlements born of the misery inflicted by Covid in a country unable to afford the expensive support offered to individuals and businesses in Europe, the UK or the US. In Khayelitsha, there are now settlements called Sanitiser, Quarantine and Social Distance. “Now things are so difficult. We don’t get help from the government. We try to help ourselves,” said Nondwebi Kasba, 73, who helps to run a communal vegetable garden set up by neighbours in Khayelithsa’s Illitha Park to help the poorest among them. Seven hundred miles to the east, in Graaff-Reinet, a small and conservative town in the Karoo desert, there is also a new struggle for the basics that the state once provided. In the townships on Graaff-Reinet’s outskirts, drug dealers steal water tanks from schools and hawk their contents alongside cannabis and methamphetamines. No one bothers to tell the police, expecting that they will not come. Jobs are rare. So too are the means by which young people could gain the skills to allow them to escape. Khanya Mbaile, a 31-year-old office administrator, hopes to start a coffee shop and internet cafe that would provide a safe meeting place for young people in the township where she lives. She has already sourced six computers from an NGO. “We are all exhausted but there is a glimmer of hope,” Mbaile said. Louise Masimela, 58, who runs a community school for young children in a township just south of Graaff-Reinet, is another of South Africa’s perpetual problem-solvers. The former journalist has no permanent premises for her students, scarce water and no funds to pay teachers. “It’s tough, really tough … but we want to give our kids an education that will allow them to go out into the world, not get stuck here,” said Masimela. So she has found solutions: a church offers a space during the week, and seven volunteers teach. Water comes from The Gift of the Givers, now one of South Africa’s biggest NGOs. Funded entirely by private donors, mainly businesses, it distributes 400m rand (£20m) of aid annually. In Eastern Cape province, the NGO works in hospitals, providing much-needed PPE, medicine, oxygen delivery devices, food for patients and even goody bags to motivate healthworkers. Elsewhere in the province, one of South Africa’s poorest, it has provided seeds, fodder and food for orphanages, trucked water into poor communities and even dug boreholes. “There are a lot of good people in government who want to do the right thing … and I can see things changing. It’s not massive change but people want to fix things,” said Dr Imtiaz Sooliman, the NGO’s founder. “We have to fill the gap but by filling the gap we are putting on pressure. People are asking why we are doing what the government should do.” Recent local elections have been seen by many analysts as a cause for optimism. The ANC was punished by voters, losing 8.3% of its vote share and just under 1,000 council seats. The party was forced to share power in many small towns – including Graaff-Reinet – and its grasp on cities such as Johannesburg and Pretoria slipped further. In several towns, local communities joined together to create political alternatives that frequently won support. “A lot of this is hopeful … It shows a desire for a new inclusive project,” said Gumede. Many see a need for political options that offer an authentic alternative to the ANC but also escape the toxic legacy of South Africa’s traumatic past. The dominance of the ANC at national level means the most important political battles occur within the organisation. Judith February, an analyst, wrote for the Daily Maverick website in December: “From the insurrection in July to the shambles which is our intelligence services, [from] an increasing … anti-vaxx position to a commitment to coal, the tensions within the party are … at odds with the country’s best interests. Ramaphosa’s grip on power appears reluctant and tenuous.” Farmers say the relief provided by rain that has broken a five-year drought has helped the agricultural sector offset losses elsewhere, but the key industry of tourism has been badly hit by the pandemic, with huge losses of income and jobs. “It has been a disaster, a total disaster,” said 59-year-old Kobus Potgieter, who runs a farm guesthouse outside the town of Oudtshoorn, on the spectacular R62 road that was once busy with tourists. After 16 years he is thinking of closing for good, or at least downscaling. In Franschhoek, a centre of fine dining and wine-making amid mountains and vineyards an hour’s drive from Cape Town, the absence of overseas visitors has forced top restaurants to close, hotels to shut for months, and led to the loss of thousands of jobs. As elsewhere, the national vaccination campaign has lacked resources, offering minimal opportunities for local people to get jabbed and almost no information that might help overcome very widespread hesitancy. To convince would-be visitors that the town was safe, Franschhoek’s tourist office sought to organise its own vaccination drive, supported by crowdfunding, big businesses and the local administration. By November, 85% of those working in the hospitality industry were jabbed. But just as the tourists began returning, the identification of the Omicron variant in South Africa brought new travel bans. “It was devastating,” said Ruth McCourt, a marketing manager. In a country with some of the highest levels of inequality in the world, some have been able to weather South Africa’s economic and political storm better than others. Even its residents admit Franschhoek is a “bit of a bubble”. Khayelitsha is not, and its half a million inhabitants have little protection from the forces buffeting the country. “It will be a bitter, black Christmas,” said Twani, the community leader in Lockdown Village, interviewed in mid-December. “My fear is that here in South Africa we are living in a timebomb. People are angry … Eventually, anything can happen.” • This article was amended on 4, 6 and 7 January 2022 to correct misspellings of Franschhoek, Oudtshoorn, and the surname of Kobus Potgieter.Two of New Zealand’s most prominent Covid experts are taking legal action against their employer, the University of Auckland, over what they say is its failure to respond adequately to “harassment from a small but venomous sector of the public” that is becoming “more extreme”. Siouxsie Wiles, an associate professor of medical science, and Shaun Hendy, a professor of physics, have filed separate complaints to the Employment Relations Authority, which last week ruled that they should proceed directly to the Employment Court due to the “high public interest” in their Covid commentary. According to the ruling, the scientists say that as a result of their work they have “suffered vitriolic, unpleasant, and deeply personalised threats and harassment” via email, social media and video sharing platforms which has had a “detrimental impact” on their physical safety as well as their mental health. The determination also noted that Wiles had also been the victim of doxxing – in which personal information is published about a person online – while Hendy has been physically confronted at his university office by a person who threatened to “see him soon”. The pair say that they are expected to provide public commentary as part of their jobs and that it is “consistent with the principle of academic freedom” but that the university had “failed to take proactive action to protect them” from abuse and that it had “failed to take all reasonable steps to provide a safe working environment”. Wiles, who is known for her trademark pink hair, was named New Zealander of the Year last year for her work on explaining the science behind the Covid-19 pandemic, including everything from how the virus spreads to how vaccines work. Her collaborations with cartoonist Toby Morris for The Spinoff website were widely shared and resulted in work for the World Health Organization. Hendy’s expertise in data-modelling has been credited with shaping the country’s pandemic response. The Employment Relations Authority determination said the issue of their safety had first been raised in early 2020 shortly after the pandemic began but Wiles and Hendy claim the steps taken to protect them were “inadequate” and not consistent with the university’s contractual and statutory obligations and had resulted in “ongoing unjustified disadvantage”. The scientists, who say they had been asked by both the university and the prime minister’s office to provide Covid commentary, claim that in a letter sent in August, the university urged them to cut back on their public comments and suggested they take paid leave in order to“minimise any social media comment”. The university denies unjustifiably disadvantaging the scientists or breaching its statutory obligations and said they were neither expected or required to provide comment on Covid as part of their jobs, adding that much of their public commentary had been undertaken in a private capacity. It also said that it had responded “appropriately” to Wiles’ and Hendy’s concerns and denied telling them to keep their public comments to a minimum. It said it had “merely advised the applicants that doing so is an option they may want to consider”. The Employment Relations Authority said the matter should be resolved as quickly as possible by the court – rather than going through the authority’s sometimes lengthy and potentially more costly process – due to the high public interest in their commentary. It also noted, “the authority is concerned about the uncontested evidence that the harassment is escalating and is expected to continue to do so. The issues associated with the vaccination of children aged 5-11 years of age is already a topic that has stirred up increased vitriol towards the applicants.”A moist airstream surging through the cold massif of the Peak District deposited ground fog over mid-Derbyshire. Just to the west, however, at the county boundary with Staffordshire, and before the world fell away to mist-enshrouded flatlands about Leek, there was a band of high country held in piercing sunlight. What little warmth fired down at this place then rebounded off the bare gritstone ridges, so that the air around the Roaches actually felt hot. Perhaps it was these conditions, in a context of otherwise absolute winter stillness, that gave rise to the day’s wildlife drama. For in the fields, and in an eddy of slow-rising warmth drifting toward the hill known as Hen Cloud, there unfolded a remarkable abundance of spiders. Initially I noticed it as strands of white wafting thread, wound around the roof edge, walls, gates and fence posts near the cafe at this spot. Then I began to feel strands of cottony stuff in my eyes. Looking down, I could see a million silvery pixels glistening in wavy lines among the fields. There were spiders everywhere: on fence tops, on stone figures in the cafe garden, on dead plants, bushes, running through my hair and across my cheek. On one post I counted 15. But the deepest insight into overall numbers came when I ran binoculars from the ground into the middle sky. The air had become a visible fluid made almost liquid by snaking, lifting lengths of silk. I’ve never seen anything like it. There must have been millions of money spiders, probably in the family Linyphiidae, dispersing in response to their high densities at source in a technique known as “ballooning”. The drag of air through the silk is greater than the weight of its maker, and the spider is carried aloft to pastures new. Who knows where it might settle? Silk strands have been recorded at elevations of 6,000m. When Krakatoa erupted in 1883 and punished the whole world with a summer of ashy skies and plunging temperatures, the first to plant a flag for life on that dead volcano was a spider on its magical silk carpet. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryChen Kun was living in Indonesia with his wife and daughter when he learned from his brother Mei’s boss that he had been “taken away for investigation” by Chinese police. He immediately suspected it was to do with his brother’s website, a citizen news project called Terminus 2049. Since 2018 Mei, his colleague Cai Wei, and Cai’s partner – surnamed Tang – had been archiving articles about issues including #MeToo and migrant rights, and reposting them whenever they were deleted from China’s strictly monitored and censored online platforms. It was April 2020, and for the last few months Terminus 2049 had been targeting stories about the Covid-19 outbreak and response. In an interview with the Guardian from his home in France, Chen recalled warning his shy but passionate younger brother about setting up such a website, but thinking the worst case scenario was that Mei would be “invited to drink tea”, a euphemism for interrogation by security agencies, not arrested. Instead Mei and Cai spent almost 16 months in detention. Tang was released in May, when the other two were convicted at a trial which Chen said lasted just 100 minutes. Mei and Cai were sentenced to 15 months jail and released in August on time served. Mei is potentially still under surveillance. The group is on a growing list of journalists and others who have been arrested and detained by Chinese authorities, often without trial, in a crackdown that appeared to escalate during the pandemic. In December a report by Reporters Without Borders (RSF) detailed a worsening “nightmare” for journalists under the rule of Xi Jinping, with 128 known to be behind bars or disappeared. More than 70 are Uyghur journalists, and at least 10 people were arrested for reporting on the Covid outbreak and lockdown in Wuhan. Chen said it was a sign of how sensitive Chinese authorities were and remain about the pandemic and its origins. “I’m sure the reason why my brother was arrested was because of Covid,” Chen said. “Before his arrest … they didn’t encounter any problems.” ‘A war on independent journalism’ Mei was formally arrested for “picking quarrels and provoking trouble”, a vague and ubiquitous charge frequently levelled at dissidents, activists and journalists, and sent to residential surveillance in a designated location (RSDL) – China’s increasingly utilised form of secretive and solitary detention where the accused can be held for up to six months and interrogated without charge, or access to lawyers or family. The rights group Safeguard Defenders estimates between 45,000 and 55,000 people have been sent to RSDL, including about 15,000 in 2020. Among them have been Mei, the Australian CGTN anchor Cheng Lei, the journalist Sophia Huang Xueqin and the activist Wang Jianbing. Mei and his Terminus 2049 colleagues were freed in August, and he is living at home in China. Chen is still advocating for those still detained, particularly Huang, and says that neither his brother nor their parents are aware of his campaigning. As well as reporting on the #MeToo movement and the Hong Kong protests – the latter for which she was detained for three months in 2019 – Huang had also interviewed Chen and written about Mei. “She was always trying to record the stories and experiences of a lot of people like my brother, about defenders,” Chen said. The independent investigative journalist has not been seen since she and Wang were arrested in September on the eve of her planned departure to study in Europe. In October her parents were told she had been formally arrested for “subverting state power”. Also subject to human rights campaigns is Zhang Zhan, a former lawyer turned citizen reporter, who last Christmas was sentenced to four years in jail over 122 videos she posted online and interviews she gave to foreign press during 14 weeks in Wuhan. Deep into a lengthy hunger strike, which no friends or family can convince her to stop, Zhang is close to death, her family says. While human rights observers, legal groups, and media organisations maintain she should never have been convicted in the first place, an international campaign is urgently calling for her release on any grounds possible, to save her life. Feng Bin, who like Zhang broadcast reports on YouTube from Wuhan, has not been seen since his arrest in February 2020, and Li Zehu, who broadcast the police chase which led to his arrest around the same time, was detained for two months. Chen Qiushi, a former human rights lawyer turned citizen journalist, reported from Wuhan’s hospitals interviewing families, disappeared at the same time and didn’t reappear until September. In February 2020 Cheng Lei, an anchor for Chinese state broadcaster CGTN, posted on Facebook that she and her friend Haze Fan, a Bloomberg news assistant, had been unsuccessfully lobbying to report from Wuhan. In August Cheng was detained and later charged with “illegally supplying state secrets overseas”. Fan was detained in December. Both remain in detention more than a year later. Cedric Alviari, RSF’s east Asia bureau director, said the 128 detained journalists and press freedom defenders is the biggest count in five years. It includes 71 Uyghur journalists, and at least 10 who face impending death if not immediately released, according to RSF. Alviari said the crackdown is driven by Xi, who has “declared a war on independent journalism” after tightening controls on traditional media. “Everything he and the CCP have been doing over the past eight years … has been to suppress independent voices.,” he said. “The Chinese people, like every person on earth, crave information on what’s happening around them.”Tesla has opened a new showroom in the capital of Xinjiang, a region at the heart of years-long campaign by Chinese authorities of repression and assimilation against the Uyghur people. Tesla announced the opening in Urumqi with a Weibo post on 31 December saying: “On the last day of 2021, we meet in Xinjiang. In 2022 let us together launch Xinjiang on its electric journey!” The post was accompanied by photos of the opening festivities including people holding placards which read “Tesla [heart] Xinjiang”. The US has enacted a range of sanctions and regulatory and other measures against China over its continuing human rights abuses in Xinjiang, including restrictions on US business dealings with local operators and suppliers. President Joe Biden last month signed the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act, and the US government intends to conduct a diplomatic boycott of the upcoming Beijing Winter Olympics. Uyghur rights groups criticised the opening of the showroom, reportedly Tesla’s 211th in China. The Council on American-Islamic Relations urged its immediate closure, and the cessation of what it alleged “amounts to economic support for genocide”. “No American corporation should be doing business in a region that is the focal point of a campaign of genocide targeting a religious and ethnic minority,” said the council’s director of national communications, Ibrahim Hooper. Human Rights Watch’s Australia researcher, Sophie McNeill, said: “Beijing and businesses have long banked on a global willingness to put profits ahead of human rights, even in the face of crimes against humanity, but we must not allow this to continue in 2022. “Elon Musk and his Tesla executives need to consider human rights in Xinjiang or risk being complicit.” Tesla has been contacted for comment. Tesla’s decision drew some support on Chinese social media, and followed revelations a week earlier that US tech company Intel had requested suppliers not to source goods, services, or labour from the region. One commenter welcomed Tesla’s support for “the development and construction of Xinjiang, unlike some other companies”, an apparent reference to multinationals seeking to reduce business links with Xinjiang over the rights abuses. Last month Intel was accused by state media of offending the Chinese market after it wrote to suppliers requesting they avoid using “any labor or source goods or services from the Xinjiang region”, citing restrictions imposed by multiple governments. After a backlash the company published a letter to “deeply apologise for the confusion”, saying the request was a matter of compliance with US law and didn’t represent its stance on Xinjiang. Commercial operations in China have become fraught as international brands come under increasing pressure to cut ties with Xinjiang suppliers if they can’t guarantee the absence of forced labour or other abuses. Companies including H&amp;M and Intel have been widely criticised or threatened with boycotts in China over their decisions to distance the brand from Xinjiang labour and products. Case studies of such mass online reactions have found the nationalistic backlash is often driven or amplified by Chinese state media and state-linked social media accounts. Xinjiang is the site of a long campaign of forced assimilation by Chinese authorities against ethnic minorities including Muslim Uyghurs. As many as one million people are estimated to have been detained in mass detention and reeducation centres, and the broader population subjected to suppression of religious and cultural activity, intense surveillance and policing, alleged forced labour programs and enforced birth control. Governments including the US have declared the campaign to be genocide, while several human rights and legal groups have said the actions amount to crimes against humanity. Beijing denies all accusations of human rights abuses, and says its policies are part of anti-terrorism efforts and poverty alleviation programs.Labour has called on the government to explain why it claimed Liz Truss hosted a £3,000 lunch at a private members’ club because it was available at short notice, when correspondence later showed that she had insisted on the venue. In a letter to the international trade minister, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, Labour also asked why Truss, Trevelyan’s predecessor in the role, had overruled civil servants’ concerns about the cost of the members’ club, owned by a Tory donor. The correspondence, disclosed by the Sunday Times, showed that Truss, now the foreign secretary and a favourite to succeed Boris Johnson, “refused to consider anywhere else” and asked that public funds should pay for the event with Joe Biden’s trade representative. According to the correspondence, Truss, then the trade secretary, “explicitly asked that we book 5 Hertford Street”, owned by Robin Birley, a £20,000 donor to Boris Johnson’s leadership campaign and the half-brother of Zac Goldsmith, the environment minister. The venue agreed to reduce the bill to £1,400, but on condition of immediate payment – which meant civil servants had to use an emergency process to pay up straight away. In the letter to Trevelyan, Labour’s shadow international trade secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, said that when the Mail on Sunday asked about the event in November, “it is understood that the department’s own press office stated that the reason for such expense was due to it being organised at ‘short notice’ and therefore down to availability”. He continued: “However, in correspondence it showcases that it was not down to short notice, but the insistency of the former secretary of state.” As well as seeking clarification on this, the letter asks Trevelyan when she learned of the dinner, why the venue was chosen and why Truss overruled civil servants, and whether the club had been used for other events. “These revelations showcase the complete lack of transparency and accountability of such decisions,” Thomas-Symonds wrote. “What we see from this government is a flagrant abuse of the powers that have been given to them.” Before attending the event with US trade representatives, a civil servant described the club as “obviously incredibly expensive and more than I understand we’d usually expect to pay for such a venue”. It was requested, the official wrote, as the private dining room was “of the appropriate size and standing”. Truss and her companions drank two measures of dry gin; three bottles of Pazo Barrantes Albariño, a Spanish white wine, costing a total of £153; and two bottles of the French red Coudoulet de Beaucastel, costing a total of £130, it was reported. Department for International Trade officials argue that the booking was made at short notice, just a day before the event, and that alternative venues might not have been cheaper. A spokesperson for the department said: “This was a diplomatic working dinner attended by the previous international trade secretary, senior UK officials, and US counterparts from our largest single trading partner.” • This article was amended on 4 January 2022 to correct details of the drinks reportedly ordered at 5 Hertford Street. An earlier version also erroneously said the Truss correspondence was obtained by the Sunday Times in a “leak”.Elizabeth Holmes, founder of the blood testing company Theranos, has been found guilty on four charges of fraud – a verdict that will probably land her in prison and have major implications for Silicon Valley. Holmes was acquitted on three charges relating to patients who received inaccurate test results but found guilty on four charges, including one count of conspiracy to defraud investors and three counts of wire fraud against investors. The jury remained deadlocked on three of the charges. The split verdicts are “a mixed bag for the prosecution, but it’s a loss for Elizabeth Holmes because she is going away to prison for at least a few years”, said David Ring, a lawyer who has followed the case closely. It also marks a milestone for Silicon Valley – an industry that has for years evaded accountability in its pervasive culture of “fake it till you make it” that encourages founders to make big promises, often with little proof. “Silicon Valley has thus far been famously been resistant to much prosecutorial activity because its business model assumes you are going to take an aggressive, optimistic view of your product or service to attract investors,” said Jack Sharman, a white-collar defense lawyer at Lightfoot, a law firm in Alabama. “And if that product or service succeeds, you’re not a fraudster, you’re a visionary,” he added. Theranos sold a promise to improve health with tests on one drop of blood – a claim that despite having little scientific proof raised hundreds of millions of dollars and attracted big-name investors such as the media mogul Rupert Murdoch and the former secretary of state Henry Kissinger. The Theranos verdict could cause startups to tread more carefully in the future, said Neama Rahmani, a former former federal prosecutor and president of West Coast Trial Lawyers. “In Silicon Valley, this conviction will resonate with the big law firms that advise startup companies,” he said. “Attorneys are going to be advising their clients to be more careful, especially in what they say to investors.” The Silicon Valley investor Jason Calacanis, who was an early backer of major firms like Uber and Robinhood, said the verdict was a “reminder to founders”. “Never lie, never bend the truth, always be honest about where you are at with your traction, especially when raising money,” he tweeted. Greater whistleblower power The verdict could also mark a new era for workers in technology, who are increasingly speaking out against their powerful employers. Throughout the trial, former employees of the company testified they long suspected Theranos could not deliver on its promises, but felt they could not raise questions. Tyler Shultz, a witness in the trial and early Theranos whistleblower, said on Monday he hoped the verdict encouraged others to speak out against corporate wrongdoing. “This has been a long chapter of my life,” he said. “I am happy that justice has been served and that this saga is finally in my rearview mirror.” He also highlighted Erika Cheung, another whistleblower and former employee at Theranos who spoke out against the company’s deceptive business practices. “Proud of the impact that Erika and I had,” he added. “Hope to inspire other young professionals to hold their leaders accountable.” Experts said the verdict showed that the decision to put Holmes on the stand – a major gamble made by the defense – did not play in the founder’s favor. This could set a precedent for fraud cases in the future, said the Los Angeles criminal appeals attorney Matthew Barhoma. “This jury did not fall for it and ultimately that points to why it’s generally best for defendants to avoid testifying in their own defense,” he said. “If a master manipulator like Holmes can fail to convince a jury, what chance does the average defendant have?” What happens next for Holmes? A hearing has been set for next week during which the prosecutors will reveal whether they plan to retry Holmes on the three charges the jury could not decide. Such a retrial is “not very likely”, Sharman said, as the convictions already carry considerable sentencing time. “I would expect them to declare victory,” he said of prosecutors, noting that Holmes was already decisively convicted on hundreds of millions of dollars of fraud charges. Holmes walked out of the courthouse on Monday after parties agreed she would not be taken into custody until her sentencing hearing. That date will be set at the hearing regarding the retrial next week. With no prior convictions, Holmes is unlikely to face the maximum prison time her charges carry, which is 20 years, said Rahmani, and she will probably face just several years in prison and more on probation. Still, Holmes is almost certain to appeal. “She’s not someone who is going to want to do even five months in prison, much less five years,” he said. The Associated Press contributed reportingAlthough, mercifully, still rare, there are signs that wild animal attacks on humans are increasing. Research from the scientific journal Nature found that, as our urban areas further expand into the territories of carnivorous animals, attacks on pets, livestock and sometimes humans have been on the rise. In Kashmir, local wildlife departments have been reporting a marked increase in attacks, with almost 200 people killed and more than 2,000 others wounded in man-animal conflict in the region since 2011. From a British citizen attacked by otters in Singapore, to monkey attacks in Thailand, squirrel attacks in New York, and a man who fought off a crocodile with a pocket knife in Queensland, these encounters capture our imaginations. But how does it feel to survive such an ordeal – and how does it affect your life? ‘I tried to punch the mountain lion in the face’ – Anne Hjelle, 48, Orange County, California One day in January 2004, I texted my biking friend Debi to see if she wanted to meet for a ride. I live in California and wanted to do a 45-minute loop at Whiting Ranch, which was only a 10-minute drive from my house. I left my groceries on the counter at home. It was about 3.45pm when we started. I was coming around a blind corner and saw a man in the middle of the trail with another bike propped up against the bushes. I slowed down and asked if everything was OK. He said he had found an abandoned bike and was looking for the owner. Debi and I continued, trying to pick up speed. A minute later, I came to a twisty section, bordered by thick brush and a slope down to a ravine. In my peripheral vision I suddenly saw this flash of reddish-brown fur. I knew it was an animal, but my first assumption was that it was a deer, since they would sometimes bound across the trail. In the next second, the animal leapt and grabbed me. There’s only one animal that would attempt that; I knew it was a mountain lion. It latched on to my shoulders and tried to bite down on the back of my neck. It felt like getting hit by a truck. I was slammed to the ground and it knocked the wind out of me; I could not believe this was happening. The cat started to drag me down into the ravine. It had me by the back of the neck and I tried to punch its face but it didn’t have any effect. It dragged me several feet and then readjusted its grip to over my left ear and then the left side of my face. I realised that it was working its way around to the front of my neck. At this point, I was trying to scream for Debi and I saw her – she was screaming, too, and in a tug of war with the cat over me. It had me by the head and she grabbed me by my calf to try to keep it from pulling me down into the ravine. Meanwhile, it closed its grip on the left side of my face and pulled my cheek away. It was like a hot knife through butter. I started to say goodbye to Debi as it tried to grab the front of my throat. Within a matter of seconds, things began to go black. I was convinced this was the end of my life. I just felt peace. But Debi’s screams had brought other riders over to us. One went back to call the emergency services and two others started throwing rocks at the cat. They hit it three times – and when one landed on its head, it let go of me. Shortly after that, I came to. I remember being very shocked that I had woken up – and that the cat was gone. I was choking on my own blood and it felt as if I was drowning. The left side of my face felt like someone had stapled a steak to it. My next concern was whether I could see out of my left eye. When I realised I could, that was the first moment I thought I was going to be OK. It took 19 minutes from the 911 call until the paramedics arrived. When the helicopter was flying overhead, the pilot saw the cat crouched down, waiting for another chance. The sheriff’s deputies later found a body that was identified as Mark Reynolds. He was killed earlier by the cat – the abandoned bike was his. Without Debi stepping in, I would not be here. Mark was a high-level athlete and he did not survive because he was by himself. People have no clue how powerful these animals are – it was like being mobbed by 10 people. That night, I went into surgery for six-and-a-half hours. My trauma surgeon later said that my injuries were the worst he had ever seen. But I was lucky – out of the 20 deep puncture wounds I sustained, none hit my trachea, oesophagus, voice box or carotid artery. My doctors said it was a miracle. I got back on a bike only four months later. I got friends together and went to ride that same trail. Either I let the fear control me or I take control; I wanted to check it off the list and move on. I’ve had zero issues with nightmares or PTSD since the attack. I am just so thankful to be alive. I don’t let this attack define me. I now have a daughter, who is eight, and I try to be strong and set an example for her. ‘I grabbed the shark in a bear hug to stop it biting me’ – Rodney Fox, 81, Adelaide At 22, I was the winner of the South Australian spearfishing championships, holding your breath and spearing a variety of fish under a time limit. I was trying to regain my title in 1963, off Aldinga beach. After three or four hours, I needed to catch some special species, so I swam a long way offshore, where none of the other competitors had been, and dived to the bottom. I was just about to pull the trigger on a really prized fish when a huge crash hit me in the side. It knocked the gun out of my hands and the mask off my face and I was dragged through the water faster than I’d ever swam before. I initially thought I’d been hit by a submarine, but then I realised it had to be a giant shark – a great white. Fortunately, I had been talking to a guy who had been bitten on the leg a year earlier, and we had worked out that the most vulnerable spot on the shark was its eyes. So I gouged around its head trying to get the shark to let go of me. And it did. I fell out of its mouth and I instinctively thrusted away with my hand, but that went into its mouth and tore on its teeth. I then grabbed the shark in a bear hug around the belly because I knew it wouldn’t be able to bite me there. I was 30 or 40ft underwater and I realised I was going to drown if I didn’t move. So I let go and kicked up to the surface, then I looked down through the blood red water and saw this big set of white teeth coming back towards me. I kicked as hard as I could at the shark but I only just touched it. Instead, it turned and swallowed the float that I had tied my fish to. That float was connected to my lead belt by a rope and that caught on the shark’s teeth. It dragged me underwater again. I knew I had to find the quick release for the belt, but my hands were all cut up. I was within split seconds of drowning when the shark pulled, the line snapped and I managed to thrash to the surface. Miraculously, a boat was on its way over to have a look at all this red water and the people on board pulled me in. The fear of dying overrides pain. It was only when I was lying down on the boat that the waves of pain arrived. I knew I had done my best – now it was up to my rescuers to try to save me. In those days, there was no microsurgery, so they put 29 stitches in my lung to close up the pleural sac, and every rib on my left side was broken. I had 462 stitches in my chest in total, since all of my organs were exposed and my torso was ripped open. Doctors said it was the worst shark attack they had seen. Just seven months after the attack, I was at Adelaide zoo looking at a lion’s cage. I had this idea that I could build a cage underwater and reverse the roles. I would look at these sharks and try to understand them, and then see if I wanted to go back to diving. In 1964, I managed to organise an expedition with two other shark-attack survivors. The sharks were more interested in the bait than us, and I started to realise that maybe the sharks weren’t going to attack us every time we went in the water. A lot of people would say the best sharks are dead sharks, but I knew there was already lots of blood in the water from the speared fish, so I don’t blame the shark for coming and biting something. Over the years, it’s been a huge battle trying to get people to understand sharks better. We have to learn not to kill them from fear. A year and a half after the attack, I entered the Australian spearfishing championships and came first in several events. I’m 81 now and it hasn’t given me any real problems, except that I have a tight feeling in the left side of my chest to remind me how lucky I was. I’ve been running expeditions for people to watch sharks in their habitats ever since. ‘The otter kept torpedoing underwater to bite my legs ’ – Leah Hiller, 42, Minnesota My dad owns a cabin in a remote area on Island Lake, Minnesota, where we would often spend holidays. In July 2012, when I was 31, I was staying there while training for the USA Triathlon National Championships. My husband and two children, who were four and two at the time, were with me. One morning, I went for my usual mile-long swim. I’d done it 100 times before and my dad was going to take my kids out to follow me on his pontoon boat. Everything was going great until my kids said they wanted to be taken back to eat some snacks. I told my dad it was fine for him to go, since there was no boat traffic. In Island Lake, the water is the colour of dark rum, so when your hand passes into it, you can’t see past your elbow. You don’t know what is beneath. I circled the island in the lake and was on my way back to shore when I was bitten on the heel. It was a really sharp pain. At first, I thought it was a muskie, which are these huge fish that populate the lake, but they’re not known to be violent. Then I was attacked on the calf. Something grabbed my leg and just started biting. I was in real pain and my mind was in shock. About 20ft away, a head popped out to look at me and I realised it was an otter. I’m an animal lover and had never thought otters would attack anyone. Over the next 10 minutes, I was yelling and calling for help. The otter kept torpedoing underwater to bite my legs and then it would come up, track where I was, and attack again. I knew I couldn’t outswim it, so I just had to brace for the bites and try to protect my neck because, if it hit me there, I would have drowned. These sharp, searing bites were coming from every angle and it bit me 25 times. Some of them were two inches deep and one pierced my ankle bone, while another went through my calf muscle. But I am no stranger to adversity. When I was 18 I survived a car crash where I was sent flying through the windscreen. I spent six months in the hospital and had to have multiple surgeries. When I was 23, I was diagnosed with thyroid cancer and had to have my lymph nodes removed. I believe these experiences helped me – I knew I had to fight. I kept on screaming and eventually my dad heard me. He was so panicked he flooded the motor of the pontoon boat trying to start it. He had to get to his other boat, which luckily did start, and he made it to me and pulled me out of the water. He couldn’t leave my kids alone, so they were in the boat, too, and my daughter was bawling at seeing her mum covered in blood. Even though I was in pain, I switched into mum mode and was comforting her. I knew, now I was out of the water, I would be fine. It must have been 10 to 15 minutes before my dad got out to me, and without him it could have gone on for a lot longer because there were no other boats nearby. My wetsuit was a saviour – that quarter inch of neoprene took a lot of the scratches and it was shredded. The blood was streaming under it. We went straight to the hospital where the doctors were worried that the otter might have rabies. Since I had 25 open wounds, I had to get a rabies shot in each of them – it was so much medication that I threw up everywhere. The first thing I asked when I stopped vomiting was, “When can I get back in the lake?” The doctors thought it was crazy, but I knew that if I could not get back in the water and face my fear, I would never want to again. I was given a two-week course of antibiotics and after that I was told I would be good to go. There was a triathlon happening about two weeks later and I knew that would be my way to get back in. I did it in a wetsuit that said “otter girl” on the back. I still swim now. I’m proud of that otter attack story because it showed me how mentally strong I can be. That otter still lives, too. No one knows why it attacked me, but the doctors guessed that it must have been a mother otter protecting its babies. My dad would see it swimming around for years afterwards – I just don’t think anyone else swam in that spot again. ‘The grizzly bear carried me 30ft in its mouth’ – Colin Dowler, 47, Vancouver Island In summer 2019, I was exploring potential hiking routes to climb Mount Doogie Dowler in British Columbia. I was cycling down a narrow logging path when I came around a corner and spotted a grizzly bear. I had seen two or three black bears before and, usually, if you make some noise, they move away. But this was the first time I had seen a grizzly – and it was staring at me. I got off my bike, since it wasn’t moving. I was peering out of the corner of my eye and noticed it slinking towards me, until it was only a couple of feet away. It had almost cleared past my bike – until it made a 180-degree turn towards me. I spun around to put the bike between us and got my hiking pole out as it moved closer, placing it between its eyes. It pushed back a little and that seemed like a decent stalemate until it rolled its head, bit on to the pole and tossed it away. I took off my bag and threw it to the side – I thought it would go for the food in there instead of me. It took a sniff but then started prodding me with its paw. Each poke got a little more aggressive until it lifted its paw high. I thought it would inflict some serious damage so I threw my bike at it. It lunged forward and sank its teeth between my ribs and hips on my left side and soon I was in the bear’s mouth as it carried me 30 or 40ft towards a bush. I was in crushing pain. It put me down and I tried to gouge at its eyes but I couldn’t reach. I was thrashing while it pinned me and started biting and tearing at my thigh. It was so painful it felt like my hip was going to dislocate. It excavated into my thigh so far I could hear its teeth grinding against my femur like a dog chewing a bone. I started saying goodbye to my wife and kids in my head and felt guilty that I’d even taken this trip in the first place. Then I realised I had a pocket knife. I had to use both hands while I was still pinned down but I eventually managed to get it out. The blade was under three inches long but I gave the bear a stab in its neck with all the energy I had. When I pulled the knife out, it lifted its head up and a big gush of blood splashed on to my waist. It got off me and walked to my bike, sniffed at it for a while and then stood back at the bush where it had stepped out from. I knew I had to move fast otherwise I’d bleed to death. While the bear was still watching, I cut the sleeve off my shirt and made a tourniquet for my left leg. I looked over again and the bear had gone. It was 12.01pm and I knew there wouldn’t be any loggers here until later in the afternoon. So, I dragged myself to my bicycle, gathered my wits and started pedalling with one leg for about 45 minutes until I finally saw a loggers’ cabin. The door was open and I crashed into their stairwell, yelling for help. Thank God there were five guys there who seemed panicked but got their first aid kits out and called 911 while patching my 60 puncture wounds up. One wound was so big that my kidney was visible. An air ambulance came about an hour later; they gave me two pints of blood on the cabin floor and then flew me to hospital for six-and-a-half-hour surgery. The next day, I began 40 days of recovery at Vancouver general hospital. They had me back up and walking 24 days after the attack and, by January 2020, the specialists were seeing some nerve regeneration in my left leg. By February, I began jogging on a treadmill. In September, I ran a half marathon. Mentally, it was a lot harder than I thought it would be getting back into the woods. I made a conscious effort to walk in the bush behind my house as soon as I could so I wouldn’t be overwhelmed by fear. I used tactics to help me, like playing music in headphones to drown out the noise of critters moving around. I have since bumped into a few black bears on the trails, too, but I yell and they get out of the way. ‘The hippo was thrashing me around like a toy’ – Kristen Yaldor, 41, Odessa, Florida My husband, Ryan, and I decided to go to Victoria Falls for my 37th birthday in 2018, and take a canoe trip down the Zambezi River on the day itself. The weather was great and the temperature was perfect. As far as safety was concerned, the guides just said that if you fall out, swim to shore as fast as you can. We brushed it off – we’re from Florida and are used to being on the water, so we didn’t think we’d fall out. There were three canoes in total – the first one had a guide and another tourist, the second canoe was myself with Ryan in the back, and the third was another guide. We were only around the corner from where we had launched when a guide told us that he had seen a group of hippos ahead, so we should head to the bank. We were paddling left and I glanced over to look for them. I saw one submerged – and as we paddled a few more strokes, it came under our canoe. It leapt up and forced us out, bending the canoe with a big thud. I fell forward towards where the hippo was and Ryan fell backwards towards the bank. We had lifejackets on so I quickly popped back to the surface. I started swimming, but after a few strokes it grabbed my leg and pulled me straight down. I was only about six strokes from the shore. My first instinct was to reach for the sky to see if my hands would break the surface and when I just felt more water, that’s when I went into survival mode. Just before I went down I had instinctively taken a deep breath and I told myself to hold it and stay calm. As soon as the hippo dragged me to the bottom, it started thrashing me around like a toy. I bunched up around its snout and tried to pry its mouth open. I knew I wasn’t strong enough to, but it must have got freaked by me grabbing it, or my staying still made it think I was dead, since it then, surprisingly, let go. Because I was wearing a lifejacket, I popped back up to the surface, but I couldn’t swim. I couldn’t kick my leg and I thought I had broken my knee. I yelled to everyone on the shore and started back stroking with my arms before reaching for the guide’s paddle, and was pulled out. I think the whole episode only lasted about 45 seconds but, from Ryan’s account, when he came up to shore and looked back, he saw nothing. Even though I was being thrashed around underwater, there was no surface movement, I was just gone. My entire trouser leg and the skin on my thigh and knee were ripped apart. I could see my muscle, and a chunk of it was sitting on top of my leg. We waited 45 minutes for a helicopter to come and take us to the local hospital. They prepped me there and then we waited for an emergency flight to take us back to the trauma centre in Johannesburg. My femur was broken and I also needed a skin graft. I spent two weeks in the Johannesburg hospital before taking a medical flight home to finish the remaining procedures. I have had 21 surgeries to date and I don’t know if it’s because nerves were severed, but I have had hardly any pain throughout. I’m very determined. I didn’t ever think I wouldn’t be able to walk again. My husband signed me up for a charity 5k run when I wasn’t even able to walk, knowing that I’m goal-oriented. I told him that if I was able to achieve it, he would need to dress up as a hippo and come with me. Even though I couldn’t run, we took part in 2019. After that, we signed up for a 10k, which we completed in November, and in January we’re doing a half marathon. The attack was so instantaneous that I didn’t properly see the hippo. I haven’t been haunted by PTSD. My struggle has been to get over the muscle loss and to walk again. I’m almost there now, and I’ve just finished physical therapy. I know I’m going to be working on it for the rest of my life but that’s OK. At least I’m still here and doing the things that I want to do. I just won’t go back canoeing on the Zambezi again.Airbnb rental hosts in the state of Oregon will no longer be able to see guests’ names before approving their bookings, according to a new plan announced by the company. The policy update is specific to Oregon, for now, and was born out of a lawsuit in which three Black women from the Portland, Oregon, area alleged the rental site’s use of names and photographs allowed for racial discrimination, violating the state’s public accommodation laws. The suit was settled in 2019, and starting on 31 January, Airbnb announced this week, hosts in Oregon will only see a guest’s initials until their booking is confirmed, only after which their full name will be visible. The update will be in effect for at least two years, the company said. “As part of our ongoing work, we will take any learnings from this process and use them to inform future efforts to fight bias,” the company added. Complaints about discrimination on Airbnb aren’t new. In 2015 and 2016, the hashtag #AirbnbWhileBlack circulated, highlighting racism experienced by some of the platform’s users. Many Black users discussed being denied bookings until they changed their names online or used generic profile photos. Some even found that using photos of white individuals could game the system. A study conducted by Harvard Business School researchers in 2016 affirmed these stories through data. After studying 6,400 Airbnb listings in five American cities, the study concluded that “requests from guests with distinctively African American names are roughly 16% less likely to be accepted than identical guests with distinctively white names”. Advocates called the Oregon policy change a good start, but cautioned that the adjustment shouldn’t be heralded as the end of racism on Airbnb. “We believe that measuring discrimination is crucial to eliminating it, and we think all tech companies should take responsibility for that,” said Johnny Mathias, deputy senior campaign director at the racial justice organization Color of Change. In order to know if changes are meaningful, Mathias continued, companies should measure the outcomes and be transparent with their findings. In other words, making a gesture without numbers to back up its efficacy is not useful. “I’m glad that Oregon has specific public accommodation laws that provided for this suit,” he added. “But whether this specific change is the most important change to ensure [they’re] addressing discrimination on the Airbnb platform, we’ll only know if we see the research.” As with most emerging tech platforms, rules and regulations are often playing catch-up with the technologies they’re supposed to govern. In their study, the Harvard researchers noted that anti-discrimination housing laws that hold sway over traditional landlords – such as those renting large apartment buildings – are often lost on the smaller-scale landlords who use Airbnb. Airbnb has resisted doing away with names and photos altogether, arguing that they add to the sense of community on the site. But the company has taken some steps to fight the bias on its platform. In 2018, it announced that it would hide guests’ profile photos until after their booking was accepted. It also requires that all hosts and guests to agree to the Airbnb Community Commitment, “which requires everyone who uses Airbnb to treat others without discrimination and with respect”. And in 2020, Airbnb launched Project Lighthouse, an initiative created to measure bias on its own platform, with Color of Change and other civil rights organizations.The principality of Andorra is sandwiched between France and Spain in the eastern Pyrenees. The sixth-smallest country in Europe, with an area of 180 sq miles (468 sq km), it is smaller than every English county apart from Rutland. Landlocked, and lying entirely above 840 metres (2,750ft), the climate is, as you would expect, mostly continental and alpine. Because Andorra lies on the southern, Spanish side of the highest peaks, which run along its northern border, it is more sheltered and drier than locations on the French side. Winters are fairly cold, dry and sunny, with as much as five hours of daily sunshine in January and February. Winter temperatures in the capital, Andorra la Vella, are mostly a few degrees above freezing and precipitation is mostly low – just 160mm (6.3in) from December to February. However, heavy snowfalls can occur, especially when fronts sweep in from the Atlantic to the west. In Soldeu, at an altitude of 1,800 metres (5,900ft), temperatures are much colder throughout the year, staying below freezing from December to March. Temperatures rise rapidly from May onwards, with average daily maxima of the mid-20s Celsius (high 70s Fahrenheit) in the summer months; pleasantly warm but rarely very hot. The wettest months are usually May and June, when there are regular thunderstorms. Rainfall is low and fairly regular for the remainder of the year.Shortly after Margaret Thatcher became prime minister in May 1979, Eddie Chambers made an artwork called Destruction of the National Front. Then a 19-year-old student in Wolverhampton, Chambers reconfigured the union jack as a swastika, before tearing it into fragments across four panels. The image stands as a defiant rebuke to a resurgent far right, evoking the anger many Black Britons felt at the time. The work was emblematic of the Blk Art Group, a radical association of young Black artists founded by Chambers in 1979. The group, stylised as Blk and pronounced “Black”, aimed to combat racism with work that focused on the experience of being Black in Thatchers’ Britain, while promoting a distinctly Black British political identity. Although short-lived – it only lasted for five years – the group casts a long shadow over British art, through its influence on subsequent generations of Black artists and its impact on contemporaries such as Lubaina Himid and Sonia Boyce. More than 40 years on from the group’s foundation, Keith Piper, 60, still looks every inch the artist in his red flannel shirt and goatee. Malta-born and raised in Birmingham, he now lives in London, though his accent is still unmistakably Brummie. Piper met Chambers in 1979 while studying at Lanchester Polytechnic, Coventry, now known as Coventry University. “I overheard him talking about a show,” he says, referring to Black Art An’ Done, held at Wolverhampton Art Gallery. “I thought, ‘He’s very serious.’ But we had a lot in common because we were the only two Black students on the course.” Chambers quickly set about recruiting Black students from West Midlands’ art schools and soon their ranks grew. By 1982, Dominic Dawes, Claudette Johnson, Wenda Leslie, Ian Palmer, Donald Rodney and Marlene Smith had joined. “Eddie was a great organiser,” says Piper, “but we all had our own specific creative concerns.” The group’s work features prominently in a new exhibition at Tate Britain, Life Between Islands, which focuses on the work of British artists of Caribbean heritage. Life Between Islands was co-curated by the director of Tate Britain, Alex Farquharson, and David A Bailey, an artist and contemporary of the Blk group. You can see how their work influenced subsequent generations, not least the Black YBAs Chris Ofili, Yinka Shonibare and Steve McQueen. Chambers, now professor of art history and African diaspora art at the University of Texas at Austin, epitomised Blk’s political approach. How Much Longer You Bastards, from 1983, directly challenged the activities of Barclay’s bank in South Africa at a time when Margaret Thatcher was refusing to impose sanctions on the apartheid regime. The collage features the bank’s logo alongside pages from the Financial Times and a widely publicised image of parents carrying their dead child after the 1976 Soweto uprising, to illustrate British complicity in the inhumanity of apartheid. Piper, in turn, incorporated text into pieces such as 1983’s The Body Politic in order to articulate complex narratives of dehumanisation and torture, for which he took inspiration from the work of Gavin Jantjes and Rasheed Areen. The work features two naked and headless bodies – a white woman, a black man – with identical text alongside each figure: “To you I was always (just) a body.” Piper says: “I needed the audience to understand the hostile scrutiny Black bodies came under from the white majority.” The group’s work was always rooted in the politics of the era. “Wolverhampton was one of a number of places to be decimated by the experiment Thatcher was undertaking,” says Piper. “It was the usual tensions of the 1980s – the far right on the rise, anti-apartheid, Greenham Common, policing, the New Cross Fire. It was a very politicised time – and that was core to my perspective as a young Black man.” This febrile atmosphere was evident in the reception the group received. They were immediately polarising: a breath of fresh air in some quarters, an unwelcome source of aggravation in others. “We were surrounded by a lot of reactionary forces, people who were openly hostile,” says Piper. At a 1983 showing of The Pan-Afrikan Connection at the Herbert in Coventry, complaints from a security guard about the exhibition’s subject matter forced the gallery to erect a warning notice outside the entrance: “Not suitable for people under 18.” Even on the left, the group’s work was largely dismissed. A note left in the visitors’ book read: “Angry. Too angry … more Marxist approach needed.” In the Guardian, Irene McManus wrote: “Their work is really just a collection of political posters.” But some Blk members are now considered innovative. Donald Rodney was a leading figure, who died in 1998 at just 36. “Donald was a very active and energetic person,” says Piper, who shared a Nottingham flat with the artist in the early 1980s and is now a trustee of his estate. Completed shortly before his death, In the House of My Father is a closeup photograph of Rodney’s hand. In his palm is a tiny sculpture of a house made of pieces of his own skin. Rodney suffered from sickle cell anaemia, an extremely painful blood condition that is particularly common in people of African or Caribbean heritage. The artist and curator Marlene Smith was 18 when she joined the group and believes they shared a vision. “We were very coherent, both in terms of our pan-Africanism but also in wanting to make Black lives visible. There was a lot of protest in the work but what’s overlooked sometimes is the humanity.” Pan-Africanism – the idea that African peoples and diaspora share a common history and identity, often symbolised through the colours red, gold and green – was a guiding principle for the group. “We wanted to illustrate the connection between Victorian colonialism and the struggle that we had as teenagers to find our place,” says Smith. “We were all children of Windrush but, for me, pan-Africanism wasn’t just about making sense of the world but also about making sense of me.” The movement could only provide limited answers, however. “Pan-Africanism really fed me but it couldn’t help me understand the role gender played in my identity. We were devouring books in an attempt to make sense of that time.” She mentions Ain’t I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism, by bell hooks, who died last month, as well as the work of Toni Morrison and Alice Walker. Smith’s 1985 sculptural installation Good Housekeeping depicts a Black woman beneath the words: “My mother opens the door at 7am she is not bulletproof.” The work was a direct response to the police shooting of Cherry Groce, who was left permanently paralysed by the incident that incited the 1985 Brixton Uprising. Smith remembers the first meeting of Blk at Chambers’ parents house: “Claudette Johnson did an absolutely jaw-dropping job of showing her work in relation to the canon – Picasso, Rubens, Manet’s Olympia. She showed us how Black women were seen as decorative in art history, either as exotica, or evidence of how wealthy someone was.” In a statement for The Pan-Afrikan Connection, Johnson wrote: “While the black woman experiences oppression on the grounds of her sex, sexuality and race, there is not yet a word that describes the specific and deliberate nature of this oppression.” As she says now: “The word ‘intersectionality’ didn’t exist at the time.” Johnson’s career stalled in the 1990s but has restarted in earnest. Last month she presented a solo exhibition, Still Here, at Hollybush Gardens in London. “The oppression of black women was a hot potato. It could be seen as divisive. People would ask me where I was putting my energy in terms of fighting for change: are you black, or are you a woman?” Johnson’s 2017 work Reclining Figure was emblematic, she says, of “the subtle and dramatic difference that occurs when the person doing the gazing was a black female herself.” This almost lifesize image depicts an exhausted Black woman lying horizontal. “My mum used to adopt a similar position on the sofa after she’d been on her feet all day. I had in mind that poignant moment when she finally wasn’t doing something for someone else.” Of Blk, she says: “In the 1980s, we were seen as people passing through – so much of our work was about making the point that we were here to stay.” Sonia Boyce was a contemporary, as was the future Turner-prize winner Lubaina Himid. Smith and Johnson both mention The Thin Black Line, a show curated by Himid at the Institute for Contemporary Arts in 1985, as the high-water mark of Black British art in the period. The show featured key works from 11 Black female artists, including Johnson, Smith and Boyce, along with Himid herself. “That show was like storming the citadel,” says Johnson. “Lubaina had gone to the Royal College and was trying to find black artists – she curated, she wrote, she was like a magnet gathering different artists together. In terms of persuasive power, she was very similar to Eddie Chambers.” Blk’s members were not only defined by their youth (at 25, Johnson was the oldest when the group disbanded) but also by their art school education. “Blk wasn’t outsider art,” says Johnson. “We were full of hope that we could change things – that our art could mobilise black people and inspire white people to see us differently. We were trying to bring in a new audience that hadn’t been served by those galleries before.” Beyond Blk, 1980s Britain was fertile ground for a thriving ecosystem of Black artists. Now 74, Tam Joseph was both a forerunner and a contemporary of Blk. Sitting in his paint and dust strewn studio, he explains how his childhood in Dominica lends his work a different emphasis. “I am Windrush,” he says. “I didn’t experience growing up as a Black child in England.” By way of explaining his approach, he says: “I love taking the mickey.” And he points to a bubble-wrapped painting of Jimi Hendrix as Frans Hals’s Laughing Cavalier. “Hendrix looks more like a cavalier than a fat white man,” he says. Another painting, 1982’s The Spirit of Carnival, encapsulates the legacy of police aggression towards British Caribbean communities. The image features a carnival masquerader, alone in a sea of British police; Joseph was inspired by his experience at the 1976 Notting Hill carnival, where a riot broke out after police clashed with revellers. Debates around education, housing and the police were central to the work of many Black artists in the 1980s. Joseph’s 1983 work UK School Report depicts the passage of a Black child through the British education system in three portraits captioned: “Good at sports”, “Likes music” and “Needs surveillance”. The director and artist Steve McQueen has mentioned the work in reference to his Year 3 photo series. While at art school, Denzil Forrester was charged with using insulting language after he was apprehended outside a jewellery shop in London. “They thought I was casing the joint but I was just drawing it. They came over to see what I was doing and my expensive college camera attracted their attention!” Forrester frequently painted nightclubs in his early career and says he “only started painting about the police after my friend Winston Rose was killed in 1981. I could never have done Three Wicked Men without my knowledge of what happened to Winston. I really had to work hard to capture the darkness of that London street.” Born in Grenada, Forrester moved to Britain aged 11. “Everywhere was dark and grey,” he says. “I never painted in the West Indies but I studied painting because my school in Stoke Newington had an art room. It was the only time you were allowed to do what you want. Once I got into art school, I knew there was no stopping me.” The Blk Art Group disbanded shortly after the second National Black Art Convention in 1984. Most left the West Midlands after their art degrees concluded, primarily heading to London for gallery work or postgraduate study. “It was Eddie’s founding impulse that brought us all together,” says Piper. “When he lost that impulse, we went our separate ways.” “The YBAs took the DIY strategies we used in alternative spaces and applied them in some of the biggest institutions,” says Marlene Smith. “We were the AYBs – angry young Blacks,” she jokes. Picking up on this theme, Johnson says: “We wanted to be more political than previous generations of Black artists. We used the N-word and were unafraid to reference violence, lynchings and slavery in our collective resistance to the Thatcher government. Sometimes I’m surprised the work still seems to speak to people more than 30 years later, but then the struggles we were articulating are the struggles of many still.” Says Piper: “We were serious about seizing space and time in the venues that had previously only been open to white artists. But we were also just young kids, egging each other on and having a good time. We were supposed to be talking about the logistics of shows but we’d mostly fight about politics and music – mainly Reggae, Mod, Ska-revival and 2-Tone in those days … It was a bizarre and multilayered era but a very important one in terms of the consolidation of Black communities in this country.” Looking back, Piper thinks it was remarkable how fully formed the group’s vision was at the outset: by the time Chambers applied for degree courses, Destruction of the National Front was already under his belt: “I remember him working away in his room, marking up these flags and tearing them to pieces. It’s mad to think he was turned down with that in his portfolio. Now it’s part of the national collection at the Tate.” • This article was amended on 4 January 2022. Piper met Chambers in 1979 while studying at Lanchester Polytechnic, Coventry, which is now Coventry University. An earlier version said the institution was “now Wolverhampton School of Art”. Keith Piper’s major solo show is at the New Art Gallery Walsall, West Midlands, from 14 January. Marlene Smith features in Cut &amp; Mix at New Art Exchange, Nottingham, until 8 January. Tam Joseph’s new exhibition, The Face: Portraits, is at Felix &amp; Spear, London until 9 January. Life Between Islands is at Tate Britain, London, until 3 April.“I fucking hate the Labour party, they’re a fucking disgrace … They’ve betrayed the working classes, they’ve betrayed ordinary people.” Thus spake Noel Gallagher, the former Oasis guitarist, and out it poured on to Twitter. Well, he would, wouldn’t he? He long ago regretted that embarrassing Cool Britannia moment of euphoria when Tony Blair summoned stars to a 1997 Downing Street party. Gallagher’s purist state of mind is shared by a rump of the left, who feel forever betrayed. In my last column I looked ahead with a glimmer of optimism that, after 12 wilderness years, Labour might be on the road back to power. The usual below-the-line warfare had broken out, with responses such as: “I left the Labour party. I will not vote for Starmer, his policies or anyone who supports him.” “He has introduced a Stalin-like purge of the membership, the grassroots, the activists.” “They are worse than the Conservatives.” “A clone of the Tory party.” “Tory-lite.” “Cancelled my membership.” Here’s a Twitter trope I get all the time: Polly Toynbee and the Guardian helped put the Tories in power (often accompanied by the hashtag #rightwingmedia). Odd this, as the Guardian (and I) backed Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour against the Tories in 2017 and 2019. If only we had such influence, the Tories wouldn’t have governed twice as long as Labour all my life. Sometimes I answer back, other times I retell what Labour achieved when last in power: SureStart, tax credits, civil partnerships, more doctors, nurses and beds that helped reduce long hospital waits, increased school and further education funds, an Equality and Human Rights Commission, free entry to museums, a doubling of foreign aid, free nurseries, lifting more than a million pensioners and more than a million children out of absolute poverty – despite the tragedy of Iraq. But of course this legacy wasn’t enough. It was too easily uprooted, never satisfying the limitless hopes of those of us on the left. Maybe it’s admirable to hold out for better, but I will always back whoever I think can best deny the Conservatives power. Yes, sometimes, that means compromising to win votes. As our archaic electoral system kills new parties, capturing an existing one is the only viable route for a political cause. Labour has had periods of leftist entryism after losing elections. But suddenly that online raucousness sounds like voices from the past, fringe noises coming from outside a party that has since transformed itself. Labour MPs now find local parties no longer locked in warfare. Over the next weeks they are all up for reselection: expect no upsets. The tail end of the antisemitism trauma is dragging on with expensive court cases: Corbyn stays out while he rejects the Equality and Human Rights Commission’s overall findings on antisemitism. Meanwhile the shadow cabinet is proposing policies such as wealth taxes, a £28bn green new deal and fair pay deals, all of which refutes the “Tory clone” jibe. The party is inching towards electability. But look on the other side, where the Tory party is devouring itself, eaten up by the Ukip-inflected extremists who have been selecting its MPs for years. Brexit was their opening salvo but this breed of libertarians are now pushing other policies – spending cuts and deregulation – that are unsellable. A recent poll of 57 red wall seats in the Mail on Sunday put Labour 16 points ahead of the Conservatives and up five points nationally, with Keir Starmer outscoring Boris Johnson. The paper revealed a litany of lost voter trust, reporting “panic among MPs who fear they are doomed” and a “frenzy of bitching”. The chancellor’s rift with the prime minister runs through the party, which summoned a Pied Piper populist to bribe voters but balks at paying for his tune. With Rishi Sunak’s wallet shut, the only thing Michael Gove can magic up for his delayed “levelling up” policy is ectoplasm. With no shine left on Brexit or Johnson, there’s no glue holding that strange north-south voter coalition together. The months ahead will bring even more problems. April’s cost-of-living collision of rising inflation, energy bills, national insurance and council taxes will punish the government in May’s local elections. Rarely has Labour ever been quite as out of touch with voters as the brand of libertarianism that is consuming the Tory party. Nearly 100 Conservative MPs voted against Covid precautions despite public backing for compulsory passports. The cabinet took a reckless position on new year clubbing, yet the Sunday Telegraph still complained that “Nannyism has won”. Its recent editorial commanded the Tories to “fulfil Brexit, deregulate, lower taxes” in a country “swollen by regulations and spending”. This crescendo of libertarian demands is the only tune you now hear from the Tories and their press as the party vacates the playing field, just as Labour steps up to re-engage voters. The right’s “freedoms” of post-Brexit deregulation would have publicly unacceptable consequences. Do they mean dirty food, Dickensian labour and unsafe buildings, unchecked by ridiculed environmental health officers? They never say. Abandoning their tax rise would lead to the NHS and social care collapsing. This new strain of rightwing anarchy is no longer anchored to old conservative interests in business, agriculture or even the City. It’s new to hear industrialists, farmers and financiers angry at damage done by their erstwhile party. The Tories seem unhinged by Brexit’s balloon bursting, with the UK losing £12bn of trade in October alone and the Office for Budget Responsibility estimating Brexit will cause a 4% drop in GDP. It seems unlikely that this out-of-control party will choose anyone who can bring them back to earth before an election. If not, impulsive spending cuts and deregulations will lose them votes, and Labour will be right there, feet firmly planted on the ground. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistThe NHS can no longer treat every child with an eating disorder, a leading psychiatrist has warned, as “worrying” figures reveal hospital admissions have risen 41% in a year. A dramatic surge in cases during the pandemic has left already struggling community services overstretched with many unable to care for everyone who requires help, experts said. NHS Digital data for England shows a sharp rise in admissions in every area of the country. The provisional data for April to October 2021 – the most recent available – shows there were 4,238 hospital admissions for children aged 17 and under, up 41% from 3,005 in the same period the year before. The 2021 figure is also a 69% rise on the pre-pandemic year of 2019. From April to October 2019, there were 2,508 admissions for those aged 17 and under. Charities said the fast rising number of hospital admissions was “only the tip of the iceberg”, with thousands more children needing support for eating disorders. Dr Agnes Ayton, the chair of the eating disorders faculty at the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said: “The hidden epidemic of eating disorders has surged during the pandemic, with many community services now overstretched and unable to treat the sheer number of people needing help. We are at the point where we cannot afford to let this go on any longer. “Early intervention is key to recovery and to preventing serious illness, which is why it’s crucial that the money announced by government urgently reaches the frontline. The government must also deliver a workforce plan to tackle the shortages in eating disorder services so that they have enough staff to treat everyone who needs help.” Tom Madders, the director of campaigns at YoungMinds, said the figures were “worrying” and said the impact of the last two years had “left many young people isolated, uncertain about the future and with less control over their lives”. The Guardian reported last September how record numbers of children and young people were seeking access to NHS mental health services, as the devastating toll of the pandemic was revealed in a new analysis. In just three months, nearly 200,000 young people were referred to mental health services – almost double pre-pandemic levels, according to the Royal College of Psychiatrists. Madders said many young people had struggled to get “timely support” for their mental health before the pandemic and the last two years had deepened the crisis. “We know the NHS is under increasing pressure and staff are working extremely hard to support those that need it, but it’s clear the government must redouble its efforts and ensure that it improves access to NHS services,” he added. “It’s also crucial that early support is available for young people in their local communities, which is why we want to see the government invest in a network of early support hubs.” Overall, the data shows there were 23,302 admissions for eating disorders among all age groups in the financial year 2020-21, up 13% from 20,647 admissions in 2019-20. The 2020-21 figure is also up 21% on the 19,244 admissions among all age groups recorded in 2018-19. Provisional data for April to October 2021 shows there were 15,941 admissions so far among all age groups, suggesting 2021-22 will be the highest year yet for people needing inpatient treatment, whatever their age. The new NHS data shows that 5,941 admissions among all ages from April to October 2021 were for anorexia. The next biggest set of admissions, at 3,263, were for bulimia. Hospital admissions are most common in adults aged 18 to 39, the figures show, with 8,298 in this age group from April to October 2021. There are also regional differences, with a higher number of hospital admissions in the south-east and south-west than in many other regions. Tom Quinn, the director of external affairs at the eating disorders charity Beat, said: “It is concerning that the number of hospital admissions for people with eating disorders is continuing to increase. “We know that accessing quality community treatment reduces the chances of somebody needing hospital care, and so the rise in admissions suggests that people are not getting the support that they need quickly enough.” Quinn said the pandemic had had a “devastating impact” on people with eating disorders, which had contributed to the rise in the number of people needing support. He added: “The number of hospital admissions is only the tip of the iceberg, and there are many other people needing support for an eating disorder.” He urged ministers to publish data about the number of people waiting for eating disorder treatment, in order to “better understand” the scale of demand.The government’s politically motivated attacks on the BBC are part of a general abasement of British institutions in recent years, the broadcaster Melvyn Bragg has warned, as he called for the corporation to be protected. Bragg accused ministers of failing to recognise the value of the institution, which he said has earned the country’s support. His comments follow what some see as a sustained campaign by government ministers intent on waging a culture war, with the BBC as a key front. “Recently, it has sometimes seemed that, sadly, we are becoming a lesser country by the year,” he told the Radio Times. “I hope the BBC is not allowed to become part of this surrender to a creeping deterioration. Indeed, I believe it could lead by example if we want to escape a situation where our great institutions are increasingly damaged for political purposes. “It comes down to what sort of country we want this to be. The BBC has earned our respect and repaid our support, in war and peace, over many years. It has built itself in our image. Surely, now that it is so clearly up against it, we cannot let it down.” Bragg, who has spent most of his television career at ITV, has previously spoken out in defence of the BBC, declaring himself “foursquare” behind it. In an interview with the same magazine last summer, he said the BBC was worth “storming the Bastille” to save and would never be reinvented if it was destroyed. “Have a go at it, fine. But to try to damage it, as some people are doing, try to pull it down? The BBC is worth fighting hard for, worth storming the Bastille for, and saying: ‘No, you can’t do that’.” In recent years, government ministers have sought to influence the BBC’s news coverage by painting criticism of them as political bias. They threatened to decriminalise non-payment of the licence fee – a move that would probably hit the BBC’s finances hard – and they tried to pave the way for a longstanding and staunch opponent of the BBC to be installed as the head of the broadcasting regulator Ofcom. Ministers also tried to block the appointment of a respected journalist who had previously stood up for a colleague who was being publicly attacked by a member of the government. A former adviser to Theresa May reportedly warned of negative political consequences for the BBC should the appointment go ahead. And the prime minister used a minor row over whether Rule, Britannia! and Land of Hope and Glory should be played as instrumental pieces only at the annual Proms to portray the BBC as unpatriotic.Over the past two years I’ve spent much of my time as a GP assessing and managing the fear, fever and breathlessness caused by coronavirus, but I’ve also spent more of my time than ever before talking to people about recovery and convalescence – not only from the virus, but from the damaging effects of repeated lockdowns. I’m a GP in central Edinburgh and, with three other doctors and two nurses, provide medical care to about 4,000 patients. The words “recovery” and “convalescence” were rarely mentioned during my six years of medical school and seven years of specialty training. Many of my tutors seemed to assume that once a crisis of illness has passed, the body and mind find ways to heal themselves. But nearly 20 years as a GP has shown me time and again that the reverse is true: guidance and encouragement through the process of recovery can be indispensable. My medical training took for granted a western medical approach to the body. But illness is not simply a matter of biology, but also one of belief, psychology and sociology. The ways we get ill are as much about culture as they are about disease, and our ideas and expectations of the body profoundly influence the ways in which we fall ill, and the ways we recover. I have learned much from those other clinicians – the nurses, physiotherapists and occupational therapists – who have most helped my patients, and I am constantly being reminded of how much more there is still to learn. What follows, then, is a discussion of recovery and convalescence as seen from within a particular medical tradition – my own as a 21st-century European general practitioner. While I acknowledge the value and the virtues of alternative approaches to the body and to illness, I will leave discussion of them to others trained in their use. It was on 31 December 2019 that the Chinese government alerted the World Health Organization to a new and dangerous strain of coronavirus that was infecting people in and around Wuhan. Humanity has learned an enormous amount over the subsequent two years – new ways of managing the pneumonia caused by the virus, as well as how to build a suite of vaccines proven to be effective against it. We move into this new year still struggling to contain a pandemic many thought would be over by now. New, more transmissible and more dangerous strains of coronavirus are still emerging. As they put our powers of recovery to the test, it’s worth thinking more deeply about what convalescence really means. * * * When I was eight years old, I woke one autumn morning with a hammer-blow headache and a churning in my stomach. My GP was called for – a kindly man of the old school who took one look and, suspecting meningitis, sent me urgently to an infectious diseases hospital an hour’s drive away where the diagnosis was confirmed. I spent eight days and nights in that hospital, in a room with large windows that gave on to trees and bright afternoon sunshine. In the niches of my memory I carry no images of the doctors, only one of a nurse in a sky-blue tunic, her black hair in a bun, her kind face lined with smiles. I remember an iron-framed bedstead, glaring white sheets and the smell of floor disinfectant. A window in an internal wall of the sickroom looked on to a nurses’ station – I was kept under continual surveillance. Though my mum and dad took shifts to be with me for most of the day, they also had my brother to attend to, and I spent many hours alone in silence waiting for them to come; waiting for home. A couple of years later, I broke my leg and was obliged to pass the whole of the summer holidays and part of the autumn school term in plaster. Beneath that plaster my leg withered and, when the plaster came off, I remember being shocked by how pallid, stunted and weakened it had become. Again, I don’t remember any of the doctors involved in my treatment. My recovery was led by a pair of brisk and cheerful physiotherapists. With a limb, it seemed possible to objectify the part that needed recovery, to look down on the leg and say “that’s the problem, right there”. My progress was effortful, but at least I could see it, inscribed in the bulk of my thigh and the colour of my skin. My recovery from meningitis was far more difficult to grasp – the edges of what recovery meant were far less clear. A languorous, fuzzy-headed exhaustion dominated my days, burnishing the world with the bright haze of a dream or hallucination. My body was in convalescence, but the process itself felt disembodied, ethereal, as much mental as physical. As I look back on it now, it’s clear that it was my first experience of the complexities of convalescence, and how it can and must take very different forms with different illnesses and between different people. The word “rehabilitation” comes from the Latin habilis, meaning, among other things, “apt” or “fit”, and carries the sense of restoration: “To stand, make or be firm again.” The aim of rehabilitation, then, should be to make someone as fit as they can be – to stand on their own feet if they’re able, and to recover as much mobility and independence as possible if they are not. I worked once as a junior doctor in a unit dedicated to rehabilitation from brain injury, and learned there that convalescence is anything but a passive process. Though its rhythms and its tempo are often slow and gentle, it’s an act, and actions need us to be present, to engage, to give of ourselves. Whether it’s our knees or skulls that need to heal from an injury, or lungs from a viral infection such as Covid-19, or brains from a concussion, or minds from a crisis of depression or anxiety, I often have to remind my patients that it’s worth giving adequate time, energy and respect to the process of healing. There is no hierarchy to suffering, and it’s not possible to say of one group of conditions that they deserve sympathy while another group deserves to be dismissed. I’ve known patients whose lives have been dominated for years by the grief of a failed love affair, and others who have taken the most disabling injuries, pain, indignity and loss of independence in their stride. Though it can be tempting to resent someone whose illness appears to be less serious than our own, or to judge ourselves harshly when others seem to be coping with more challenging circumstances than we are, comparisons are rarely helpful. Neither is it advisable to set out a strict timetable of recovery: it’s more important to set achievable goals. Sometimes, all I can do is reassure my patients that I believe improvement of some kind is possible. The recovery I’m reassuring them of might not be biological in nature – in terms of a resolution of their condition – but rather an improvement in their circumstances. * * * In the course of my medical work I sometimes see viral infections sending their sufferers to bed for weeks or months, and, in a few cases, for years. Why this happens is poorly understood. It’s as if the struggle with illness draws so deeply on one’s inner reserves of strength that the body does all it can to retain its energies, even going so far as to manipulate our sense of effort so that to take a short walk, or to climb a flight of stairs, is to risk exhaustion. Through the successive waves of Covid-19 during 2020 and 2021, I spoke to many patients in whom coronavirus has triggered this kind of enduring fatigue. A letter in the journal Nature Medicine published last March reported that, for their sample group, one in eight victims of Covid-19 suffered symptoms lasting longer than four weeks, one in every 22 had symptoms lasting longer than eight weeks, and one in 44 patients had symptoms lasting longer than 12 weeks. The most persistent symptoms were breathlessness, loss of smell, headache and fatigue. Physiotherapists encourage people experiencing relentless post-viral fatigue to gently push at the limits of what they can do in terms of physical effort. They’ve found that if those limits are not tested, then the realm of the possible begins to shrink – horizons contract, muscles weaken and sufferers can become trapped in a cycle of effort followed by collapse. The effort required to provoke each collapse begins to dwindle. Everyone has a different tempo of convalescence, and will require different strategies. It’s normal that the process can be slow, and normal, too, for long-term illness to vary in its manifestations from person to person. Protracted symptoms from viral infections may differ enormously between different individuals, but can include varying amounts of breathlessness, difficulty concentrating, forgetfulness, mood changes, insomnia, weight loss, weight gain, exhaustion, muscle weakness, joint stiffness and flashbacks. When I see patients troubled by these kinds of problems, I try to emphasise that to experience them isn’t evidence that recovery has stalled, or is going into reverse. On the contrary, those symptoms are evidence that the body and mind are reacting and changing in response to the illness – and where there’s change, there’s hope. There is a booklet I hand out to people with ongoing symptoms of Covid-19, written by local physiotherapists, that emphasises the importance of this “pacing” approach to recovery. It’s an attitude I’ve benefited from myself. During my first year in training as a GP, I got sick. I’d worked for many years in hospitals, had already qualified as a trainee in emergency medicine, but the intensity and breadth of problems I was learning to face in my new role as a doctor in the community felt to me almost overwhelming. An old problem with my sinuses flared up, leaving me with a ceaseless, drilling headache above the eyes that sapped all of my energy. I was exhausted, couldn’t concentrate and was in chronic pain. An MRI scan showed that I needed surgery, which might take months to arrange. In the meantime, I had my GP training to complete. I couldn’t do anything to speed the arrival of my operation date, but I could do something about my exhaustion and my levels of stress. Rather than stop work altogether, I reduced my hours to a three-day week – each day in clinic would be followed by a day off to recover. The headache was as bad as ever, but with more time to rest and recuperate between clinic days, the pain bothered me less. Knowing I’d have the breathing space of a day at home meant that I was able to give my best to my patients on those days I was in the clinic. My training would be delayed – it would now take longer than a year for me to be signed off as a competent GP – but I persuaded myself that there was no point risking burnout for the sake of a schedule of someone else’s making. And I qualified all the same, albeit a couple of months late. The operation, when it came, was successful, my headaches were cured, and I had learned a valuable lesson. We need strength and energy to live with illness. Cutting my workload gave me the reserves I needed not just to live with chronic pain until the operation, but to begin slowly on the path towards recovery from it. * * * All worthwhile acts of recovery have to work in concert with natural processes, not against them. Many antibiotics don’t “kill” bacteria as such, but merely inhibit the growth of bacterial colonies and leave the body to do the rest. A doctor who sets out to “heal” is in truth more like a gardener who sets out to “grow” – actually, nature does almost all the work. Even when I stitch a patient’s wound, the suture material itself does not knit the tissues – that thread is simply a trellis to guide the body in its own work of healing. This idea of the body as belonging to the green, organic world is something often forgotten in the clinics and hospital wards where I’ve trained and worked – so much so that it came as a surprise to read of a physician who has taken it to the heart of her clinical management. Victoria Sweet is an associate professor of medicine at the University of California in San Francisco. For many years she worked in one of the last almshouses in the United States – a hospital for the poor who have nowhere else to go. Sweet’s book God’s Hotel: A Doctor, a Hospital and a Pilgrimage to the Heart of Medicine explains how, after reading about the medieval healer Hildegard of Bingen, she came to the conclusion that, to better describe the aims of recovery, we should resurrect Hildegard’s medieval concept of viriditas, or “greening” – to be healed is to be reinvigorated by the same force that gives life to trees as much as it does human beings. She, too, observed that the work of the physician is much more like that of a gardener than it is like a mechanic. This makes intuitive sense: until very recently, physicians had to study botany, not only because so many medicines are derived from plants, but because the study of plants is a way to understand life itself. The GP I had as a child – the one who sent me urgently to hospital with meningitis – told me later that he had to take botany classes as part of his medical school curriculum in the 1950s. It is as if, with the pharmaceutical revolutions of the later 20th century, we have forgotten something of the importance of a broader approach to recovery. It has been shown that patients recovering in a hospital bed need less pain-relieving medication if they have a view out over something green, growing and alive. This was recognised long ago by Florence Nightingale, but seemingly forgotten by the modern architects of our hospitals. The word “physician” can be rooted back to the Greek physis, meaning “nature”, and phuo, which means “to grow”. Just like a plant, what we need in order to grow back into wholeness is a “regime” of the right nutrients, the right environment and the right attitude – and to be left in peace. This attitude to recovery has been crowded out in modern medicine because it takes time. Sweet wouldn’t want to return to medieval medicine, and wouldn’t give up our blood tests and scans, our robotic surgery or antibiotics. But she would like to see the value of time restored to the practice of medicine – and so would I. * * * Doctors and nurses bring their own personalities and experience to every medical encounter, and we know that people recover more quickly from physical conditions if they perceive their clinician to be sympathetic to their concerns. Psychological research into “compassion fatigue” has shown that most students begin clinical studies with a great deal of compassion, but the longer they work in caring professions, the more they seem to lose it. The word “doctor” comes from docere, meaning “to teach” or “to guide”, and just as every teacher you’ve ever had works with a different style, so does every doctor. The idea that there’s a universal approach every practitioner should adopt is false, and would be a terrible way to offer medical care. In the 30 or 40 medical encounters I have in the course of a normal working day, there must be several that I misjudge, guessing wrongly which kind of doctor that particular patient needs me to be. I’m not sure this kind of intuition is something that can necessarily be taught. But what can be taught is the confidence to act on the small voices of conscience and experience that suggest when a therapeutic relationship will benefit from going off-piste – away from the well-trimmed paths of textbook solutions into something wilder, more unscripted and perhaps more effective. Within modern medicine, this creates a conflict, between an idea of a clinical encounter that should be measurable, reproducible and thus open to professional regulation of standards, and the idea of the clinical encounter as an alchemy that combines the experience of two human beings in an unrepeatable moment that changes both of them. Doctors have to be well grounded in the science of medicine – that isn’t up for debate. But what is open to question is whether scientific knowledge is where medical practice ends, or where it begins. The answer might of course be different in different situations. I have some patients who see me solely as the conduit through which to gain access to specialists, and others who want from me, as a representative of the medical establishment, the scientific facts of their particular condition. And at the other end of the spectrum I’ve known patients for whom the aim of our consultations is to feel cared for, and to be given a sense of confidence in their recovery even when their condition is one that can’t be cured. Just as some people need to understand the science of their disease in order to better appreciate how to defeat it, others need to understand illness as a story that is tending towards a happy ending. I’m happy to take whichever approach the patient prefers: the biology of an illness, or its biography. Both are equally valid ways of approaching medical encounters. Similarly we would do well, as a profession, to expand the notion of what counts as a therapy. Drugs can be the least of healing, and the idea that therapies must be something that you swallow or inject – that they should be pills or syrups or infusions – is manifestly untrue. I’ve seen choirs, walking groups, gardening clubs and voluntary work revolutionise the health of patients of mine, and there are many opportunities, frequently unexploited, for patients to become their own best physicians, often with the help of non-medical agencies. Similarly, there can be non-medical solutions that help greatly with medical problems. For a gambling addict I knew, the most effective therapy was referral to a debt counsellor. For a woman struggling against drug dependency, starving herself to feed her habit, it was referral to a food bank. Having enough food in the cupboard gave her the peace of mind to be able to address her addiction. For a fit, newly retired and newly widowed man I knew, it was volunteering in a charity shop that helped him the most. For someone escaping the stress of an abusive marriage with her three children, it was a phone call to the local branch of Women’s Aid. For an immigrant family living in a damp, cramped slum that was worsening one child’s asthma, it was a letter to the housing department. Clinicians such as doctors, nurses and physiotherapists drop in and out of patients’ lives so fleetingly that for most people in recovery, the majority of caring work is done by family and friends. Some of my patients over the years have found it difficult to remember the needs and the frustrations of loved ones who are doing the bulk of that work. But the contributions of those around us to healing are irreplaceable, and their resilience is something to be cherished and protected. It, too, may hold the key to recovery. * * * It is a tyranny to assume that positivity can overcome all obstacles. Much of what constitutes illness consists of things we cannot change. In his book Between Sickness and Health: The Landscape of Illness and Wellness, the rehabilitation specialist Christopher Ward has written of how his first step with a new patient is always to acknowledge their suffering, and to then redefine the goals of treatment not necessarily as “rehabilitation”, but as “possibilitation”: the opportunity of each person to work towards the best possible version of their life. Even with the advances of 21st-century medical technology, surgery, DNA profiling and gene therapy, the list of illnesses that can be definitively cured is surprisingly short. In terms of drugs or quick fixes, medicine has depressingly little to offer people suffering from long Covid symptoms. But for all that the western medical attitude to the body and illness frequently disappoints, it remains a powerful approach, and for that reason has been adopted in some form or another across much of the globe. Even its ability to define and name our illnesses can offer consolation – I’ve seen many reassured by that act of naming, comforted by the knowledge that what afflicts them has an existence separate from themselves. The naming of an illness offers access to a community of others who have found ways of living with the same difficulties, and that itself can be a source of hope. But there’s a paradox at work: categorising an illness can offer a false sense of definition, locking us into an expectation that becomes self-fulfilling. I’ve known patients who accept the label of an illness with relief, and others who detest all labels as stigmatising. Where possible, I try to take those preferences into account. The reality of mind and body is one of dynamism and change – any vision of human life that is static at heart is an illusion. Sometimes the most helpful attitude to adopt is not to think of illness categories as concrete, immutable destinies, but as stories of the mind and the body. Within certain impassable limits, stories can be rewritten. No one is getting any younger, and all of us would do well to remember that health can never be a final destination, but a balance between extremes, different for everyone, and whether we achieve it or not depends on our goals and priorities as much as it depends on anatomy and physiology. Every illness is unique, which means that all recoveries must also be in some sense unique. There is no one-size-fits-all to getting better. And though I have tried to set out some principles that have proven helpful over the years in guiding me, and my patients, through the many landscapes of illness, I’m conscious that it’s possible to touch on only a few waypoints – it’s rarely possible to indicate an easy way out. It’s a landscape we all have to visit sooner or later. From time to time we all need to learn the art of convalescence. Recovery by Gavin Francis (Profile, £4.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Half a century since the world’s first safe house for women and children escaping domestic violence opened in Chiswick, west London, the CEO of the charity it grew into has said demand for its services remains almost as high as during the peak of the Covid pandemic, and technology is increasingly being used as a tool of abuse. Refuge, like other domestic abuse support services, reported a surge in demand during the pandemic, as police warned that abusers had “weaponised” the virus while vulnerable women were trapped at home. The demand shows little sign of abating, says Refuge’s chief executive, Ruth Davison, who took up her post in February. Calls to the national domestic abuse helpline operated by Refuge increased by 61% between April 2020 and February 2021. “It’s now levelled off, but at a new level of demand,” said Davison. Pre-Covid, Refuge’s helpline was logging about 4,600 incoming contacts a month, including through a newly introduced live chat function online. The figure rose to 8,000 a month in the first lockdown and again in the second, and is now at about 7,000 a month. In a similar period, the charity reported a 97% increase in complex tech abuse cases, which include social media abuse but also more subtle forms of abuse such as the manipulation of smart heating, doorbell cameras or online banking. A recent example involved an abusive ex-partner implanting a listening device in the toy of a child with shared custody. “We hear really quite awful stories,” says Davison. “It’s really very pervasive. There are many ways in which technology is being misused by perpetrators to harm women and children.” There has been some progress in the last year, says Davison, pointing to the passing of the Domestic Abuse Act, which put a legal duty on local authorities to fund refuges, recognised children as victims for the first time, recognised economic abuse as a form of domestic abuse, and abolished the “rough sex” defence. But despite vocal lobbying, the bill does not protect migrant women. “Right now there are some groups of women, women with no recourse to public funds, migrant women, disabled women, who will have a very different experience accessing services – that has to change,” says Davison. This year the charity would continue lobbying for better online protection for women in the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill and the online harms bill. Things have changed massively since the first refuge was set up in 1993 by the Chiswick Women’s Aid founders, Erin Pizzey and Anne Ashby, in 1971. Carol Messenger was four years old when her mother took her and her sister from Manchester to the houseat 2 Belmont Terrace in Chiswick. She recalls that the first house was known as the battered wives’ home, “not very PC, but that’s what we all called it. In fact, someone graffitied it on the front of the building at one point. It was there for a long time.” She remembers that during the five years she spent on and off there, the house was full to bursting with mattresses, some even put in the kitchen at times. She also recalls going on marches, and squatting houses to get accommodation. “They would literally get a bunch of women, a bunch of kids and get into the houses, and they’d set us up with camping stoves and lights and eventually take them over in some cases.” Pizzey is no longer associated with Refuge, and she has been criticised for expressing the view that often women are as culpable for domestic abuse as men. Davison diplomatically says they have never met, but says that even if Pizzey’s views havehad changed, the women’s sector owes her a debt of gratitude. “She has saved hundreds of thousands of women’s lives, because she started something that’s led into a movement. Some of it she would recognise, some of it she probably wouldn’t, but all of it came from that really brave decision.” Refuge may no longer squat premises but it is as deeply political as ever, says Davison. And after a year in which rape prosecution rates fell to record lows, and a series of high-profile killings – such as those of Bibaa Henry and Nicole Smallman, and of Sarah Everard by a serving police officer – sparked public outrage, the charity is needed more than ever, she says. “The bottom line is in England, Wales, two women a week are murdered by their current or former partner, and one in four women are affected by domestic abuse,” Davison says, adding that there is a “strange tension” between optimism and dismay in the sector. “We face a very bleak reality and a growing need, but there is huge optimism and hope of what the kind of anger we have seen [in the last] year can create,” she says. “My hope is that we see a real change in public dialogue and really try to address the root causes of men’s violence and understand why we tolerated this for so long in this country.” In 50 years’ time, Davison hopes the need for Refuge to exist will be greatly diminished. “Our vision as a charity is that we will live in a world where domestic abuse is no longer tolerated,” she says. “That’s what we work for every day. There’s still a long road ahead.”Toast of Tinseltown 10pm, BBC Two Steven Toast is back – and he is angrier than ever. In fact, he has reached peak anger: cue a trip to the retreat of Des Wigwam (Kayvan Novak) for some kill-or-cure therapy. But the anger-management programme has unexpected side-effects – one of which eventually explains this show’s new title. With Ray Purchase, Jane Plough and Clem Fandango still in tow, it is wonderful to have Matt Berry’s grotesque thespian back. Phil Harrison Digging for Britain 8pm, BBC Two Dr Alice Roberts once more uncovers what lies beneath Britain. Tonight, she is in the east of England to see a spectacular Roman mosaic, while a Saxon burial in Kent reveals a gnarly seventh-century death. The team also learn about Anglo-Saxon beer-making in Norfolk. Continues on Wednesday. Henry Wong Sarah Beeny’s New Life in the Country 8pm, Channel 4 Update: Beeny still has not finished her massive house. She has moved upstairs, though. This week, her four sons, who have been closely involved throughout the build, give their opinions on what form their bedrooms should take. Meanwhile, that zipwire over the pond isn’t going to erect itself. Jack Seale Future of Work 8.40pm, PBS America This three-part documentary examines how the pandemic has helped to accelerate the use of artificial intelligence in the workplace. Spoiler: we are all one software update away from being out of a job and replaced by robots. Hollie Richardson Pen15 9pm, Sky Comedy Cringes are guaranteed as Anna Konkle and Maya Erskine return to negotiate dial-up, braces and a whole lot of bullying in their superior comedy. But life is changing fast for the girls. As Maya’s attention is turning to romance with high-school boys, Anna is adjusting to her parents’ divorce – and splitting her time between two houses. Hannah Verdier The Language of Love 10pm, Channel 4 Davina McCall and Ricky Merino host this new series in which a group of daters can’t speak each other’s language. Can they break past the obvious barrier? Nauseating as it might sound, most of the daters are genuinely sweet, making it quite a charming, fun watch. HR Live sport International Test cricket: Australia v England 10.30pm, BT Sport 1. The first day of the fourth Ashes Test at Sydney Cricket Ground. Can England restore some pride after losing the series in only 12 days?Queensland Health has defended an anomaly in the state’s Covid rules which forces Covid-negative international travellers into a longer quarantine than people infected with the virus in the community. The state updated its public health directive for Covid-positive cases on Monday, 3 January. The rules state that anyone in Queensland informed of a Covid diagnosis must immediately isolate for seven days. The rules for international arrivals remain unchanged since 1 January. They require all arrivals to quarantine for 14 days. Returning Australian citizens and their family members can quarantine at home if they are fully vaccinated and return a negative PCR test. The human rights lawyer Melanie Hyde has been living overseas throughout the pandemic and returned – with her partner and two-year-old daughter – to Queensland to see family. They are in home quarantine. Hyde said she contacted Queensland Health about the discrepancy, but they could not explain why international travellers required longer isolation, even when they were vaccinated and had returned negative tests. She intends to lodge a complaint with the state’s human rights commission. “I have an elderly grandmother, I have friends and family I haven’t seen for two years,” Hyde said. “I’m seeing this inconsistency and an unwillingness to do anything about it. “What’s most disappointing to me … is this apathy and lack of concern about what’s happening. The government has an obligation to make sure (Covid restrictions) have the least restrictive impact on people’s rights.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Queensland Health told Guardian Australia the state continues “to take a cautious approach as we reach vaccination milestones and ease restrictions”. “The risks associated with overseas travellers have not changed,” a spokesperson said. “While both interstate and overseas hotspots are a concern, the risk profile for overseas hotspots is greater due to several factors, including quality of vaccinations, different variants circulating overseas, and uncertainty in contact tracing processes used in other countries. “That’s why we may impose tighter restrictions than what has been set nationally.”Top story: Prince Andrew civil case hearing looms Hello, I’m Virginia Harrison and here is your first morning briefing for 2022. A 2009 legal settlement between Virginia Giuffre and Jeffrey Epstein, the late financier and convicted sex offender whom she accused of sexual abuse, has been released. The settlement was made public on Monday as part of Giuffre’s 2021 civil lawsuit against Prince Andrew, whom she accuses of sexually abusing her two decades ago when she was 17. Lawyers for the prince contend that a release clause in the settlement restricts her ability to sue others connected to Epstein. The documents also showed she would be paid $500,000 as part of the settlement of her case against Epstein. The prince – who vehemently denies the allegations made by Giuffre and is not mentioned in the 2009 settlement – has said that the deal shields him from any liability. Lawyers for the prince contend the settlement contains provisions that bar Giuffre from taking legal action against many Epstein associates. Giuffre has long accused Epstein and his sometime girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell – now a convicted sex trafficker – of forcing her into sex with the royal when she was 17. It now falls to US district judge Lewis Kaplan in New York to determine whether the clause in the 2009 agreement blocks Giuffre’s lawsuit against Andrew. The litigation is in its early stages, and Kaplan has said it could go to trial between September and December of 2022 if no settlement is reached. A hearing over Andrew’s motion to dismiss the civil lawsuit is scheduled for Tuesday. * * * Theranos verdict – Elizabeth Holmes, the founder of Theranos, has been found guilty on four of 11 charges of fraud after a jury delivered a partial verdict following a dramatic day in which jurors said they remained deadlocked on three counts. The decision followed a high-profile, 15-week trial that chronicled the missteps of the now-defunct blood testing startup. As the verdict was read, Holmes bowed her head, remained seated and expressed no visible emotion. She faces 20 years in prison. The 37-year-old pleaded not guilty and is expected to appeal. As Kari Paul writes, the verdict marks a milestone for Silicon Valley and its pervasive culture of “fake it ‘til you make it”. Read the full analysis here. * * * ‘A state of crisis’ – Multiple NHS trusts across England have declared “critical incidents” amid soaring staff absences caused by Covid-19, with health leaders saying many parts of the service are now “in a state of crisis”. Boris Johnson has ruled out the introduction of new curbs “for now”, but on Monday said he recognised that the pressure on the NHS and its hospitals was “going to be considerable in the course of the next couple of weeks, and maybe more”. As so many deal with the impact of Covid, GP Gavin Francis writes on the overlooked art of recovery. Whether it’s our knees or skulls that need to heal from an injury, our lungs from a viral infection such as Covid-19 or our minds from a crisis of depression or anxiety, he writes that patients often need reminding that it’s worth giving adequate time, energy and respect to the process of healing. * * * Truss and the £3,000 lunch – Labour has called on the government to explain why it claimed Liz Truss hosted a £3,000 lunch at a private members’ club because it was available at short notice, when leaked correspondence later showed that she had insisted on the venue. In a letter to the international trade minister, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, Labour also asked why Truss, Trevelyan’s predecessor in the role, had overruled civil servants’ concerns about the cost of the members’ club, owned by a Tory donor. The correspondence, disclosed by the Sunday Times, showed that Truss, now the foreign secretary and a favourite to succeed Johnson, “refused to consider anywhere else” and asked that public funds should pay for the event with Joe Biden’s trade representative. The venue later agreed to reduce the bill to ￡1,400. Department for International Trade officials argue that the booking was made at short notice, just a day before the event, and that alternative venues might not have been cheaper. * * * Eating disorders – A leading psychiatrist has warned the NHS can no longer treat every child with an eating disorder, as “worrying” figures reveal hospital admissions have risen 41% in a year. The dramatic surge in cases of people aged 17 and under during the pandemic has left already struggling community services overstretched with many unable to care for everyone who requires help, experts said. Dr Agnes Ayton, the chair of the eating disorders faculty at the Royal College of Psychiatrists, said: “We are at the point where we cannot afford to let this go on any longer.” * * * ‘Don’t surrender the BBC’ – The government’s politically motivated attacks on the BBC are part of a general abasement of British institutions in recent years, the broadcaster Melvyn Bragg has warned, as he called for the corporation to be protected. In an interview with the Radio Times, Bragg accused ministers of failing to recognise the value of the institution, which he said has earned the country’s support. His comments follow what some see as a sustained campaign by government ministers intent on waging a culture war, with the BBC as a key front. “Recently, it has sometimes seemed that, sadly, we are becoming a lesser country by the year,” Bragg said. “I hope the BBC is not allowed to become part of this surrender to a creeping deterioration. Indeed, I believe it could lead by example if we want to escape a situation where our great institutions are increasingly damaged for political purposes.” * * * Today in Focus podcast: How to manage your time in 2022 We only have about 4,000 weeks of life on average, says the writer Oliver Burkeman, so make sure you are prioritising what really matters. Burkeman says by embracing the joy of missing out, you can begin to devote your precious time to the things that really matter to you, no matter how long they take. Lunchtime read: When animals attack Although, mercifully, still rare, there are signs that wild animal attacks on humans are increasing. How does it feel to fight off a predator in the wild? And what effect does it have on your life? Five people, who lived to tell the tale, explain. Sport Romelu Lukaku is in line to return to Chelsea’s squad after holding productive talks with Thomas Tuchel over the striker’s controversial interview. Tuchel is expected to restore Lukaku to his side when Chelsea host Tottenham in the first leg of their Carabao Cup semi-final on Wednesday after the £97.5m forward expressed regret over going public with his unhappiness about life at Stamford Bridge. It comes as Tuchel’s team look vulnerable and the squad appears fragile. Eyes moist, red mohican sparkling in the lights, scalp painting glistening with sweat, Peter Wright won his second PDC world championship in one of its tensest and most absorbing finals. Once again the Ashes circus arrives in Sydney as players and broadcasters desperately try to inject a little jeopardy into this long-moribund series. As Jonathan Liew writes, radical change is needed to stop the Ashes ending up a fading museum piece – a shorter series and the introduction of a multi-format contest would help prevent the increasing frequency of dead rubbers between mismatched sides which tarnish cricket’s showpiece. Ash Barty is embracing the hype as the world No 1 lines up for her best chance yet to break Australia’s most infamous sporting drought. Business Ministers have greater powers to block foreign takeovers of British firms after new rules came into effect giving them more scope to unpick deals that have the potential to harm national security. The National Security and Investment Act, which enhances existing powers, is described by the government as the “biggest shake-up of the UK’s national security regime for 20 years”. Elsewhere, the number of UK first-time homebuyers has hit its highest level in 19 years, according to a new estimate from the Yorkshire Building Society. To the markets and the FTSE is set to open lower after the holiday break, and the pound is buying $1.35 and €1.19. The papers The Covid emergency and the latest twist in Prince Andrew’s legal woes dominate today’s front pages. The Guardian leads with “Critical incidents at several NHS trusts as Covid staff shortages hit”, while a picture of Prince Andrew with Virginia Giuffre and convicted sex trafficker Ghislaine Maxwell in the background accompanies “Epstein paid duke’s accuser $500,000”. The Times has “We’re on the right path to tackle virus, says PM”, alongside a picture of a masked Boris Johnson, while the Daily Mail leads with “Covid chaos fear as million isolate”. The i has “NHS leaders warn PM over growing Covid staffing crisis” and the Telegraph warns “We can’t jab the whole planet every six months”. The broadsheet also carries the Prince Andrew story and the now recognisable shot of the Duke of York with a young Giuffre. The Mirror’s take on the story is “Secret deal to silence Andrew accuser”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe New South Wales teachers’ union has called for an urgent meeting with health and education officials to discuss safety at the onset of the new school year amid the growing Covid-19 outbreak in the state. The NSW Teachers Federation president, Angelo Gavrielatos, warned absentee rates could cause chaos and said “serious questions” about safety needed to be answered before students returned to classrooms in early February. “The current plan is the plan we had when schools went into the vacation period,” he told Guardian Australia. “All that’s changed. We are now living in a very different context to what we were in the weeks prior to schools going into summer recess.” In highly vaccinated NSW, case numbers have exceeded 20,000 in recent days. Gavrielatos said schools were already heavily disrupted in 2021, when far fewer cases circulated in the state, with an average of about 40 schools a day affected by staff or students testing positive. “That was at a time when numbers were but a fraction of what we’re seeing today,” he said. “So clearly there’s a lot of concern.” The union is seeking an “urgent meeting” with education and health officials this week to ensure a proper plan is in place. “Who knows what that plan might look like? Who knows how many cases we might have?” Gavrielatos said. “There are a number of scenarios potentially at play here, including the possibility of remote learning in certain settings.” Gavrielatos said a multi-pronged approach to Covid-19 was sorely needed in schools, where vaccination rates differ from the general NSW population. As of Monday, 78.2% of NSW children aged 12-15 were double-vaccinated, compared with 93.6% of people 16 and older. The vast majority of primary school students are currently unvaccinated, with the rollout for children aged 5-11 to begin on 10 January. Among the union’s demands are “enhancements” of rules around masks and ventilation, with an “urgent audit and stocktake” needed on air purifiers. “We need to know what on earth is happening with rapid antigen testing,” Gavrielatos said. “We need to know what efforts are being made to procure and make available that other critical component in risk mitigation strategy.” Covid-19 has generally produced a milder illness in children than adults, though it is possible for children to become severely ill and in rare cases die. Research on children and the Omicron variant is still emerging. Towards the end of the 2021 school year, measures in place for NSW schools included physical distancing and outdoor lessons where possible, mandatory vaccinations for staff and compulsory masks for staff, visitors and students in year 7 and above. Masks were strongly recommended for primary school students. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Ventilation advice was to open doors and windows. The department said advice from NSW Health, the Doherty Institute and the World Health Organization was that “maximising natural ventilation in our learning spaces is the most effective method for minimising the spread of Covid-19, as it is a very effective way to disperse particles in the air”. But there are concerns this will not always be possible in a hot Australian summer. The department has bought air purifiers, but they will not be brought in across the board and only used in situations where, for instance, bushfire smoke or poor air quality rules out opening the window. In the UK, similar ventilation advice was criticised as unworkable in the context of a harsh winter. The education department said on Tuesday it was working closely with NSW Health “to finalise school settings for the start of the new school year and detailed advice for term 1 will be made available soon”. “The settings will be fit-for-purpose, while also providing time for schools to prepare for the beginning of classes on 1 February,” a spokesperson said. “We remain committed to reducing the disruption to schools, keeping staff and students safe, and providing a greater degree of normality in line with changes communicated in the final weeks of term 4.” The department noted vaccine appointments were available for children aged 5– 11 from 10 January. “We encourage parents to book a vaccination appointment for their child as soon as possible, as evidence shows vaccination offers excellent protection against Covid-19 for children and helps keep your family safe and well.”The start of January is not a boom time for lifestyle statistics. It’s all resolutions and intentions, all inputs, no outputs. But it’s a great time, thanks to NHS Digital and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, to find out who landed in A&amp;E in the first year of the pandemic. I pore over these lists, thrilling with schadenfreude. More than 7,000 people in England got bitten or struck by a dog in 2020-21; my dog is mental, but at least he’d never bite me and can’t, to my knowledge, use a weapon. More than 2,000 people spilled something hot on themselves, which I haven’t done for years. Nearly 1,000 people ended up in hospital having tried to climb a tree (“Accidents are preventable”, the RoSPA says, and of course it would say that, wouldn’t it, but nothing has ever seemed to me to be so entirely preventable as falling out of a tree). Power tools, hammers and saws, keeping rats, scorpions and venomous spiders – I think of all these ways I’ve stayed out of hospital, by not doing things I didn’t want to do anyway, and feel both completely blessed and unusually civic-minded. We had one domestic accident, at the signature Christmas meal, when the table was set for 15, which meant 15 crackers, and – you won’t believe it, but it’s true – 30 glasses, and everything else. Mr Z decided that he wanted beer instead of a regular Christmas drink, but none of the perfectly serviceable bottles of beer would do. Instead, he tried this mini-keg that we’ve had under a table lamp since July, and it exploded. Most of the beer, he claims, ended up in his trousers, but that doesn’t explain how we came to be mopping the ceiling, or that every glass contained a tablespoon of beer, as if I’d laid the table for tiny Vikings, or how the crackers lost their bang, or why the room still smells like a pub a week later which, actually, I don’t mind. All I could think was, oh my, that could have been so much worse. So many ways we could have ended up as an A&amp;E statistic. It would have been such an outlier event, we’d have definitely made it on to the bulletins – something for someone else to feel smug about. Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistAs the Queen, the longest-serving British monarch in history, attains 70 years on the throne, 2022 is expected to be a year of mixed blessings – with national celebrations as well as the possibility of yet more unwelcome headlines. The monarch joins an extremely exclusive club in February when she marks her platinum jubilee, also achieved by Louis XIV of France, Johann II, Prince of Liechtenstein, and, most recently King Bhumibol of Thailand. It is a first in UK royal history, with the occasion due to be celebrated over a four-day weekend in June. The festivities, including a service of thanksgiving and the colourful spectacle of a jubilee pageant, will be an undoubted highlight for the monarch, who will be 96 in April, and preparations for 2022 have long been in the planning at Buckingham Palace. “But 2022 is going to be a year of mixed blessings for her, I think,” said Joe Little, the managing editor of Majesty magazine. “Clearly, there are various clouds on the horizon, the Duke of York perhaps being the biggest at the moment. But, blowing in from the west, the Duke of Sussex’s book, whatever form that may take.” The platinum jubilee The anniversary of her accession is 6 February, but it has always been a day of mixed emotions for the Queen as it is also the anniversary of the death of her father, George VI. Trooping the Colour, bringing together more than 1,400 soldiers and 200 horses, will kick off the jubilee bank holiday weekend on 2 June, when she and her family will be on the Buckingham Palace balcony watching the traditional RAF fly-past. Over the weekend there will be beacons lit, a St Paul’s cathedral service of thanksgiving, a BBC “Party at the Palace”, a jubilee pageant and street parties. “But the highlight, for her, will be the Derby,” said the royal historian Hugo Vickers. It is her first jubilee without the Duke of Edinburgh at her side – though he missed much of her diamond jubilee in 2012 after becoming ill following the Thames River Pageant. Her 2002 golden jubilee year was blighted by the deaths of her sister, Princess Margaret, and her mother. “I think during this forthcoming jubilee she will be less visible than she has been for all the previous jubilees because clearly account will be taken of her age and her health at the time things are happening,” said Little. So Charles and Camilla, and William and Kate, are likely to be bobbing around the country and Commonwealth – Covid restrictions permitting – on her behalf. “If you look at 70 years of service as a monarch, it does put some of the grumbly things that are going on rather into perspective,” said Vickers. “Jubilees are great fun.” But they are also tiring, he said. “I remember Princess Anne saying at the time of diamond jubilee that the family had to rally to make sure the Queen and Prince Philip did not get overtired.” “So I think she is going to do about 10 notable things that will be high profile.” Family reunion? One big question is whether Harry and Meghan will be on the palace balcony along with other members of the royal family for the June festivities. “You would expect the Sussexes to return to the UK for that, if not beforehand. So that could be the first opportunities for the Queen to meet the newest member of the Sussex family, Lilibet,” said Little. Royal watchers will have their metaphorical – and literal – binoculars trained for any signs of family tension, against the backdrop of reported rifts. Harry’s vocal criticism of the family, and institution, include being cut off financially by his father, Charles. His comments that he wished to break the cycle of “genetic pain and suffering” in the royal family was seen as a swipe at Charles’s parenting, as well as the Queen and Philip’s. Observers have suggested an unravelling of the father-son relationship, with the two last speaking face-to-face at Philip’s funeral in April. They did not meet when Harry was in London in July for the unveiling of a statue of his mother, Diana, and Charles has still not met Lilibet – named after the Queen’s family nickname. Harry’s memoirs Penguin Random House pulled off a coup in landing Harry’s memoirs. The publishers have described it as an “honest” and “inspiring, courageous and uplifting human story”. Harry, who is working with the Pulitzer prize winner JR Moehringer as his ghostwriter, has said: “I’m writing this not as the prince I was born but as the man I have become.” Some question if he has much left to reveal, having been vocal since he decamped to California. “I really can’t imagine what Prince Harry can say that will be constructive. Presumably, the publishers will want him to come up with something. But if he comes up with something unattractive, I think it will backfire, in this country anyway,” said Vickers. Royal watchers are primed. One, predicting it will cause “mayhem” within palace walls, has said: “It will become an international bestseller, but at what cost to the monarchy?” If Harry goes into detail about issues involving his wife, or alleged racism within the royal family, which is denied, it will be damaging. The book is due to be published globally in the latter part of 2022. Andrew’s court case The Duke of York’s legal battle with Virginia Roberts Giuffre, who has alleged that he sexually abused her when she was aged 17, while being trafficked by Jeffrey Epstein, could be the blackest cloud on the horizon. The allegations are strongly denied by Andrew, with his lawyers asking for the case to be dismissed. On Monday, a previously confidential document Andrew’s legal team believes will stop the civil lawsuit against the royal was made public, showing Giuffre had entered into a “settlement agreement” in 2009 with Epstein for $500,000 (£371,000). The document provided a release for “any other person or entity who could have been included as a potential defendant” against various claims by Giuffre. Andrew’s lawyers are expected to argue in a New York court on Tuesday that even though they say her allegations against him are baseless, Giuffre cannot even bring the case because of the document she signed. If the case is not dismissed, the New York judge Lewis Kaplan is aiming for trial between September and December, and has announced that depositions for the case must be submitted by 14 July 2022. Andrew’s name had already featured in the Ghislaine Maxwell criminal case, which last week resulted in Maxwell, a friend of Andrew’s, being convicted on five of the six charges she faced relating to sex trafficking teenage victims of Epstein’s. The Queen is reportedly footing the legal bill for her second son in the civil action case brought against Andrew by Giuffre. “At this time of her reign she should be sailing toward glorious, golden uplands, yet she has had a lot of stress – not only Harry and Andrew, but also Brexit, and possibly Scottish independence,” said Vickers.As an epidemiologist and NHS consultant, 2022 begins much like 2021 did – I’m again analysing data on the impact of a new Covid variant that threatens to put huge pressure on our hospitals. And I’m back on the frontline in A&amp;E, helping my NHS colleagues to deal with that pressure. But we are actually in a much better position, and there are good reasons to be confident that 2022 will be a much better year than 2021. Last January was perhaps the darkest time of the entire pandemic in the UK, with tens of thousands being admitted into hospital and thousands losing their lives every week. Now, with the majority of us well protected with highly effective vaccines, we have a much lower individual risk of ending up in hospital – or worse – if we catch Covid. The combination of vaccines and a better knowledge of how to treat Covid means both hospitalisation and death rates are now much lower, with the infection fatality rate having fallen by over 80%. And this means that, unlike last year, our children are going back to school this week, retail and hospitality businesses are open and we are able to meet our friends and families. Although the NHS is again under massive pressure – particularly due to staff shortages – the early indications are that we are not facing a repeat of last winter with hospital admissions rising more slowly and ICU admissions and deaths mercifully still flat. The information from South Africa and the early data from the UK gives us a realistic hope that this wave will be over quicker than previous ones, and with much less loss of life. There are reasons to be optimistic beyond just this wave, as well. Firstly, the long-promised antiviral medicines have arrived. These new Covid treatments, which have just started being used in the UK, have the potential to transform the situation as similar medicines have done with HIV and hepatitis C. They can reduce the risk of being admitted into hospital by up to 90%, are effective against all variants, can be taken orally and are much easier to distribute than vaccines. Two are already approved but many others are currently undergoing clinical trials and should be available this year. Next, new vaccines are in development that will make it easier to manage the coronavirus variants that will inevitably emerge over the coming year. As with influenza, “multivalent” vaccines – which protect against infection from multiple variants – will probably become available later this year. Other vaccines that target parts of the virus besides the spike protein – parts that don’t mutate as easily – are also on the horizon. There are also vaccines being trialled that can be delivered by nasal spray, inhaler, orally and using skin patches – all of which will make distribution easier and overcome needle phobia. But the immediate priority must be to ensure that our existing and very effective vaccines are distributed more equally across the globe. We have made huge progress, with 8.5bn doses delivered to date, but far too many – especially those at high risk and frontline healthcare workers in low-income countries – have not even received their first dose. Vaccinating the whole world in 2022 is a realistic prospect but this will require an end to hoarding in high-income countries and a temporary lifting of patents. And this is in our interests too – we won’t be able to prevent new variants completely but we can reduce the risk by ensuring everyone, everywhere is able to be vaccinated. Sadly Covid is not going away permanently, but we can be optimistic that 2022 will be the year the pandemic ends and it becomes an endemic disease here and in most countries thanks to the very high levels of population immunity we now have – through a combination of vaccination and natural infection. There are still likely to be seasonal winter peaks, like with flu, and an annual booster jab will probably be needed to deal with new variants and waning immunity. Like many, I have lost family, friends and colleagues. I have seen countless patients suffer from Covid – as well as from its knock-on effects on our health services – and from the lockdowns. But the huge loss of life and pain should soon be a thing of the past. We are certainly not out of the woods yet – cases are at unprecedented levels and rising (though more slowly now) and Covid is still a serious threat to the most vulnerable – so we need to continue following the public health guidance to protect them and to help reduce the pressure on the NHS so we can continue treating all our patients. But there is a realistic prospect that 2022 will be the year we can begin to live with the virus – and without the fear of both Covid and lockdowns that has haunted us for the past two years. Dr Raghib Ali is a clinical epidemiologist at the University of Cambridge and an honorary consultant in acute medicine at the Oxford University hospitals NHS trustI’m no slouch, but I’m struggling to keep up with Jeremy Dagley as he opens a gate off the A104, the main road through Epping Forest, and bounds into the woods. He is the head of conservation here and charmingly eager to show me his work. I had assumed his job would be all wellies and fleeces, clippings and handfuls of soil. The reality is he spends a lot of time indoors helping local councils with planning applications, making sure they are sustainable and sympathetic. It’s clear he’s happier out here. Jeremy’s knowledge is immense, unspooling in tangles of “ologies”. While telling me that the chalk ridge we are walking along is a ripple caused by the formation of the Himalayas, his ears twitch towards a chirrup and he points to a podgy bundle of grey and black feathers with a bright red cap. It’s a juvenile great spotted woodpecker, says Jeremy. As he regales me with the history of the ownership of this land, I stumble into a hidden ditch; eyes drawn down, he points at a delicate yellow plant. Lousewort, he says, excitedly: it was thought extinct in these parts in the 1990s. It’s thrilling being in the company of such a master. We’re soon deep in the forest, but it’s still airy and spacious, with the low afternoon sun sending gold from the west. The trees here stand in friendly gatherings, not crowds. Jeremy stops abruptly by an ugly, gnarled thing, and traces his hands across its snakeskin bark. Beeches normally last 300 years before they conk out and topple over. This one is 800 years old, he says, blue eyes shining. It has tickled the horses of medieval kings, survived centuries of storms, seen off war and pestilence, and remained rooted here in this soil. I feel bad for judging its wrinkles. In fact its ugliness explains its longevity. Around head height, the snub trunk bulges in a bole, from which a handful of smaller, strong, smooth trunks reach up and branch out in subtle angles. This is the product of pollarding, trimming the tops of trees for wood, a commoner practice here for centuries. Done sparingly, it exposes dormant buds, encouraging new growth. The result is, in effect, a clutch of 200-year-old trees growing from one 800-year-old trunk. Pollarding struck me as a beautiful thing, humankind and nature gaining strength from each other. Conservation by careful use, not the lack of it. Epping Forest is home to 55,000 ancient pollards: 10,000 oak, 20,000 beech, 25,000 hornbeam. These are pollard riches unmatched in the UK, and they are only half an hour on the overground train from the City of London. During the Covid lockdowns, many Londoners realised their luck: visitor numbers increased by 300%. As local historian Mark Gorman explains in his book Saving the People’s Forest, such easy access has not always been a given. In the mid-19th century, a new train service to Forest Gate, close to Wanstead Flats, the southernmost point of Epping Forest, brought thousands of new visitors from the East End. About the same time, the crown estate began selling the land to local aristocrats, who sniffed an opportunity to develop housing for the expanding London population. Just as the people had begun to enjoy the public land, it was being taken away. When, in 1871, Lord Cowley of Wanstead instructed agents to fence off a large section of Wanstead Flats, packed meetings agreed on a march to save the forest. On 8 July, 30,000 people assembled on the Flats, many with gorse in their lapels – a symbol of common land – and tore the fences down. Within a month, parliament passed the first of a series of acts to protect the forest. The City of London Corporation lent support, sensing a popular cause. Between 1871 and 1882, it paid £256,275 to secure conservatorship. With its help, the last of the Epping Forest Acts was passed in 1878, the first legal declaration of the right of the public at large to use an open space for leisure. It wasn’t all progress. Locals had for centuries had the right in some places to “lop” branches seven feet from the ground for use as fuel over the winter, but this was removed (in return for some compensation) in 1878. Jeremy is clear this was a mistake. The best thing for biodiversity, he says, is a mosaic environment, a mixture of thorny scrub, grassy clearings and thickets of trees. It makes sense to me. Not everything can live in the darkness and stillness of a thick forest: more niches makes for more species. Pollarding provides helpful disruption, thinning the trees, allowing light for low-growers and providing dead wood for fungi, all encouraging a wider range of fauna. In 1989, the corporation of London began regular pollarding again, but even before that a visitor here wouldn’t have seen overgrown forest. That’s because grazing rights for commoners were never removed, and cattle continued browsing parts of the woodland through most of the 20th century. As we walked through a lush clearing, Jeremy explained the importance of hungry, clumsy herbivores: they play a similar role to pollarding, causing disruption by nibbling leaves and knocking over young saplings. It’s why the trees here are in friendly gatherings, not crowds. In the 1990s the delicate balance was upset when the BSE crisis put an end to commoner grazing. In response, the corporation introduced its own herd of longhorns. Most are brought inside for winter, but a handful are left out to help maintain the habitat. Just before sunset, Jeremy took me to Chingford Plain to see them, a hit squad of squat muscle and sharp horns within charging distance of the high street. As they began to edge in that direction, Jeremy showed me his phone, displaying a map of the area with a moving dot for each cow. As one beast neared the virtual boundary, its GPS necklace emitted a high-frequency sound, prompting the animal to lumber off in a different direction. As the light drained from the blue sky, everything here seemed in harmony: humankind, nature, technology. This is what the world can be. A few weeks earlier I had been at Cop26 in Glasgow, and its gloomy graphs still haunted my dreams: one night I screamed myself awake. I came here needing a lift. If we are to heal the world, it is of course essential to understand how it is degrading. But as US writer Rebecca Solnit says, concentrating on what is being lost can leave us with the sense that decay is normal, inevitable. We need to hold the good bits in mind – finding wonder in what works well. We need to “take that beauty as a sacred trust, and celebrate the memory of it”, she wrote. “Otherwise we might forget why we are fighting.” There are few finer reminders than Epping Forest. Daily trains run four times an hour from London Liverpool Street and Walthamstow Central stations to Chingford (five minutes’ walk from Epping Forest)The House select committee investigating the 6 January attack on the Capitol is facing a race against time in 2022 as Trump and his allies seek to run out the clock with a barrage of delay tactics and lawsuits. Republicans are widely expected to do well in this year’s midterm elections in November and, if they win control of the House, that would give them control to shut down the investigation that has proved politically and legally damaging to Trump and Republicans. The select committee opened its investigative efforts into the 6 January insurrection, when a pro-Trump mob stormed the Capitol to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win, with a flurry of subpoenas to Trump officials to expedite the evidence-gathering process. But aside from securing a cache of documents from Trump’s former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, the select committee has found itself wading through molasses with Trump and other top administration aides seeking to delay the investigation by any means possible. The former US president has attempted to block the select committee at every turn, instructing aides to defy subpoenas from the outset and, most recently, launching a last-ditch appeal to the supreme court to prevent the release of the most sensitive of White House records. His aides are following Trump in lockstep as they attempt to shield themselves from the investigation, doing everything from filing frivolous lawsuits to stop the select committee obtaining call records to invoking the fifth amendment so as to not respond in depositions. The efforts amount to a cynical ploy by Republicans to run out the clock until the midterms and use the election calendar to characterize the interim report, which the bipartisan select committee hopes to issue by the summer, as a political exercise to damage the GOP. The select committee, sources close to the investigation say, is therefore hoping for a breakthrough with the supreme court, which experts believe will ensure the panel can access the Trump White House records over the former president’s objections about executive privilege. “I think the supreme court is very unlikely to side with Trump, and part of it is the nature of executive privilege – it’s a power belonging to the President,” said Jonathan Shaub, a former DoJ office of legal counsel attorney and law professor at the University of Kentucky. “It’s hard to see how a former president could exercise constitutional power under a theory where all the constitutional powers are vested in the current president, so I think Trump is very likely to lose or the court may not take the case,” Shaub said. Members on the select committee note that several courts – the US district court and the US appeals court – have already ruled that Biden has the final say over which White House documents are subject to executive privilege, and that the panel has a legislative purpose. A victory for the select committee at the supreme court is important, members believe, not only because it would give them access to the records Trump has fought so hard to keep hidden, but because it would supercharge the inquiry with crucial momentum. The select committee got its first break when House investigators obtained from Meadows thousands of communications involving the White House, including a powerpoint detailing ways to stage a coup, and are hoping the supreme court can help to sustain their pace. “It’s pretty clear that these documents are serious documents that shed light on the president’s activities on January 6 and that may be quite damaging for Trump,” said Kate Shaw, a former Obama White House counsel and now a professor at the Cardozo School of Law. “They could make a difference to the record being compiled by the committee and thus they could give the process additional momentum,” Shaw said. “That’s probably why Trump is resisting their release as hard as he is.” More generally, the select committee says they are unconcerned by attempts by Trump aides and political operatives to stymie the inquiry, since Democrats control Washington and the panel has an unprecedented carte blanche to upturn every inch the Trump administration. “The legislative and executive branches are completely in agreement with each other, that this material is not privileged and needs to be turned over to Congress,” said congressman Jamie Raskin, a member of the select committee. “Things have been moving much more quickly.” But the select committee acknowledges privately that they face a longer and more difficult slog with Trump aides and political operatives who are mounting legal challenges to everything from the panel’s attempts to compel production of call records and even testimony. The trouble for the select committee, regardless of Democrats’ controlling the White House, Congress and the justice department, is that they are counting on the courts to deliver accountability for Trump officials unwilling to cooperate with the inquiry. Yet Trump and his officials know that slow-moving cogs of justice have a history of doing nothing of the sort. House investigators only heard from former Trump White House counsel Don McGahn this past summer, years after the end of the special counsel investigation. The House has not even been able to obtain Trump’s tax returns – something Democrats have been fighting to get access to since they took the majority in 2018 – after repeated appeals from the former president despite repeated defeats in court. Trump and his aides insist they are not engaged in a ploy to stymie the investigation, though they admit to doing just that in private discussions, according to sources close to the former president. When the select committee issued its first subpoenas to his former aides Mark Meadows, Dan Scavino, Steve Bannon and Kash Patel, Trump’s lawyers told their lawyers to defy the orders because it would likely serve to slow down the investigation, the sources said. The result of Trump’s directive – first reported by the Guardian – is that Bannon and Meadows refused to appear for their depositions, and the select committee now may never hear their inside information about the Capitol attack after they were held in contempt of Congress. It remains possible that Bannon and Meadows seek some kind of a plea deal with federal prosecutors that involves providing testimony to the select committee in exchange for no jail time, but the court hearing for Bannon, for instance, is scheduled late into the summer. The reality for House investigators is that the cases are now in the hands of a justice department intent on proving it remains above the political fray after years of Trump’s interference at DoJ, and therefore indifferent to the time crunch felt by the 6 January committee. The situation for the select committee may be even trickier with Republican members of Congress involved in 6 January, as they just need to stonewall the investigation only through the midterms, before which the panel hopes to release an interim report into their findings. A spokesperson for the select committee declined to comment on the outlook for the investigation and their expectations for the supreme court hearing in the case against Trump, which the panel, cognizant of their limited timeframe, has asked to expedite. Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, originally aimed to have the final report completed before the midterm elections, but the efforts by the most senior Trump officials to delay the investigation means he could need until the end of the year. Either way, sources close to the investigation told the Guardian, the select committee is hoping that the supreme court will deliver the elusive Trump White House records – and that it could pave the way for the investigation to shift into yet another higher gear.Is Stella gay? My hopes are high. Mia, Borsetshire’s Greta Thunberg, has decided that the new manager of Home Farm would make a lovely wife for her stepfather, Will Grundy, who never sounds sexy but maybe is, given that he is a former gamekeeper. Mia opined that Stella seemed to be straight – which, knowing Mia’s powers of perception, means she is the most obvious lesbian who ever walked this Earth. What would you call your dog, if you had one, Mia asked her, brightly? The answer: Weaver. After Sigourney Weaver in Alien. I mean: come on. I would rest my case right there, but then came a touching scene between Stella and Ruth Archer, during which Stella found Ruth’s lost invoices, and coquettishly suggested a drink. I admit this does not necessarily suggest Lauren Bacall-Humphrey Bogart levels of sexual charge. Nevertheless, my partner, no great Archers listener, walked into the room at this moment, and, unprompted, declared: “This is so gay!” Seriously: I can see it. Say David Archer is killed by – well, there are so many possibilities on a farm – drowning in the slurry pit, shall we say? Then Ruth becomes a later-blooming lesbian and has a rapturous affair with Stella, thoroughly complicating the Home Farm/Brookfield inheritance nexus. The Archers is deeply invested in the village rituals that mark the passage of the year: flower and produce show, fete, harvest supper. Winter means some over-elaborate amateur theatricals mounted by Lynda Snell: this year, it was medieval mystery plays peripatetically adapted to locations scattered through Ambridge – the annunciation in the kitchen at Brookfield, that kind of thing. One of the most peculiar things on British radio – no, in British culture altogether – must be the full Radio 4 broadcast of this production, in which the listener hears professional actors playing characters who are amateurishly playing another set of characters. So far, so The Mousetrap. But it’s much odder than that: into this cocktail are added voiceovers from Archers characters qua Archers characters (rather than mysteries characters) informing the listener whereabouts in Ambridge we are. Then there’s the sound design, which, far from bringing us Borsetshire in December, offers us the hum of cicadas to summon up a warm night in Bethlehem. There is also a soundtrack of vaguely medieval-sounding music – presumably meant to recall the period in which the mystery plays were originally conceived. In short, it’s a splendidly odd layering of temporal, geographic and imaginative spaces for which the word “meta” completely fails to do justice. One can only pity the casual turner of the radio dial. It must be utterly impenetrable. Finally, a thought with which to end 2021: what is Hazel Woolley up to? • This article was amended on 21 January 2022 to clarify that Will Grundy is no longer a gamekeeper.Q My parents are in their early 80s and own their home – worth about £500,000 – outright so they are mortgage free. In addition to their house they have savings, taking them over the £1m inheritance tax threshold, to maybe £1.2m. They are thinking of giving their home to me (and then moving out) in the hope of avoiding IHT by surviving seven years after making the gift. Also, they need to dispose of their property so that they can buy and move into more suitable sheltered housing, which should cost less than £100,000. I am aware that for inheritance tax purposes I will need to obtain a valuation of the property when my parents give it to me. I also know that the local council will take into consideration the value of the property they disposed of when means testing any future care home costs. At the moment my mother has no care needs and my father has a carer visit the home twice a week, which he pays for directly. This costs less than £40 a week. However, I am unsure how the local council would value the property as I am intending to keep it for at least five years before selling it. I may keep it for more than 20 years. If their property is worth £500,000 on transfer to me and I still own it when care home fees start to be paid – say in five years’ time – does the council assess the value of the property when my parents gave it away (so £500,000) or its value when fees started to be paid, which could be £650,000 (five years after the gift)? Also, is the answer different if, after five years, I sell the property for £650,000 and then a further three years later, my parents start paying care home fees and the property would now be worth £700,000? DS A Whenever your parents start paying care home costs, the council won’t care what their house is worth because their other assets put them well above the threshold at which they would qualify for financial help. People in England with total capital under £23,250 are entitled to council help in meeting care home costs but people like your parent who have capital of more – or in your parents’ case way more – than £23,250 do not get council help and have to meet the full cost themselves. Local authorities only care about people depriving themselves of assets – for example, by giving away property – when doing so has brought down an individual’s total capital to below £23,250. When that is the case, the council would take into account the value of the property at the time that it did the financial assessment. However, you are right that it would make sense to have a professional valuation of your parents’ house done when it is given to you. The valuation will also give you an acquisition cost to use when working out any capital gains tax bill if you do decide to sell the property at some point in the future. • Want expert help finding your new mortgage? Use our new online tool to search thousands of deals from more than 80 lenders with the Guardian Mortgage Service, powered by L&amp;C.Tim Bergling – the Swedish DJ and producer known as Avicii – killed himself in Muscat, Oman, in April 2018 at the age of 28. The very worst happened when things were apparently looking up. The successful but troubled electronic dance music (EDM) star had retired from relentless touring in 2016 to focus on his wellbeing. He had weaned himself off opioids – prescribed by doctors when bouts of alcohol-induced pancreatitis led to debilitating pain and, later, surgery. He was communicating regularly with a therapist, was often surrounded by childhood friends, donated to charities. He meditated. Having crossed over from pure party music to making tracks alongside established stars such as Coldplay and Nile Rodgers, Bergling was working on new material he was excited about. A documentary about his meteoric rise and his stress levels – Avicii: True Stories – had been broadcast in 2017, seemingly with a happy ending. When it appeared on Netflix, True Stories reverberated well beyond club culture, super-charging the existing public debate around the mental health of performers. Viewers were witness to a life unravelling, privy to alarming practices that were normalised. Stardom has always come at a high price, but in EDM, capitalising on your hot streak seemed especially urgent. Quite aside from the usual hedonism, the hours an ambitious, in-demand EDM DJ had to keep were gruelling: multiple gigs in one night, sometimes in different countries or time zones, with constant travel (especially hard for the flight-phobic Bergling) and scant basic self-care. In 2019, an anonymous book by another industry insider, The Secret DJ, went even deeper into the lunacy of the lifestyle. Tim: The Official Biography of Avicii retells Bergling’s story, adding considerable context and lashings of pain: parents Klas and Anki Bergling are major sources. Written by Swedish journalist Måns Mosesson and translated by a US academic Brad Harmon, the book’s slightly wide-eyed tone finds strait-laced grownups grappling with the extremes of youth, from World of Warcraft – an obsession of the younger Bergling – to the wild west of club culture, via the monomaniacal perfectionism of digital music-making. The book succeeds in fleshing out Bergling, an elfin poster boy for hyper-commercial EDM who wanted to be taken seriously as an artist. Mosesson is very good on the path to fame and the wider ecosystem around Avicii. A shy, curious, stubborn youngster who feared he would get cancer, he suffered from serious acne and social anxiety, affecting his self-esteem. An interest in the esoteric led Bergling to name himself after a particularly punishing zone of Buddhist hell. He ended up in something like it. Mosesson had access to Bergling’s rehab journal and almost everyone in his life – ex-girlfriends, childhood pals, fellow superstar DJs, psychotherapists. The author was also privy to Bergling’s digital life – texts, emails and messageboard posts; a level of intimate access biographers must surely have only dreamed of until now. Bergling’s former manager, Arash Pournouri, declined to participate. After Bergling’s death, online opinion swirled around the relentless schedule over which Avicii’s management had presided. But in a recent interview, Bergling senior was specific in exonerating Pournouri, with whom his son had reconciled, and keen to examine the bigger music industry picture, beating the drum for swifter mental health interventions. There are no kneejerk conclusions here, just candour and context: pressure, both external and internal, absolutely played a role in Avicii’s unravelling, as did the US prescription opioid scandal. As the book draws to its harrowing ending, Mosesson offers up a series of factors at play in 2018. Although he had kicked virtually everything else, Bergling still smoked a lot of weed. The book discusses how insidiously – or suddenly – psychosis can affect THC users. Bergling became involved with transcendental meditation, which he credited with reducing his anxiety. But he would meditate intensely for hours, impatient to achieve enlightenment at speed. In messages to his therapist, he confided that he had become confused by what felt like a torrent of insights. At the same time, Bergling texted his mother, full of love and excitement about a move from LA back to Stockholm. In the aftermath of Bergling’s death, many of his closest associates sought help for their own issues and dependencies. The DJ’s father is especially keen that the word “suicide” be used in relation to his son; to speak plainly about what the mental health charity (Tim Bergling Foundation) set up in the DJ’s memory calls “a global health emergency”. • Tim: The Official Biography of Avicii by Måns Mosesson (translated by Brad Harmon) is published by Sphere (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyAnd that brings another day and another blog to an end – join us again tomorrow. Here’s today’s news wrap: A new record of 47,738 Covid cases were recorded nationally. In New South Wales, there were two deaths and 23,131 new Covid cases, and 1,344 people are in hospital. Victoria also saw two deaths. There were 14,020 new cases, a jump of more than 5,000 cases. Queensland recorded 5,699 new cases, another substantial increase, as the chief medical officer warned there could be hundreds of thousands of cases within the month. There were 702 new cases in Tasmania, 3,246 in South Australia, 926 in the Australian Capital Territory, and 75 in the Northern Territory. The Australian Medical Association said it warned the federal government about the lack of rapid antigen tests in September. Researchers say T-cells are the body’s “back up” in fighting Omicron. And in better news, theatres in Sydney and Melbourne are declaring “on with the show”. In case you need some good news on this diabolical afternoon, the theatres are starting to open back up in Sydney and Melbourne after at least 90 performers in major shows across both states tested positive to Covid over the Christmas and New Year period. Opera Australia’s La Bohème is “full steam ahead” for its opening night tonight, after it was forced to cancel its traditional New Year’s Eve performance due to Covid. An OA spokeswoman said: Incredibly, tonight’s cast and orchestra is almost entirely intact. All principals are back on deck, I think maybe one or two chorus and one musician may still be out. But that’s it. Remarkable considering where we were a week ago. Opera Australia’s Turandot was forced to suspend rehearsals last week but resumed today and is expected to open as planned on 12 January. The cast of Hamilton are back on stage tomorrow night in Sydney after isolating over the New Year break. Come From Away is also back after a number of cancelled performances. A Chorus Line at Riverside Theatre in Parramatta delayed its opening at the Sydney festival due to a number of positive cases in rehearsals, but is expected to go ahead on 13 January. Also at Sydney Festival, Girl from the North Country will commence from 6 January after a delayed bump-in, due to positive cases among the house crew at the Theatre Royal. In Melbourne, Moulin Rouge is back on stage tonight after its sudden mid-show stop last week due to a positive test result. Jagged Little Pill will finally open at the Comedy Theatre on Thursday 13 January after delaying 12 days due to a Covid outbreak among the cast. Frozen the Musical at Her Majesty’s Theatre in Melbourne is expected to reopen tomorrow. Queensland Health has defended an anomaly in the state’s Covid rules which forces Covid-negative international travellers into a longer quarantine than people infected with the virus in the community. The state updated its public health directive for Covid-positive cases on Monday. The rules state that anyone in Queensland informed of a Covid diagnosis must immediately isolate for seven days. Read all about it here: See below from the ABC’s Andrew Greene. Japan and Australia were expected to talk defence, China, and of course Aukus – and then Omicron happened. Again. Here’s a piece from Daniel Hurst with some more context. $65! For two! I would say it’s getting silly, but obviously it’s past that now... Health authorities might be watching the Covid case numbers spike, but economists have their antennae up for other data, such as what effect, if any, Omicron might be having on consumer confidence. ANZ is among the first out of the blocks on this one, reporting today that tracked spending on dining and travel shows “that the rapid spread of Omicron may be leading to cautious behaviour”. “The drop in spending after the key Christmas and Boxing Day trading was much sharper this year than in previous years,” it said, with NSW the most evident with visitors apparently avoiding the “premier state”. There was 25% less spending in the week to 2 January 2021 compared with the week to 2 January 2020, the bank said. Other states haven’t done much better, though. Victoria’s spending was off 19%, Queensland 17% and the other states off 15%. Unpacking – or perhaps unwrapping – the figures is getting a little trickier over time, since some of the end-of-year spending drop is the result of an increase in online shopping on “Black Friday” – another US-flavoured import. That’s the first Friday after “Thanksgiving Day”, and the result is less money being splurged on Boxing Day sales. In other words, Omicron might not be wholly to blame for the lower spending of late. Thanks Mick! Hm, is the coronavirus technically still novel? Seems like it’s getting pretty old by now. OK, I’m going to hunt for something to freshen up your afternoon. That’s it for my short and sharp contribution. I’ll hand you over to Tory Shepherd while I go and get a booster shot to protect me from the novel coronavirus. In non-Covid news, the board of the Sydney festival has released a statement about a $20,000 sponsorship from the Israeli embassy to stage a production of the Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin’s Decadance. The sponsorship has sparked calls for a boycott of the festival from pro-Palestinian organisations and assorted artists and academics, and has led to a number of acts pulling out. In a statement released this afternoon the festival board said it was “conscious of the calls for artists and audiences to boycott the festival” over the sponsorship but that “all funding agreements” for this year’s festival would be “honoured”. However, it said that it would “review its practices in relation to funding from foreign governments or related parties” for future festivals. Here’s the statement: The Board is also conscious of the calls for artists and audiences to boycott the Festival in relation to the Israeli Embassy’s financial support of a performance by the Sydney Dance Company of a work, Decadance, by world renowned Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin. The Sydney Festival Board wishes collectively to affirm its respect for the right of all groups to protest and raise concerns. We spent time with a number of groups who have concerns about this funding and welcomed the opportunity to engage with them. All funding agreements for the current Festival – including for Decadance – will be honoured, and the performances will proceed. At the same time, the Board has also determined it will review its practices in relation to funding from foreign governments or related parties. We see it as the core role of the Sydney Festival to present art and to provide an inclusive platform for all artists. We aim to profile a diverse representation of work by artists and companies locally, nationally and internationally. We respect the right of any artist to withdraw from the Festival and hope that they will feel able to participate in future festivals. We likewise respect the many artists who continue to look forward to their participation in this year’s Sydney Festival and welcome them, and audiences to view the art they will present and its myriad of perspectives. As a Board we ask for respectful dialogue by all individuals and organisations when engaging with artists, especially for the personal decisions that artists make. Very interesting thread here from Juliette O’Brien, a data journalist who has been doing excellent work right through the pandemic. She’s casting some doubt on a Daily Telegraph story from a few days ago which quoted the New South Wales health minister, Brad Hazzard, as saying 40% to 50% of hospitalised Covid patients were actually admitted for other reasons. O’Brien has done her own digging and found that at two major hospitals in NSW right now a sample of patients showed the number in hospital with Covid, as opposed to for Covid, was closer to between 20% and 24%. Good afternoon. The New South Wales opposition leader, Chris Minns, has today called on the state government to make rapid antigen tests free, amid continuing long delays for PCR tests and following the closure of a number of private pathology test clinics. Calling it an “urgent situation”, Minns has gone further than federal Labor by saying rapid tests “need to be free of charge”. This is what is happening in other jurisdictions around the world. It’s happening in the UK, it’s happening in the USA, it works. The minimum the government can do for the citizens of this state, is ensure that they’re providing the services so that they can test whether they’ve got Covid or not, that’s the smallest and minimum thing the government can do on behalf of the citizens of New South Wales. Now, at the end of the day, it’s a difficult set of circumstances and we know that we have to live with Covid. But that doesn’t mean we can’t live without a government. There is important work of the NSW government to do, most importantly, staffing and properly resourcing our public hospitals. Now we’re seeing a significant rise in hospital admissions over the last week, we’re expecting more admissions in the coming weeks ahead. And with that, I am going to hand you over to Michael McGowan, who will take you through the rest of the evening. Reporter: Omicron is obviously much more transmissible. Have you commissioned new modelling to inform your planning for this current strain? Bennett: I don’t commission modelling, so the department does, as does national cabinet. And so, as I said, there has been modelling under consideration about Omicron. To do the modelling you really do need to understand the virus itself. And that’s only becoming more apparent more recently. Reporter: Is there work being undertaken to make those rapid antigen tests results visible to authorities? Bennett: Yes, I think all of those things will be under consideration. And they are ongoing discussions with the chief medical officer and chief health officers around the country. We learn clearly from overseas as well as learn from each other with the states and territories. Reporter: In terms of the healthcare workforce ... are they going to be able to cope with the concurrent pressure of cases, of demand for vaccines and for testing? Bennett: With the vaccine program, as I said, I think certainly at the beginning of the vaccine program that fell on healthcare workers were primarily providing the vaccination, but there is a range of avenues now that people can access vaccination, which also frees up healthcare workers and hospitals to do other things. As you say it’s been a very busy couple of years and I think we would all acknowledge the health workforce generally is very tired. And there are plans in place to cope with surge whenever it may occur and support healthcare workers. Bennett is asked about charities now spending tens of thousands of dollars to buy RATs: National cabinet meets again tomorrow and I’m sure they will be considering that. The use of all testing, both PCR and rapid antigen testing, and the range of measures are under constant review and consideration with the pandemic context. So I would expect any new information will be out shortly. I think it’s important though to remind people the most important thing that you can do is to get vaccinated. And now have your booster. Again, the second most important thing is if you are unwell then you do need to stay home and certainly seek – I’m not saying don’t get tested, I’m saying seek access to a test. I just don’t want people to be anxious if they can’t get a test immediately because regardless the most important thing they can do in that situation is stay home in they are unable to find a testing centre. Bennett is asked why the government decided to rely on the market for an essential health product. She says: I don’t think that’s really a question for me. All I can do, as I said, from a policy point of view, of the rapid antigen tests and their use case, certainly the Communicable Diseases Network of Australia have always had a testing strategy in place and that’s been published and that included use of rapid antigen tests as policy questions. So they don’t consider the market issues in that. So it’s probably not a question that I can answer. In response, Bennett is asked if there was any discussion or modelling done about the possibility of a more transmissible strain of the virus and testing demand going up when the government was planning for opening up: That’s always been on the table. Again, I would say that every country is dealing with this situation. So you always plan for various options. You can’t act on all of those various options though because you can’t predict which pathway that will take. So there was certainly planning done, which is part of the reason I think that governments have been able to act so incredibly quickly. Even in countries that had testing in place in a widespread way – because they had more cases – have found it difficult to increase that availability of testing exponentially with Omicron. Bennett is asked again about the rapid antigen tests – and if it is a failure of the federal government that it did not secure enough supplies before we all needed them? I don’t accept that at all. I think the context in September was very different. If you remember we were dealing with Delta variant and so there had been a lot of planning around the Delta variant. There had been modelling to indicate what sort of numbers we could expect to see at various levels of vaccinations – you know as Australia reopened and people started to live their daily lives – and so we are in a very different situation now. Very different context with the case numbers we are seeing. And there is a lot of work. There’s a lot of people working to ensure that that supply is secured as quickly as possible and that will certainly clear in the next few weeks. Bennett is asked where the RATs are at: So the rapid antigen tests, they are still accessible now. Not to everybody. I acknowledge. But they are continuing to come in and over the next week or so – and I think the government announced earlier – we should see upwards of 100m rapid antigen tests coming into the country. So we will have plenty of tests for people to access as they need. Right now people who do need testing can get it. There are different avenues to get that through obviously, but the most critical message I would have is if you are mildly unwell stay home. Bennett is asked if it is even problematic that people around the country can’t get tested – especially if it is a good thing it is spreading further than we know: “I wouldn’t be confident to say that the reason we don’t know all the cases in the community is because people can’t access a test. I do acknowledge at the moment there are delays to testing. We are seeing queues and people might have to look around to see where they get a test. National cabinet last week discussed testing of cases and contacts and that was revised to accommodate really testing those most at risk. The most important thing for people is if they are feeling unwell they should stay home if they are unwell. Now, if you need a test and you area close contact you will be informed of that, either through the case or the public health authorities, and you should certainly seek to get a test if you are advised to do so. Those tests are available from what I’m hearing. Bennett is asked what she thinks the real case numbers are at the moment: A little bit like the data is not entirely telling us what’s happening, I think that’s fair to say. And as we said, in hospital, you know, the numbers we are seeing, people actually being hospitalised for different reasons and happen to have Covid, there is certainly many more cases of Covid in the community we are not aware of. That’s not necessarily a bad thing because I think generally that where we are seeing Covid is in younger people, it’s very mild. Many might not know they have it, or it’s just a sniffle. So they are not overly unwell. And it does mean then you get a natural boost from that in the population. And it also would indicate then if there are more cases we don’t know about, then the impact on the system is even less than we anticipate now. Bennett says we have plenty of vaccines for boosters and kids’ vaccines: I know everybody is aware the five- to 12-year-olds as of 10 January that vaccination program will also commence. So for parents who have already decided to get their child vaccinated, please consider making a booking as soon as they open. Bennett says everyone knows someone with Covid: Talking about those significant case numbers, they do continue to rise. They are large numbers that we have never before seen in Australia. I think at this point we all know somebody who has either got Covid or we have got workers off work because they are quarantining or isolating or had events cancelled. And other impacts in our daily lives that are occurring because of the sheer case numbers. So it really is time for all of us to play our part in managing those numbers and helping them stabilise and come down. And we do that through our behaviours, Covid-safe behaviours which we are all aware of, but more critically we know that the booster, whilst double dose vaccination protects against severe disease, the booster is much more effective at preventing against infection. And so I’m really pleased today to be able to say ... another 8 million Australians became eligible for a booster, having completed their primary course four months ago. We have already seen 2.5 million Australians have their booster, but with another 8 million eligible today that’s really exciting news. Bennett says people are going to the hospital for other reasons and finding out they have Covid: Some interesting evidence that a lot of people are in the hospital wards, not intensive care but hospital, have gone to hospital for another reason and tested positive for Covid. And that’s not surprising given the sheer case numbers that we are seeing in the community. We do know that the Omicron variant is inherently in itself a less severe virus but it’s also part of the outcome of our excellent vaccination coverage, double dose vaccination coverage here in Australia, that we are really seeing limited severe disease despite those significant case numbers. Australia’s deputy chief medical officer, Dr Sonya Bennett, says we’ve had 47,738 Covid cases across the nation: In the last 24 hours nationally we have had 47,738 cases reported. Which is an increase from about 38,000 cases yesterday. 2,362 COVID cases are in hospital. Which is almost double the number that were in hospital last week. 184 cases are in intensive care, only slightly up from last week, which was 135, and of those 59 are ventilated – that is steady. She says the majority of people in ICU have Delta: We haven’t seen an increase in cases in intensive care that are ventilated. As usual, we are working collaboratively with the states and territories looking at the data particularly with respect to hospitalisations, and there is some early evidence that the majority of people in critical care have the Delta variant, particularly in jurisdictions such as Victoria. Australia’s deputy chief medical officer, Dr Sonya Bennett, is expected to address the media soon. The ACTU has joined a growing list of organisations calling for free rapid antigen tests, saying workers are losing shifts because they can’t find them. The acting secretary of the ACTU, Liam O’Brien, said: The fact the ACCC has been forced to take action to stop unscrupulous operators ripping off Australians desperate to get their hands on rapid antigen tests is a shocking indictment of Prime Minister Scott Morrison and his total failure of leadership on rapid antigen testing. Rapid antigen tests must be free and accessible for all Australians who need them, just like they are in the UK and the USA. Working people are losing shifts and wasting hours as they scramble to find rapid antigen tests and, if they’re lucky enough to find an outlet that still has them in stock, they are being gouged by skyrocketing prices. Australia’s system of universal public health care, Medicare, is a source of national pride. Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s undermining of Medicare with his pivot to a “user pays” pandemic is wrong, and he must immediately reverse course. Where did it all go wrong? How did Australia go from being the envy of the world with our best practice public health measures, low case numbers, a prepared health system and an economy ticking along nicely to what can only be described as a shambolic mess? The only example Australia is providing to the world now is a warning about what not to do with the Covid-19 pandemic, writes Kerryn Phelps. Read her piece for Guardian Australia here: A Victorian man charged over last week’s fire at Old Parliament House in Canberra has been granted bail. From AAP: A Victorian man charged with arson and damaging commonwealth property over a fire at Canberra’s Old Parliament House has been granted bail. The 30-year-old appeared via video link on Tuesday from Canberra’s prison, where he was being held in remand. His bail conditions include him reporting to the nearest police station to his home in Gippsland once a week, not entering the ACT unless for legal purposes and attending court in the ACT when compelled. A suppression order has been granted to stop the man’s name from being publicised in fear of retribution for his alleged actions. A woman purporting to be from “the sovereign nation of Terra Australis” applied to represent the man in court, but was denied. He is being represented by Legal Aid. The case will return to court on 25 January. We lost a bit of the Northern Territory Covid presser because of the ACCC announcement, so I’ve just grabbed this from AAP for those who want more info: The Northern Territory has detected 75 new Covid-19 infections as testing requirements for travellers are further eased due to interstate chaos. New arrivals are no longer required to show evidence of a negative PCR test taken 72 hours before travelling to the territory. They will now be handed a rapid antigen test upon arrival in the NT so they can self-test and report their result within two hours. “If you are in a queue down south trying to get a PCR test, leave and we will sort it out when you get here,” chief minister Michael Gunner told reporters on Tuesday. Children under two years are not required to be tested. Gunner said the policy change is a response to testing issues in other states that have seen long queues, delayed result delivery and clinics close. “PCR supply and testing down south are getting thinner and thinner. They are buckling on some places. The shelves are empty of RAT kits,” he said. “It is now clear we need to be in full control of our testing regime and we can’t rely on other jurisdictions.” It comes as fears grow that the virus could have spread to another remote Indigenous community. A Gunbalanya man tested positive after he travelled to his home in west Arnhem Land, about 300km east of Darwin. “The man has spent time in Darwin prior to his arrival,” Gunner said. Birmingham is asked about people panicking over supplies as cases skyrocket: People shouldn’t need to engage in panic buying or any of those things. In Australia, there are many different means of support that are available for people who may need to isolate in terms of the financial support that’s there for those who have loss of income. As well as, of course, the opportunities to be able to have your other goods delivered through usual commercial means. But also the extent to which we’ve seen so many Australians helping out family and friends, neighbours and others to ensure that they are given the assistance they need through these times where they have to isolate. The federal finance minister, Simon Birmingham, is talking in Adelaide now. He says rapid antigen tests are free if you need a clear reason. “We are working with states and territories to make rapid antigen tests freely available to those who need them in those circumstances.” He is asked why RATs are $30 here when they are free in the UK and $4 in Thailand. “We are making sure we have more supply coming into the country in the coming weeks. We expect to see more than 100m kits sourced for Australians to be able to use. “We’re also working through the process of ensuring that for a concessional cardholder, there are subsidies and discounts available to support their access. “Most importantly testing remains free for those who need it.” Wendy Harmer posted this video of the Collaroy sea wall on Twitter earlier. As some of you might remember, we wrote about this last year – beachfront residents paid $300,000 each for the wall, but other locals worried it would eat the beach up. Royce Kurmelovs had the story: The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has set up a team to look into the soaring price of rapid antigen tests after receiving more than 100 complaints about the issue, chair Rod Sims says. It comes after increasing pressure on the Morrison government over RAT prices, which have surged amid an explosion in Covid cases caused by the Omicron wave and as governments restrict the availability of polymerase chain reaction tests. The government has so far rebuffed calls to make the tests free. In a statement, Sims said the ACCC “won’t be shy to name and shame suppliers and retailers we consider to be doing the wrong thing”. Its ability to take other direct action is limited because there is no commonwealth law regulating prices. However, the ACCC could take suppliers to court if there was evidence of collusion on price or prices were so high as to be unconscionable. Sims said the ACCC “will take appropriate action under its existing powers” and “has not sought, and does not need, more powers to deal with the current situation”. He said: “We are seeking information from suppliers about their costs and the current pricing of rapid antigen tests. We are also asking them about their current stock levels, and the amounts on order, and about their expectations about when additional tests may become readily available to consumers. “We are also contacting major retailers and pharmacies seeking similar information and reminding them that they need to be able to substantiate any claims they make to consumers about the reason for higher prices.” Rod Sims, the chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, has just been speaking in Sydney about the cost of rapid antigen tests. Guardian Australia’s Ben Butler is about to bring you more info on it, but below is the statement form the ACCC: “Won’t be shy to name and shame.” The Northern Territory chief minister, Michael Gunner, says there are 75 new cases in the NT. The NT is dropping its requirement to get a PCR test before interstate travellers arrive. “If you’re trying to find a PCR test, if you’re looking for a PCR test, stop. We’ll sort it out when you get here,” Gunner said. The Northern Territory chief minister, Michael Gunner, will provide a Covid-19 update any minute now. Professional Pharmacists Australia, which represents employee pharmacists, today joined the growing chorus of voices asking the federal government to make rapid antigen tests free and available for all Australians. The CEO of Professional Pharmacists Australia, Jill McCabe, said “we should be protecting the health and safety of all workers and their families, not just those who can afford to buy the tests”: We represent the vast majority of pharmacists in Australia – employee pharmacists – and we’re calling on the federal government to act urgently and provide the tests free to all given the surge in cases and the change in testing regimes. The virus hasn’t changed just because the federal government’s definitions and approach to testing has changed. The president of Professional Pharmacists Australia, Geoff March, said working pharmacists believe people’s access to RATs should not be dependent on how much they earn and can afford to pay: Employee pharmacists are on the frontline of this issue, constantly running out of supply and seeing the look on people’s faces when they struggle to pay for tests. Most Australians find the cost of testing their family prohibitive – if they’re able to find testing kits at all. If Australians have to rely on the private sector to get Covid tests, they will be paying up to $20 each – that’s $100 for a family of five for just one test each time. Hello everyone, this is Cait Kelly back to take you through the next few hours. If you see anything around that could be good for the blog, tweet me @cait__kelly or email me cait.kelly@theguardian.com Let’s get cracking into the afternoon. I’m going to hand back to my colleague Cait Kelly now. Enjoy your afternoon! Steven Marshall says he’s contacted the federal chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, and the prime minister, Scott Morrison, asking for AHPPC to look at how schools and childcare can return this year. “We’d prefer to have a national approach,” he says. Marshall says 30-40% of the people in hospital are not fully vaccinated. The proportion of people in SA 12 years and over who are not fully vaccinated is about 10%. Therefore the unvaccinated are overrepresented in hospital, says Marshall. Marshall insists testing result waiting times have not blown out. “They haven’t blown out,” he says. “They have actually been coming down for the last four days.” Not everyone agrees, though. On hospitalisations, Marshall says that the 102 people in hospital with Covid is “well within our capacity”. “We have been flexing up our capacity, we’ve already done it ahead of opening the border on 23 November for the Delta strain, now of course we have been able to revise that capacity surge for Omicron, and we continue to look at it pretty much on a daily basis,” he says. The private pathology operator that has closed four of its sites is Clinpath. Asked if their decision to shut four sites with no notice was acceptable, Marshall says: I’m not going to make a comment on a private company because they have got to, if you like, justify their reasons. But what I can say is that Clinpath has done an outstanding job as a private laboratory in South Australia, and are continuing to do good work in critical sectors in South Australia. Obviously they have made a decision to close four of their sites in South Australia and I think some interstate as well. Other private laboratories are closing down sites interstate. Marshall says private laboratories in South Australia do a “proportionally small amount of the overall testing in South Australia”. “SA Pathology is the workhorse,” he says. On rapid antigen tests, Marshall says the state received a shipment of 250,000 today. The state has 10m on order and is expecting to get about 1m tests in each week. Marshall says there is a private lab that is closing four testing sites in South Australia. He says also that there are 128 cases in the prison population, up from 90 yesterday. South Australia has recorded 3,246 new cases, the premier, Steven Marshall has announced. He says there are 102 people in hospital, 12 in ICU, one patient who is on a ventilator. This is a very long line for a PCR test in Brisbane. Ocean Grove is about 100km outside Melbourne, on the Bellarine Peninsula. The Australian share market is firmly higher in its first trading session for the year as investors looked past surging local coronavirus cases and instead focused on strong gains on Wall Street, AAP reports. The benchmark S&amp;P/ASX200 index was up 95.9 points, or 1.29%, to 7,540.5 points at 1200 AEDT on Tuesday. The All Ordinaries index rose 97.9 points, or 1.26%, to 7,877.1 points. The gains came after a strong cue from Wall Street overnight, with all three major US indices ending firmly in the green thanks to solid gains in shares of technology giant Apple and electric car maker Tesla. That helped investors brush aside concerns about rising hospitalisations amid a surge in local Omicron cases across major states. Hello everyone. It’s Luke Henriques-Gomes here. Happy new year. I’ll be with you for a bit. Thanks to Cait Kelly for her great work this morning. If you see something that we should know about, send me an email: luke.henriques-gomes@theguardian.com I’m also on Twitter: @lukegomes I am just going to hand you over to Luke Henriques-Gomes who will take you through the next few minutes while I eat some lunch! Peak advocacy organisation People with Disability Australia has called for free rapid antigen tests and N94 masks for people with disabilities. The PWDA president, Samantha Connor, said at minimum free tests should be available to people with disability who are at risk of severe disease, their families and workers: Government has a clear responsibility to keep people with disability safe by providing safe and free in-home testing, including PCR testing for those who cannot safely travel. Free or heavily government-subsidised tests should be also readily available to the public via pharmacies, community pick-up points, education settings, workplaces and other public settings. Connor, an advocate and disability rights activist, said Australia could look overseas for good models to follow. In the United Kingdom, a twice weekly preventative regime is in place to ensure that people with disability who receive care services are safe from Covid. People with disability and their caregivers are able to access rapid antigen tests in the UK, including via mail, as part of a wider preventative regime of Covid-safe strategies. PWDA is concerned the push in national cabinet to change the national definition of close contacts for Covid testing to four hours of contact will mean that people with disability could unknowingly contract Covid from support workers, who often work shifts less than four hours. Without a free and freely available regime of rapid antigen testing for disability support workers, families and carers, people with disability who are clinically vulnerable to Covid could die. Tired: Lining up for five hours for a PCR test only to be turned away. Wired: Lining up for a vaccine like a champ. Rod Sims, the chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, is to face the media in Sydney at 1.30pm to talk about the pricing of rapid antigen tests. With the tests in high demand and Scott Morrison ruling out making them free through the federal government, prices have soared, leading to accusations – denied by pharmacists – of price gouging. As we’ve previously reported, Josh Frydenberg spoke to Sims about the issue last week, while the ACCC chair was on holidays. It’s his first day back on the job today. Because there are no commonwealth price control laws, Sims has limited options. However, he can name and shame anyone who’s unreasonably jacking up prices. You can read more about the process here. We are just going to jump back to Queensland quickly – the presser is over, but I thought many of you would be interested in this. D’Ath was asked if all those pre-testing requirements were pointless in the wake of huge case numbers. “When we opened our borders, we expected thousands of people,” she said. “But we ended up with tens of thousands of people, and now hundreds of thousands of people flooding into Queensland from interstate hot spots. “We had to do everything we could to reduce the risk of the virus coming in quickly. You have to remember, we opened our borders at the same time as Omicron came onto the scene. It was very new, we didn’t know how fast it would spread. “We only waited [for] just over a week of data to analyse before we changed the rules,” she said. “We were not complacent. Health has got to come first.” Allen is asked about the agenda for tomorrow’s national cabinet: “The agenda is still to be made available and I understand ... that will come through over the course of today. “I think it’s fair to say [topics will include] conversations like the availability of Rapid Antigen Tests [and] making sure that we’ve got continuing confidence from the commonwealth about the supply of vaccines, both for the adult population and for kids as well. “So those will be issues that will no doubt be discussed at national cabinet.” Weimer says if you have symptoms, be prepared to wait at a PCR clinic. “Don’t stop trying. What we really don’t want people to do is go, ‘OK’, and [then] carry on running around.” Weimar said the high positivity rate means they cannot “batch our tests” in the normal way, and each one now must be tested individually – which is created the backlog. “We would expect there to be far more cases out in the community... Omicron is sweeping throughout the community now in a way we have not seen.” He says 30-40% of the cases in Victoria are in the 20-40 aged group, and that the “sheer number” of cases we are seeing will put pressure on the health system in the coming weeks. Both Queensland and Victoria are laying blame at the feet of the federal government for not ordering/providing RATs as part of the national plan. “Every territory or government around the country and just about every jurisdiction around the world is wanting RATS. “The first batch are on their way and we’ve had to step up and do this in the absence of national leadership.” Allan was asked if there are concerns people with Covid may die at home. “There is a concern about how we continue to support the Victorian community through this period of time. And clearly, if people are quite unwell, reaching out to their GP is often everyone’s first point of call when [they’re] experiencing symptoms or unwell and we need to continue following those important steps. “[Such as] contacting your GP, talking to NURSE-ON-CALL.” In Victoria, that’s 1300 60 60 24. Weimar said 54 private testing sites would be suspended from today so they could deal with the backlog. “They will continue to work 24-7 to process the backlog of test results,” he said. Weimar said those clinics would reopen when they have dealt with the backlog. The next month would be difficult, he added. “It is a challenging time for all of us.” Allan did not rule out introducing “common sense” public health measures on top of mask-wearing. “And we’ll continue to look at if there are any other common-sense measures that can be taken,” Allan said. “Those are obviously matters, I should stress, for the Health Minister to make … that’s a matter for him to consider as we monitor very closely what’s going on in the Victorian community at the moment.” Weimar said one in four tests in Victoria were now coming back positive. He says if you return a positive RAT test and cannot get a PCR test, you need to assume you have Covid and isolate. “You’ve got a positive result already. Again, if you can’t get hold of a PCR, then again I say treat it as a positive result.” We’re just going to jump down to Victoria where acting premier Jacinta Allan and Covid commander Jeroen Weimar has just been talking to the media. We’ve missed the start, but the takeaway was that the state recorded a big spike in cases overnight. “Obviously that is a large increase and equates to a very high positivity rate of the virus in our community,” Allan said. Allan thanked Victorians for their patience in getting tested and urged everyone to get boosted. “If you’re eligible, please, go and get your third dose vaccination.” Victoria will get some supplies of RATs in the next few days. Queenslanders need to be wearing their masks more. 529 masks were handed out and five on the spot fines were issued to people just on the Gold Coast alone. Gerrard says each person with Omicron is, on average, infecting 7–10 other people, according to some of the figures that have been quoted. He says the testing queues and shortage of RATs is a “problem right across Australia. It is not unique to us.” He adds that more RAT tests should become available soon, but until then, if you are a healthy young adult and you have “something that looks like the common cold or flu” you should stay at home. “Most people are getting better within one or two days.” D’Ath says if you are symptomatic and you can’t get a test, you need to act like you are positive. She is asked about people travelling into Queensland. “It was only a few days ago where we were being told that other states were overwhelmed at testing clinics for PCR, because ... people were travelling to Queensland. “That’s what we read and we made (the changes) to RAT and we have not seen a decrease in those lines interstate.” D’Ath says Queensland “is prepared as we can be”. “We knew when we shifted to the RAT, we’re going to see an issue with availability. So we’re sourcing those as quickly as we can.” She says she will be contacting the federal health minister Greg Hunt today about if RATs can be used instead for screenings in aged care so the general public can use those PCR. “It means that we’re taking other private pathologists offline, who were running drive-thru clinics, so I’m going to have a chat with Greg Hunt about that today.” D’Ath says the government reached out to the private pathologists about opening after Christmas. She says 17 of 200 private clinics are closed. “We can’t force their staff to go to work if they’re positive.” Dr John Gerrard says if you are sick and you cannot get a test you should assume you have Covid and stay at home. “If you are experiencing the following symptoms then I suggest you seek immediate medical advice or call an ambulance. “That is: if you are breathless, if you have significant breathlessness, chest pain, fainting or severe lightheadedness. “And also, I would suggest that you seek medical advice if you have not had a medical diagnosis of COVID-19 and your symptoms are continuing or not improving after the third day”. Queensland’s chief health officer Dr John Gerrard says there are now 25,920 active cases in the state. A total of 33,312 tests were processed in the last 24 hours. He says 23% of the tests taken yesterday came back positive. “Even though the proportion of patients requiring intensive care is substantially lower than what we have seen previously, the number of cases we are expecting to see through January, early January will be very high,” he says. “Certainly in the hundreds of thousands if not more in Queensland.” Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath says five private testing clinics will remain shut until January 9. That will put some pressure on the system, she said. “I do want to remind people, there should only be three reasons to come forward and line up for a PCR test, either through drive-throughs or walk-up testing. “That is, that you have COVID symptoms. Secondly, that you have done a rapid antigen test and it’s come up positive, or you are a close contact and it is day six and you haven’t been able to get a RAT test. “If you don’t have any symptoms. That’s not a reason to turn up for a PCR test.” Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath is speaking now. She says 11 people are in ICU, two are ventilated. There are 170 cases on top of that in hospital. We are just waiting for Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath - who is expected to address the media shortly. There is also testing trouble in Queensland, with one ABC reporter queuing up before 7am on the Gold Coast only to be told the site was not opening. The New South Wales teachers’ union has called for an urgent meeting with health and education officials to discuss safety at the onset of the new school year amid the growing Covid-19 outbreak in the state. The NSW Teachers Federation president, Angelo Gavrielatos, warned absentee rates could cause chaos and said “serious questions” about safety needed to be answered before students return to classrooms in early February. “The current plan is the plan we had when schools went into the vacation period,” he told Guardian Australia on Monday. “All that’s changed. We are now living in a very different context to what we were in the weeks prior to schools going into summer recess.” There’s been a bit of media around house prices over the past year, so it seems only right to make some note of how they fared in 2021 overall. CoreLogic is one private consultancy that’s quick out of the blocks. According to them, average “housing values” rose 22.1% last year, which is either a sign of low-interest rates doing their thing or one of market insanity, given the wider economic disruptions that are obvious if you visit any shopping centre, for instance. But we want to know details such as the fact that December “values” only rose 1% compared with 1.3% in November, or that those in the regions were still increasing at a 2.2% clip in the final month of 2021 – perhaps as city folk sought to flee future lockdowns in urban areas. For the year, the Southern Highlands and Shoalhaven regions of NSW posted a 37.7% rise in prices for the year, the fastest in the nation, according to CoreLogic. Queensland’s Sunshine Coast wasn’t far behind with a 33.7% rise. Across the capitals, Melbourne reported its first retreat – all of 0.1% in December – since October 2020, while Brisbane reported a 2.9% “surge”, CoreLogic said. For the year, the Victorian capital’s rise was 15.1% and Brisbane’s 27.4%. Sydney housing prices were bobbing along at 0.3% higher in December and 25.3% for the year. Hobart’s 28.1% rise was the most among the capitals for 2021. “The slowing trend in Sydney and Melbourne can be explained by a bigger deposit hurdle caused by higher housing prices alongside low income growth, as well as a recent surge in advertised inventory levels and weak demographic trends,” CoreLogic said. “Slower conditions across the Perth housing market [with its mere 13.1% annual rise] may be more attributable to the disruption to interstate migration caused by extended closed state borders which has had a negative impact on housing demand.” “In Brisbane and Adelaide, housing affordability is less challenging, advertised stock levels remain remarkably low and demographic trends continue to support housing demand,” CoreLogic said. I suppose the question is when will Covid logic catch up with the market. Probably before the first rise of official interest rates, which the RBA at least doesn’t think will happen until 2023, at the earliest. The ACT have recorded 926 new cases overnight, making for a total of 2,789 active cases. That’s 13 in hospital, with one person in the ICU and one on ventilation. 98.5% of the 12+ population are vaccinated, with the current total of cases since August 2021 standing at 6,120. A city that plagues together stays together: Anthony Albanese: You can’t get access to a PCR test because testing queues go for six or eight hours. You get told to get a rapid antigen test but you can’t find one. If people are lucky enough to find one, they’re not affordable. And for many people, it’s simply pricing them out of access to that important healthcare. And of course, we have no action from the federal government when it comes to price. The Labor leader says the government had months to plan for opening up: Greg Hunt announced in September last year, to quote him, he said, “Home testing is important to the national plan.” The national government didn’t plan for the national plan. Anthony Albanese is just talking on the Central Coast in NSW. He is attacking the government for the testing system being in chaos: Today there are 28 testing sites closing today which will only exacerbate the existing problem of the queue times which are there. Australian’s are being told, ‘You’re on your own go out and get a rapid antigen test.’ But they’re not available in so many areas. You have on the front page of one of the Sydney papers today, your guide to finding RAT. That’s how bad it is. In the last 24 hours, 2,088 tests were processed, with a positive rate of 33.6%. Three people are in hospital, with one being treated specifically for Covid symptoms. More to come. I’ve got some weather updates for you. Very hot in parts of Queensland, very wet in Victoria and Tasmania. When my father fell ill on New Year’s Eve, we had two choices: admit him into an understaffed hospital riven with Covid or try to keep him alive at home, an anonymous writer says. From AAP: Australia has passed the grim milestone of more than 500,000 Covid-19 cases since the pandemic began. The mark was passed this morning after both NSW and Victoria registered record daily case numbers. NSW had 23,131 new cases, with a further two deaths. The state has 1,344 patients in hospital, up by 139 from the day before, with 105 in intensive care, up by 10. There were 14,020 cases in Victoria, the first time the state has recorded a one-day total of above 10,000. There were another two deaths in the state, with 516 patients in hospital – a rise of 25 – while there are four more patients in intensive care, taking the total to 108. The rise in cases comes as Scott Morrison comes under increasing pressure to make rapid antigen tests free, as widespread shortages continue. As people struggle to get a rapid test, leading to long queues at PCR testing sites, medical experts have slammed government inaction to secure enough tests to meet demand. Covid-positive nurses are being recalled to work in hospitals across New South Wales – in breach of state health protocols – as hospital managers resort to desperate measures to staff facilities buckling under the Omicron outbreak. Guardian Australia has been contacted by multiple nurses working across several hospitals in the state who are alarmed at finding themselves working alongside Covid-positive colleagues, as 2,500 health workers are in isolation across NSW. The public hospitals span three local health districts in NSW and include major Sydney hospitals and smaller regional facilities. A key figure in South Australia’s response to Covid has tested positive to the virus this morning. Police commissioner Grant Stevens is the state’s emergency coordinator during the pandemic. After waking up yesterday with a sore throat he is now isolating at home. State opposition leader Peter Malinauskas also tested positive to Covid yesterday. Victoria has recorded a steep increase in cases, recording 14,020 new overnight. It’s an increase of more than 5,000 cases on 8,577 recorded on 3 January. In Victoria, 516 people are in hospital and of those, 56 are in ICU. Three of the state’s major hospitals in the western suburbs have asked people to only go to the emergency department if it was “absolutely necessary”. In eight days the number of hospitalisations has increased by 148. On 27 December there were 368 people being treated for Covid, and as of today, there are 516. From Australian Associated Press: There are 1,344 people in the state’s hospitals, 78 more than the previous record set on 21 September when NSW was in the grips of the Delta variant. Tuesday’s hospitalisation figure marks a rise by 140 on the previous day’s figure. Two more deaths were reported on Tuesday. The new cases were from 83,376 tests processed in the 24 hours to 8pm on Monday, with the positivity rate at a record 27.7%. While ICU numbers are rising – 105 at the latest count – they are well short of the peak of 244 in September. Intensive care admissions continue to be driven largely by the more severe Delta variant. Human bodies have a second line of defence against Covid that offers hope in the global fight against the Omicron variant, Australian researchers say. University of Melbourne research, done in conjunction with the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, has found that T-cells should be able to tackle the virus. Omicron has a higher number of mutations than other variants, which means it can sometimes slip past the antibodies produced by vaccination or infection. But if it does enter the body, the T-cells – white blood cells that originate in the marrow – will attack. Brett Holmes is the general secretary at NSW Nurses and Midwives’ Association. He writes in the Sydney Morning Herald this morning talking about the situation in NSW hospitals: Over the weekend, an ICU nurse at an outer-metropolitan hospital declared, “We are falling like flies.” In the state’s north, an ICU nurse said, “We’ve had two years to prepare for this and it’s still shit everywhere”; another reflected, “There’s nothing left in the tank.” “Staffing has become so bad that many ICUs are working without team leaders or the nurses they need in addition to bedside nurses to keep the units working seamlessly.” He says nurses have been told not to remove their masks or glasses when they’re together – even if socially distanced. “If pulled from home isolation, they can only travel to and from work, with strictly no stops. They are not provided with rapid antigen kits for home use, having to do these tests at work under supervision. “Some have been waiting three days or more for their PCR test results, even for testing that has been fast-tracked for health workers.” Guardian Australia political reporter Amy Remeikis is on RN right now and this is what she had to say about the election: We look back at the election cycle at this point last time, and most people had made up their mind about Bill Shorten. Many had decided who he was and whether or not they liked him and he was an unpopular leader. This time around with Anthony Albanese, some people like him, some people don’t but there’s still a big chunk of voters who are undecided and Labor sees that as a lot easier to overcome. She was also asked which seats the election will be fought and won in: New South Wales, and western Sydney in particular. I think that’s going to be the most important jurisdiction of the election, and you can see that from how much time both leaders are already spending there. Australian Clinical Labs has shut 28 PCR testing clinics around Sydney “until further notice” because of the backlog in tests. The closures mean the company is now only operating its Bella Vista clinic for paid international travel tests, the Sydney Morning Herald reports. The 28 sites include both drive-through and walk-in clinics. The company said: These closures have been necessary due to the significant increase in testing volumes across the State. Labor MP Linda Burney has been on the ABC this morning calling for the federal government to make RATs affordable: If people need the test and they are required to have it, then they should be able to have it at an affordable price and they should be able to have access to it. I have never seen such a bungled policy stuff-up in my life. AMA vice-president Chris Moy was on RN Breakfast this morning. He said the AMA had told the federal government about the shortage months ago: Good morning. This is Cait Kelly and I will be taking you through today’s news. Here are the big stories so far: Millions more Aussies are now eligible for their booster shot with the time frame between second and third doses reducing to four months from today. About 7.5 million Australians are now eligible, up from around 4.1 million at the end of 2021. Boosters will be brought forward to four months after the second dose, down from five months. From 31 January, people can get boosters after three months. NSW is likely soon to set a new record for Covid-19 hospitalisations as it nears the figure reached at the height of the Delta outbreak in September. There were 1,204 people in the state’s hospitals with Covid on Monday, 62 shy of the record set on 21 September when NSW was in the grip of the Delta wave. And Victorians are being warned to expect surging cases numbers and hospitalisations. Victoria’s Covid-19 response commander, Jeroen Weimar, has warned that the number of people hospitalised with the virus, now at 491, is expected to increase “quite rapidly” in coming days. The fight about free rapid tests also continues, with the tests being difficult to buy despite forming the backbone of Australia’s new testing regime. Scott Morrison has so far resisted calls to make the tests free, despite some states moving to do so. “We’re now at a stage of the pandemic where you can’t just make everything free,” the prime minister said, while the AMA has revealed it warned the federal government about a shortage of RATs last September. With that – let’s get into it.With the most recent Oscar ceremony having taken place abnormally late in April, it feels like we barely had a break before the machinery of awards season started cranking up again. It began at the Venice film festival at the tail end of summer and is now in full cry, with major critics’ groups and more dubious collectives like the Golden Globes having already weighed in – and a gaggle of apparent frontrunners establishing themselves in major categories. In the acting fields, we’re already pondering the likelihood of victories for stars like Kristen Stewart, Benedict Cumberbatch, Will Smith and Rita Moreno – though there’s still plenty of wiggle room for surprises. Last year’s extra-long season yielded an almost entirely unforeseen nomination for Lakeith Stanfield and an against-the-odds win for Anthony Hopkins: never make the mistake of taking the pundits’ word as gospel. With that in mind, we’re highlighting a few outlying performances that ought to be in the mix, but haven’t yet generated the buzz they deserve. Some of them are just outside the perceived top tier of contenders, others are long shots that we can merely dream about. But there’s still a long way to go – Oscar nomination ballots only go out toward the end of January, for one thing. And the season would be more interesting for having all these names invited to the party. Richard Ayoade, The Souvenir Part II Two years ago, Ayoade’s brief, haughty cameo was a comic high point of The Souvenir, the first part of Joanna Hogg’s quietly momentous, autobiographical portrait of the artist as a young woman. His expanded presence in the second is one of the film’s great surprises: the character enters proceedings as a hilariously preening, self-involved film-maker on the rise (allegedly inspired by Julien Temple) before delivering an unexpectedly bittersweet shot of wisdom in his final scene. He lost the British Independent Film award to After Love newcomer Talid Ariss, and given the first film’s failure to register with Bafta and the Academy, that might have been his best shot on goal. Bradley Cooper, Nightmare Alley and Licorice Pizza Bradley Cooper has been nominated for eight Oscars, four of them for acting, and has yet to win: last time, he suffered the humiliation of putting his heart, soul and real singing voice into portraying a doomed rock star in A Star is Born, only to lose to Rami Malek’s lip-synching, rubber-dentured Freddie Mercury. You’d think he’s carrying a pretty hefty IOU into this year’s race, but so far neither of his two superb, very different performances in high-profile prestige films have generated much heat. He’s unnerving as a fraudulent, tar-souled mentalist in Guillermo del Toro’s sleek noir remake, and a blast of gonzo comic energy as flamboyant producer Jon Peters in Paul Thomas Anderson’s California nostalgia piece: perhaps voters will eventually latch on to the bravura range he’s showing. Matt Damon, Stillwater After some gauche interview statements, Matt Damon’s popularity isn’t at a high right now, and barely anyone saw Tom McCarthy’s Amanda Knox-inspired fish-out-of-water water drama when it hit cinemas in the summer – extinguishing whatever awards hopes remained after its tepid Cannes premiere. That’s a shame, since he’s genuinely terrific in it: cast against type as a Trump-supporting Oklahoma oil worker attempting to defy the French legal system after his daughter’s murder conviction, he’s both calloused and wounded, resisting cheap political stereotyping, but not also shying from the bluster of ugly-American entitlement. He’s been nominated for far less substantial work. Anders Danielsen Lie, The Worst Person in the World Renate Reinsve, the luminous lead of Norwegian director Joachim Trier’s generational dramedy, has deservedly led the film’s awards charge since winning best actress at Cannes in July, and recently placed second with the LA film critics. But Danielsen Lie, who’s having a banner year between this and Bergman Island, deserves some of the hype too: as the older Gen X boyfriend of Reinsve’s restless millennial protagonist, he’s a wry anchoring presence in the film’s early stages, before stepping up to carry the film’s most devastating strand – including a punch-to-the-gut monologue confessing his fears of being erased by the future. He deserves more recognition, not that the actor – who still maintains a second career as a doctor – seems especially bothered. Ana de Armas, No Time to Die The latest, bleakest James Bond adventure divided popular opinion in most of the usual ways, but there was one component of the film that everyone agreed on as a highlight: Ana de Armas’s funny, thrilling, one-and-done action sequence as an inexperienced Cuban CIA agent drafted in to help the ex-007 out on a delicate Havana mission, that she then proceeds to blow up in absolutely every sense of the term. Many complained that her presence was too brief, but it’s an ideal Bond cameo: she waltzes in with all guns blazing and charisma to spare, sets everything on fire, and leaves you wanting more. Can you name a supporting actress contender this year who does more in less time to juice up her film? Dagmara Domińczyk, The Lost Daughter Maggie Gyllenhaal’s marvellous directorial debut is rightly racking up awards buzz for Olivia Colman and Jessie Buckley as different but eerily synched iterations of the same character, with the latter hoping to score in the supporting category. I hope she does, but her meatier role gives her a leg-up on her fine co-stars, who also merit consideration: Dakota Johnson for one, but especially the excellent, oft-sidelined Polish American actor Domińczyk, who burns an immediate hole in proceedings as the watchful, passive-aggressive holidaymaker who first locks horns with Colman’s equally thorny tourist. Radiating volatile don’t-tread-on-me energy beneath even a polite offer of birthday cake, she lingers faintly terrifyingly in the mind long after her character recedes into the background. Colman Domingo, Zola The malevolent secret weapon of Janicza Bravo’s raucous, ripped-from-Twitter stripper romp, Domingo hasn’t been entirely ignored so far this season, having collected supporting nods from both the indie-oriented Gotham and Spirit awards. But it’s looking all too likely that he’ll be crowded out of the Oscar race by bigger names in slicker, softer films, and that isn’t right. As the mysterious, initially nameless Nigerian pimp who comes to hold Taylour Paige and Riley Keough’s road-tripping dancers in his ruthless grip, he’s a lightning bolt in an already sparky enterprise, code-switching with uncanny aplomb and controlling the very tone of the film on a dime. Polly Draper, Shiva Baby Emma Seligman’s brilliant, claustrophobic comedy of manners, errors and bagels has one of the year’s most beautifully cast, balanced and rhythmically integrated ensembles – and it’s been a shame to see that go unrecognised by voting groups who reserve ensemble awards for films cramming the most A-list names on to the screen. But if there’s any MVP in the closely matched group (and I very nearly plumped for Dianna Agron’s sweetly venomous shiksa at the all-Jewish wake), it’s Draper’s invasive, fretful, maddeningly neurotic but movingly concerned mother to Rachel Sennott’s spiralling protagonist – a walking Jewish mother joke whose punchline turns out to be her very human tenderness. Rebecca Hall, The Night House When this excellent, underrated psychological horror film was released in August, I wasn’t the only critic to note that Hall unassumingly gives one of the year’s best performances in it: a study in politely suppressed grief erupting as increasingly off-kilter mania. Of course, it was agreed at the time, this modest genre indie wasn’t the kind of film that would return at awards season; good thing her superb directorial debut Passing would get her some behind-the-camera gold instead. Five months later, Passing also is getting less than its due in precursor awards, and one way or another, Hall deserves better for the standout year of her career. Gaby Hoffmann, C’mon C’mon When I first saw C’mon C’mon, I assumed Hoffmann would be among the top tier of women to beat for all best supporting actress prizes. A well-loved child star turned valued character actor in TV and film alike, she does the best work of her career in Mike Mills’s lovely, melancholic study of parenting, guardianship and the burden of care. As the weary but enduringly patient sister of Joaquin Phoenix’s protagonist, straining under the weight of responsibilities to her son and husband alike, Hoffmann exquisitely essays the emotional exhaustion that is a symptom of the age we live in, playing her neither as sainted martyr or frazzled harridan, but something credibly in between. It’s delicate, precise work, and evidently too subtle by half – even the Spirit awards, otherwise high on Mills’s film, failed to nominate her. Toko Miura, Drive My Car Japanese director Ryusuke Hamaguchi’s rich, finely woven three-hour adaptation of a Haruki Murakami short story has emerged as the unexpected darling of critics’ award season, even uniting the rarely simpatico New York and Los Angeles critics’ groups in their best picture voting. Leading man Hidetoshi Nishijima has received some best actor attention along the way, but Miura, his most essential scene partner for the bulk of the film, has been largely ignored. As the young, taciturn chauffeur to Nishijima’s withdraw stage maestro, gradually revealing a life of inordinate tragedy in economical phrases and gestures, she’s as compelling a listener on screen as she is a speaker, and deserves her share of the glory. Charlotte Rampling, Benedetta It’s been a good year for Rampling, who wouldn’t be a bad shout in best supporting actress for her darkly imperious Gaius Helen Mohiam in Denis Villeneuve’s spectacular take on Dune. But that isn’t the first, nor the best, Reverend Mother figure she’s played this year: she’s a riot in Paul Verhoeven’s lurid nuns-gone-wild spectacular, playing a progressively undermined authoritarian figure who pivots from gorgon to strangely sympathetic victim almost entirely on the strength of Rampling’s austere, stricken gravitas. But she’s blissfully attuned to the high camp of the enterprise too, reeling off some of the year’s most impeccably withering one-liners: “No miracles happen in bed,” she says at one point with pitch-perfect, life-learned disdain. Charlie Shotwell, John and the Hole In a good year for child performances, two boys are hogging the attention: Woody Norman, the furious, capricious, heart-on-sleeve British prodigy of C’mon C’mon, and Belfast lead Jude Hill, an appealing presence tackling somewhat less complex demands. Fourteen-year-old Shotwell, however, should be right up there with them. Having already proven himself an impressively eerie presence in The Nest, he carries Pascual Sisto’s chilling, Haneke-esque riff of Home Alone with unnerving assurance and vivid psychic pain – as a meek teenage boy trapping and imprisoning his family in order to live independently. It’s an unnerving premise, enriched by Shotwell’s refusal to play John merely as a dead-eyed boy-psycho: he’s a kid, curious and vulnerable, stretching for an epiphany that eludes him. Dan Stevens, I’m Your Man That Dan Stevens, erstwhile toff dreamboat of Downton Abbey, speaks German throughout Maria Schrader’s delightful sci-fi romcom is the most immediately surprising aspect of a performance that nonetheless goes on to wrong-foot and disorient us in more substantial ways. As a bespoke android boyfriend perfectly tailored for the needs of Maren Eggert’s wary career woman, he has fun luring us into the character’s robotic implacability before inviting us to question whether his sentience and emotional weak spots are themselves programmed, or a kind of human ghost in the machine. It’s one of the year’s most spry comic turns, and the high point of a career that has recently taken quirkier directions than anyone might have guessed after his TV breakout. Mary Twala, This is Not a Burial, It’s a Resurrection A legend in her native South Africa, the 80-year-old Twala died in 2020, mere months after her career-crowning turn in Lemohang Jeremiah Mosese’s staggering Lesotho-set fable first popped at the Sundance film festival. That may add a degree of poignancy to her performance as a rural widow whose preparations to die are disrupted by a battle for her ancestral land, but it needs no sentimental context: it’s already devastating work on its own terms, carrying a lifetime of labour and marginalisation in her gnarled but defiant bearing and expression. She stands her ground as though she’s grown roots in the earth itself.Flanders Moss bog is slumped on the flat, farmed landscape of the Carse of Stirling in Scotland like a jelly fungi. It wobbles when you walk on it, and a metal pole goes down eight metres before reaching hard ground. This lowland-raised bog is a dome of peat fed mainly by rainfall and it acts like a single organism – the whole thing has to be looked after for any part to be in really good shape. If it is drained in one area it will affect the water level across the entire bog. For much of human history peat bogs have been thought of as wastelands. This 860-hectare (2,125-acre) site has been hacked away and drained since the early 1800s to make space for fertile farmland below. It is about 60% of its original size. Bogs scar easily and the drainage ditches made more than 100 years ago are still visible. It is now recognised that peat bogs are among the greatest stores of carbon and, after decades of restoration, the holes in the peat at Flanders Moss have been patched up. Areas that used to be purple with heather are turning green as key bog plants such as sphagnum (peat moss) and cottongrass come back. The bog rises out of the land like a sponge and “breathes” as changes in the weather and water level cause it to swell and contract. Researchers in Scotland are tracking “bog breathing” using the latest satellite technology that can detect just a few millimetres of change. This provides an accurate test of how healthy the site is and how much carbon it could be holding. Flanders Moss holds around 3m tonnes of carbon. Thanks to the restoration work, the water table has risen by as much as 40cm on the site and is now at the surface. As the bog draws in water from the surrounding land it helps manage flood risk. Flanders Moss bog has removed 890 hectares of land from the Forth catchment, reducing flooding downstream. A healthy bog is a bit like a malfunctioning compost heap. “With a compost heap we keep throwing stuff in and it all rots and breaks down, but with a bog, it doesn’t. It just keeps accumulating and accumulating,” says David Pickett, who manages the site, which is a National Nature Reserve. The Scottish government-funded Peatland Action project, which started in 2012, is helping revive 25,000 hectares of degraded peatland. In 2020, the Scottish government committed £250m of funding over 10 years to bog restoration in a bid to lock carbon in the land. It is hoped the satellite data can be used to work out which bogs need urgent help and what efforts are working. “At some point, hopefully, we’ll be able to inform government, but also private investors and other funding bodies, to say ‘well, it’s better to put your money into these sites’,” says Henk Pieter Sterk, who is working on the Peatland Action project at NatureScot. “Here in Scotland, we have the opportunity to protect and restore peatlands … It’s the easiest thing you can do. Restoring peatlands is a no-brainer.” It takes about a month to process the satellite data for a third of Scotland, which is available through the Copernicus Open Access Hub. The technology is still in development but is likely to be cheaper than ground-based mapping. “The next steps would include looking at an even wider range of peatland types and conditions across Scotland, followed by – hopefully – an assessment of the tool across the UK for the same purpose,” says Sterk. Despite these restoration efforts, Flanders Moss is still a net emitter of carbon. Scotland’s bogs emit about 10m tonnes of carbon equivalent, which is almost as much as the transport sector. Stopping these emissions and preventing further degradation are the primary objectives of the restoration project. Bogs work on a different timeframe than humans. They form slowly, accumulating between 0.5mm to 1mm of peat a year, taking up to 1,000 years to grow one metre. But Pickett’s team has jump-started recovery. “We’ve done most of the big work here,” he says. “Now, it’s a question of waiting. The process of fixing this site will last 100 years, and the benefits of work being done now will only be seen by the next generation.” It’s easy to see why bogs weren’t popular. They are stores of partly decayed organic matter, which are too acidic and devoid of nutrients to support healthy trees. But this bog is colourful and has a fresh, earthy smell. As well as being a fantastic store of carbon, this ancient, watery land – healthy peat is about 90% water – is also rich in wildlife, including rare lizards, dragonflies and even snakes. “There isn’t headline sexy stuff like puffins and seals but you go around the boardwalk and it’s a fantastic place,” says Pickett. “I always used to think bogs must have been named on a Friday after a really bad week. We’re trying to change the perception of bogs but it’s a hard sell.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresWhen Sydney man Scott Sumner woke up in a “full sweat” at midnight on Monday with aches and cold symptoms he thought to himself: “This is not a good sign.” It was more bad news when the Petersham resident arrived at the Summer Hill testing clinic about 8.15am on Tuesday to find a queue of cars he guessed was 3km long. Still, he joined it, and inched forward, passing the time with Netflix and hoping he might be home in time for lunch. But at 10.53am, when he was about 100 metres from the clinic, his hopes were dashed. “They just started calling people through and saying, ‘Nope, we’re done for the day’. I was like, ‘What do you mean you’re done for the day?’” The clinic was closing at midday and they had to end the line somewhere. Sumner didn’t make the cut. By the time he spoke to Guardian Australia he was in a walk-in line at the Royal Prince Alfred hospital in Camperdown for his third attempt at being tested. “It’s pretty bad, it’s pretty frustrating,” Sumner said. His head was throbbing in the hot weather and – because he’d initially expected to stay in his car – he had not brought sunscreen. He got home six hours after he left, sick, sunburnt but, finally, tested. “I feel kind of abandoned,” he said. Throughout the pandemic, he said, “I’ve been trying to do the right thing constantly … I’m now trying to do the right thing again and it’s like, I guess I’ll just get messed around by the government all day. You feel like you’ve done so much to sacrifice already. We’ve done lockdowns, we’ve done all those things, and now it feels like they’re actively not wanting us to get tested.” In December, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said: “We have to move from a culture of mandates to a culture of responsibility. That’s how we live with this virus into the future.” But many Australians doing their best to take personal responsibility feel they are being thwarted at every turn. Across the Christmas and New Year period, social media lit up with fury and frustration over lost hours and days as people tried and often failed to do the right thing. Australians are waiting hours to get tested, waiting days for results, and waiting who knows how long for rapid antigen tests to appear at their local store. If they can afford them, that is. Instagram account @bondi_lines, which previously posted wait times for popular nightlife spots in the beachside suburb, has started posting testing clinic wait times, as well as advice on where people can find rapid antigen tests. Tempers are fraying. When a driver tried to cut the line at Summer Hill on Tuesday morning, two “large men” descended on the car, Sumner said. “[They] were banging on the window and saying, ‘You can’t do this’. We had all been in line for hours at that point … everyone’s frustrations were so high.” Tatiana Paipetis joined the queue at Mascot drive-through, also run by Laverty Pathology, about 7.30am on Tuesday. “I’ve said about five times I wish I had brought a book,” she told Guardian Australia in a phone interview from her car about 11am. Her voice was muffled by the mask she wore to protect against possible infection from her teenage son, who was lying in the back seat, too ill to sit up. He had tested negative twice before Christmas and both times received exposure alerts from the walk-in 4Cyte clinic. Now he was sick again after being exposed to the virus on New Year’s Eve and Paipetis thought she better take him to the drive-through. “I’m just trying to protect him and others, because I’m pretty sure he’s got Covid,” she said. After they had been queuing for about an hour, Paipetis watched a woman get out of the passenger seat in the car in front of her and walk away. She returned half an hour later – with McDonald’s. “I was like, ‘Oh my god, this woman went to Macca’s,” Paipetis said. “And she’s probably got Covid because she’s the passenger being driven to the testing.” Despite waiting nearly four-and-a-half hours to get tested, Paipetis and her son were among the lucky ones. She was within 20 cars of the cut-off point, where those lining up were told to go elsewhere. “They’re going to have a riot on their hands in a minute because they’re telling people they can’t be tested and they’ve been here for hours,” she said. Paipetis said she could afford to take the morning off work, to use up petrol by running the air conditioner for four hours. But what about people who can’t? “It really is about equity and access that concerns me most,” she said. “This government is clearly looking after private interests and the top end of town, and it’s really not the way we should be operating as a society.” The Omicron surge came just as private pathology providers closed testing clinics or substantially reduced hours for the festive season. Other closures were simply to cope with the immense backlog of tests. On Monday, Australian Clinical Labs shut a number of sites, stating it was necessary “due to the significant increase in testing volumes across the state”. On Tuesday, of the pathology clinic’s 31 testing sites, 19 were closed and the remaining 12 open during the morning. All Histopath centres, bar the airport, were either running on reduced hours or closed altogether until 9 January, while several 4Cyte clinics were closed, some until 5 January and others until 10 January. All but a couple of Laverty sites closed at midday on Tuesday, while Medlab Pathology clinics were mostly completely shuttered, one open until 1pm. “There’s obviously reasons everything slowed down,” Paipetis said. “But it’s not like we couldn’t logistically plan for this.” And the wait doesn’t end when people finally get swabbed. Balmain man Dean Morelli received a positive test result 126 hours after he was tested – a period of more than five days. “By the time [NSW Health] got that information and it was published as a daily statistic, I’d substantially recovered from Covid,” he said. “The state government is hostage to the quality of the data being presented. If the data is inaccurate, it begs the question, what’s the quality of the decision-making process? “In fairness, I fully appreciate the fact they were totally inundated. But someone’s got to take responsibility somewhere for this situation.”More than 20 acts have pulled out of the 2022 Sydney festival, just 48 hours before opening night, boycotting the festival over a sponsorship deal with the Israeli embassy. The comedian Tom Ballard, the Belvoir theatre production of Black Brass, former NSW politician Meredith Burgmann, First Nations dance company Marrugeku and commentator Yumi Stynes are just some of the festival participants who have either cancelled or distanced themselves in protest, joining a growing number of Arab, pro-Palestinian, First Nations and Greens groups spearheading the call for a boycott. A number of festival events including Marrugeku’s Jurrungu Ngan-ga, the acclaimed play Seven Methods of Killing Kylie Jenner and an installation of the Wiradjuri visual artist Karla Dickens’ work Return to Sender are still going ahead, but in an independent capacity, having withdrawn from the Sydney festival banner. The Belvoir St Theatre production of Black Brass is also still going ahead but has opted not to receive its previously agreed funding from the festival. In a statement posted to social media on Tuesday, Belvoir said it had a “long and fruitful relationship” with the Sydney festival. “Black Brass was made by and with the many African communities in Perth,” the post said. “At the heart of the process was a commitment to cultural safety which gives artists the freedom to work without fear or compromise. “In recognition that the community is now divided and Palestinian artists are unable to participate in this year’s Sydney Festival with the same cultural safety that was so essential to the making of Black Brass, we are choosing not to accept any direct financial support from the Festival.” On Tuesday the Sydney festival board put out a second statement, backing its controversial decision to forge ahead with a Sydney Dance Company production of Decadance, a work created by the Israeli choreographer Ohad Naharin and Tel Aviv’s Batsheva Dance Company, whose Sydney festival participation is being funded by a $20,000 grant from the Embassy of Israel in Canberra. The board’s latest statement acknowledged the mounting calls for artists and audiences to boycott the festival, a movement which began in late December. “The Sydney Festival Board wishes collectively to affirm its respect for the right of all groups to protest and raise concerns,” the statement said. “We spent time with a number of groups who have concerns about this funding and welcomed the opportunity to engage with them. All funding agreements for the current Festival – including for Decadance - will be honoured, and the performances will proceed. “At the same time, the Board has also determined it will review its practices in relation to funding from foreign governments or related parties.” The statement went on to say it respected the right of any artist to withdraw from the festival. “As a board we ask for respectful dialogue by all individuals and organisations when engaging with artists, especially for the personal decisions that artists make,” the statement concluded. Guardian Australia has sought comment from the board’s chairperson, David Kirk. Among the other artists and organisations withdrawing are the comedian Nazeem Hussain, visual artist Khaled Sabsabi, burlesque performer Betty Grumble, Malyangapa and Barkindji hip-hop artist Barkaa, as well as the Bankstown poetry slam, and musician Marcus Whale. On Instagram, Melbourne band Karate Boogaloo – who have also pulled out – said the act of boycotts and divestments had a strong track record of holding governments and corporations accountable for their actions. According to a statement released on 22 December by the Palestinian Justice Movement Sydney, the sponsorship deal was sealed in May, the same month Israeli armed forces launched a series of air attacks on Gaza, killing a number of Palestinian civilians. “Palestine advocates call on all opponents of apartheid to boycott the 2022 Sydney Festival,” that statement said. “By partnering with Israel, Sydney festival will … contribute to the normalisation of an apartheid state.” In a statement issued to the Guardian on 23 December, and reiterated on 4 January, the Israel Embassy said: “The State of Israel is proud to support and participate in this important Festival that showcases leading artists and performances from around the world. “Israel has always and will continue to promote cultural exchange and engage in cultural dialogue in numerous countries including Australia. “Culture is a bridge to coexistence, cooperation and rapprochement and should be left out of the political arena.”Samia Chowdhury of Ontario, California, saw her work hours in the restaurant industry dwindle from full-time to less than 10 hours a week when Covid shutdowns began in the US in March 2020. But the loss of work was not her only problem. As a someone who has had type 1 diabetes since she was 12, Chowdhury could not afford health insurance after losing most of her work hours and couldn’t get on Medicaid through California. Instead, she relied on visiting medical clinics for insulin prescription refills when she could afford to do so and mutual aid from other people with diabetes around the US. “I could barely scrape together the $35 for the visit,” said Chowdhury. “I could not make ends meet. I was essentially choosing either a roof over my head or my health insurance.” She relied on the clinics for doctor visits, lab work, and had to ration insulin and supplies while struggling to make ends meet with rent and other bills. “Because I have to take the quick-acting insulin more often when I eat, that would be the only prescription I would pick up. The only way I can describe the effects on someone’s body is it feels like your whole body is acidic, but at least you’re getting to tomorrow,” she added. “I was making a vial last for up to two months.” She also had to go without other supplies, such as testing strips, and reused syringes until they became too dull to use any more. From rationing insulin during the pandemic, to previous periods in her life when she didn’t have access to insulin, Chowdhury has experienced significant side effects such as kidney issues and eye issues. In October, Chowdhury was able to afford health insurance again after getting a new job, but still pays co-pays for doctor visits and prescriptions and is working to recover from the credit card debt she accrued while trying to get by through the rest of the pandemic. As part of the Biden administration’s Build Back Better plan the co-pay for insulin would be capped at $35 for individuals who have health insurance. But the legislation is currently in a perilous limbo in Congress and under serious threat after being blocked by centrist Democrat Joe Mancin. Even if it survives Manchin’s opposition, or emerges in a different form, those who depend on insulin say it may not help them enough. People with type 1 diabetes, who cannot produce any insulin and require it to survive, have criticized the proposal and messaging around it, citing the insurance cap includes loopholes, does not impact individuals who do not have health insurance coverage in the US, and doesn’t address the issue of US pharmaceutical companies price gouging the sales price of insulin, while people in other industrialized nations are charged a fraction of US prices. “It just seems like a big scam for the private insurance companies,” said Ginni Correa, a 27-year-old with type 1 diabetes in Jacksonville, Florida. “Our lives are being used for propaganda. Wording is very important. Because when you tell the general public that you’re capping the price of insulin, that’s deceitful because millions of Americans aren’t insured and the majority of diabetics who are insured, they still can’t afford the cost and it’s going to go to the premiums.” Correa has frequently been forced to ration insulin or insulin supplies since she turned 18 and aged out of a state health plan when she went away to college. It’s a constant worry she has to take into account because of health insurance tied to her employment, and the out of pocket costs even with insurance, from deductibles to co-pays for doctor visits, labs, insulin and insulin supplies, and figuring out what insurance companies will cover. “These are things that aren’t addressed when it comes to the Build Back Better plan and the $35 co-pay cap, because even if you are fortunate enough to have insurance at the time, insurance isn’t something that’s necessarily stable in this country,” she said. According to the CDC, 34.2 million Americans, more than one out of every 10 Americans, has diabetes, with Native Americans, Hispanic and Black people disproportionately affected and less likely to be covered by health insurance. 1.4 million US adults aged 20 or older reported having type 1 diabetes and using insulin, in addition to 187,000 adolescents and children under 20 who have type 1 diabetes. This number is projected to grow to 5 million Americans by 2050. Individuals with type 1 diabetes require several daily doses of insulin, while those with type 2 require varying dosages, as these individuals are able to produce insulin but cannot rely on it to control their blood sugar levels. One in four people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes have rationed insulin due to high costs in the US, and according to an American Diabetes Association survey, nearly one-third of people with diabetes have skipped doctor appointments or paying bills in order to afford insulin. Americans with diabetes are faced with 2.3 times greater healthcare costs. American adults and children with type 1 diabetes spend an out of pocket average of $2,500 annually for healthcare, ranging from high costs of insulin to expensive supplies such as insulin pumps, syringes, and glucose monitors. It’s the most expensive chronic disease in the US. The price of insulin in the US has soared over the past several decades, and far exceeds costs for the same type of insulin in other countries. One vial of Humalog insulin produced by Eli Lilly was priced at $21 in 1999; by 2019 it cost $332, over a 1,000% increase. The average list price of one unit of insulin in the US is $98.70, compared to $12 in Canada and $7.52 in the UK. The US consists of about 15% of the global insulin market, but accounts for nearly half of the pharmaceutical industry’s insulin revenue. These high costs persist despite the founders of insulin selling the patent for $1 in 1923 because they viewed it as unethical to profit from a lifesaving drug. Today in the US, three pharmaceutical companies, Novo Nordisk, Sanofi-Aventis and Eli Lilly control most of the insulin market. “They’re not actually going after the list price with the pharmaceutical companies. So the rest of that money has to come from somewhere,” said Mindi Patterson of Dayton, Ohio. “It only takes one illness, one car accident, to put people in a position where they have to pay completely out of pocket.” Her two sons and husband have type 1 diabetes. On Christmas Day in 2018, her family lost her husband’s sister, Meaghan Carter, 47, who passed away due to ketoacidosis which occurred due to rationing insulin through a six-month period where she was in between jobs. During the Covid pandemic, Patterson’s family has struggled to afford the medical costs associated with diabetes and her husband’s disability, which worsened as his hip replacement surgery was delayed for months, while they were fighting with their health insurance company to try to get coverage for the proper wheelchair her husband needs. She caught Covid in December 2021 while awaiting surgery to repair a torn meniscus she incurred while working and fought for weeks to process and start receiving short-term disability payments. “I’m getting half of what my paycheck normally is through short-term disability and almost all of that is going toward medication for my family and supplies. I don’t have an extra $200 or more lying around that I can pay for insurance each month,” added Patterson, who noted the insulin co-pay cap would have a minimal impact on her family’s healthcare costs. “It’s a band aid on an open, majorly gushing wound. It’s not enough.” • This article was amended on 4 January 2022 to change references to diabetes that did not adhere to Guardian style guidelines.There are few couplets in pop that capture modern life’s seesaw between cynicism and hope as well as this choice gem near the end of The Overload, the forthcoming debut album from Leeds group Yard Act: “It’s all so pointless / Ah, but it’s not though, is it?” The line bares the soft underbelly of a band whose bleakly hilarious post-punk clatter channels the interior monologues of some of the country’s very worst bigots and bores, before finding unexpected humanity within them. A band who have won comparison to such caustic mavericks as Fontaines DC and Sleaford Mods, at the same time as finding themselves unlikely residents of the Radio 1 playlist and the record collection of one Elton John, who declared himself a fan in a Guardian interview. “I’m an optimist,” insists James Smith, Yard Act’s gangly, garrulous frontman, Zooming from his Leeds bedroom and fussing with his mop of mousey hair. He knows a perverse variant of luck is on his side right now. Yard Act were a late-career roll of the dice after his previous band of nine years, Post War Glamour Girls, splintered. Then, almost as soon as Yard Act formed, Covid surfaced and venues shuttered. Still they have thrived against all odds. Smith’s prospects weren’t always so sunny. Growing up in Lymm, near Warrington, he was a South Park-obsessed budding animator whose dreams were scotched by art teachers with whom he had “disagreements”. But as that door closed, his next youthful obsession, Gorillaz, opened Smith’s ears to pop and set him on a wayward path that took in his dad’s hip-hop records, the early 21st-century indie renaissance of the Strokes, LCD Soundsystem and Arctic Monkeys, and the poetic growling of Tom Waits. “My world was small,” he remembers. “My ambition was to move to Leeds. I wanted to start a band, and there weren’t enough people in my town who understood what I wanted to do.” He arrived in Leeds aged 18, and found his home in the city’s “nurturing, insular DIY scene”, making friends with the other local bands and never dreaming much further than its city limits. “Most bands in Leeds aren’t bothered about breaking out, or don’t know how to,” Smith says. Post War Glamour Girls were a little of both: “We didn’t connect, for whatever reason. I was in a dark, miserable place, as most men in their early 20s are when they face life head-on and realise it’s not as fun as they thought it was gonna be.” Smith spent his days teaching music and as a support worker for “a lad with a brain injury and cerebral palsy, who I worked with for nine years and is one of my best friends”. His evenings, meanwhile, involved post-work pints with friend Ryan Needham, the bassist in another Leeds band, Menace Beach. The pair bonded over music and more – “I just found him so funny, and I wanted to be around him all the time because he made me laugh so much,” Smith says – and when Needham became briefly homeless, Smith offered his spare room. “My wife was very accommodating and let me play music with my friend for three months and ignore her,” he grins. It wasn’t time wasted. Smith and Needham formed Yard Act in the image of US lo-fi indie rock greats Guided By Voices. “We were just gonna get drunk, write pop songs, record them on cassettes and give ’em to friends,” Smith remembers. “But Ryan started leaning towards no wave, dance-punk basslines, and encouraged me to explore the style I’ve ended up writing in now.” That style was a spoken-word post-punk hybrid, heavy on narrative. “It’s rap music, but it’s not rap music,” he explains. “A lot of rap is first-person statements and defining who you are. My approach was conversational, and humorous. You’re putting yourself out there when you start cracking jokes. It’s a lot more nerve-racking than being po-faced and mysterious. But mystique’s never been my strong point.” Smith’s new style crystallised on Fixer Upper, Yard Act’s debut seven-inch, self-released in July 2020. An exercise in blackly comedic character observation worthy of Steve Coogan, the track showcased Smith’s new creation Graeme, a charmless, overbearing self-made man with a sideline in low-grade bigotry. “I’ve become quite defensive over Graeme,” Smith says, adding that for many of Yard Act’s nascent fanbase Graeme was “the embodiment of everything they hate. But he’s just a bit of an idiot, really, with a lot of half-formed opinions he thinks are gospel. He’s an amalgamation of friends’ dads and men in the pub when I was growing up; they’re rife in small towns. Ultimately, if we can’t figure out how to coexist with the Graemes of the world, we’re not going to get anywhere.” Smith says that with Yard Act he has struck a balance “between the anger and the mellowness that make me up”. That anger grew, he says “post-Brexit referendum”, as he felt “the world get harder and harder”. Perhaps trying to find the good in Graeme is his attempt to make peace with this anger? “The state of this country, and the world, can quickly get you into a spiral of Everything Is Bad,” he nods. “But it’s not. The good moments don’t exist without the bleak shit. We can’t eradicate misery and depression, we’ve got to coexist with it. “Lately, I’ve been watching series after series of First Dates,” he continues. “People just want to find someone to love and to listen to them. Even the Graemes of the world, even the nasty bastards. And no one’s fully formed, people can change. There’s that Bill Callahan song, I’m New Here, where he says: ‘No matter how far wrong you’ve gone, you can always turn around.’ I try and apply that to everyone I meet.” He pauses. “Of course, if you’re really fucked off with someone, it’s fine to think they’re absolutely shit as well.” Focusing on the good stuff is his medicine now, and there’s plenty for Smith to be positive about: parenthood, imminent pop stardom of some stripe and the patronage of a celebrity fan. “Maybe Elton could give Bernie Taupin a few weeks off, and I’ll send him some of my stories for his next record, and see if he can make them cinematic,” Smith grins. “Elton John, eating his breakfast, listening to Yard Act … It blows my mind, I can’t lie.” The Overload is out on 21 January on Island Records/Zen FC.London’s stock market is facing a barrage of criticism, with global investors likening it to a “global backwater” struggling to attract and retain growth companies that excite investors and are building the 21st-century economy. However, after a surge of stock flotations in 2021, including cutting-edge firms such as Oxford Nanopore, and new listing rules, London’s status as a global financial centre could brighten in 2022. Currently, the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip companies looks dated. Technology only makes up about 2% of the London market, compared with 20% across global markets. “That means London is tenfold underweight in the part of the economy growing faster, and which is attracting high valuations,” says Simon French, the chief economist of Panmure Gordon. “If you’re an investor looking to invest in growth, you haven’t got a lot of options on the UK public market, with the greatest respect to Sage and Micro Focus.” Paul Marshall, the boss of the £40m ($55bn) hedge fund Marshall Wace, wrote in the Financial Times that the City of London risked becoming “a sort of Jurassic Park”, and that fund managers were content to collect dividends from ponderous old economy players rather than encouraging and rewarding innovation. French points out that in the US market, liquidity has doubled since the financial crisis, but on the FTSE All-Share it has more than halved, putting some fund managers off investing in London. “Performance begets liquidity begets performance, so London’s underperformance can lead to a vicious circle,” French explains. He fears that recent reviews of the UK’s listing regime have failed to tackle this liquidity issue. James Anderson, the joint manager of Baillie Gifford’s Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust and an early investor in major US tech stocks such as Tesla, has compared the FTSE 100 to a 19th-century stock market – heavy with banks and oil stocks, but sadly lacking in real innovation. It will take time for London to shake off this image, French says. “You don’t go from a 19th-century stock exchange, or a Jurassic Park one, to a Star Trek exchange overnight.” There are signs that London is beaming up some fast-growing companies, with Oxford Nanopore, Deliveroo and Darktrace coming to market. In total, 122 companies listed on the London Stock Exchange last year, raising more than £16.8bn – the biggest initial public offering pot since 2007. But the journey has been shaky: Deliveroo tumbled by 30% on its debut in March, and is languishing at record lows, while Darktrace was ejected from the FTSE 100 after its initial share surge faded. Others have done better, such as the consumer review site Trustpilot, which has gained 25% since floating. “For every Deliveroo or Darktrace, there is a Trustpilot or Auction Technologies out there,” says French. High valuations on the other side of the Atlantic also hurt London – they mean firms don’t have to sell as much of their company on the Nasdaq, tor example, to raise the same money. London’s new listing rules mean private firms needn’t sell as much stock to go public. They also allow firms with dual-class share structures popular with entrepreneurs and founders on to the FTSE 100 and the 250 index of smaller firms. Marshall, though, says London needs to move “faster and harder still” to lure growth companies, close the gap with New York and become a more attractive place to list and raise capital than the EU and Asia. “London is also the natural home for ESG [environmental, social and governance] winners, emerging market winners and digital assets. To capitalise on these advantages, we need to encourage asset managers to invest in these assets and develop a wider culture of growth-oriented investing,” he insists. The move towards ESG investing had counted against London, with fund managers shunning polluting industries such as fossil fuel producers and mining companies. London’s problem in 2021 was retaining companies as much as attracting new ones. A string of listed companies became takeover targets,, such as the defence firm Meggitt and UK tech firm Blue Prism, with speculation BT could be next. The weaker pound also left some growth companies as sitting ducks – chip designer ARM, the crown jewel of UK tech, was snaffled by SoftBank just after the Brexit vote in 2016. US private equity firms have also taken advantage of depressed valuations. This hoovering up of British tech firms by US investors is worrying MPs, with 130 UK tech firms reportedly acquired by American companies between January and mid-December 2021. “We need to recognise the impact this is having on our own capabilities and sovereign strength,” Tobias Ellwood, the chairman of the parliamentary defence select committee, told the Daily Telegraph. “It goes against the grain of the government’s wise long-term ambition of becoming a high-tech superpower.” David Miller, an executive director of Quilter Cheviot, pushes back on the idea that the City of London itself risks becoming a backwater. “In many ways it remains an ideal location for investment managers, with its time zone, language, huge infrastructure and the right attitude. London has always been good at global investment, it’s always looked out, not in, and that makes London the best place for global investment,” says Miller. The UK broker AJ Bell estimates that the FTSE 100 will pay out £81.8bn in dividends in 2021, a 32% increase compared with 2020 when the pandemic forced firms to cut or suspend payments. The mining companies Rio Tinto and BHP Group, oil firm Shell and tobacco company BAT will dole out the most, highlighting the City’s dilemma – owning these “sin stocks” can generate a healthy income, vital for pension funds and income funds. Miller can’t see a world in which a balanced portfolio doesn’t have dividend payers as part of the mix; not paying a dividend shouldn’t see a company excluded if its prospects are good. The balance between growth and value stocks today is different than before the dotcom crash two decades ago. “In 1999, people sold dividend-paying firms to buy firms that just evaporated,” Miller says. There’s also a different mindset to investing across the Atlantic. “Investors in the US want the companies they invest in to grow market share – market share really excites US fund managers,” Miller says. In the UK and Europe there’s much more focus on profitability. “If a company isn’t profitable now, we want to know when it will be profitable.” In the short term, the FTSE 100 could benefit if the pandemic eases in 2022, lifting banks, mining firms, oil companies, travel and hospitality firms. JPMorgan recently upgraded its rating on UK stocks to “overweight”, pointing out that British equity markets are now trading at a “record discount”. Matt Weller, the global head of research at Forex.com and City Index, agrees that much of the FTSE’s underperformance comes down to sector weightings. “The FTSE’s heavy allocation to the underperforming consumer staple and financial sectors (both near 20% weighting) dwarf the index’s minuscule (under 2%) exposure to technology stocks, exactly the inverse of the allocation that you’d create with the benefit of hindsight,” says Weller. “Of course, markets are highly cyclical, and the recent uptick in inflation and interest rates could be the catalyst to shift sector performance in favor of the FTSE’s weights in the coming quarters.” London has also lost out to Amsterdam in the race to attract “blank-cheque” companies, big on Wall Street, which seek out a fledgling business to acquire. London’s first special purpose acquisition company (Spac) launched at the end of November, by which time Amsterdam had already racked up 13. In the long run, local exchanges could be pushed further to the margins. 24 Exchange, a Bermuda-based crypto and foreign exchange trading platform, is planning to bring in around-the-clock stock trading, which is already possible with cryptocurrencies. Miller says the general idea of 24-hour trading is not a “totally ridiculous” one. “The transition from floor trading to where we are now isn’t going to stop where it is now.” To an extent there is already 24-hour trading through the working week, with bourses in Asia-Pacific markets, Europe and New York together covering most time zones. But many stocks are only listed on one exchange, and liquidity in individual companies is better when their local exchange is open. Non-stop trading could be gruelling for equities traders, although nothing that other industries don’t handle. “If the car industry can work on three shifts per day, why can’t traders?” Miller points out.Three asymptomatic cases of Covid-19 were enough for Chinese authorities to lock down a city of almost 1.2 million people on Monday, joining 13 million others in locked down Xi’an, where local authorities have asked for restrictions to be tightened even further. Beijing is holding on to its zero-Covid strategy ahead of the forthcoming Winter Olympics next month, and with local officials facing sanctions or sackings over outbreaks, cases have prompted increasingly strict responses. Authorities in Yuzhou, Henan province, announced the lockdown on Monday evening, ordering all residents to stay inside, and residential communities to post sentries at gates. Different parts of the city have varying rules – some are allowing people to enter but not exit while others allow neither. Public transport has been suspended and no cars are allowed on the road except for epidemic response vehicles, and all shops, entertainment and leisure venues have been closed. Only businesses that are “guaranteeing the supply of daily life materials” can operate. Yuzhou’s locked down population join Xi’an in Shaanxi province, where a harsh lockdown has been in place for almost two weeks, including the requirement for negative tests before an individual can seek medical care. The city has recorded more than 1,700 cases since early December, and put tens of thousands in quarantine. All positive cases are taken to hospitals for treatment and isolation. While the strict response had drawn some concern and complaints including about food shortages, on Tuesday Communist party authorities demanded local officials “strictly and properly” implement restrictions. “The various work that needs to be done must only be strengthened,” said Liu Guozhong, the provincial head of the party in Shaanxi, of which Xi’an is its capital. The epidemic control effort is at a pivotal moment, Liu said. “We’d rather widen our identification of groups at risk than to overlook a single person,” he was quoted as saying in an article published by the Xi’an government on Tuesday. He said no one should be overlooked during mass testing in key Xi’an areas and “household doors” should be closely watched in rural parts of the city to make sure people are complying with travel curbs. The swift and extreme response in Yuzhou drew some concern online, with some commenters questioning the need to go so far over a handful of cases, but others were largely supportive, in line with apparent broad support for China’s continued policy of stamping out outbreaks. While most of the world is open and operating with huge case numbers, including some countries that previously pursued zero-Covid strategies, China has stuck with its policy of keeping the virus at bay, putting increasing pressure on local officials as they battle sporadic outbreaks. In Xi’an, two senior Communist party officials in the northern city were removed from their posts over their “insufficient rigour in preventing and controlling the outbreak”. In Guangxi, officials paraded pandemic rule-breakers through the public streets, with placards around their necks. And last month, China’s disciplinary body announced that dozens of officials were punished for failure to prevent the outbreak in the city. China reported a further 175 new Covid-19 cases on Tuesday, including five in Henan province and eight more in a separate cluster linked to a garment factory in the eastern city of Ningbo. Officials did not say what variant the outbreak involved. Although the reported cases are low compared with elsewhere in the world, new coronavirus infections in recent weeks have reached a high not seen in the country since March 2020. Additional reporting by Xiaoqian ZhuShares in the embattled Chinese property developer Evergrande rose on Tuesday after they resumed trading on the Hong Kong stock exchange following a suspension. China’s second-biggest developer halted trading on Monday after receiving an order from authorities at Danzhou city in Hainan on 30 December telling it to demolish 39 under-construction buildings at the Ocean Flower Island project. Shares in the company, whose market value has plunged almost 90% over the last year, jumped by 10% after they resumed trading on Tuesday and Evergrande announced that the demolition order would not affect the rest of its project at the Hainan resort. However, they later fell back to a rise of almost 2%. It comes after Evergrande said its sales for 2021 had plunged 39% from the year before to $69.5bn (£51.6bn). The developer is struggling to repay more than $300bn in liabilities by selling assets and shares. Nearly $20bn of international market bonds were deemed to be in cross-default by ratings firms last month after the company missed payments. Evergrande missed new coupon payments worth $255m due last Tuesday, though both have a 30-day grace period. On Friday, Evergrande scaled back plans to repay investors in its wealth management products, saying each investor could expect to receive 8,000 yuan ($1,257) a month as principal payment for three months irrespective of when the investment matures. Altogether, Chinese property developers owed $19.8bn in US dollar-denominated offshore debt in the first three months of 2022, analysts at Nomura said last month. In the second quarter of this year, they must find another $18.5bn, while also meeting billions of repayments in local yuan debt. Other developers at risk of default include Kaisa, which missed a huge repayment in December and which has twice suspended its shares in recent months. Its stock has lost 75% in value in the past year. Analysts at S&amp;P have estimated that one-third of Chinese developers could face a liquidity crunch in the next 12 months. Developers must also find 1.1tn yuan in backdated pay owed to construction workers before the lunar new year starts at the beginning of February.Sui Wenjing and Han Cong, figure skating With two gold and three silver world championship medals, this pairs team from China is also the current world record holder. Sui and Han, aged 26 and 29 respectively, have been skating together since 2007. They have developed a banter that charms fans, arguing and joking like an old married couple. Not many athletes would consider a silver medal at the Olympics a disappointment but losing by only 0.43 points in Pyeongchang was not what the team had hoped for. In Beijing, they will no doubt be vying for gold in front of the home crowd. Yuzuru Hanyu, figure skating There is not much this two-time Olympic champion has not accomplished. The beloved skater, a household name in Japan and one of the country’s most popular sportspeople, has broken the world record 19 times, which is a record in itself. He also boasts seven world championship medals and four Grand Prix Final titles. After each skate, fans will throw dozens of Winnie the Pooh toys onto the ice, a tradition that developed after Hanyu started carrying a tissue box in the shape of the bear. Competing in his third Olympics, the 26-year-old will be rivaling with Nathan Chen for gold. Eileen Gu, freestyle skiing In the past year, the American-born freestyle skier and soon-to-be Stanford student has quickly established herself as a podium contender for Beijing 2022, winning two golds at both the Winter X Games 2021 and the world championships. When she’s not on the slopes, Gu, who is also signed to IMG models, is sitting front row at Paris fashion week or appearing on the cover of Elle. The 18-year-old competes for China but grew up in the United States. Identifying as both American and Chinese, she hopes to help build a bridge the two nations and inspire future Chinese skiers. Katie Ormerod, snowboarding At only 16, the British gymnast turned snowboarder became the first female to land a double cork 1080, an incredibly difficult move. Four years later, she flew to Pyeongchang as one of Britain’s best winter athletes. Unfortunately, she broke her heel during training and did not compete. Seven operations and a year of recovery later, Ormerod made a successful comeback by becoming the first British snowboarder to win a World Cup event. Set to compete in Beijing, the 24-year-old is focused on performing the best she can, regardless of results. Suzanne Schulting, short track The already accomplished Dutch athlete won gold in every event at world championships last March, proving herself unbeatable. She is only the second female speedskater to accomplish the sweep, with one of the victories being the Netherlands’ first ever women’s relay gold. Schulting, who has also competed in long track speedskating, will be eyeing multiple short track medals in Beijing, entering as the reigning 1000m Olympic champion. Liu Shaoang, short track The 23-year-old, who was born to a Chinese father and a Hungarian mother, grew up in Budapest and represents Hungary in short track. In 2018, Liu became an Olympic champion. Just a few months ago, he claimed his first world championship title in Netherlands, where his older brother also took home a gold for Hungary. Having trained in China, the Liu brothers have amassed lots of fans in Beijing and are looking forward to competing in the country they call a second home. Sarah Nurse, ice hockey Playing for Canada’s hockey team, Nurse has one bronze and one gold medal from world championships in 2019 and 2021 respectively. In the 2018 Olympics, she scored a goal against the final against the US, where Canada lost in a shootout. With one silver medal under her belt, Nurse and the rest of the team are aiming for a victory in Beijing. The forward from Ontario, who is biracial, has also been very vocal about systemic racism in sports, universities and societies in general. Natalie Geisenberger, luge The 33-year-old from Germany is the most decorated female luger. Her Olympic debut came at Vancouver 2010, where she won a bronze medal. In the next two Olympics, she won two gold medals each. With this hardware collection, Geisenberger is tied with Tobias Arlt and Tobias Wendl for the most successful luge athlete of all time. Earlier this year, she took home silver in the women’s singles at her first world championships since giving birth to her son, Leo. Beijing will most likely be the new mother’s last Olympics, but she has no plans on retiring anytime soon. Ireen Wüst, speed skating At 35, the Dutch speed skater has long solidified her legend status. Since becoming the youngest Dutch Olympic champion at 19, Wüst has been the most successful Olympian from the Netherlands and the most decorated speed skater of all time with 11 medals, five of them gold. Her other accomplishments include but are not limited to: being named Dutch Sportswoman of the Year twice, having an ice rink named after her, competing in the Dutch road cycling championships, and being the first Winter athlete to win gold medals at four consecutive Olympics. Markus Kleveland, snowboarding At 17, the Norwegian snowboarder landed a quad cork at his debut Winter X Games, becoming the first person to successfully compete the skill and winning his first of four X Games golds. Later that year, he was awarded Rookie of the Year by Snowboard Magazine. This year, the now-22-year-old secured his first world title in slopestyle while winning a bronze in big air. Like many snowboarders, Kleveland chases adrenaline outside of the snow by skateboarding, trampolining, biking and surfing. Beijing 2022 will most likely be his first Olympic games. Markéta Davidová, biathlon At her first world championships, Davidová finished in 43rd place. At her second, she placed eighth. This year, she won gold. The Czech biathlete shot a perfect 20 out of 20, beating the reigning Olympic champion to the world title just a year before Beijing. The 24-year-old, who also loves horseback riding, completed a bachelor’s degree in animal sciences while competing at the elite level. She finished 57th at the 2018 Olympics but that was four years ago. Now, she is entering Beijing with a high chance of a podium finish. Francesco Friedrich, bobsleigh Considered one of the best bobsledders of all time, Friedrich has 13 world championship gold medals and 46 World Cup titles, a record that he broke at the beginning of this year. The 31-year-old first started bobsledding with his older brother, David. After two severe injuries, David retired but still supports his brother in all his success. At Pyeongchang, Friedrich took home two Olympic golds for Germany. Now, he is looking to defend his title in Beijing. Anna Hasselborg, curling Born into a family of curlers, the 32-year-old Swede was first introduced to the sport by her dad and her brother at age 7. She went on to achieve more success than not only her family members, but most curlers in the world. Now 32, Hasselborg is the reigning Olympic champion, two-time European champion, and two-time world silver medalist. In summer of 2020, she gave birth to a baby named Mira, who often sits by the rink and watches her train. Having already qualified for Beijing 2022, Hasselborg will be leading her team to defend their title. Pita Taufatofua, cross-country skiing You may know him as the oiled-up shirtless flagbearer for Tonga, but this taekwondo and cross-country skiing athlete has a life that is nothing short of inspiring. Taufatofua is not a medal contender, but simply competing in his second Winter Olympics as skier from a tropical country with a humble background is a major accomplishment. The many hardships he has encountered include numerous injuries, personal loss, financial instability and losing his childhood home to a tropical storm. Now a three-time Olympian, two Summer and one Winter, the 37-year-old also has an engineering degree and is an Unicef ambassador who works with homeless youth.One day after work last month, Tom Otieno* went to a shopping centre in Nairobi to pick up groceries before heading home. He got a call from someone he had been chatting to for a week on Grindr, a social networking app for gay, bi, trans and queer people. The man had already tried ringing several times during the day while Otieno was with colleagues and was keen to meet. Otieno, 29, mentioned where he was but said that he did not want to see the man. Then, as he was heading to his car, he got another call. As he answered it, someone approached him and said they were a police officer. Seconds later, two other officers joined him and surrounded Otieno. “One of them had this envelope,” he says. “He was getting papers out of the envelope and looking at them and then at me. I saw it was a chat [from Grindr] and I saw my face on it. I knew I had been set up.” The police asked him to get in their car to “help with an investigation”. Otieno refused and they accused him of having sex with a minor and started getting violent. “One tried to cuff me by force. Then he punched me on the chest and bent me over the car bonnet.” Otieno agreed to go with them as long as they did not handcuff him. Once in the car, he realised they were taking a longer route to the station and started to panic. “I felt I was going to die. A few months ago, I heard a transgender person was found dead and word went round that it was the police,” he says. Tom refused to hand over his phone to the police, even though they asked, because he knew he had done nothing wrong and they had not officially arrested him. He started to call friends, one of whom got in touch with a lawyer from the National Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (NGLHRC). She rang Otieno and said she would meet him at the police station. Once the police knew a lawyer was involved, they took Otieno to the station but not before threatening him and demanding money to “make everything go away”. Otieno’s experience on social media sites or dating apps of being “catfished” – as using a fake identity to lure someone online is known – by people intending to extort money is common among members of the LGBTQ+ community in Kenya. With section 162 of the colonial-era penal code criminalising sexual acts deemed “unnatural”, there are fertile grounds for the practice to thrive. Activists want social media companies to take action to stamp out the extortion. Kenya’s high court rejected a bid to repeal the law criminalising gay sex in 2019. There is another move to repeal section 162, which is at the root of this issue, now waiting to be heard in the court of appeal. Njeri Gateru, executive director of NGLHRC, says: “The existence of laws that criminalise homosexuality create a landscape where anyone attracted to someone of the same gender is seen to belong to a lesser place in society, and as a criminal. That creates room for people to take advantage of queer individuals.” According to Gateru, cases of blackmail and extortion are increasing, methods are becoming more sophisticated, and while this type of crime used to be limited to Nairobi, it has now spread to other areas of the country. Exact figures on its prevalence are hard to come by and Gateru estimates that only about 10% of cases are reported. The NGLHRC legal aid centre has dealt with 679 such cases since its inception in 2013. Other LGBTQ+ organisations in the country say they have anecdotal evidence of thousands of such cases. Otieno, who works in finance, was aware enough of his rights that he questioned the police officers’ actions and rebuffed their efforts to extort bribes from him. Once he arrived at the station and met his lawyer, the minor the police claimed had wanted to press charges against him was suddenly unavailable. Otieno was not arrested or charged. Many other members of the LGBTQ+ community have ended up in dire situations after being catfished on social media and dating sites. Lawyers and caseworkers have reported cases where people have been beaten so severely that they required hospital treatment and some almost died. Others have been raped and robbed at gunpoint. Many have been forced to empty their bank accounts and pay bribes amounting to tens of thousands of pounds to their blackmailers. Perpetrators include police officers, but also other officials and members of the public. Bruno Shioso, speaking for the National Police Service, says these claims are “suspicious”. “Police don’t stalk citizens on social media. I don’t understand what the motivation would be,” he claims. Kelly Kigera, of the emergency security response team at the Gay and Lesbian Coalition of Kenya, says blackmailers approach members of the LGBTQ+ community online, sometimes using “cute” fake pictures, to chat and gain their trust before arranging to meet. Sometimes they will take compromising pictures or videos, which they use to threaten to expose their victim’s sexual orientation. Other people report police officers storming into their homes, threatening them with prosecution under section 162. Kigera adds: “They take your phone, contacts, passwords. They see other gay men you’ve been talking to, and trace them using other platforms.” The pandemic has made everything worse, says Gateru: “There has been such a loss of income and livelihoods from within the community and some people have resorted to these means to try to make a living for themselves.” Activists say it is important to educate police officers about the rights of the LGBTQ+ community to try to avoid this happening. Gateru says she has made five allegations of misconduct to the Independent Policing Oversight Authority (IPOA) over the past two years. “Very little is done,” she says. “It’s very frustrating.” A spokesperson for the IPOA denies this: “The authority is not in receipt of any complaint falling within the ambit of police targeting individuals as a result of their sexual affiliation.” Many question whether the social media companies are doing enough to protect users. Gateru says: “It’s a very slow response from some sites, even when we report instances of blackmail. Action taken is minimal to none.” A Grindr spokesperson says: “We are always saddened to hear about the difficult and sometimes tragic experiences that our community members have experienced both online and off.” He says that Grindr has published a security guide and safety tips and has weekly in-app messages to remind users to exercise caution in all aspects of life in countries where it is illegal to be gay. In Kenya, those messages include links to the NGLHRC. In Nairobi, Otieno is still recovering from his ordeal. Friends have since told him similar stories of abuse and extortion. He wants social media and dating sites to do more. “I really think they should do a lot more when it comes to eliminating such characters,” he says. “For most of us in Africa, [these sites] are the only avenue where we can meet people of our type. “If they are now a threat to us, something must be done,” he adds. “You can’t put people’s lives on ransom.” *Name has been changed to protect his identity Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Prof Neil Ferguson, the scientist who helped shape Britain’s coronavirus lockdown strategy, said he was “cautiously optimistic” that Omicron infections had plateaued in London and could reduce in the next week. Ferguson, a mathematical epidemiologist from Imperial College London, cautioned that record cases numbers being reported were likely to be an underestimate because test supplies have run out in some areas. But speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, he said: “An epidemic reaching such high numbers can’t sustain those numbers forever. So we would expect to see case numbers start to come down in the next week, maybe already coming down in London, but in other regions a week to three weeks.” He added: “I’m cautiously optimistic that infection rates in London in that key 18 to 50 age group, which has been driving the Omicron epidemic, may possibly have plateaued. It is too early to say whether they’re going down yet.” Ferguson also said that despite a recent doubling in Covid hospital admissions the vaccinations were proving effective at preventing severe disease. He said: “Vaccination is holding up in terms of protection against severe disease, assisted by the fact that Omicron almost certainly is substantially less severe, but it still puts pressures on the health system.” Ferguson said: “Omicron is substantially less severe. And that has helped us undoubtedly. We would be seeing much higher case numbers in hospital otherwise. And vaccines are holding up against severe disease and against severe outcomes well, but that doesn’t mean it’s not going to be difficult few weeks for the NHS.” Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said the NHS did not want staff going back into hospitals with Covid and risk passing it on. He told Times Radio that reducing the self-isolation period to five days should be done only if the science “said it was absolutely safe”. On the general outlook, he said: “We should feel some hope and confidence about the medium term, [and] that we will gradually become more able to live with Covid as the prime minister has said, that when Omicron has gone through us that we make it to that stage and the NHS will recover.” But Taylor added: “On the other hand, we’ve got to recognise that in the next few weeks at least things are very, very difficult. One thing that people in our service find difficult is that it does seem as though there’s a kind of almost politicised attempt to suggest that things aren’t as difficult as they are, that any suggestion that we should sustain the restrictions or whether it’s personal responsibility or policy. “If you’re working in health service, you see the reality, and what you want politicians, what you want people, to be driven by is the data and what’s happening at the frontline, and let’s not be in the business of … getting away from the reality of this.” He said the judgment on restrictions “needs to be driven by the data and what’s in the best interests of the country”, adding: “It shouldn’t be driven by a kind of political virility symbolism, where the sooner we can be free, the better it is, regardless of the effects. Let’s carry on being driven by the data.” The minister for vaccines and public health, Maggie Throup, said she was “not sure” how many Britons were currently in self-isolation. She told Sky News: “I’m not sure of that [actual] figure, but I think what’s shown over Christmas is that a lot of people have caught the disease, the Omicron variant is very transmissible, but what is good news, it doesn’t seem to be resulting in severe diseases as some of the other variants did.” She added: “Well, not everybody declares that they’re self-isolating, I think that’s one important thing, that it’s something that they do because they’ve tested positive or they’ve been in contact with somebody whose tested positive, they don’t have to report that in. “The vaccine is working and that’s the best way to stop the transmission, and to stop hospitalisations and for our life to get back to normal.”How on earth are the movies going to compete with all that deliciously seductive #content on streaming services? How do you persuade people to mask up and venture out to the cinema when they can sprawl on the sofa and watch Succession’s gorgeously horrible Roy family for less money and hassle. People will leave their homes for James Bond and Spider-Man. But the grownup movies – the cinema of ideas and character and dialogue and complexity – well, people are increasingly tempted to stay home for those. James Cameron, director of mighty box-office champs such as Titanic and Avatar has the answer: six-hour films! Films with the amplitude and the addiction factor of long-form TV. At first glance, that sounds like a buttock-annihilating nightmare, and a six-hour film from the alpha-gorilla Cameron is another worry. Six hours of Cameron’s cheerfully macho storytelling? Six hours of military hardware, and people in flightsuits walking into vast hangars with fighter-planes? Or does Mr Cameron have a six-hour cut of Titanic up his sleeve? Actually, that’s not really what he’s suggesting. What Cameron has in mind is a new integrated theatrical-streaming distribution model in which a six-hour “movie” is shown in a number of episodes for home viewing and then in a shorter, slimmed-down two-hour version for movie theatres. It’s not out of the question – and it’s been done before. Olivier Assayas’s 2010 work Carlos, starring Édgar Ramírez as Carlos the Jackal was shown in three TV episodes totalling five-and-a-half hours but in cinemas shorter versions were shown. And for literary adaptations, it could make sense. After all, Granada Television’s legendary 11-episode version of Brideshead Revisited in 1981 weighed in at almost 12 hours: a different, perfectly plausible 2008 feature film version of the same novel came in at two hours 14 minutes. You could fuse the two concepts … couldn’t you? Film has traditionally responded to the threat from television by emphasising grandeur and scale. In the decades after the war, and worried about TV, Hollywood gave us epic movies, biblical and sword-and-sandal dramas, often shown in awe-inspiring widescreen mode. The threat to cinema is different here – now it’s almost as if television is the bigger form with an almost unlimited running time for its products. So maybe the Cameron model is workable. The danger is of course that the cinema will just come off looking like second best. Who wants to see the short-change cut version of some sexy new drama in cinemas – which will inevitably also be subtly longer than the comfortable feature-film length – when you can get the real thing at home in full measure, and submit to the deferred, extended pleasure of episodic narrative, which is the whole point of TV entertainment? And of course, it would be the sex and violence that would get chopped for cinemas and bowdlerisation would rule. Of course, cinema is already giving us “serial” movies. Denis Villeneuve’s colossal new sci-fi Dune is only part one – part two is due to follow. And in the arthouse realm, Joanna Hogg’s autobiographical film The Souvenir came out in two parts. But this isn’t quite the same thing. And time is different watching TV – bingeing something for four hours is different from watching a four-hour movie: with the TV show you can bail out at any stage without inconvenience or feeling culturally shallow or disloyal. Not so in the cinema. Well, it would be interesting if Netflix or Amazon Prime tried the Cameron model. But what I’d really like – masochistically enough – is a six-hour movie culture that had the courage of its convictions: showing the actual six-hour films in cinemas. A new Bollywood-style sense of scale, to toughen up pampered western movie consumers. Cinephiles dream of finding the original eight-hour cut of the Erich von Stroheim 1924 silent drama Greed. I would love to see the rumoured 20-hour cut of Quentin Tarantino’s Once Upon a Time in Hollywood. At all events, I want to maintain the concept of committing to an entire created artwork, in its entirety, all at once, from beginning to end – and the cinema is still the best place for that. Peter Bradshaw is the Guardian’s film criticCovid-19 has been recorded on the death certificates of more than 5.4 million people worldwide since the pandemic began two years ago. As countries brace for further waves of infections driven by the Omicron variant, the families of 14 people who lost their lives tell of incalculable loss as they pay tribute to their loved ones. Ruth Lopes Rodrigues, 80, and Rosemeire Lopes Rodrigues Bortolin, 54, Brazil Ruth Lopes Rodrigues, 80, and her daughter Rosemeire Lopes Rodrigues Bortolin, 54, lived in São Paulo and died 15 days apart in early 2021. Rodrigues was hospitalised on 13 December 2020 after she fell and broke her femur. Bortolin decided to visit her mother in hospital on 29 December because she missed her so much. “Rose was so afraid of getting Covid, but she felt she had to visit her mom,” her cousin Liliane Bacci, 52, said. “She got emotional when she saw her mother and kissed her, even though she had been really careful throughout the pandemic and wore a mask everywhere.” The next day, on 30 December, Rodrigues was diagnosed with Covid-19. She deteriorated rapidly and was intubated two days later. Bortolin was hospitalised with Covid on 6 January. Rodrigues died on 18 January, a day after her 80th birthday, which she shared with her daughter, who turned 54. Bortolin was intubated on 21 January, and died on 2 February. “They were two women carrying their family, and now they’re gone,” Bacci said. “Rose was like a sister to me. I miss them so much. If it hadn’t been for my aunt’s fall, I think both of them would be alive now.” Oduetse Ratshipa, 41, Botswana Dr Oduetse ‘Odie’ Ratshipa was born in Serowe on 23 June 1980. He studied medicine at St George’s University, Grenada, and graduated in 2010. He then returned to Botswana to work for the Ministry of Health and Wellness in the capital, Gaborone, for 11 years, later specialising in disease surveillance and outbreaks. In 2014, he had a lung transplant after being diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The transplant left him vulnerable but he was determined to continue his work. During the pandemic, Ratshipa was working on the rollout of the vaccine and caught Covid after his second dose of the Pfizer vaccine. “It’s a blow to have lost someone so young,” said his father-in-law, Peter Smith. “He was the bravest man I ever met.” Ratshipa loved playing chess and supported Chelsea football club. He died aged 41 on 7 August 2021, and is survived by his wife, Thato, and two sons Jason and James. Saeid Azari, 67, Iran Saeid Azari, 67, was a businessman and philanthropist who lived in Tehran with his wife, while his two daughters were living in Canada. Azari died in hospital on 14 July 2020, 10 days after becoming ill with Covid. His family said his transfer to intensive care was delayed because of a shortage of beds. Covid restrictions meant his family was unable to hold the kind of memorial service they would have wanted, and said goodbye to him at a small funeral with strict social distancing in place. Azari’s younger daughter watched via video call from Canada. It was only after his death that his family discovered he had been sponsoring the studies of two orphans for years. Azari’s eldest daughter, Neda, 39, last saw her father in September 2019, when he hugged her goodbye at the airport after visiting her in Canada. She said: “He was a source of inspiration for my mother, my sister and I. He always had a sweet smile on his face and he encouraged us to pursue our dreams. He was a man who gave his daughters wings to fly. We love him so much and he is missed terribly, his death has completely changed our lives.” Jean Hodgson, 82, UK Jean Hodgson, 82, lived her whole life in Manchester, where she ran a successful bakery and a fish and chip shop. She raised her three sons as a single mother while maintaining both businesses before marrying her husband, Jim, who died in 2012 from asbestosis after years working as a labourer. In February 2020, she had a heart attack and went into a care home, shortly before the pandemic properly began. She was supposed to stay there temporarily, as she wanted to live by herself with some assistance. But she contracted Covid and died on 8 August 2020. “The care home advised us that this was the safest place for her, which was obviously wrong,” her granddaughter Alexandra Hastie, 26, said. “I saw her five days before she died, and she was so happy, but we only saw her through the glass. We didn’t get the chance to say goodbye properly. “The extent of her warmth on others was clearly shown on the day of her funeral when the entire street came out to say their goodbyes and the amount of people that turned up outside the church. I have never known an 82-year-old as popular as my Nana Jean! Her favourite sandwich was cow tongue and ready salted crisps – the most disgusting combination I have ever seen but would give anything to see her enjoy once more.” Andrey Schelkonogov, 60, Russia Andrey Schelkonogov, 60, a father of two and grandfather of three, lived in the Moscow region and was an engineer at a state-owned infrastructure company, a job he loved. His family believe he caught Covid either at work or on public transport. He was hospitalised on 18 October 2020. When Schelkonogov died on 5 November 2020, just three weeks before his 61st birthday, it was a huge shock to the family. “He was a big football fan and incredibly healthy and strong prior to his infection, we thought he would recover and come home after perhaps one week,” his daughter Julia, 36, said. That his coffin had to be closed during his funeral was also difficult for his family. “It was a huge disappointment that we were not allowed to see his face one last time,” she said. “My daughter was just three weeks old when he died. I had sent him photos of her while he was in hospital, as we couldn’t visit him, it was prohibited. He loved his grandchildren so much.” Şenol Yaşar, 55, Turkey “I’ve lost my rock and now he’s no longer there,” said Deniz Aslan of her 55-year-old father, Şenol Yaşar. Yaşar, who was born on 12 February 1965 in Istanbul, worked in real estate and had three children. He is thought to have caught Covid while dining in a restaurant after the reopening of businesses and public spaces in June 2020. His family said he started off with flu-like symptoms and was hospitalised at a time when Turkey was recording some of its highest daily death figures of the pandemic. He was in intensive care for nearly three weeks before dying on 22 November 2020. “I couldn’t hold his hand and say the words which I desperately needed to say before it was too late,” said Aslan. Alberto Lema, 83, and Pedro ‘Toto’ Gallegos, 76, Argentina Juana Lema’s grandfathers Alberto Lema, 83, and Pedro ‘Toto’ Gallegos, 76, died from Covid in Buenos Aires on 9 April and 1 June 2021 respectively. Born on 14 September 1938, Alberto Lema was president of General Motors for Argentina and Latin America in the electro-motive division. He was hospitalised for two weeks before dying. Gallegos was born on 9 June 1945 and worked as a private driver. He always tried to make people laugh and had a “very unique personality”, said his granddaughter. His family believes he caught Covid when he had to renew his driving ID. He was put on a ventilator and given a tracheotomy two weeks after being hospitalised. He was released a fortnight later and spent less than 24 hours in a recovery centre before having a stroke due to Covid. Juana Lema said: “We were burying Alberto when we were told Pedro had to go into hospital with Covid. It’s been really hard as I’ve never lost anyone close to me.” Mosharef Hossain, 81, Bangladesh Born in Noakhali on 9 January 1940, Mosharef Hossain worked for the Pakistani embassy in Islamabad, as a cypher assistant for years. He moved to the UK in 1971 before returning to Bangladesh in 2005 where he founded a school a year later. He caught Covid at the beginning of April 2021 and was hospitalised for 21 days. He was discharged and went home to where his wife lives in Dhaka to recover for a few weeks, but died on 22 June at the age of 81. His granddaughter Sabah Hussain said it had been three years since she last saw him: “We were really close when he lived in the UK and we thought it was a miracle when he recovered from Covid. His death came as a really big shock.” Bagila Zhakypbayeva, 81, Kazakhstan Bagila Zhakypbayeva, 81, from Almaty, was born on 13 April 1940 and worked in administration before retiring. She liked making beautiful patchworks and singing. She lived with her daughter and stayed at home for most of the pandemic. However, both of them tested positive after Zhakypbayeva started feeling unwell. She was in hospital for 10 days and spent her last three days in intensive care. She asked to be taken home to die but died on 28 August 2021. “She was on her own and couldn’t be with the people who loved her,” said her granddaughter Nellya Serikova. “She sacrificed a lot of things for my sister and I when we were kids. We were so close.” Rimon George Sultanian, 76, Jordan Rimon George Sultanian, 76, worked as a decorator and in construction in Amman before he retired. He was an orphaned refugee from Palestine and lived alone initially when he came to Jordan. He went on to have four children and six grandchildren. Sultanian contracted Covid in October 2020 and died in hospital on 10 December 2020. “My dad worked really, really hard all his life, even after his retirement, and sacrificed a lot for his family, so we could have the education and lifestyle he wanted us to have,” his daughter Armen, 33, a sales manager, said. “He had a difficult life but he always managed to not let us feel it.” Sultanian loved reading books, especially crime novels by Agatha Christie. “He would walk two times a week to book stores and a library and return with many books,” Armen said. “My dad was everything to us.” Gianpiero ‘Nonno’ Carlo Luigi Albertini, 89, UK Gianpiero “Nonno” Carlo Luigi Albertini was born in London on 13 July 1930 to Italian parents who had moved from Italy after the first world war. He had three sisters and lived in Surrey. He served in the British army for two years and returned to his profession as a lawyer before retiring. “I have many happy memories of my nonno [grandfather in Italian],” said his granddaughter Isabel. “Like him giving us a bath when we were little and cleaning our feet by instructing: ‘One footy up’. He was a gentleman and a gentle man, always kind and polite to everyone regardless of who they were.” Albertini initially went in to be treated for kidney failure and had started to improve when he tested positive for Covid. He died four days later on 19 May 2020 at East Surrey hospital. He was 89. Albertini is survived by his four children and 10 grandchildren. Andrew Daly, 93, Ireland Andrew “Andy” Daly, 93, was a greyhound breeder, owner and trainer from County Westmeath who was born on 20 November 1926. He settled in England after a career with the British army that involved time in Germany and Hong Kong. He took part in changing of the guard at Buckingham Palace and reportedly enjoyed drinks with Prince Phillip. After leaving the army he returned to Ireland in the 1970s and became a gun dog breeder and sold his dogs all over Europe and showed at Crufts. His granddaughter Claire Daly said he had an “incredible and eventful life and was much loved and respected by everyone he met and is much missed by us all”. In his later years he lived in a nursing home and suffered regularly from pneumonia. He contracted Covid early in the pandemic and died on 1 April 2020.Day four of the new year, day two of the new Rumour Mill, and already the new Newcastle thing feels long in the tooth. Zenit St Petersburg striker Sardar Azmoun is the latest name on a shopping list that already features Lille defender Sven Botman, Atlético Madrid full-back Kieran Trippier, Everton’s Lucas Digne, Arsenal’s Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, River Plate attacker Julián Álvarez, and south Devon utility man Thomas Cobley. We’re all going to have to get used to this quick-smart. It’s going to be a long month. Meanwhile the fuss and furore over Romelu Lukaku’s love letter to Internazionale is giving cover to a couple of Chelsea defenders making a bolt for the door marked Do One. Andreas Christensen, out of contract in the summer, may leave for Barcelona in a cut-price deal, while Antonio Rüdiger is eyeing a move to Real Madrid but will consider Bayern Munich, PSG or Juventus should talks turn sour. Barcelona also claim they’re in the mix for Borussia Dortmund’s Erling Haaland, presumably having found a loose £200m down the back of that tatty old settee. Perhaps the Catalan paupers will raise the cash by offloading Ousmane Dembélé to Newcastle, whose latest mention may lock the Mill into a screeching feedback loop, so turn down your speakers and/or take out those buds you got for Christmas. Barça are also hopeful of securing the services of Álvaro Morata, currently on loan at Juventus from Atletico Madrid, and offloading Philippe Coutinho, though that story is as old as references to Widecombe Fair. Arsenal are in the mix for Netherlands midfielder Georginio Wijnaldum, whose dream move to Paris Saint-Germain has turned into, if not a nightmare, then a fitful sleep on a hot evening under nylon bedsheets. The Gunners are also reportedly close to a deal for Real Sociedad and Sweden striker Alexander Isak. Ainsley Maitland-Niles could pass him on the way out, heading for a loan spell at Roma, while Bukayo Saka fancies a move to Liverpool, it says here. Manchester United want West Ham midfielder Declan Rice, and are willing to spend upwards of £100m for his signature. They’re also in for Barcelona and Uruguay defender Ronald Araújo, who is desirous of a pay rise at his current club but has yet to trouser one. Liverpool are also interested. Watford plan to snaffle defender Samir from Udinese, and may send Christian Kabasele the other way. Two days down, then, 27 to go.A judge has dismissed a lawsuit against Nirvana made by Spencer Elden, who appeared as a naked baby on the cover of the band’s classic 1991 album Nevermind, Spin magazine reports. In California District Court on Monday, Judge Fernando M Olguin dismissed the case “with leave to amend”. Lawyers for Elden missed the deadline to file an opposition to the Nirvana estate’s request to dismiss the case made in December. His team have until 13 January to refile. In the lawsuit filed in August, Elden claimed he was the victim of child sexual exploitation and that the cover artwork was a child sexual abuse image. “Defendants knowingly produced, possessed and advertised commercial child pornography depicting Spencer,” the lawsuit read. Elden said that appearing on the cover of Nevermind caused him “extreme and permanent emotional distress with physical manifestations”, plus loss of education, wages and “enjoyment of life”. Lawyers for the band’s estate – surviving members Dave Grohl and Krist Novoselic; Courtney Love, Cobain’s widow and executor; and Kirk Weddle, the photographer of the cover image – said Elden had “spent three decades profiting from his celebrity as the self-anointed ‘Nirvana Baby’”, recreating the image on the album’s 15th and 20th anniversaries, and tattooing the album’s title on his chest. They stated that the statute of limitations on such a case expired more than a decade ago, and that Elden’s claims that the image constituted child sexual abuse were spurious. “A brief examination of the photograph, or Elden’s own conduct (not to mention the photograph’s presence in the homes of millions of Americans who, on Elden’s theory, are guilty of felony possession of child pornography) makes that clear.”The head of the influential Doherty Institute, Prof Sharon Lewin, has added her voice to the growing chorus of experts who are calling for rapid Covid tests to be provided free of charge in Australia, as Omicron causes havoc across the country. A record of nearly 50,000 new Covid cases was reported nationwide on Tuesday as state health systems groaned under the increasing demand and experts warned the peak of infections was likely weeks away. As the Morrison government defended its failure to secure sufficient rapid antigen tests to deal with the surging national test demand, the deputy chief health officer, Dr Sonya Bennett, sought to reassure Australians there were “plenty of tests” on their way. She also played down concerns there may be many more undetected cases in the community, saying this demonstrated that the Omicron variant was proving to be milder than the Delta strain. “There’s certainly many more cases of Covid out in the community that we’re not aware of, but that’s not necessarily a bad thing,” Bennett said on Tuesday. “Where we’re seeing … in younger people, it’s very mild, many might not know they have it, or it’s just a sniffle. “So they’re not overly unwell and it does mean then you get a natural boost from that in the population, and it also would indicate that … the impact on the system is even less than we anticipate now.” She suggested the country would eventually move away from the current Covid testing regime, which was revised by national cabinet last week, as the virus became endemic and more like the flu. National cabinet will meet again on Wednesday when state and territory leaders will finalise plans for concessional access to rapid antigen tests, and assess the latest information on the virus spread, the vaccine rollout, the health system capacity and the current testing rules. Lewin, the director of the Doherty Institute whose advice has been central to Australia’s pandemic response, agreed on Tuesday that people should not have to pay for rapid antigen tests. “We’ve now begun to heavily rely on antigen testing which I think makes sense when we have such big numbers, and the shortage of antigen tests is a real problem at the moment, and I think also access to those tests really has to be free,” she told ABC TV’s 7.30 program. “The beauty of our healthcare system, and it is the absolute plank of our public health approach, [is] free access, equitable access for absolutely everyone. “So if we’re going to rely on antigen testing, and I think we can do some really innovative things with antigen tests and it may even give us additional freedoms in certain situations, they really have to be widely accessible and free.” Lewin said she was increasingly concerned about the rate of hospitalisations, saying that while the Omicron variant was milder, the increasing caseload and high levels of furloughed staff were creating new stresses. “The numbers are showing no signs of slowing down, unfortunately,” she said. “I’m getting increasingly concerned about pressures on our healthcare system. Numbers of hospitalisations are increasing. They’re not increasing at the same rate as in previous waves [but there are a] lot of emergency department attendances, which is causing significant stress on the system.” There were 47,738 cases of Covid recorded nationally on Tuesday, taking Australia’s total number of cases since the pandemic began to more than 500,000. Hospitalisation rates have almost doubled in the past week up to 2,362, with 184 of those in intensive care. All states expect WA reported new record highs, with NSW reporting 23,131 infections, while Victoria reported 14,020 and Queensland 5699. There were 3,246 cases in South Australia, 926 in the ACT, 702 in Tasmania, and 75 in the Northern Territory. The growing number of infections is already putting strain on the country’s hospital network, with staff shortages exacerbated by furloughing contributing to an “exhausted” workforce. More than 2,000 health workers are currently furloughed in NSW, and Guardian Australia reported on Tuesday that some workers who had tested positive were being called in to work if asymptomatic. Testing sites continue to be overwhelmed, with clinic closures across the country adding pressure to already strained pathology services. The demand for take-home testing kits, known as rapid antigen tests, is being hampered by supply constraints. But the strain on the health and testing network is expected to worsen, with Bennett saying the experience of the Omicron wave overseas was for a “short sharp rise” in infections. She said case numbers would probably keep rising for several weeks before plateauing, aided by the booster rollout. “We will probably continue to see cases increase over the next few weeks but by February, I’d expect, with the booster program in place as well, that we should see it plateauing and cases starting to come down,” Bennett said. “There are things that we need to do now, that we can do now to work together to bring those case numbers under control, and I’d just like to reiterate that the booster program is the single most important thing that we can do,” she said. An extra four million people became eligible for boosters on Tuesday, with the gap for second and third doses now reduced to four months. The gap will shorten again at the end of January to a three-month interval. The federal finance minister, Simon Birmingham, said booster shots were key to managing the outbreak, and he said the Omicron variant was responsible for the surge in cases and testing numbers. “Obviously, Omicron has once again changed the Covid landscape incredibly significantly. The much more highly transmissible nature of Omicron has seen a surge in case numbers, well above what had been anticipated under modelling related to Delta,” he said. “We’re responding to that by procuring more rapid antigen tests, by refining the definitions around assessing and testing, and to make sure that it is targeted to those who most truly need it and by ensuring that supports will be in place for those who need financial assistance in accessing rapid antigen tests.” The Coalition has been resisting calls to make the tests free for everyone, prompting criticism from welfare groups, medical experts and Labor. The federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, slammed the government, saying it was responsible for the “largest public policy failure in Australian political history”. “Australians are being told, ‘You’re on your own and go out and get a rapid antigen test’, but they’re not available in so many areas,” Albanese said. “If people are lucky enough to find one, they’re not affordable and for many people, it’s simply pricing out access to important healthcare.” Albanese has resisted calling for the tests to be free but later on Tuesday he told the ABC he “would have no problem with that”. His counterpart in NSW, Chris Minns, went further, saying the tests “need to be free of charge”. The Australian Consumer and Competition Commission announced on Tuesday that it would investigate claims of price gouging for rapid antigen tests, accusing some businesses of “cartel” conduct and calling for consumers to dob in retailers doing the wrong thing. “We have the ability to name and shame people if they are doing the wrong thing,” the ACCC chair, Rod Sims, said. But amid the widespread shortages, Bennett defended the health department’s strategy for rapid antigen tests, saying the department had modelled various scenarios but it was not possible to predict the “pathway” the virus would take. “This is a problem that we’re seeing around the globe. I think the sheer increase in numbers with Omicron, while everyone knew it was more transmissible, it’s happening very quickly,” she said. “But testing is accessible and will become even more accessible very shortly.”I look back at my list of failed New Year’s Eve resolutions with detached amusement. A few were vain attempts to improve myself (realistically, was I going to learn the harmonica or grow my own beetroot?), some reflected my concerns at the time (“I probably should touch it less, just in case it does drop off”) and as I aged others felt simple but somehow unachievable (eg 2018’s “have a shower before the school run”). My new year’s resolution for this year, however, will be achieved. Quite simply, it’s to play as much five-a-side as possible. Like most football fans, I’ve been playing the game for as long as I can remember. I grew up with loads of kids my own age on an estate of starter homes, which – coupled with a local primary school headteacher who thought that homework damaged children – created the perfect conditions to play football every day. I commentated on the matches we played in the park, I commentated on the kickabouts played in the hall of my friend’s house: “And the ball’s taken a wicked deflection off the Yellow Pages! LOOK AT HIS FACE, JUST LOOK AT HIS FACE!” Growing up in west Wales, where to PE teachers rugby union was king and football wasn’t played in lessons, I took part in unofficial matches between schools organised by the pupils. Football’s enforced absence during the pandemic has restored my enthusiasm to these teenage levels. In fact, to levels of eagerness not seen since Ian Rush played for Juventus. Although I never played 11-a-side Sunday League football, I did play in a competitive five-a-side league for most of my 20s. This saw levels of hostility I hadn’t expected before signing up. A bloke squared up to me during one game and said that he’d knock me out in the car park, even though I was turning out for a regional gas pipe company and he was representing the call centre of a big insurance firm – all that pent-up aggression and we weren’t even playing in one of the big utility company derbies that are so common at Tuesday night five-a-side. “It’s EDF versus British Gas here at Cardiff Powerleague, AND IT’S LIVE.” As much as I loved playing, and my mind often returns to goals I scored in those games more than 15 years ago, that very angry bloke (who signed off with the brilliantly 1960s insult of “you longhaired freak”) is a good example of what I’m trying to avoid in the games I now play in as a man in my 40s. The right ethos is essential. I already play in one game where the attitude is perfect, but having played so little in 2020 a match a week just doesn’t feel like enough any more. If I’m asked to make up the numbers for somebody else, finding out if shinpads are usually worn is a good indicator of what the game will be like. Friends I’ve played with since primary school will confirm that I’ve never thrown myself into tackles like Bryan Robson during a World Cup group game, but at 41 I don’t want to have my tib and fib broken by some meathead from Kent who works in recruitment and no longer loves his wife. As a self-confessed luxury player (trans: genetically unable to get stuck in, a lot of what I try doesn’t come off, the talent I do have is largely unappreciated in England) I would ideally like to play with nine other people who are a laugh and slightly less good than I am, so I can score lots of goals and kid myself as I drive home that I could have played at a higher level. This is the magic of playing football. I’ve interviewed professional footballers who haven’t kicked a ball since they retired, and yet when I kick the ball I could be 11 again. All the people I play with are the same. The only difference is that I now wear the boots my mum wouldn’t buy me in 1991 because they were too expensive, and I’ve come to accept that, age-wise, I’ve progressed from being “a senior pro” to “elder statesman of the dressing room” to “can his creaking limbs cope with one more campaign” to “club legend devastated to have contract terminated” before settling finally into the “young manager has new ideas” phase of my life. Thankfully, I’m usually playing against people closer in age to Eddie Howe than Erling Haaland. Five-a-side is the most accessible format of the world’s most popular sport, and as football is so ubiquitous, most players have a certain degree of competence. I love riding my bike, but when I’m cycling to Tesco to buy an onion and some AAA batteries I don’t kid myself that what I’m doing is the same as Geraint Thomas gritting his teeth during the Alpe d’Huez stage of the Tour de France. But even though I know it’s not true, a goal being lashed in with your weaker foot, an intelligent lay-off to a teammate, dribbling past an off-balance full-back will make me think: ‘Yes. I am Ferenc Puskas and I somehow slipped through the net.’ And then I will trip over my own feet or the ball will bounce off my shin and I will concede that actually: ‘I think the net was probably right to let me drift off into the Irish Sea.’ I have watched too many American football documentaries where the coach will tell his young players that if they fail to make the high school play-offs, this will be the final game they ever take part in. There is no real comparable NFL equivalent to five-a-side. Thankfully though, the kind of football I like can be played into old age. If you ask me, I will play. Just don’t expect me to track back.There is the kernel of a good idea in this second world war drama: a Gestapo officer (Sebastian Roché) in occupied France is invited to a dinner at a Côte d’Azur villa where the serving staff are, unbeknown to him, the rebel radio broadcaster (Cary Elwes), dissidents and Jewish fugitives he has been hunting all along. Unfortunately, Matthew Hill and Landon Johnson’s timid film fails to fully capitalise on this uncomfortable scenario and misses opportunities elsewhere, instead going big on self-satisfied pieties about fighting the just fight. Elwes’s Jacques is the gravelly voice of freedom in wartime Lyon, bidding insurgents over the airwaves to “stay safe” from his garret. But when his daughter Juliet (Greer Grammer) is almost caught filching a radio vacuum tube, she takes refuge in the office of Swiss financier Andre (Jason Patric). Her desperation is unrefusable – and her debutante looks don’t harm her either. Soon, with chief goose-stepper Klaus Jager closing in, Andre agrees to smuggle her and her household-in-hiding to his Mediterranean mansion. Resistance: 1942 has English-language dialogue throughout, with – weirdly – only the Nazis doing “Cherman” inflections. (Having the French characters follow suit would probably have been too ’Allo ’Allo!) By far the most damagingly inauthentic thing, though, is Elwes’ oddly detached, borderline-parodic performance. Maybe the impish presence he showcased in The Princess Bride would have been a perverse fit here if the film had dug more deeply into what a life of subterfuge means in practice, culminating in his dissembling butler at the reception. But we learn little about Jacques, and Elwes starches his turn with so much caricatural stiff upper lip, ’Allo ’Allo! might in fact have been his primary research material. As written here, the ambiguous Andre – who channels Nazi money – is a much more interesting character; a kind of Oskar Schindler lite. Patric’s inscrutable performance recedes intriguingly while Elwes over-reaches, suggesting a man locked in internal combat. But beyond facile montages in which Jacques’ radio addresses uplift no one in particular, the directors don’t make a case for why heroism is ultimately the more compelling. • Resistance: 1942 is released on digital platforms on 10 January.Nobody wants what’s coming, so nobody wants to see what’s coming. On the eve of the first civil war, the most intelligent, the most informed, the most dedicated people in the United States could not see it coming. Even when Confederate soldiers began their bombardment of Fort Sumter, nobody believed that conflict was inevitable. The north was so unprepared for the war they had no weapons. In Washington, in the winter of 1861, Henry Adams, the grandson of John Quincy Adams, declared that “not one man in America wanted the civil war or expected or intended it”. South Carolina senator James Chestnut, who did more than most to bring on the advent of the catastrophe, promised to drink all the blood spilled in the entire conflict. The common wisdom at the time was that he would have to drink “not a thimble”. The United States today is, once again, headed for civil war, and, once again, it cannot bear to face it. The political problems are both structural and immediate, the crisis both longstanding and accelerating. The American political system has become so overwhelmed by anger that even the most basic tasks of government are increasingly impossible. The legal system grows less legitimate by the day. Trust in government at all levels is in freefall, or, like Congress, with approval ratings hovering around 20%, cannot fall any lower. Right now, elected sheriffs openly promote resistance to federal authority. Right now, militias train and arm themselves in preparation for the fall of the Republic. Right now, doctrines of a radical, unachievable, messianic freedom spread across the internet, on talk radio, on cable television, in the malls. The consequences of the breakdown of the American system is only now beginning to be felt. January 6 wasn’t a wake-up call; it was a rallying cry. The Capitol police have seen threats against members of Congress increase by 107%. Fred Upton, Republican representative from Michigan, recently shared a message he had received: “I hope you die. I hope everybody in your family dies.” And it’s not just politicians but anyone involved in the running of the electoral system. Death threats have become a standard aspect of the work life of election supervisors and school board members. A third of poll workers, in the aftermath of 2020, said they felt unsafe. Under such conditions, party politics have become mostly a distraction. The parties and the people in the parties no longer matter much, one way or the other. Blaming one side or the other offers a perverse species of hope. “If only more moderate Republicans were in office, if only bipartisanship could be restored to what it was.” Such hopes are not only reckless but irresponsible. The problem is not who is in power, but the structures of power. The United States has burned before. The Vietnam war, civil rights protests, the assassination of JFK and MLK, Watergate – all were national catastrophes which remain in living memory. But the United States has never faced an institutional crisis quite like the one it is facing now. Trust in the institutions was much higher during the 1960s. The Civil Rights Act had the broad support of both parties. JFK’s murder was mourned collectively as a national tragedy. The Watergate scandal, in hindsight, was evidence of the system working. The press reported presidential crimes; Americans took the press seriously. The political parties felt they needed to respond to the reported corruption. You could not make one of those statements today with any confidence. ••• Two things are happening at the same time. Most of the American right have abandoned faith in government as such. Their politics is, increasingly, the politics of the gun. The American left is slower on the uptake, but they are starting to figure out that the system which they give the name of democracy is less deserving of the name every year. An incipient illegitimacy crisis is under way, whoever is elected in 2022, or in 2024. According to a University of Virginia analysis of census projections, by 2040, 30% of the population will control 68% of the Senate. Eight states will contain half the population. The Senate malapportionment gives advantages overwhelmingly to white, non– college educated voters. In the near future, a Democratic candidate could win the popular vote by many millions of votes and still lose. Do the math: the federal system no longer represents the will of the American people. The right is preparing for a breakdown of law and order, but they are also overtaking the forces of law and order. Hard right organization have now infiltrated so many police forces – the connections number in the hundreds – that they have become unreliable allies in the struggle against domestic terrorism. Michael German, a former FBI agent who worked undercover against domestic terrorists during the 1990s, knows that the white power sympathies within police departments hamper domestic terrorism cases. “The 2015 FBI counter-terrorism guide instructs FBI agents, on white supremacist cases, to not put them on the terrorist watch list as agents normally would do,” he says. “Because the police could then look at the watchlist and determine that they are their friends.” The watchlists are among the most effective techniques of counter-terrorism, but the FBI cannot use them. The white supremacists in the United States are not a marginal force; they are inside its institutions. Recent calls to reform or to defund the police have focused on officers’ implicit bias or policing techniques. The protesters are, in a sense, too hopeful. Activist white supremacists in positions of authority are the real threat to American order and security. “If you look at how authoritarian regimes come into power, they tacitly authorize a group of political thugs to use violence against their political enemies,” German says. “That ends up with a lot of street violence, and the general public gets upset about the street violence and says, ‘Government, you have to do something about this street violence,’ and the government says, ‘Oh my hands are tied, give me a broad enabling power and I will go after these thugs.’ And of course once that broad power is granted, it isn’t used to target the thugs. They either become a part of the official security apparatus or an auxiliary force.” Anti-government patriots have used the reaction against Black Lives Matter effectively to build a base of support with law enforcement. “One of the best tactics was adopting the blue lives matter patch. I’m flabbergasted that police fell for that, that they actually support these groups,” German says. “It would be one thing if [anti-government patriots] had uniformly decided not to target police any more. But they haven’t. They’re still killing police. The police don’t seem to get it, that the people you’re coddling, you’re taking photographs with, are the same people who elsewhere kill.” The current state of American law enforcement reveals an extreme contradiction: the order it imposes is rife with the forces that provoke domestic terrorism. Just consider: in 2019, 36% of active duty soldiers claimed to have witnessed “white supremacist and racist ideologies in the military”, according to the Military Times. ••• At this supreme moment of crisis, the left has divided into warring factions completely incapable of confronting the seriousness of the moment. There are liberals who retain an unjustifiable faith that their institutions can save them when it is utterly clear that they cannot. Then there are the woke, educational and political elites dedicated to a discourse of willed impotence. Any institution founded by the woke simply eats itself – see TimesUp, the Women’s March, etc – becoming irrelevant to any but a diminishing cadre of insiders who spend most of their time figuring out how to shred whoever’s left. They render themselves powerless faster than their enemies can. What the American left needs now is allegiance, not allyship. It must abandon any imagined fantasies about the sanctity of governmental institutions that long ago gave up any claim to legitimacy. Stack the supreme court, end the filibuster, make Washington DC a state, and let the dogs howl, and now, before it is too late. The moment the right takes control of institutions, they will use them to overthrow democracy in its most basic forms; they are already rushing to dissolve whatever norms stand in the way of their full empowerment. The right has recognized what the left has not: that the system is in collapse. The right has a plan: it involves violence and solidarity. They have not abjured even the Oath Keepers. The left, meanwhile, has chosen infighting as their sport. There will be those who say that warnings of a new civil war is alarmist. All I can say is that reality has outpaced even the most alarmist predictions. Imagine going back just 10 years and explaining that a Republican president would openly support the dictatorship of North Korea. No conspiracy theorist would have dared to dream it. Anyone who foresaw, foresaw dimly. The trends were apparent; their ends were not. It would be entirely possible for the United States to implement a modern electoral system, to restore the legitimacy of the courts, to reform its police forces, to root out domestic terrorism, to alter its tax code to address inequality, to prepare its cities and its agriculture for the effects of climate change, to regulate and to control the mechanisms of violence. All of these futures are possible. There is one hope, however, that must be rejected outright: the hope that everything will work out by itself, that America will bumble along into better times. It won’t. Americans have believed their country is an exception, a necessary nation. If history has shown us anything it’s that the world doesn’t have any necessary nations. The United States needs to recover its revolutionary spirit, and I don’t mean that as some kind of inspirational quote. I mean that, if it is to survive, the United States will have to recover its revolutionary spirit. The crises the United States now faces in its basic governmental functions are so profound that they require starting over. The founders understood that government is supposed to work for living people, rather than for a bunch of old ghosts. And now their ghostly constitution, worshipped like a religious document, is strangling the spirit that animated their enterprise, the idea that you mold politics to suit people, not the other way around. Does the country have the humility to acknowledge that its old orders no longer work? Does it have the courage to begin again? As it managed so spectacularly at the birth of its nationhood, the United States requires the boldness to invent a new politics for a new era. It is entirely possible that it might do so. America is, after all, a country devoted to reinvention. Once again, as before, the hope for America is Americans. But it is time to face what the Americans of the 1850s found so difficult to face: The system is broken, all along the line. The situation is clear and the choice is basic: reinvention or fall.In England, the spring school term began in early January, with compulsory mask wearing in secondary school classrooms. The government’s guidance was lifted in late January, but some schools that have complied with the rule change are having to temporarily reintroduce them a week later due to outbreaks in Covid infections. If you are a teacher, we would like to hear your thoughts and experiences on the return to school. If mask wearing rules have changed in your school, what are your views? Do you have any concerns? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Elizabeth Holmes, founder of Theranos, has been found guilty on four of 11 charges of fraud, concluding a high-profile trial that captivated Silicon Valley and chronicled the missteps of the now-defunct blood testing startup. The jury found Holmes guilty of several charges – including conspiracy to defraud investors – following a dramatic day in which jurors said they remained deadlocked on three of the criminal counts she faced. On Monday, the seventh day of deliberations, the jury told US district judge Edward Davila that it was unable to reach a unanimous verdict on those three charges. In response, Davila encouraged them to deliberate further, but jurors later returned and rendered their final decision. As the verdict was read, the Theranos founder bowed her head, remained seated and expressed no visible emotion. Her partner, Billy Evans, showed agitation in earlier moments but appeared calm during the verdict reading. Holmes was found guilty on four charges: one count of conspiracy to defraud investors, and three counts of wire fraud against investors. Holmes was meanwhile acquitted on three charges, including one conspiracy to defraud patients and two charges related to patients who received inaccurate test results. One charge was thrown out earlier in the trial, and the jury did not come to a verdict on the remaining three charges. The verdict seals Holmes’ extraordinary rise and fall and could have wide-ranging consequences for the tech industry. It also marked an indictment of the hype machine that helped rocket Holmes to fame, as she graced the covers of major magazines, headlined conferences, and drew comparisons to Apple’s Steve Jobs. The split verdicts are “a mixed bag for the prosecution, but it’s a loss for Elizabeth Holmes because she is going away to prison for at least a few years”, said David Ring, a lawyer who has been following the Holmes case closely. Holmes, 37, faces prison time, although a sentencing date has not been set. She pleaded not guilty and is expected to appeal. After the judge left the courtroom to meet with jurors individually, Holmes got up to hug her partner Billy Evans and her parents before leaving with her lawyers. Over the course of nearly four months, federal prosecutors called 29 witnesses, outlining missteps and alleged fraud Holmes committed during her 15-year reign as CEO. Holmes founded the company after dropping out of Stanford at 19 years old, promising a revolutionary technology that could run hundreds of health tests on just a drop of blood. But the company ultimately fell short of its ambitious pledge. Once a charismatic figure, Holmes was initially hailed as a visionary. As Theranos grew, the company attracted big-name investors including the former secretaries of state George Shultz and Henry Kissinger. At its height, Theranos was valued at more than $9bn. But cracks in the glossy surface began to show in 2015 when Wall Street Journal reporting revealed that its in-house tests had massive inaccuracies, and that the company was performing other tests using traditional blood drawing methodology and outside labs. The fall of Theranos has been followed with perhaps even more fervor than its spectacular rise, inspiring multiple documentaries, a feature film, and an upcoming television show. Starting in late August, throngs of reporters have lined up in the early morning hours for a seat inside the federal court house in San Jose, California. During the trial, prosecutors painted a picture of Holmes as a strict, power-hungry leader willing to go to any lengths to save her company’s image, repressing internal and external dissent and manipulating the press. “She chose fraud over business failure,” prosecutor Jeff Schenk said in his closing arguments. “She choose to be dishonest with investors and patients. That choice was not only callous, it was criminal.” As witnesses, the prosecution called forward Theranos lab directors who testified that their concerns over the technology’s shortcomings were largely ignored. Meanwhile, investors such as the former US secretary of defense James Mattis said he and others were discouraged from scrutinizing the company for fear of missing out on opportunities. The defense team for Holmes sought to counter that image by portraying Holmes as an ambitious entrepreneur who did not knowingly commit fraud, but rather did not understand the shortcomings of Theranos’ complex technology. Those arguments came to a head when Holmes made the stunning decision to take the stand in her own defense, arguing she made decisions in good faith and did not knowingly commit fraud. Prosecutors repeatedly pointed to documents that Holmes admitted to doctoring before sharing with potential partners, adding the logos of pharmaceutical firms and falsely implying they had endorsed the methodology. “I wish I hadn’t done that,” she told the jury on the stand. Her defense team stated in closing arguments that the logo evidence was “a distraction” and that Holmes was in talks with those companies at the time. Her attorneys also put forward a line of defense that Holmes was abused by her former romantic and business partner Sunny Balwani, who served for ten years as co-president of the company. “There was another side of Holmes’s relationship with Balwani that the public never saw,” said defense attorney Lance Wade in opening arguments, adding that “trusting [Balwani] as her primary adviser was one of her mistakes”. Some of the most powerful moments in the trial came when Holmes testified directly about Balwani’s alleged abuse, growing emotional as the prosecution called on her to read their romantic texts. She claimed he controlled what she did, who she spent time with, and even what she ate in an effort to turn her into a successful CEO. Balwani has strongly denied claims of mistreating Holmes. He faces his own trial in 2022 for fraud. Holmes did not respond to questions lobbed at her during a walk from the courthouse to the nearby hotel on Monday where she has stayed during jury deliberations. In a written statement, the US attorney Stephanie Hinds thanked the jury for navigating the case through the pandemic and said Holmes must now be held “culpable” for her crimes. Holmes will remain free on bond while awaiting sentencing, which will be determined by the judge. The Associated Press contributed reportingA North Korean defector who made a daring return to his home country at the weekend had reportedly struggled to build a new life in South Korea since his arrival just over a year ago. The man, who has not been named, crossed the heavily armed demilitarised zone [DMZ] that has divided North and South since the end of the 1950 to 1953 Korean war, on Saturday. Reports said the defector, who is in his 30s, had been prompted to make the dangerous journey back across the border after struggling to make ends meet in the South. His decision to return to North Korea has raised questions about how defectors are treated in the South, where many face discrimination in employment, education and housing. The North has not publicly commented on the man – one of about 30 double-defectors who have returned to their home country from the South in the past decade – but has acknowledged receipt of messages from the South Korean military about his escape, the Yonhap news agency said. A South Korean military official confirmed that the man, who had worked as a cleaner, appeared to have been experiencing financial difficulties. “I would say he was classified as lower class, barely scraping a living,” the official said. Officials said they had no reason to believe the man had been spying for the North and have launched an inquiry into how he was able to negotiate a barbed wire fence running along the 248km (155-mile)-long border, which is dotted with landmines and patrolled by troops around the clock, despite being caught on surveillance cameras hours earlier. After fleeing North Korea in November 2020, the man identified himself as a former gymnast and told investigators that he had crawled over barbed wire fences to reach the South, according to a defence ministry statement. An official at the South Korean unification ministry, which is responsible for cross-border affairs, said the man had received resettlement support from the government for his personal security, housing, medical treatment and employment since arriving in the South via the same eastern section of the DMZ. He had been spotted throwing away his belongings the day before he fled the South, Yonhap said. “He was taking out a mattress and bedding to rubbish dumps that morning, and it was strange because they were all too new,” a neighbour told Yonhap. “I thought about asking him to give it to us, but ended up not doing that, because we’ve never said hello to each other.” More than 33,000 North Koreans have defected to the South since the late 1990s – the vast majority via China and south-east Asia – to escape political persecution, food shortages and poverty. While some, such as the national assembly member Ji Seong-ho, go on to become highly successful in the wealthy, democratic South, many others struggle to find well-paid work. About 56% of defectors are categorised as being on low incomes, according to unification ministry data, and nearly 25% are in the lowest bracket – making them eligible for basic livelihood subsidies – six times the ratio of the general population. In a survey released last month by the Database Center For North Korean Human Rights and NK Social Research in Seoul, about 18% of 407 defectors polled said they were willing to return to the North, most of them citing nostalgia for the country they had left behind. “There is a complex range of factors, including longing for families left in the North, and emotional and economic difficulties that emerge while resettling,” the unification ministry official said. “The government has been continuing efforts to improve our support programmes to help them better resettle in the South.”Horticultural experts have compared it to finding a wondrous and unknown library of rare first editions, said the head gardener of Wentworth Woodhouse, Scott Jamieson, recalling the discovery of camellias believed to be some of the oldest and rarest in the western world. The important shrubs have been identified in a dilapidated glass and brick building on the estate of Wentworth Woodhouse, a spectacular Georgian palace near Rotherham in South Yorkshire, which is the subject of one of the UK’s biggest heritage restoration projects. The huge house and gardens are gradually revealing their secrets, one of the most eye-catching of which has been the discovery of the camellia house. “It is quite incredible,” said Jamieson, who has been at Wentworth Woodhouse for 17 years. “There are very few camellia houses left anywhere, certainly not one with a great collection of historic camellias.” For many years the building, with jagged glass likely to fall at any point, was too dangerous to go into. That glass roof has been removed, allowing access to the 200-year-old camellias. The shrubs were imported for wealthy families in the 18th century on merchant ships belonging to the East India Company. The camellias were, wrongly, judged so precious and fragile that they needed to be pampered in a building with lots of light and a stove to heat the brick walls. There are 19 camellia shrubs in total, with the oldest believed to have arrived in 1792. That makes it older than any in the nationally important camellia collection at Chiswick House in London and a contender to be the oldest anywhere in the west. With the help of Chiswick House and others, three varieties have been identified and the detective work continues to find out more. It was about two years ago that Jamieson began trying to work out what the building was. He sent a plaintive callout to people who might know and a number of experts came in and were amazed. “They said it was almost like having a library of first editions … it’s that important in gardening history. So it’s wonderful.” The survival of the camellia house is all the more remarkable given it spent decades only feet away from an open cast mine, which began operating in the 1940s. It was a lunar-like landscape, said Jamieson, who has recently led a project restoring the original pathways to the gardens. “It would have been a strange environment, I imagine, you would have had a hacking cough and stinging eyes with that amount of pollution in the air. And it would have been noisy.” Two hundred years ago it would have been a very different story, with the ladies gathering in the camellia house to drink tea, gamble and smoke when the men were out hunting. The plan now is to develop the site into a specialist tea house and a community cafe. It is hoped it will open in 2022. Wentworth Woodhouse remains one of the nation’s most spectacular stately homes most people have never heard of. To say that Wentworth Woodhouse is “over the top” is almost an understatement. It is twice as wide as Buckingham Palace, has 124,600 sq ft of living space, three acres of roofs, a room for every day of the year and is often described as Britain’s biggest house. The entire house would once have screamed opulence and excess, the walls lined with important paintings – notably George Stubbs’s Whistlejacket, now a star of the National Gallery. The volunteer guide Steve Ash says it hides in plain sight. “It’s lovely when you see young people come, because very often this is the first time they’ve been to a place like this. Then they realise it is on their doorstep. It is absolutely a proper hidden gem.” The property was in a terrible state when it was bought for £7m in 2016 by the Wentworth Woodhouse Preservation Trust – established after a campaign by a local business owner, Julie Kenny. It is now the subject of a restoration project that could easily cost more than £250m. The house was given £4.6m of levelling up money by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, in his October budget. That money will enable work to begin this year on the house’s vast stable block, a building so grand that some people assume it’s the main house.Go-Ahead has halted the trading of its shares on the London Stock Exchange after the train and bus operator failed to file its financial results because of issues surrounding a £25m breach of Southeastern’s railway franchise agreement. The transport group, which was stripped of the contract to operate the commuter network in September, said it was continuing to work closely with its auditor Deloitte to attempt to publish its results for the year to 3 July by the end of the month. In December the company, which apologised for “serious” failings in its railway business after it was found not to have declared more than £25m in taxpayer funding that should have been returned, said the scandal meant it would miss the six-month deadline for filing its annual results and have to suspend its shares under UK regulatory rules. The announcement of the impending trading suspension prompted a 25% fall in the company’s share price, which ended the year at 667p, giving Go-Ahead a market value of £288m at the close of the last day the company’s shares traded on New Year’s Eve. Go-Ahead’s shares were officially suspended on Tuesday morning. “The company intends to request a restoration of the listing of its ordinary shares and its bond on publication of the full year 2021 results,” said Go-Ahead in a filing to the London Stock Exchange on Tuesday. “The group continues to work closely with Deloitte to ensure that the full-year 2021 results are published as soon as possible. This is expected to be before the end of January.” The scandal, which cost Go-Ahead’s group chief financial officer, Elodie Brian, her job, will result in a fine from the Department for Transport. In December, Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, said that although the money had been recovered further investigations were being conducted into historical contact issues related to the franchise. The government has taken back control of the Southeastern franchise, which Go-Ahead operated through Govia, a joint venture with France’s Keolis. Go-Ahead still runs some of the busiest lines in the UK through Govia Thameslink Railways, another joint venture with Keolis.Four former ministers and a serving secretary of state will be cross-examined this year in a potentially politically explosive climax to the four-year Grenfell Tower public inquiry. Eric Pickles, the former secretary of state for communities, Brandon Lewis, the current Northern Ireland secretary, and the former housing minister Gavin Barwell will face hours of questioning over claims Conservative-led governments prioritised a “bonfire of red tape” over safety. Senior politicians are likely to be interviewed on how they responded to direct warnings about safety in high-rise blocks from the commissioner of the London fire brigade just weeks before the disaster. James Wharton, a former junior minister and close ally of Boris Johnson, and Stephen Williams, a former Liberal Democrat junior minister, are also expected to give evidence in person. Over three months, the inquiry will turn the spotlight from the actions of combustible materials manufacturers and the consultants and builders involved in the council block’s disastrous refurbishment, to the government that pursued – lawyers for the bereaved claim – “a political ideology which broke free from common sense and safety constraints”. Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, has already admitted the government “failed people at Grenfell” and told MPs that “on a couple of occasions” it had “not necessarily appreciated the importance of fire safety and not necessarily done everything in the wake of the Lakanal House tragedy [a 2009 tower block fire where six people died] that it should have done.” While the inquiry will look at the actions of governments going back to the 1990s, a principal context will be what David Cameron described in 2012 as his government’s “resolution to kill off the health and safety culture for good”. The bereaved have called for Cameron to give evidence to explain his policy, but the inquiry has not asked him to do so and Lord Pickles will field important questions Pickles was Cameron’s cabinet minister in charge of building safety from 2010 to 2015, and will be asked why the government failed to overhaul fire regulation guidance despite an instruction to do so by the coroner on the Lakanal House fire. The ambiguity of the guidance, which remained in place at the time of the Grenfell disaster on 14 June 2017, was a significant factor in allowing companies and consultants to use combustible materials, the inquiry has heard. In one letter disclosed to the inquiry, Pickles is shown assuring the coroner there would be a “future review” but arguing “fire protection in buildings is a complex subject and should remain, to some extent, in the realm of professionals”. Lawyers for the bereaved have argued the government became the “junior partner” in a relationship with the housebuilding industry, which allowed companies too much control over standards. In 2011 Pickles launched the “red tape challenge” to slash bureaucracy facing business. In the budget that year a new rule was introduced that required a waiver for any change to the building regulations. The inquiry will examine internal Whitehall documents showing how in 2015, a civil service briefing for the then housing minister Lord Wharton, was explicit that the review had been postponed “whilst the department focused its attention on other priorities including the red tape challenge”. Only “lip service” was paid to the commitment to the coroner to review the regulations, Anne Studd QC, counsel for the mayor of London has argued. Pickles has so far told the inquiry in a statement he does not recall “the potential industry use of combustible materials in external cladding systems was ever raised with me”. Pickles is also likely to be questioned on his resistance to introducing sprinklers as a safety measure, which the Fire Brigades Union has told the inquiry would have saved lives at Grenfell. In October 2013, when the Welsh government made sprinklers mandatory for new-build homes, Pickles complained it had “hit the housing market with extra red tape, adding £13,000 to the cost of building a new home”. In fact, a government briefing note disclosed to the inquiry said the amount was no more than £3,000. The inquiry may ask where he got his numbers from. In February 2014, Lewis, a junior minister under Pickles at the time, told parliament that “sprinklers work” but referred to a “one in two out” rule as part of the coalition’s red tape policy and said: “In that context … we want to exhaust all non-regulatory options before we introduce any new regulations.” Ministers are also likely to be asked about their dealings with Sir David Amess, the Tory backbencher who was killed in October. In 2014 Amess chaired the all-party parliamentary fire safety and rescue group, which was pressing Willams, the housing minister, to get on with the building regulations review ordered after Lakanal. Penny Mordaunt, an undersecretary in the department at the time, told Amess that Williams had seen no evidence it was urgent, and that he “was not willing to disrupt the work of the department” by getting on with it. This was “chilling”, the inquiry has heard. Amess’s group replied that it was “at a loss to understand” how independent evidence “which had life safety implications” was not urgent. It said: “Should a major fire tragedy with loss of life occur between now and 2017 … where the matters which had been raised here were found to be contributory to the outcome, then the group would be bound to bring this to others’ attention.” Lord Barwell, Theresa May’s former chief of staff who held the office of housing minister in the year before the disaster, is likely to face questioning over how he handled direct fire safety warnings from the London fire commissioner, Dany Cotton. On 3 April 2017 Cotton told Barwell and Lewis, by that time policing and fire minister, of “mounting evidence of issues of concern within residential buildings and, in particular, blocks of flats” about compartmentation and the impact on the policy of telling people to stay put in the event of a blaze. She said: “We are also concerned about contractor competency, and how this influences compartmentation deficiencies and therefore occupants’ safety.” This was prescient as the compartmentation failed catastrophically at Grenfell, partly because of poor workmanship, and the stay-put policy was kept in place for too long, costing lives, the inquiry has already found. A significant civil servant facing questioning will be Brian Martin, a former building control officer who rose to be a senior adviser to ministers on building regulations. He is likely to be asked what he knew about companies bringing dangerous, non-compliant materials to the market by exploiting confusions in how the building regulations could be met. Michael Mansfield QC, representing some of the bereaved, has alleged Martin “took an attitude that was complacent and collusive with a dangerously out-of-control industry”. In July 2014 Martin emailed a contact at the National House Building Council, which provided building control and warranty services for new-build homes, saying that “reliable sources” had been telling him that combustible foam insulation was being used in cladding on high-rise flats. He referred to polyisocyanurate foam, the kind specified for Grenfell that fuelled the fire and released toxic gas, but all he said was: “The purpose of my email is a friendly warning. You might want to double-check with your inspectors [ … ] that they are on top of this”. The inquiry resumes on 24 January.It’s been one year since a mob of Donald Trump supporters stormed the United States Capitol, as the “stop the steal” rally demanding to overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election turned into a deadly insurrection. After the attack, the Department of Justice and Federal Bureau of Investigation mobilized one of the largest criminal investigations in American history. Those efforts have so far resulted in more than 700 federal cases and counting, with more suspects expected to be charged. But for all that we have learned about the insurrection and the people who took part in it, crucial questions remain about the fallout of the attack for the far right and what it means to hold its perpetrators accountable. Federal prosecutors want the arrests and convictions of those responsible to act as a deterrent against extremism and future attempts to undermine democracy, experts say, but despite more than 150 guilty pleas so far, the legacy of 6 January is already contentious. A judicial debate has emerged over the appropriate sentencing for rioters, while trials in the coming months will test whether prosecutors can secure convictions on more serious charges facing far-right extremists. The fundamental understanding of what happened on 6 January is also being increasingly contested, as Republican lawmakers and rightwing media attempt to whitewash the events and reframe the insurrection as an act of justified political protest. More than any court case, researchers say, this revisionist narrative may have long-lasting implications for the far right and for political violence in America. The suspects In the months after the insurrection, law enforcement officials investigated hours upon hours of videos from the day, thousands of social media profiles and hundreds of thousands of tips from the public. They have arrested hundreds, sometimes raiding homes where suspects had stockpiled weapons and ammunition. As the arrests rolled in, researchers began to get a more complete picture of who was involved in the attack. The people charged came to Washington DC from nearly every state in the union, and ranged from teenagers to senior citizens. Beyond sharing a fervent support for Trump and belief in election conspiracies, no single profile has emerged. Overall the suspects are overwhelmingly male – about 80% according to research from George Washington University’s project on extremism – and the average age is 39. The vast majority of suspects are white. Many belonged to far-right militias and white nationalist groups that played an outsize role in the attack, but most had no direct affiliations with extremist organizations. “They’re sort of your nextdoor neighbor,” said Kurt Braddock, an assistant professor of communication at American University and extremism researcher. “It shows how far far-right ideologies have extended.” There were white-collar workers, people who came with their family members and a cross-section of other Trump supporters radicalized into committing political violence. Many believed in the QAnon conspiracy movement that viewed Trump as a messianic figure who would return to office and destroy a cabal of liberal elite pedophiles. The charges and sentencing Although the charges range from misdemeanors such as trespassing to violent assaults against Capitol police officers, the bulk of cases that have come in front of a judge so far have involved individuals pleading guilty to minor charges. Except for some high-profile rioters – including “QAnon shaman” Jacob Chansley, who was sentenced to 41 months in prison after pleading guilty to a felony charge of obstructing Congress – most of the sentences doled out have not exceeded several weeks in prison. Many of the rioters have received no jail time at all, instead receiving fines or probation. There have been significant differences between how US district court judges have approached sentencing and cases. One group of judges has questioned why prosecutors are seeking jail time for misdemeanor offences such as trespassing on Capitol grounds. US District Judge Trevor McFadden, a Trump appointee, made comparisons between Black Lives Matter protesters and the 6 January attackers and told a defendant that he was “acting like all those looters and rioters last year”.(McFadden did, however, later reject a defendant’s claim that he was being treated unfairly compared with leftist protesters in Portland.) Other judges have vehemently rejected the comparison to BLM, and have insisted that participants in the riot face serious consequences for their involvement. US District Judge Tanya Chutkan stated that the siege was an unprecedented attempt to “violently overthrow the government” and “stop the peaceful transition of power”. Chief US District Judge Beryl Howell questioned why prosecutors were letting rioters accept lighter misdemeanor plea deals and lamented that “the government has essentially tied the sentencing judge’s hands”. “No wonder parts of this public are confused about whether what happened on 6 January at the Capitol was simply a petty offense of trespassing, with some disorderliness, or was shocking criminal conduct that posed a grave threat to our democratic norms,” Howell said. The more complex cases and serious charges will probably go to trial in the coming months, researchers say, including those involving members of the Proud Boys, Oath Keepers, Three Percenters and other far-right militias. One member of the Oath Keepers, Jason Dolan, already admitted as part of a plea deal that he traveled with other militia members and stashed an M4 rifle at a Comfort Inn a short drive outside the Capitol. In December, 34-year-old Matthew Greene became the first member of the Proud Boys to plead guilty in a felony conspiracy case, with prosecutors stating that he and other Proud Boys coordinated their actions using programmable radios and dressed to conceal their affiliation with the group. After the riot, Greene allegedly ordered more than 2,000 rounds of assault-rifle ammunition, bragged that his group “took the Capitol” and told a friend to study guerrilla warfare and be ready to “do uncomfortable things”. The criminal trials this spring for felony charges such as obstructing Congress and a multi-defendant conspiracy case against members of the Oath Keepers may reveal new details about the level of coordination and planning that went into the attack on the Capitol. But they will probably also present difficulties for prosecutors. The government has already succeeded in dismissing some pre-trial defense objections, such as whether the common charge of “corruptly obstructing an official proceeding” was unconstitutionally vague, but more challenges will come. “It’s going to get complicated very quickly,” said Seamus Hughes, deputy director of the program on extremism at George Washington University. “You’re going to get into uncharted water with this prosecution at some point, just by the sheer number.” The investigation The FBI received more than 250,000 tips related to the siege, including family members turning in relatives and Facebook friends reporting old high school acquaintances. One suspect, New York state’s Robert Chapman, told a match on the dating app Bumble that he had stormed the Capitol and bragged about making it all the way to the National Statuary Hall. “We are not a match,” the other Bumble user replied, according to court filings, before sending a screenshot of their exchange to law enforcement. More than 80% of cases cite some form of social media as evidence for the charges, but the FBI’s investigation goes far beyond relying on amateur online sleuths and combing through social media profiles. Law enforcement has also used invasive technology and surveillance tactics that could expand law enforcement powers and have implications for future investigations. In addition to using facial recognition software to identify rioters, itself a deeply controversial practice, law enforcement appears to have expanded its use of geofencing search warrants – a process that involves using data from digital services to locate people within a certain area during a given time period. In practice, it means that authorities can demand Google hand over anonymized user location data, then ask for specific users’ private information, including their names, emails and phone numbers. Dozens of Capitol rioter cases cite Google location data in their court filings, according to a Wired investigation. “It’s going to set a precedent for geofencing,” Hughes said. “If they can get enough successful prosecutions … that will be something that’s used in future investigations.” The FBI’s use of surveillance has come under additional scrutiny in recent weeks after a New York Times investigation found that the bureau deployed surveillance teams to monitor Portland activists’ protests against policing, a move that civil rights groups condemned as domestic spying. Whitewashing the attack As the FBI has carried out its investigation, there has been a parallel effort to create a different narrative of the insurrection. Republican politicians and conservative media have been on a months-long campaign to whitewash the attack on the Capitol. Over the past year they have settled on a story that presents 6 January as a largely peaceful protest for legitimate election grievances, sometimes baselessly claiming that any violence was the result of antifa or leftist infiltrators. Prime-time Fox News host Tucker Carlson in November aired a three episode special entitled Patriot Purge that uncritically interviewed rightwing activists with ties to the white nationalist movement, who claim that the FBI investigation is an unjust political crackdown on conservatives. Carlson states in it that there is a leftist “purge aimed at legacy Americans” and features sympathetic interviews with people who took part in the insurrection. Two Fox News contributors quit over the special, with one suggesting that it would lead to violence. Many of the rioters have embraced a burgeoning celebrity status within the far right. Some suspects refer to themselves as “1/6ers”, and have launched online fundraising campaigns where they identify as political protesters and victims of government persecution. One collective fundraising page for the approximately 40 suspects being held in pre-trial detention has already raised hundreds of thousands of dollars and sells hoodies emblazoned with the slogan “free the 1/6ers.” Other high-profile suspects have created individual pages to capitalize on their notoriety. Richard “Bigo” Barnett, a self-described white nationalist who stole a document from speaker of the house Nancy Pelosi’s office and was photographed putting his boots up on her desk, launched a fundraising site that doubles as a manifesto for his anti-government views. “Richard Barnett’s picture at Speaker Pelosi’s desk has become the face of the new anti-federalist movement,” Barnett’s website states on its fundraising page. “We will not go gently into that good night. Click below to donate to the fight.” The group being held in pre-trial detention at the Correctional Treatment facility in Washington DC has also banded together while incarcerated, calling themselves the “Patriot Wing” and attempting to become far-right influencers. These suspects include numerous members of extremist groups such as the Proud Boys and Oath Keepers, as well as others facing more serious charges of violence and conspiracy related to the insurrection. They have started writing open letters and reportedly passed around a handwritten newsletter in the jail, in which they boast about reciting the pledge of allegiance and singing the national anthem together. Some Republican lawmakers have amplified this far-right narrative that the suspects being held in pre-trial detention are political prisoners and unjustly suffering for their beliefs. Representatives including Marjorie Taylor Greene, Paul Gosar, Matt Gaetz and Louie Gohmert have rallied in support of insurrection suspects and staged an attempt to visit the jail, claiming a conspiracy to mistreat the prisoners and that their detention was evidence of Marxism and totalitarianism. Meanwhile, more mainstream Republican lawmakers have stonewalled a House committee investigation into the roots of the attack, and Trump allies have refused to cooperate with subpoenas. All these developments – the solidifying of in-group identity among the more dedicated insurrections, the financial support for rioters and Republican lawmakers’ willingness to paint them as martyrs – concerns extremism researchers about the long-term effects of 6 January. Even if those responsible face significant prison sentences, there is little incentive for them to de-radicalize once incarcerated. “You may get to a point where folks who spend their time in jail come out and are basically provided a kind of a rockstar status within the movement,” Hughes said. The revisionist history of 6 January has also correlated with a declining interest among Republicans in punishing those involved. After the insurrection there was wide bipartisan support for prosecuting rioters, but a Pew Research Center study in September found the number of Republicans who believe it is important to hold those responsible legally liable for their actions significantly declined over the course of the year. Involvement in the events of 6 January is also apparently not disqualifying for Republicans seeking public office. At least 10 people who attended the Washington rally have now been elected to various positions, according to HuffPost, including three in state legislatures. What concerns some extremism researchers is that while it’s critical for prosecutors to secure convictions for those involved in the insurrection, these broader problems remain of how deeply embedded the far right has become in American politics. Even if authorities may be better prepared against future rallies aimed at subverting the democratic process, the reaction from rightwing media and some Republican lawmakers has threatened to legitimize far-right ideology and resorting to political violence to achieve their goals. “January 6 exemplified what the far right is now,” Braddock said. “But it definitely doesn’t end with January 6.”An Ohio high school student has filed a lawsuit against his former school and sports coaches after they forced him to eat a pepperoni pizza against his religion. The 17-year old student, known in court documents as KW or Junior, argues that his former coaches, who knew that he was a member of the Hebrew-Israelite faith and did not consume pork products, forced him to eat a whole pepperoni pizza as a consequence of missing a workout last May. According to the complaint filed last week, coaches at the Canton McKinley high school in Stark county, Ohio, forced Junior to eat the pizza in the middle of a gymnasium after he was unable to attend a weight-lifting session due to a shoulder injury. Junior asserts that at the time of the incident, he had been a member of the football team for two and a half years and that coaches were aware of his dietary restrictions. Junior “reminded defendants’ employees that he does not eat pork, due to his religious beliefs … In fact, Junior kicked the pizza box away from him, refusing to touch the pork pepperoni pizza … Defendants’ employees retrieved the pizza box and again ordered Junior to eat the pork pepperoni pizza,” the complaint said. It added: “Junior stated a minimum of 10 times that he did not eat pork or pork residue … At this point, defendants’ employees then stated that Junior could remove the pork pepperoni slices; however, the residue was clearly still covering the pizza and Junior continued to object.” When his coaches then threatened to remove him from the team, Junior ate the pizza with the pepperoni residue. The federal civil rights lawsuit alleges that the coaches’ “antisemitic and shameful” behavior caused Junior to suffer “substantial permanent injury”. It also argues that the coaches violated Junior’s first and 14th amendment constitutional rights by infringing his right to exercise freedom of religion and denying him due process and equal protection. As a result, Junior and his parents are seeking over $12m in damages from the school district and coaching staff. He has since transferred to another school and football program. Seven coaches were fired in June after the incident. Peter Pattakos, an attorney for most of the former coaches, argued that his clients are the “real victims in this matter”, were wrongly terminated and have sued for defamation.The transformation of the rapidly warming Arctic is being accelerated by a wave of thousands of newcomers that are waddling and paddling northwards: beavers. Scientists who sought to map the spread of beavers in Alaska were astounded to find that the creatures have pushed far north into previously inhospitable territory and are now set to sweep into the furthest northern extremities as the Arctic tundra continues to heat up due to the climate crisis. “We didn’t know what we would find and ended up being very surprised,” said Ken Tape, an ecologist at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, who co-authored the new research. “There are areas of Alaska that had no evidence of beavers 50 years ago that are now apparently saturated with them,” he said, adding: “It’s just a matter of time before they head even further north. When you consider this is likely happening across the rest of the Arctic in Canada and Russia, that gives you an idea of the scope of this change.” Using aerial photographs and satellite imagery reaching back to 1949, and observations recorded from before then, an international team of researchers involved in the Arctic Beaver Observation Network identified more than 12,000 ponds created by beavers damming rivers and streams across western Alaska. This number has doubled in the past 20 years. In recent years, as the Arctic has heated up three times quicker than the global average, the North American beaver has ventured north and west and now occupies vast swaths of the Seward peninsula, a large landmass that extends from the western coast of Alaska. The impact of these portly semiaquatic rodents has been felt by the remote Indigenous communities of Alaska, with the flooded areas created by beavers causing concern over access to food and travel. It’s unknown how many beavers are now in the northern and western parts of Alaska, with estimates ranging from 50,000 to close to 100,000. “The true impact of the spread of beavers into the Arctic on the environment and the Indigenous communities who live there is not yet fully known,” said Helen Wheeler, a researcher at Anglia Ruskin University. “However, we do know that people are concerned about the impact beaver dams are having on water quality, the numbers of fish downstream of the dams, and access for their boats.” A broader consequence of the arrival of beavers could be the acceleration of the climate change which, in combination with a reduction in fur trapping over the past century, has probably allowed the beavers to push north. Beavers, which do not hibernate, have benefited from shortening winters and the wider availability of vegetation available to feed upon. The pools that accumulate when beavers dam rivers create localized unfrozen “hotpots” that result in the thawing of permafrost, the always-frozen ground of the Arctic that holds vast amounts of carbon. Scientists warn that a widespread thawing of permafrost could cause global heating to spiral dangerously out of control. “Those ponds absorb heat better, they change the hydrology of the area and the permafrost responds to that,” said Tape. “Beavers are coming in from the outside, imposing themselves on the ecosystem and disrupting it. “It’s accelerating the effects of climate change. When you realize what’s happened in western Alaska is likely to happen to northern Alaska, it does give you pause.” Tape said that the Brooks Range, a mountain range that runs across northern Alaska, will be an obstacle to the beavers but will not stop them as they follow rivers up to the north coast. Further research is under way.As we begin the year 2022, in these unprecedented times, I know it’s easy to give in to despair. We are facing a raging pandemic with seemingly no end in sight. We are rapidly moving toward oligarchy and while income and wealth inequality grows, millions struggle to obtain the basic necessities of life. We have a dysfunctional healthcare system with more than 84 million uninsured or underinsured and nearly one out of four unable to afford prescription drugs. Climate change is ravaging the planet and systemic racism and other forms of bigotry continue to eat away at the fabric of our society. We have a corrupt political system in which corporate money buys elections and a mainstream media that largely ignores the pain that ordinary people experience. And, in the midst of all this, Republicans across the country are working overtime trying to undermine democracy by making it harder for people of color, young people and those who oppose them to vote in our next elections. In other words, the challenges we face are enormous and it is easy to understand why many may fall into depression and cynicism. This is a state of mind, however, that we must resist – not only for ourselves but for our kids and future generations. The stakes are just too high. Despair is not an option. We must stand up and fight back. And here is some very good news. While the corporate-owned media may not be actively reporting it, working people all over the country, with extraordinary courage and determination, are taking on corporate greed, and they are winning. Workers at John Deere waged their first strike in more than three decades, stayed on the picket lines and eventually won a contract with strong wage increases, a ratification bonus and improved health insurance. Striking nurses in Buffalo won raises that moved all workers to at least $15 an hour and a reduction in staff shortages. These nurses fought not only for themselves, but their patients – and they won. Kaiser Permanente healthcare workers won a major victory after rejecting a contract that would have given new workers lower wages and benefits. Nabisco workers, struggling against forced overtime, inadequate wages and pensions, a two-tier health system and the outsourcing of jobs, went on strike and won. Once again we saw workers fighting not just for themselves, but for the next generation of workers. More than 1,400 Kellogg’s workers in Michigan, Tennessee, Pennsylvania and Nebraska went on strike for months and won, fighting back against a plan to give new workers lower wages and benefits. Starbucks employees in upstate New York, for the very first time, organized a union shop in a fight against a giant corporation that did just about everything it could to stop them. Those are just some of the inspiring efforts that took place last year. Let me tell you about what’s happening right now as workers continue to stand up to some of the most powerful corporate interests in the country. In Huntington, West Virginia, 450 steelworkers at the Special Metals company have been engaged in a major strike for almost 100 days. Special Metals is a profitable company owned by Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway. Buffett, of course, is one of the richest people in the world, with wealth of over $109bn. While Special Metals made $1.5bn in profits last year and Mr Buffett became over $40bn richer during the pandemic, executives at this company offered workers an outrageous and insulting contract that includes a zero pay increase for this year, and a totally unacceptable 1% pay raise next year, while quadrupling healthcare premiums and reducing vacation time. Sadly, the corporate greed that is going on in West Virginia is not an aberration. In Santa Fe Springs, California, about 100 bakery workers, who make cakes for Baskin Robbins, Safeway and Cold Stone Creamery, are on strike against the appropriately named Rich Products Corporation at the Jon Donaire Desserts production plant. About 75% of these employees are Latina women who are often forced into mandatory overtime with little to no notice and sometimes work up to 16 hours a day. This is a company that made $4bn in revenue last year. During the pandemic, Bob Rich, the majority owner of Rich Products, increased his wealth by more than $2bn. While the workers he employs barely make more than California’s minimum wage, Mr Rich currently has a net worth of more than $7.5bn. Yet, despite his billions in wealth, the “best and final offer” Mr Rich has put on the table for his workers is an insulting $1-an-hour wage increase. That is pathetic. But it’s also not unusual in the world of corporate greed. In Brookwood, Alabama, about 1,100 workers at Warrior Met Coal have been on strike since April. Just like the bakery workers in California and the steelworkers in West Virginia, these are workers who also have worked as many as seven days a week and up to 16 hours per day. In 2016, under great pressure to keep the company afloat and keep jobs in their community, these coalminers agreed to a $6-an-hour pay cut – more than 20% of their average salary – and a substantial reduction in their healthcare and retirement benefits as part of a restructuring deal made by Wall Street vulture funds like Blackstone and Apollo. Meanwhile, the executives at Warrior Met and their Wall Street investors made out like bandits. Since 2017, Warrior Met has rewarded $1.4bn in dividends to its wealthy shareholders while handing out bonuses of up to $35,000 to its executives. Yet, while the company has returned to profitability, Warrior Met has offered its workers a measly $1.50 raise over 5 years and has refused to restore the healthcare and pension benefits that were taken away. The struggles that these workers are experiencing are not unique. There are millions of other Americans in exactly the same position – people who have to fight tooth-and-nail against wealthy and powerful corporate interests for decent wages, healthcare, pensions and safe working conditions. And let’s be clear. Class warfare in this country is intensifying. Greed is on the rise. What history has always taught us is that real change never takes place from the top on down. It is always occurs from the bottom on up. That is the history of the labor movement, the civil rights movement, the women’s movement, the environmental movement and the gay rights movement. That is the history of every effort that has brought about transformational change in our society. And that is the struggle we must intensify today. At a time when the demagogues want to divide us up based on the color of our skin, where we were born, our religion or our sexual orientation, we must do exactly the opposite. We must bring people together around a progressive agenda. We must educate, organize and build an unstoppable grassroots movement that helps create the kind of nation we know we can become. One that is based on the principles of justice and compassion, not greed and oligarchy. The greatest weapon our opponents have is not just their unlimited wealth and power. It is their ability to create a culture that makes us feel weak and hopeless and diminishes the strength of human solidarity. And here is our new year’s resolution. Like the thousands of workers who stood up and fought courageously in 2021, we will do the same. No one individual is going to save us. We must rise up together. Happy new year. Bernie Sanders is a US senator and the chair of the Senate budget committee. He represents the state of Vermont“This [fuel facility] is not the eighth wonder of the world. It is Frankenstein’s monster. And we have to kill it before it kills us.” This is the plea from Marti Townsend, one of more than 1,000 Hawai’i residents urging the Honolulu City Council to take action to protect our island’s most important resource: fresh, clean water. Frankenstein’s monster is the US Navy’s Red Hill Fuel Storage Facility: a massive underground “farm” of 18-million liter fuel tanks and pipes just 100 feet above metropolitan O’ahu. Its construction began before the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. Since then, it has leaked over 180,000 gallons of petroleum into the groundwater aquifer that provides drinking water for over 400,000 residents and visitors from Hālawa to Hawaiʻi Kai. Despite its longstanding threat to water systems, this decrepit facility has been in use until operations were “paused” in late November, after hundreds of military families reported rashes, headaches, nausea, vomiting – symptoms of petroleum poisoning. The Navy denied these facts for days. “We have no immediate indication that the water is unsafe to drink,” their representatives said, even after the Navy had quietly shut down its own drinking water well. Pearl Harbor’s commander even told our community – of sick families, pregnant women and nursing moms – that “my staff and I are drinking the water on base.” Hawai‘i’s Health Department finally stepped in, advising Navy water system users not to drink their tap water. Navy officials still refuse to acknowledge that this is a crisis. It views the Governor’s emergency order to de-fuel the Red Hill Facility as a mere “request,” and has enlisted top Navy lawyers to make sure its 600m liters of petroleum stay perched above our water supply. A military spouse in our legal proceedings this week sobbed as she described the family dog rejecting its water dish for days. Another mother teared up as she remembered her infant child vomiting constantly after the Navy advised that her water was safe (it wasn’t); their own beloved and once-healthy dog had to be put down, after thousands of dollars could not diagnose its sudden debilitating illness. The Navy’s Assistant Secretary, in his subsequent remote testimony from the nation’s capital, even had the gall to complain that he had missed that night’s weekly American football game. The injustice of the Red Hill tragedy reflects the impunity of the US military – not only in its endless wars in the Middle East, but right here in Hawai’i. A fraction of the US’s $768bn defense budget could help boost our ailing and inequitable healthcare system, provide free college for all, or make the investments needed to halve our carbon emissions and help keep entire countries from heartbreaking devastation. Yet every year our politicians pour ever more taxpayer dollars into the planet’s most expensive, and deadly, machine. Not even Hawai‘i’s federal delegation has been to stand up to this mighty power. Their long-due request to the US federal government has been milquetoast: we need more studies, and we need to fix some pipes. Only Representative Kai Kahele, the only Hawai‘i delegate with military experience, has acknowledged that the facility must be defueled. The US commander-in-chief, President Joe Biden, has yet to even acknowledge the situation. Frankenstein’s monster is not just the facility: it is the larger US military machine. America’s elected leaders are unable and unwilling to rein in this monster that consumes ever more of the country’s resources as it poisons our atmosphere and now, our island’s water. These leaders dare to call themselves representatives of the people while allegedly lying under oath, letting military families be poisoned, and sacrificing entire islands of US citizens. While America’s Frankenstein may consume its creator, the people of Hawai‘i will resist it. We think about the ones we love, our children and grandchildren, and what we would do to protect them from harm. Our weapons are not guns and ships but words, signs, songs, and aloha ʻāina, love for our home, for each other. Native Hawaiians, whose ancestors have always understood the importance of wai, of water, who have fought and died and won against the US Navy before, are now leading the fight to fix a mess they had no hand in making. “History will remember the people that stood up,” Dr Kamanamaikalani Beamer recently told a crowd of several hundred at the steps of Hawai‘i’s capitol, by the statue of Hawai‘i’s last queen, herself unlawfully deposed by the US Navy. “We will regain control and authority over our resources to do what is pono (just) because we must preserve them for the generations to come. There are more battles on this issue. We’re not making suggestions to the military. We are making demands.” Wayna Tanaka is Director for the Sierra Club of Hawai’iGood morning. The extraordinary rise and fall of Elizabeth Holmes, founder of Theranos, has been sealed as jurors found her guilty on four of 11 charges of fraud, concluding a high-profile trial that captivated Silicon Valley and chronicled the missteps of the now defunct blood testing startup. The jury found Holmes guilty of several charges – including conspiracy to defraud investors – after a dramatic day in which jurors said they remained deadlocked on three of the criminal counts she faced. Yesterday, the seventh day of deliberations, the jury told US district judge Edward Davila that it was unable to reach a unanimous verdict on those three charges. In response, Davila encouraged them to deliberate further, but jurors later returned and rendered their final decision. Was she found guilty of all charges? No. She was acquitted on three charges, including one conspiracy to defraud patients and two charges related to patients who received inaccurate test results. How did Holmes react? As the verdict was read, the Theranos founder bowed her head, remained seated and expressed no visible emotion. Will she go to prison? Holmes does face prison time, although a sentencing date has not been set. She pleaded not guilty and is expected to appeal. Capitol attack panel in race against time as Trump allies seek to run out clock The House select committee investigating the 6 January attack on the Capitol is facing a race against time in 2022 as Trump and his allies seek to run out the clock with a barrage of delay tactics and lawsuits. Republicans are widely expected to do well in this year’s midterm elections in November and, if they win control of the House, that would give them control to shut down the investigation that has proved politically and legally damaging to Trump and Republicans. The select committee opened its investigative efforts into the 6 January insurrection, when a pro-Trump mob stormed the Capitol to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win, with a flurry of subpoenas to Trump officials to expedite the evidence-gathering process. But aside from securing a trove of documents from Trump’s former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, the select committee has found itself wading through molasses with Trump and other top administration aides seeking to delay the investigation by any means possible. What will happen next? Trump has launched a last-ditch appeal to the supreme court to prevent the release of the most sensitive of White House records but experts say it’s unlikely to be successful. Will the 6 January attackers be held accountable? As Republicans spread a revisionist history of the insurrection, the Guardian takes a look inside the FBI’s Capitol riot investigation. Prince Andrew accuser Virginia Giuffre’s legal deal with Jeffrey Epstein released Court papers unsealed on Monday revealed that Virginia Giuffre received $500,000 in a legal settlement with Jeffrey Epstein, the late financier and convicted sex offender whom she accused of sexual abuse. The unsealing stemmed from Giuffre’s sexual abuse lawsuit against Prince Andrew, which she filed on 9 August in Manhattan federal court. Giuffre has long accused Epstein and his sometime girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell – now a convicted sex trafficker, after her New York trial – of forcing her into sex with the royal when she was 17. He vehemently maintains his innocence. Andrew filed Giuffre’s settlement with Epstein as part of his attempt to dismiss her case, arguing that it shields him. Lawyers for the prince contend the settlement contains provisions that bar Giuffre from taking legal action against many Epstein associates. What does the unsealed settlement say? It says that upon receipt of the stipulated sum, Giuffre, referred to under her maiden name, agrees to “remise, release, acquit, satisfy and forever discharge the said second parties and any other person or entity who could have been included as a potential defendant … from all, and all manner of, action and actions of Virginia Roberts, including state or federal, cause and causes of action”. In other news … More than 1 million people in the US were diagnosed with Covid on Monday, a global daily record. A total of 1.06 million people tested positive for the virus, a figure driven largely by the Omicron variant, data from Johns Hopkins University revealed. Monday’s number is almost double the previous record of about 590,000 set four days ago, which itself was a doubling from the previous week. Tesla has been criticised for opening a new showroom in the capital of Xinjiang, a region at the heart of years-long campaign by Chinese authorities of repression and assimilation against the Uyghur people. The council on American-Islamic Relations has said no US company should be doing business in the region. A meteor that caused an earthshaking boom over suburban Pittsburgh on New Year’s Day exploded in the atmosphere with an energy blast equivalent to an estimated 30 tonnes (27,200kg) of TNT, officials said. A large cleanup effort is under way in Los Angeles county after an estimated 8.5m gallons of raw sewage flooded through a neighborhood in the city of Carson, closing beaches and leaving toilet paper, feces and toxic residue strewn across nearby streets and sidewalks. US twins in Salinas, California were delivered just minutes apart ended up being born in two different years. Aylin Yolanda Trujillo was delivered at Natividad medical center at exactly midnight on 1 January. But her brother, Alfredo Antonio Trujillo, had arrived at 11.45pm on 31 December. Don’t miss this: the next US civil war is already here – we just refuse to see it The US today is, once again, headed for civil war, and, like in the past, it cannot bear to face it. The political problems are both structural and immediate, the crisis both longstanding and accelerating. The American political system has become so overwhelmed by anger that even the most basic tasks of government are increasingly impossible. The right has recognized that the system is in collapse, and it has a plan: violence and solidarity with treasonous far-right factions. … or this: ‘I saw a big set of white teeth coming towards me’ How does it feel to fight off a predator in the wild? From a British citizen attacked by otters in Singapore, to monkey attacks in Thailand, squirrel attacks in New York, and a man who fought off a crocodile with a pocketknife in Queensland, these encounters capture our imaginations. But how does it feel to survive such an ordeal – and how does it affect your life? Five people, who lived to tell the tale, explain. Climate check: deforestation jumps in world’s largest savanna as scientists raise alarm Deforestation last year rose to the highest level since 2015 in Brazil’s Cerrado, prompting scientists to raise alarm over the state of the world’s most species-rich savanna and a major carbon sink that helps to stave off climate change. The Cerrado, the world’s largest savanna spread across several states of Brazil, is often called an “upside down forest” because of the deep roots its plants sink into the ground to survive seasonal droughts and fires. “It’s extremely worrying,” said Mercedes Bustamante, an ecologist at the University of Brasília. Last Thing: NHL fan saves life of Canucks staffer after spotting cancerous mole When Nadia Popovici spotted a small mole on the back of Brian Hamilton’s neck last October, during an NHL game between the Vancouver Canucks and the Seattle Kraken, she was unsure if the Canucks’ assistant equipment manager was aware it was there. Gaining Hamilton’s attention, she wrote a message on her phone and pressed it against the plexiglass dividing the crowd from the ice. “The mole on the back of your neck is possibly cancerous,” the fan wrote. “Please go see a doctor!” Popovici was right and Hamilton is now cancer-free. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comBritain’s manufacturers have suffered a drop in export demand amid pressure from Covid and Brexit, according to fresh data that shows supply chain disruption and staff shortages held back the economy in December. The latest snapshot from IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply (Cips) showed growth in UK factory output was limited last month by Covid restrictions and Brexit weighing on orders and pushing up costs. According to the survey of 650 manufacturers, which is tracked by the government and the Bank of England for early warning signs from the economy, inflows of new work from overseas dropped for the fourth month in a row. While firms reported continued growth at the end of last year and a slight easing of supply chain delays, manufacturers said logistics issues, Brexit difficulties and the possibility of further pandemic restrictions at home and overseas had damaged export demand at the end of the year. New trade restrictions since leaving the EU and the impact of the pandemic mean that Britain’s exporters are on track to be the slowest among big European economies to recover from Covid-19, according to research by Euler Hermes. The Paris-based trade credit insurer forecasts UK exports will not recover to pre-pandemic levels until 2023, leaving the UK lagging European counterparts, with data expected to show that Germany and Italy have already recovered in 2021 and other nations will do in 2022. The forecast comes despite a rise in demand for manufactured goods across advanced economies as consumers turn to purchasing physical products while pandemic restrictions limit appetite for services. Ana Boata, the head of economic research at Euler Hermes, said: “Our forecasts show that Brexiting in times of Covid-19 has hindered exporters’ capacity to benefit from the strong upswing in demand that lockdown has presented.” She said fresh post-Brexit border controls on UK imports at the start of 2022 would bring further disruption, while the Omicron coronavirus variant would add to severe uncertainty facing firms. “British exporters have been tasked with sailing increasingly perilous trade waters in recent years – another 12 months of headwinds could be enough to sink many,” she added. According to the latest snapshot from IHS Markit/Cips, UK-based firms suffered from rising costs for freight, shipping and air transportation amid supply chain disruption. However, firms also recorded further growth of production, new orders and employment at the end of 2021. Hiring increased for the 12th successive month in a row in December, as firms battled to meet improved demand, rising backlogs of work and efforts to address staff shortages. The IHS Markit/Cips manufacturing purchasing managers’ index (PMI) rose to 57.9 in December, little changed from a three-month high of 58.1 in November. A mark above 50 signifies growth as opposed to contraction. Inflationary pressures remained high, and companies reported a sharp increase in costs for chemicals, electronics, energy, food products, metals, timber and wood. Although firms were optimistic that disruption linked to Covid and Brexit should gradually fade over the course of 2022, experts warned headwinds for UK factory output and exports remained. Dave Atkinson, a regional director at Lloyds Bank, said: “There are tentative signs as the pace of output growth builds that some supply chain pressures, which have dragged on the sector for months, are starting to ease. But manufacturers expect supply headaches to persist throughout 2022, with chip shortages in particular likely to be prevalent even into next year.”The first anniversary of the invasion of the Capitol approaches, our cold civil war grows hotter by the day, and the numbers tell the story. A majority of Republicans view the attack as a defense of freedom (56%) and just under half (47%) cast it as an act of patriotism. For good measure, one in six Americans approve of the events of 6 January 2021, including nearly a quarter of Republicans. America’s Reichstag fire continues to smolder. A staggering 64% of Americans believe democracy here is “in crisis and at risk of failing”. Beyond that, two-thirds of Republicans agree that “voter fraud helped Joe Biden win the 2020 election”. Disturbingly but not surprisingly, the Republican party’s credo is now “heads I win, tails you lose”. Then again, the last time a non-incumbent Republican won the presidential popular vote was George HW Bush in 1988. The fact that recent Republican-backed post-election “audits” have failed to yield a different outcome, has not dulled the party faithful’s devotion to the false and Trump-driven proposition that the election was stolen. From the looks of things, the Republican party’s fealty to democracy appears tenuous at best, no longer willing to accept the finality of the ballot box or the courts. Even after the insurrection, the majority of congressional Republicans opposed certifying the election. And the base is definitely with them. Donald Trump leads all challengers for the 2024 Republican nomination. He leads his closest rival, Florida governor Ron DeSantis, by more than 40 points. Trumpism is more than a cult: it is a movement. In that same spirit, Representatives Marjorie Taylor Greene, Louie Gohmert and Matt Gaetz lie at the party’s enraged and performative core. During the last 12 months, these attitudes have managed to congeal and fester. Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger are outliers in a party driven by and suffused with grievance. Cheney is dead-on when she says the choice is between the constitution and Trump. But it is only the coastal elites who are listening. During the 2016 campaign, Paul LePage, then governor of Maine, thought Trump needed to show some “authoritarian power”. The Republican party knew who it was getting and what it wanted. Back in the day, Republican congressional leaders ushered Richard Nixon to the door. Now, crossing Trump is met with the prospect of a primary or the inevitable resignation. In Georgia, Trump is supporting the opponents of Brian Kemp, the incumbent Republican governor, and Brad Raffensperger, the incumbent secretary state, because they declined to bend to his will. In the aftermath of the election, they refused to “find” votes for Trump where there were none to be found despite relentless pressure from the White House or to overturn the will of their state’s voters. Indeed, Trump’s phone call to Raffensperger was a key event in Trump’s second impeachment. Fittingly, on Monday Trump issued his “complete support and endorsement” for the re-election bid of Viktor Orbán, Hungary’s prime minister and an outright proponent of “illiberal democracy”. In office, Orbán has curbed the press and tilted his country’s constitution and laws in his personal favor. One-party rule is his goal. Think of Mar-a-Lago along the Danube and you get the picture. Beyond that, Orbán has thrust blood, soil and Christianity into the forefront of Hungarian politics, to the approval of name-brand Republicans. Mike Pence, Trump’s vice-president, and Jeff Sessions, Trump’s discarded attorney general, have travellled to Budapest and paid homage to Orbán and conservative social values. Likewise, Fox News’ Tucker Carlson spent time broadcasting from Hungary. The nexus between the Republican party and religion grows at a moment in time when fewer Americans can be found in the pews, and religious “nones” occupy a growing space in public debate and the Democratic party. Frequency of worship is as valid a predictor of how white Americans will vote as any other. It is no longer a simple matter of denominational affiliation. In a sense, America is enveloped in a bloodless but rage-filled 16th-century-styled religious war. Meanwhile, for all of Biden’s campaign rhetoric about bridging our political chasm, his presidency has failed to narrow the breadth and intensity of the partisan divide. Booming job and stock markets have not papered over the country’s fault lines, which have only grown deeper and more acrid during his tenure. And it is not just the debacle in Afghanistan or even inflation. On that score, the 46th president and his allies refuse to acknowledge that in US politics if you want to move to the left on economics, you had better move to the center on social issues. Culture still counts – a lot. The lessons of triangulation taught by Bill Clinton three decades ago remain valid. Sadly, the realities that brought America to its present inflection point are not disappearing any time soon. Tribe, place and resentment stand to define and drive our politics for as far as the eye can see. Barrington Moore Jr once said, “No bourgeoisie, no democracy,” and these days, the middle class feels buffeted by forces outside its control. A recent Republican fundraising missive framed the debate in the US as between Americans and Democrats. So, this is where we are. Lloyd Green is an attorney in New York. He was opposition research counsel to George HW Bush’s 1988 campaign and served in the Department of Justice from 1990 to 1992A US judge is to hear arguments by the Duke of York’s legal representatives to have the sexual assault civil lawsuit brought against him dismissed without trial in a crucial New York hearing. Prince Andrew, 61, is being sued by Virginia Roberts Giuffre, 38, for alleged sexual assault that she claims took place when she was aged 17 and had been trafficked by the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. Andrew’s legal team will on Tuesday argue before Judge Lewis Kaplan that the case is baseless and should be thrown out. The hearing, by video teleconference, comes the day after a previously confidential 12-page document was made public disclosing the terms of a $500,000 settlement agreement in 2009 by Epstein to Giuffre. The prince’s lawyers are expected to argue the agreement means Giuffre has relinquished any rights to sue anyone connected to Epstein who could be described as a “potential defendant”. The settlement, which relates to a Florida state case to which the prince was not a party, states Giuffre agreed to “release, acquit, satisfy, and forever discharge” Epstein and “any other person or entity” who could have been included as a potential defendant. Though the document does not mention Andrew by name, Andrew B Brettler, who represents Andrew, has said the settlement should end the lawsuit. Brettler previously told the New York court that the agreement “releases Prince Andrew and others from any purported liability arising from the claims Ms Giuffre asserted against Prince Andrew here”. However, Giuffre’s lawyer, David Boies, argued the settlement was “irrelevant to the case against Prince Andrew”. Giuffre is seeking unspecified damages claiming she was trafficked by Epstein to have sex with Andrew when she was 17 and a minor under US law. The prince has denied all the allegations. His legal team have described Giuffre’s claims as “baseless” and alleged she is seeking a “payday” at the royal’s expense. Kaplan last week denied a motion from Andrew’s lawyers to halt the civil proceedings while the issue of where Giuffre lives is dealt with. The crunch hearing comes one week after Andrew’s former friend Ghislaine Maxwell, 60, a sometime girlfriend of Epstein’s, was convicted of charges relating to recruiting and trafficking teenage girls for Epstein to sexually abuse. Lawyers for Maxwell, who faces a lengthy prison sentence, plan to appeal. It is not known if Kaplan will make his decision on whether to dismiss Giuffre’s lawsuit on Tuesday or announce it at a later date. Lawyers for Giuffre have requested documents as part of her litigation, such as proof of Andrew’s claim that he cannot sweat. Giuffre has claimed the duke was “sweating profusely all over me” at a London discotheque on a night when she alleges they had sex. Andrew said in his Newsnight interview the allegation could not be true “because I have a peculiar medical condition which is that I don’t sweat or I didn’t sweat at the time”. The prince also maintained that on the day cited by Giuffre he took his daughter Beatrice to a late-afternoon children’s party at a Pizza Express restaurant in Woking, Surrey. After that, he said, he was at home with his children all night.Millions of critical workers in the UK could get priority Covid testing through their employers under a draft plan designed to tackle staff shortages. Amid concerns over testing availability, ministers have drawn up a prioritisation list including health workers and those working in critical infrastructure. The plan, first reported by the Daily Telegraph, is expected to be signed off by ministers early this week with pressure mounting on key services as schools return and services such as waste collection and transport resume normal schedules after the Christmas break. A No 10 source confirmed there was a prioritisation plan drawn up but said there was no plan for imminent implementation, saying they believed the plans for testing was robust, despite widespread difficulties with home deliveries and pharmacy supplies of lateral flow tests. It comes after the British Medical Association and Royal College of Nursing called for health staff to be prioritised for rapid tests to ease staffing issues. Millions of testing kits are to be delivered to schools this week and headteachers can already order via a channel for pupils and staff to test twice a week. However, critical businesses including police, transport workers and haulage could also be given access to priority testing under the plans. An unprecedented demand for tests has been driven by the government allowing vaccinated people out of self-isolation if they show repeated negative lateral flow test results after a week, and among those stocking up on kits before New Year’s Eve events. A government spokesperson said: “The UK’s testing programme is the biggest in Europe and record numbers are being delivered to pharmacies, homes and those who need them. “The NHS has additional stock of lateral flow tests and those who live or work in vulnerable settings have access to dedicated testing order routes. If at some point it is necessary to do so we will always prioritise protecting the most vulnerable as well as critical workforces, as we have done throughout the pandemic when it comes to vaccines, boosters, testing and other infection control measures such as PPE.” The minister for vaccines and public health, Maggie Throup, said she was not sure how many Britons were currently in self-isolation. She told Sky News: “I’m not sure of that [actual] figure, but I think what’s shown over Christmas is that a lot of people have caught the disease, the Omicron variant is very transmissible, but what is good news, it doesn’t seem to be resulting in severe diseases as some of the other variants did.”With the Ashes gone, England’s Test team are in what could be tactfully described as some disarray. But where there is despair, let us sow hope. A year ago, The Spin expressed six wishes for 2021, and most of them came true. Cricket’s gates did reopen, Michael Holding did have a bestseller, Ireland did keep busy and New Zealand did become world Test champions. One wish went badly awry: Zak Crawley never came close to a second Test century, and for someone who can play so regally, 2021 was an annus horribilis. Another was only half-fulfilled: Mark Wood did get more Tests – seven in the calendar year, the most for him since 2015 – but appeared only once against India and was perplexingly rested in Adelaide last month, just when his speed was unsettling Australia’s best batters. Still, as the players say, we go again. Here are six wishes for 2022. 1) England reset Joe Root, who has been wrong about most things in Australia, is right about this. England need to rethink their red-ball cricket, just as they did with the white-ball game in 2015. That operation had two masterminds: Andrew Strauss, England’s then managing director, who saw the need for it, and Eoin Morgan, the incoming white-ball captain, who made it happen by turning a team with no identity into fearless master-blasters. Transforming the Test team will take brains. The squad needs a natural captain, someone steely and crafty, not smiley and woolly. The whole set-up needs a boss with more vision and verve than Ashley Giles, who has made his mark only by getting rid of the biggest brain in the England brains trust, Ed Smith. As national selector, Smith had a win/loss ratio in Tests of 1.75 (won 21, lost 12). His successor, Chris Silverwood, has a ratio of 0.17 (won one, lost six). The fixture list has been tough, the Covid protocols taxing, but that is still a steep decline. Giles’s job should revert to Strauss, who relinquished it for personal reasons when his wife, Ruth, was dying of cancer. If he is only available part-time, the ECB can say “No problem”. It is a job that mainly consists of hiring people for other jobs lower down, though Strauss has the clarity and clout to change the mindset of those above him, too. He might even persuade them to turn down those mind-boggling bonuses. 2) The T20 World Cup is not ruled by the toss Yes, there’s another one coming up, a year after the last. In October, Australia, the surprise winners, will defend the trophy on their own soil in what should be a more satisfying tournament. In the UAE the toss held too much sway: all six of Australia’s victories came batting second. By the end they were probably playing well enough to win batting first, but they never got to prove it. England, the only team to beat them, started sublimely but ran out of steam, lost Jason Roy to injury and succumbed to New Zealand in the semi-final. That should spur them on, along with the knowledge they can be the first men’s team to hold both World Cups at once. 3) England win the Ashes The women’s Ashes, that is. The series covers all three international formats, a scenario England’s men can only envy. It begins on 26 January with a single Test, followed by three T20s and three ODIs. Australia’s women rule the world, so wresting the Ashes from them on their own turf is mission almost impossible. But the England captain, Heather Knight, has a gifted squad who have been battle-hardened by the big crowds in the Hundred. And they have plenty more to play for later in the year. Straight after the Ashes, there’s the World Cup in New Zealand, with England arriving as the holders. Halfway through the home season come the Commonwealth Games (in Birmingham, from 28 July), which will feature T20 cricket for the first time – with no men to hog the headlines. 4) Racism is given out A month ago, Yorkshire seemed to be finally cleaning out the stables after their dismal response to Azeem Rafiq’s allegations of racism. They laid off all their coaching staff and brought in Darren Gough as managing director of cricket. Since then it has gone all quiet on the northern front. This could be because the players threatened to quit: Gough may be talking to them behind closed doors. Let’s hope that if push comes to shove he is prepared to let them go and start afresh, building a new team around Adil Rashid, who is too good not to be playing four-day cricket (assuming his shoulder can stand it). And let’s hope the rest of English cricket becomes more inclusive. Every team, professional or amateur, can help by taking the knee. Sky can help by giving the commentary spot vacated by David Lloyd to Mark Butcher, not just because he’s mixed-race, but because he’s top-class – shrewd, lucid and witty. 5) England work out how to play New Zealand If you can’t beat ’em, copy ’em. Morgan’s blueprint for buccaneering was borrowed from his mate Brendon McCullum, who was the New Zealand captain at the time. In Tests these days the Kiwis are everything England are not: canny, efficient, clear-thinking. They are the only team Root has never beaten as captain (played six; lost three, drawn three) and they are coming over again for three Tests in June. We don’t know who will be in charge of England by then, but we do know they will have to work out how to deal with Tim Southee’s swing, Kyle Jamieson’s bounce and Neil Wagner’s belligerence – and how to ape New Zealand’s ability to punch above their weight. 6) Jofra Archer comes steaming in England’s most exciting discovery since Ben Stokes has not played for them since March and if he goes to the Caribbean it will be to see his family. Archer will soon have lost a whole year to a stress fracture of the right elbow. Some have doubted whether he will play another Test, but the man himself doesn’t seem to be among them. On Australia’s Channel 7 at the start of the Ashes, Archer said: “This is really one cricket tour as a fast bowler that you don’t want to miss.” Quizzed about his recuperation, he said: “Everything’s been moving forward nicely.” He’ll be back. The question is when – and in how many formats. This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.For as long as I have run, I have hoofed unathletically alongside canals and rivers – I come out in hives if I breathe too hard near roads. And for as long as I have been a towpath user, I have looked enviously at the people in canoes and kayaks, slicing through the water, eye level with the moorhens. One day, I might give kayaking a go, I thought, vaguely. Sit-on-top kayaks always made for a far better day at the beach on holiday. Rowing itself never seemed remotely attractive – too much ruling class baggage, too much shouting. But in a kayak, I thought, you might wander pacifically about in nature, maybe spot some riverbank wildlife you don’t normally see and, almost as an afterthought, perhaps build a little upper body strength. Kismet intervened a few years ago. The firstborn expressed a desire to join the local canoe club. After navigating a waiting list, I signed up for an introductory adult course. And another. There was basic handling in boats you couldn’t tip over if you tried. We learned about different types of canoe and kayak; different paddles – never oars! – the various paddle strokes. We learned to keep “river right” and how to self-rescue if you fall in – not fun in winter, but necessary as hitting cold water can shock the body, and disorient even a strong swimmer. It was, mostly, fun. It got me outdoors. I wasn’t in a rut, exactly – I had plenty going on – but it was the best kind of challenge: completely new to me, different from all the things I would do normally, and neither extreme nor ridiculous. Women were well-represented. The club actively welcomed the differently abled. It wasn’t all buff 23-year-olds, it was retirees, kids, lots of people of all ages who had recovered from something. I soon had triceps to speak of. Yes, there was the danger of river pollution and Weil’s disease, but with every dunking, I got more used to being plastered in weed. Our local club happens to be a racing club rather than a touring club. Beyond the introductory course, very little pacific meandering goes on. You are still eye-level with waterfowl, but ducks scatter before you, letting their indignation be known. I signed up for the racing course. And then joined the club. I started with the kids. Eventually, a group of newer adults and younger teens coalesced. We learned racing technique, how to carry our kayaks over locks – portaging – and, later, wash-hanging (slip-streaming in the wake of another kayak to conserve energy). We learned – well, others learned – how to turn anticlockwise at speed around buoys. We did “fartleks” – interval training in which you leap-frog one another to build up sprint speeds. We trained for stamina over distance. We sharpened our technique, using the leg drive against the kayak footplate to power the stroke. We learned that a successful stroke requires shoulder and torso rotation, not just pulling with the arms. We did race starts; time trial after time trial. Every time I lost concentration or was issued a new kayak, I fell in. It has been character-building. Like most new habits, training is about turning up and just getting a little less worse, over time. And that is how I came to be lining up, my son’s too-tight old club race vest under my buoyancy aid, number board attached to my kayak, at the starting line of my first five-mile marathon a few weeks ago. To be clear: I run for trains and buses, and I run for the endorphin rush and the improved sleep. I have never raced. I’m not uncompetitive, exactly, I just don’t go in for gung-ho stuff. But having stepped a little outside my comfort zone, I now found myself surrounded by a bevy of far more experienced entrants, being buffeted by 12mph winds, a stranger to myself. I had – ugh – carb-loaded. I had even (whisper it) sucked down a gel. Waiting for the signal, I wobbled about perilously. It was partly me, partly the kayak. Built for speed, racing kayaks are inherently unstable, not suited to sitting still. And I wasn’t even in a fast boat. I had progressed from a broad-bottomed stability 10 craft to something like a stability six. The stability threes and twos are like stiletto heels; the ones are like hypodermic needles. The people who race in those have pencil hips and abs made of titanium. I have borne children and my core is made of pasta. That pasta might be a little more al dente than it was a few years ago, but not by much. The experienced racers shot off; I was left in the churn, but upright. Gradually, I found my pace. I think I overtook someone. Fast children overtook me. I didn’t mess up the first turn: major win. I didn’t mess up the portage, or the second turn. More tiny victories. When it was windy, I kept my paddle low. When the gusts eased, I tried to coordinate legs, arms, torso and breath to move faster. Sometimes, for a minute or so, I was almost alone on the water, almost at one with the boat, limbs miraculously in sync. The feeling of flying as the prow split the water sparkling in the dappled sunshine was the stuff of cliche, but no less true for it. I limped in, penultimate in my class, arms like frankfurters, fingers like claws. But I hadn’t fallen in. And now I have a race time. And next time, I might beat it. How to do it British Canoeing is the national governing body for paddle sports. It can put you in touch with the 400-plus certified clubs in the UK, including women’s paddle sports groups. Access Adventures is a charity that aims to make sports accessible and affordable for everyone with a disability. These sorts of sports typically involve group activities, many are suitable for families, so it’s a sociable pastime with lots of events. Forums such as the Open Canoe Association, GoPaddling and the UK Rivers Guidebook are sources of information about meet-ups, mentors and trips. If you like the idea of spending time in, on or even under the water, there are lots of options. Try the British Water Ski and Wakeboard Association, British Rafting, the National Coasteering Charter, the Inland Waterways Association, the British Sub-Aqua Club or even the underwater hockey club – the British Octopush Association – for trial sessions and local group information.It was the runner beans that did it. My neighbour, who is in her 90s, dropped round an envelope filled with a small handful of dried beans, which looked as if they’d been dipped in pink and black paint. A few months later, I was eating the best runner beans I’ve ever tasted, and they kept coming, for weeks and weeks. We gave bunches and bunches away, ate more, learned that you have to de-string them, and then finally, recently, when the plants started to look tired, let them dry out, and saved the seeds for next year’s batch. I have a restless mind and I have tried everything to quieten it. Running, meditation, yoga. Working hard, hardly working. I have repeatedly listened to the app that’s meant to ground you, only to float off on a cloud of guilt for not being able to concentrate on it for long enough. But gardening works like nothing else has. I can nip into the garden for five minutes and find that three hours have passed. I don’t look at my phone. I tend not to worry or fret. And I can eat (most of) the spoils. For most of my adult life, I lived in rented flats in London, never in one place long enough to be certain of seeing a seasonal cycle through. Outdoor space was a rarity and a luxury. During the first lockdown, in another flat with no garden, I went for it anyway. A few herbs on every window ledge, mostly the easy ones, parsley and mint, but a few tomato plants, too, grown from seed, surprisingly hardy on the roof of a bay window belonging to the flat below. Then I and my partner fled the city, moved to a town and a small house with a garden at the back and front, loved at one time, but largely left to their own devices in recent years. It had become a foliage battle royale, and the winner turned out to be ivy, which was everywhere. It needed some work. It was a big job. And then one day, we got stuck in. What a simple pleasure, to have a reason to be outside whenever it was light and dry, to get mucky from digging and tired from lifting, to watch as a bed we had toiled hard to clear revealed itself over time, with nature’s underrated sense of humour, to be harbouring snowdrops and daffodils and tulips, buried far deeper than the fork had gone. To find garlic under shrubs, remnants of forgotten veg patches, to see peonies, roses, crocosmia, Mexican orange blossom, all insistent they would be making an appearance, thank you very much, despite being untended by human hands for years. Every one of them was a small marvel, a lesson in resilience. People say that bakers are sharers by nature. I think gardeners are the same. The neighbour who gave us runner beans also gave us spectral pale green nicotianas, spider plant babies that have since given birth to their own, a pepper plant that is now indoors and has just given up a late ripened red pepper. Another neighbour dropped off cucumbers that had done far better than my own. As we attempted to wrangle the semi-rewilded front garden into some sort of shape, someone brought out a wheelbarrow, in case we needed it, while someone else offered the use of the skip he’d hired for his own garden clearout. Ah, I thought. This is what community feels like. You’re supposed to leave a garden for a year, I read, to see what’s there, but I couldn’t wait that long. I got some pretty flowers going from seed – some neon-pink sweetpeas, cosmos that look like fireworks (not individually known as a single “cosmo”, as I discovered when I tried to show off about them) – but it was the fruit and veg, mostly veg, that were the biggest revelations. In a miserable year, being able to go into the garden and pick dinner was miraculous. On the night I made garden ratatouille, every ingredient grown by us, the onion, garlic, pepper, tomatoes, courgettes, herbs, I felt a satisfaction that cheers me up when I think about it today, even though most of those plants have long since gone on to the compost heap. As a hobby, gardening is not cheap (to start with, though the amount of recycling and reusing that goes on makes it easier as you go), and it’s not quick, but it is calming, and it is soothing, and it is useful. Being able to give people lettuce from the garden when the supermarket shelves were running short felt good. It was my own tiny taste of being a doomsday prepper, and though I’m not sure how much call there will be for salad at the end of the world, it’s nice to know that I could still have some Drunken Woman lettuce if I wanted it. It is becoming all-consuming. It’s getting out of hand. I went to the Chelsea flower show this year, for the first time, and came back with a bagful of bulbs and seeds, largely chosen for what they were called and whether they looked funny. I am working my way through the RHS level 2 qualification in horticulture, studying soil improvement and trying to remember how photosynthesis works. But I am not a good gardener yet, or a knowledgeable one. I am a beginner, basic, learning as I go by rolling up my sleeves. In most situations, in the other parts of my life, I can be uptight. I hate it. But if I’m not sure what to do in the garden, I’ll phone my mum. Her advice is often to just stick it in the ground and see. What’s the worst that could happen? It doesn’t work, you learn something, you try again. That approach has its uses far beyond the flowerbed. How to do it The Royal Horticultural Society has a database of local gardening groups and It’s Your Neighbourhood groups, while the BBC has an excellent resource for people looking to set up a community garden. Also check out Social Farms &amp; Gardens, a charity which provides advice, funding and training for community gardeners. The National Allotment Society has helpful tips on finding an allotment. Garden Organic’s Heritage Seed Library and Seed Sovereignty are good places to find unusual seeds to sow once you have your space. If you want to visit a garden without the faff of digging it, look at the National Open Garden Scheme – it details remarkable private gardens to visit across the UK and raises funds for health charities. To gen up, try Christopher Lloyd’s 1997 The Well-Tempered Garden,is a classic that’s stood the test of time for new gardeners. If you have vision but no space, try Alice Vincent’s book Rootbound to hear how the author got into urban gardening. Thoughtful Gardening by Robin Lane Fox offers practical advice while adding meditative and illuminating anecdotes from art and literature. Poppy Okotcha’s The Earth Food Handbook and website are fascinating accounts of the horticulturalist’s work creating an edible and medicinal forest garden in Devon.‘This is Georgia,” drawls a character near the start of this tiresome, oddly dull action thriller. “Everyone’s doing something they’re not supposed to be doing.” But the problem with Bruce Willis in the movie is that he’s not doing something that he is supposed to be doing: acting. He puts in a such a wooden performance playing a washed-up, burnt-out cop that I could have screamed in frustration. American Siege is set 10 years after the mysterious disappearance in a backwater town of teenager Brigit Baker (played in flashback by Sarah May Sommers). Brigit’s boyfriend Roy (Rob Gough) has spent the past decade in prison; now he wants the truth. Armed to the teeth, he storms the house of a local pharmacist, accompanied by Brigit’s sister Grace and her cousin Toby. This pair don’t do much for Hicksville stereotypes: Grace (Anna Hindman) is a gun-toting redneck in a white vest, Georgia’s answer to Sarah Connor; Toby (Johann Urb) is Bible-thumping and paranoid. The trio believes that the pharmacist (Cullen G Chambers) knows what happened to Brigit – and judging from the bank-grade security door on his basement, he’s up to something shady. Enter Willis as Sheriff Ben Watts, who doubles as the town drunk. Willis gets the lines out, but there are scenes here where his acting is so lethargic you’d think director Edward Drake might have called cut to check for for a pulse. Watts is lazy, corrupt and on the payroll of powerful local businessman Charles Rutledge (Timothy V Murphy, giving good icy menace). Rutledge seems to be connected with the central mystery too. And to be fair, the script gives us a missing-girl storyline with an interesting (though not entirely thought out) twist. But the movie ends with a long boring standoff outside the pharmacist’s house, Roy and his gang up against a private militia led by a guy who looks like a buff Steve Bannon. • American Siege is released on 10 January on digital platforms.Burger King UK is to launch vegan nuggets nationwide from Wednesday as the fast food chain evolves its meat-focused menu to cash in on the booming popularity of plant-based diets. The chain, which two years ago launched a plant-based Rebel Whopper burger that turned out not to be suitable for vegans because it was cooked on the same grill as meat, is the first major fast-food restaurant in the UK to offer an animal-product-free version of nuggets. The company says the product, which has been developed by The Vegetarian Butcher and certified by the Vegan Society, is made from soy and plant proteins only and tastes the same as its meat originals. Burger King, which last year launched a Vegan Royale burger that is prepared separately from animal products, aims to make half of its menu meat-free by 2030 to help it achieve a target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 41%. “Adapting to customer preferences is a key focus at Burger King,” said the Burger King UK chief executive, Alasdair Murdoch. “We are committed to helping our guests make good decisions about what they eat and drink and providing them with informed choices.” Murdoch said the move marked a response to the growing nationwide demand for meatless alternatives and products with no animal protein in the UK. The bakery chain Greggs has experienced huge success with its push into vegan foods, most notably its bestselling Quorn-filled sausage rolls, with demand outstripping supply when it first launched the product three years ago. A record number of people are expected to try to eat only plant-based foods this month, as growing environmental concerns heighten interest in the Veganuary movement. A rising number of mainstream food purveyors are backing the movement. Aldi said it was introducing its largest ever vegan range including croissants, mushroom bolognese and vegan cheese, while KFC is permanently bringing back the vegan burger it first tried out last year. This year, more than 40 companies, including Harrod’s, Superdrug and Volkswagen UK, are taking part in a Veganuary “workplace challenge” to make more vegan food available in the workplace and run events to support participating staff. More than 50,000 products have been certified by the Vegan Society, with new products including a Babybel made from coconut oil and starch, and an almond and oat-based Philadelphia spread. • The headline and text of this article were amended on 24 January 2022. Burger King is the first major UK fast food restaurant chain to offer vegan nuggets, but not the first fast food operator as an earlier version said due to an error introduced during editing; they are already offered by Domino’s.When Norwegian pop star Metteson was 18, he had an experience at a festival that made him understand the visceral impact music can have. While Emeli Sandé was performing Heaven, he kissed the boy he’d had a crush on for ages. “I wasn’t on drugs but I was as high as I’ve ever been and I had what was sort of my first sexual experience,” he says. “But the day after, I got brutally dumped when he told me that he was in love with someone else. The picture of the night before exploded and cracked.” Feeling jilted, he went to watch Lana Del Rey: “She sang Summertime Sadness and I was crying all alone. Both those of those songs have stuck with me. They’re emotional triggers and I wallow in them. I just love when music really pushes experiences to another level.” Metteson’s own music feels destined to soundtrack similar scenes. Now 28, he creates kaleidoscopic pop that is unashamedly grand and theatrical. His debut EP, 2021’s Convince Me, flirted with the Scandinavian synth melancholia popularised by Robyn and the Knife, while also pulling from the arty chamber pop of Patrick Wolf as well as Whitney Houston and George Michael. His most recent single, the sumptuous Under Your Shirt, is a symphonic yet tender devotional that perfectly captures the sparks of intimacy and the heart-pounding ache of yearning. “I tried early on to make more compact melodies and cool club music,” says Metteson, “but I would whack on a big refrain because that’s what the emotion calls for. I’m not a whispery, cool and gritty singer. Whether that big refrain comes packaged as a club banger or a piano ballad, I want it to be a representation of myself.” Born Sverre Breivik and raised in the coastal town of Moss in Norway, Metteson – the name literally meaning the son of Mette, his mother – was always a creative kid. He was enrolled in various theatre and music groups and later studied at the National Academy of the Arts in Oslo. “I was a triple threat,” he laughs. “I was the loud, musical theatre kid, and I really think I bring a lot of that into my music now.” Since graduating, he has worked as a repertory actor at the National Theatre in Bergen. When we speak, he is just finishing up a run as Prior Walter in Tony Kushner’s Aids epic Angels in America – “one of the first shows that I ever saw and thought that there was a place for me in the world of theatre,” he adds. “It’s been a big deal for me.” Metteson initially struggled with his sexuality. “I can remember knowing from a very early age that I was different and that I liked boys; wearing women’s clothing and sensing that was, in some way, wrong,” he recalls. He remained closeted until he moved to Oslo to study. “It wasn’t a prison, but I regret it. Now I’m discovering the joy and the pleasures of being young.” His new music, due in the coming months, is evidence that he has taken that leap: building on the grandeur of Under Your Shirt, songs like Never Let Me Go and the baroque Second Heart run on melodrama and escapism. He also supports fellow Norwegian pop star Aurora on her UK tour this spring, a chance for British audiences to get a taste of that newfound freedom in action with his sensual performances (think a poppier Perfume Genius). “I think I make music that’s made to be experienced live,” he says. “I hope that I can blow people away with a perfect pop experience.”The French government has heavily criticised opposition MPs after a parliamentary debate on the proposed introduction of a “vaccine pass” was unexpectedly suspended after members of the Assemblée nationale voted with a show of hands to go home. The move came after seven hours of often-heated exchanges on Monday, when ministers clashed with critics over the controversial measure due to be introduced on 15 January, but now postponed. Government spokesperson Gabriel Attal on Tuesday accused opposition MPs of playing politics and halting the adoption of what he said were “essential measures … in an urgent situation”. He said the government would push on with the controversial legislation. The proposal is to turn the current “health pass” requiring either vaccination, recovery from Covid or a negative Covid test into a “vaccine pass” requiring people to be fully vaccinated if they wish to access restaurants, bars, museums, cinemas, theatres, long distance trains, hotels and many other public places. Hospitals and health establishments would not require a “vaccine pass”. The debate, which began on Monday afternoon, was due to continue into the early hours of Tuesday and there were more than 500 amendments still to be debated when the parliamentary session was suspended shortly before midnight. Earlier, the prime minister, Jean Castex, had told the house the government could not accept that 5.3 million people remained unvaccinated in France. The new pass was intended to introduce “heavier constraints on the non-vaccinated”, he admitted. France is currently reporting an average of around 160,000 new Covid cases a day. “The tidal wave has indeed arrived. It’s enormous, but we will not give in to panic,” the health minister, Olivier Véran, told MPs. Facing vehement attacks from the far right Rassemblement National (RN) and far left La France Insoumise (France Unbowed – LFI) over the infringement of civil liberties, Véran added “selfishness often hides behind talk of supposed liberties”. Most MPs from Emmanuel Macron’s centrist La République en Marche (La REM) party and the mainstream opposition Les Républicains (LR) support the measure. “Last night we saw a form of irresponsible friendship being formed with the MPs of La France Insoumise, the Rassemblement National and LR to derail the timetable for the adoption of the vaccine pass,” Attal told France Inter radio. “The vaccine pass has to come into effect as quickly as possible,” Attal added. Far left presidential candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon of LFI, who had called for the new legislation to be rejected, accused the government of having “sown indescribable chaos because of your short-sightedness” and accused Véran of “arrogance”. He called for “a global plan” and poured scorn on “measures on those who have the right to eat popcorn or drink their coffee standing or sitting”. Critics also accused the government, which is one-seat short of an absolute parliamentary majority, of amateurism after it found itself without enough MPs present in the lower house to defeat the vote to suspend. Alexis Corbière of LFI said members of the governing party were to blame for the stalemate. “LREM MPs weren’t sufficiently mobilised last night and found themselves in a minority. It’s absolutely their fault,” he tweeted. The new legislation would also introduce heavier penalties for those using fake vaccine passes or venues that fail to check people’s vaccine status of up to five years in prison and €75,000 (£63,000) fines.I have enjoyed a long-distance relationship with my partner for five years. We are both male and used to enjoy a healthy sex life, often enjoying the time we were together, knowing we would not see each other for a few weeks. Sex seemed to be a reciprocal, affectionate adventure that occasionally included a third person to spice things up. We have since moved in together and now it seems that I am the one doing all the work. Most of the initiation and certainly all of the imagination, seems to be coming from me. I don’t feel he is attracted to me or interested in me physically any more. This weekend, he wanted to go out to a gay sauna, but I didn’t, so he went alone. Which would be fine if we were enjoying a healthy sex life, but we’re not. So the open part has now replaced our own intimate life. I feel that this is a significant change. He won’t talk about it, other than to say I am being insecure, hypocritical or unreasonable. To be honest, I have doubted myself because I too have enjoyed the benefits of the open relationship but only when they were the icing on the cake, not the cake itself. How do I reignite our own sex life? Your disappointment at the lack of ease you are experiencing in segueing into this new phase is understandable, but, for now, you will have to lower your expectations. Such a significant change in a relationship typically requires time and careful negotiation. There is probably nothing wrong with your sex life itself – you just need to discuss your individual needs and desires and try to reach a workable understanding. Some couples are better off not living together, but it is too early to know if you meet that criteria. In addition, all kinds of extra issues arise in open relationships and you will have to tackle these one at a time. Be very specific in your negotiations: you could suggest for example, “Could we agree to take turns initiating sex?” Many relationships – of all types – fail when one partner feels the unspoken contract is an unfair one. And sexual interest can be lowered due to the accompanying underlying resentment. It would be best to address it, gently, as soon as possible. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Welcome to Pushing Buttons, the Guardian’s brand new gaming newsletter. If you’d like to receive it in your inbox every week, just pop your email in below – and check your inbox (and spam) for the confirmation email. Well done everyone, we made it through to 2022. Has anyone else’s brain lost the ability to distinguish between “holiday at home with the kids” and “lockdown at home with the kids”? After 14 days ‘off’ I am very ready to be somewhere completely silent, and perhaps be able to play a video game for longer than 20 minutes without either being asked for a snack, or falling asleep. There’s a lot to look forward to this year, not least all the big games that we were supposed to be playing in 2021. There are so many open-world timesinks, especially, that I don’t know how anyone is supposed to fit all of them in. If you want to know what I will be doing in late February and the entirety of March, the answer is Elden Ring. Dark Souls meets Breath of the Wild! Get it in my veins! Speaking of Breath of the Wild, the sequel to the most expansive (and, in my opinion, the greatest) Zelda game will be out sometime this year as well. Then there’s Horizon: Forbidden West, a game about a flame-haired female warrior fighting robot dinosaurs, a game that I’m pretty sure I made up in my dreams at the age of 11. Somehow I almost forgot about Starfield, the first big Bethesda game since Fallout 4, an explorable sci-fi universe that I still know tantalisingly little about. Will Mass Effect finally have some competition? – – – Traditionally it takes a few years for new games consoles to bed in, and for developers to really explore what they can achieve with the technology. Though the Xbox Series X and the PlayStation 5 had a few standouts last year, by the end of 2022 there’s going to be a proper catalogue of new blockbusters. Of course, actually buying a new console to play them on is still, more than a year after launch, a total scramble. Supply-chain issues and huge demand as a result of ongoing global lockdowns have contributed to a scarcity that has had people frantically hitting refresh on Amazon and Game restocks, mindful that they’ll all be sold out again in minutes (or snapped up by bots, to be resold on eBay at an infuriating mark-up). This problem is likely to persist through 2022, Sony’s CFO Hiroki Totoki has admitted. It’s never been so difficult to buy into the next generation of video games. But then: do you really need to? I have always felt that buying a games console in the first year or two of its life is only necessary if you get a real kick out of technological novelty. For most people, there is no rush. We are long past the time when games became unplayably aged after a few years on the shelves. Though only a few games from my 90s childhood could be unreservedly recommended today – pity anybody coming fresh to GoldenEye on the N64, with its bizarre single-stick controls and muddy graphics – pretty much all of the best games of, say, 2010 are a) still just as good and b) still available to buy. Sometimes I rather miss the thrill I used to get from tracking down a coveted retro game on eBay, or from digging through baskets of cartridges in Japanese game stories in the late 00s and coming across a copy of some obscure sumo-wrestling game I once saw in a copy of Super Play. But it’s also undeniably a good thing that you can instantly download or even stream the vast majority of games released in the last decade, when we used to have to go to such lengths. The video games industry is obsessed with the new. As a technology-driven art form, new tech has always been part of the deal. But now more than ever, it’s not what defines games. If you’ve not got a next-gen console yet, you’re not missing out on much. 95% of the joy of this medium is available to you regardless. What to play Over the Christmas break I dipped into a few games that I hadn’t found time for over the course of the year, and one that stood out was Unpacking, the story of a life told through the act of moving house. Each chapter presents you with a diorama of a home (a childhood bedroom, a college dorm, a cosy one-bed), into which you must somehow fit all of the stuff jumbled into your cardboard boxes. I found this game soothing – it has an implied narrative that is quite sweet, if also very predictable – until I started playing with my partner, who methodically Tetrised everything on to shelves and surfaces however they would fit, like a psychopath. Given that one of this game’s themes is how to fit your possessions (and therefore your life) in around someone else’s, it felt appropriate that we were low-level arguing about how to arrange a virtual kitchen. Available on: Nintendo Switch, PC, Xbox One/Series X/S, PC Approximate playtime: 3.5 hours What to read The games industry is busy in-fighting over NFTs, the latest solution-to-a-problem-that-doesn’t-exist from the techbro universe, and also one of the most depressing trends I have encountered in all my years covering this business. Ubisoft has introduced them to its games, but nobody wants to buy them. Square-Enix’s CEO has declared his hopes that they become a major trend, which seems rather ambitious as they have yet to be proven useful for anything except Internet flexing. Having spent several months gaining a better understanding of NFTs and cryptocurrency this year, and listened to a few developers evangelise them (and more developers spit fury over them), I have found no better summary than this Gawker piece about the total soul-deadening dumbness of the entire scene as it stands: “world-altering technology is now in the hands of a culture so aesthetically and spiritually impoverished that it should maybe go back to telling stories around the cooking fire for a while, just to remember how to mean something.” You’ve read the Guardian’s 10 games to look forward to in 2022, right? It is becoming a running joke that every year, about half of the games on it fail to actually come out in the year they’re supposed to. A full 6 of the 10 games I picked for the 2021 list are still unreleased, and one of the 2020 games to watch still isn’t finished. Anyway, if you are looking for more games to look forward to and then be disappointed by when they entirely fail to materialise, Polygon has put out a list of 50. What to click The 10 best video games coming in 2022 Riot Games to pay $100m to settle gender discrimination lawsuit As a parent obsessed with my kids’ safety, I have discovered the video game from hell How playing the video games of your youth reconnects you to yourself Question Block Because everyone is still recovering from their New Year’s hangover, I’m in the hot seat for Question Block. This week, reader Lawal Muhammad asks: Which recent games made you feel happiest/most content while playing them? For me there are three kinds of game that give me happy brain chemicals: anything involving playing to music (Guitar Hero, Tetris Effect, Rez), which induce a kind of flow-state euphoria; games with predictable, repetitive, gentle rhythms that you can sink right into (Animal Crossing, Stardew Valley, old-school Harvest Moon), which create a sense of safety; and absolutely mad nonsense that makes me laugh and gives me something unexpected, feeding my insatiable need for novelty. So the games that made me happiest recently were Psychonauts 2, a game about delving into people’s brains that brought a delightfully weird buffet of different game concepts, visual gags and in-jokes to the table, and It Takes Two, a genre mashup about a divorcing couple that completely changes itself around every hour or so. If you’ve got a question for the next Question Block, hit reply on this newsletter and I’ll find someone interesting to answer them!This is not the start to the new year that any of us teachers in England had hoped for: increasing Omicron case numbers and ongoing uncertainty about how this will play out have created a nervous start for us all. As someone responsible for 350 staff working across three schools in south Oxfordshire I continue to be extremely concerned for their health, safety and wellbeing. As someone responsible for 2,700 children and young people I continue to prioritise their entitlement to an education. School leaders have spent the past 21 months of the pandemic balancing these two concerns. The greatest risk to schools remaining fully open this term is the absence of staff who have to self-isolate because of contracting the virus. Many schools were up against it at the end of last term, forced to combine classes and to use an increasing number of cover staff and supply teachers (if they could find them) to keep classes running and year groups open. I am extremely doubtful that sufficient numbers of retired teachers will return to the profession this term to create the number of extra staff who may be needed. What more can be done to support schools and colleges? Quite a lot, actually. The government should provide ventilation units, free of cost, to all settings that need them: the 7,000 announced on Sunday will not be enough. Schools and colleges should be reimbursed for the additional sums they are spending on supply teachers, as well as other Covid-related costs, from already strained budgets. Ofsted should automatically agree to requests to defer inspections this term as school and college leaders are focused, quite rightly, on managing a crisis situation. Parents and families should ensure their children and young people test twice a week at home, without fail – and we need plentiful supplies of lateral flow tests to distribute to our families to enable them to do this. Exam results tables should be removed again this summer: schools up and down the country have been differently affected by the pandemic at different times, and this will continue to be the case. It’s not fair or appropriate to pretend that we have worked on a level playing field this year. School and college leaders have shown great leadership throughout the pandemic and will continue to do so. We prioritised keeping our schools open for our most vulnerable children and the children of key workers: our three schools have not been closed at any point during the national lockdowns. We pivoted from remote education to mass testing to managing the process of centre-assessed grades. We continue to be agile and responsive to a fast-changing situation, communicating well and regularly with our staff, students and families, providing reassurance and grounded optimism. There has been much talk about “a lost generation” of children, victims of the Covid pandemic. I refuse to believe that any generation should or will be “lost”. Instead of indulging in hyperbole, perhaps those with the power to make decisions could throw themselves behind those of us on the frontline working to keep young people in school, to maintain their entitlement to an education, to protect their health and wellbeing and to open doors to their futures. There is surely no more compelling call to arms, no more important investment in our future than this. Rachael Warwick is executive headteacher at Ridgeway Education TrustA new show on Channel 4 which puts single people who speak different langauges together on an island starts on Tuesday evening. The Language of Love hopes people will be able to get on with one another on dates despite not understanding each other. We would like to hear from couples who fell in love speaking different languages. What was your experience like? Did you learn each other’s languages or choose a new one to learn together? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The extremist Republican Marjorie Taylor Greene “might be a Democrat – or just an idiot” – according to a fellow hardline conservative. Dan Crenshaw, a Texas congressman and former Navy Seal, threw the barb back at the Georgia congresswoman in a spat over his support for using the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema) to operate Covid testing sites. The US is experiencing a crippling surge of Covid cases thanks to the infectious Omicron variant, with more than 1m recorded on Monday and lack of access to testing hampering state and federal responses. Greene has consistently spread Covid conspiracy theories. On Sunday, she was permanently suspended from Twitter, for spreading misinformation. That drew support from Donald Trump, who without discernible irony called Twitter “a disgrace to democracy”, said Greene had “a huge constituency of honest, patriotic, hard-working people”, and added: “Keep fighting, Marjorie!” Regardless, on Monday Greene was temporarily suspended from Facebook, for spreading misinformation. She took aim at Crenshaw on Instagram, writing: “No Fema should not set up testing sites to check for Omicron sneezes, coughs and runny noses. “And we don’t need Fema in hospitals, they should hire back all the unvaccinated [healthcare workers] they fired. “He needs to stop calling himself conservative, he’s hurting our brand.” Crenshaw responded on Instagram, saying: “Hey, Marjorie, if suggesting we should follow Trump policy instead of Biden mandates makes you mad, then you might be a Democrat – or just an idiot.” Greene has been repeatedly fined for failing to wear a mask on the floor of the House of Representatives. Crenshaw, however, has his own history of provocative behaviour. As the Houston Chronicle pointed out, “Before calling for federally funded testing sites, Crenshaw used to share wild posts to social media, before Greene took office, including posting action movie-style videos of him beating up Antifa members.” More than 827,000 people have died in the US from Covid-19.Police in India have detained a woman accused of organising a fake online auction in which hundreds of prominent female Muslims were put up “for sale” on a website. There were shock waves of anger and disgust in India after it emerged that a website calling itself Bulli Bai, an offensive term for Muslims, had set up a pretend auction of more than 100 Muslim women, including journalists, academics, activists, scholars and artists, where they were to be “sold” as servants for negligible sums. Although no real transactions took place, the Bulli Bai website featured photos of the women, many taken from their social media and manipulated. A large number of the women targeted have been vocal critics of the ruling Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) government and many said the purpose of the site was to humiliate and silence outspoken Muslim women and help fracture India down sectarian lines. It is the second recent incident where Muslim women in India have been harassed by being “sold” online, and follows a similar fake auction held online last July. Though several police complaints were filed in that case, no one has been arrested. The Bulli Bai website was removed within 24 hours, and complaints were filed to the police by victims in Delhi, Mumbai and Hyderabad. On Tuesday, Mumbai police said they had detained a woman in Uttarakhand who is the main accused, and arrested a male engineering student in Bengaluru after extensive questioning. Sayema Rahman, a popular radio DJ, found out she was among those featured on the website when a screenshot of her name and face was sent to her by a journalist. “The most shocking part is that I’m not shocked any more because this has been happening relentlessly to women for quite some time now, especially with this communal angle,” said Rahman. “It’s Islamophobia coupled with misogyny. I was targeted, and a whole lot of other women were targeted, because we are the vocal voices, we are the liberated voices, and they want to silence us by commodifying us, humiliating us and trying to scare us.” Rahman said victims were still waiting for the prime minister, Narendra Modi, or the central government, in particular the home ministry and the ministry for women, to condemn the Bulli Bai website. “This is a massive national scandal but we are yet to hear a word from the central government condemning this or offering assurances, and that is very unsettling and very unnerving for the safety of women in this country,” she said. Speaking to the Guardian, Rajeev Chandrasekhar, the IT minister, said his department’s investigative unit had looked into the website, and those responsible would be prosecuted. “The government of India is committed to ensuring the internet is open, trusted and safe for all Indians. We take this responsibility very seriously,” he said. Khalida Parveen, 67, a veteran activist, was also among the women targeted. On Monday, she filed a police complaint in her home city of Hyderabad against the perpetrators, and the GitHub platform that had facilitated the site. A GitHub spokesperson said it had taken down the user account that had hosted the website, and would cooperate with investigating authorities. Parveen, in her police complaint, called for the perpetrators to be charged with “harassing me, horribly sexualising me, a senior citizen, and casting aspersions on me, and my character, and the community to which I belong” and also to be charged with human trafficking. She said she had been “sad and angry” when she learned she was among those targeted. “What kind of mindset do these people have, selling me, an old lady, and other women online?” Parveen asked. “They are trying to silence our voices on social media. We see again how under this government, Muslim women are targets.” Parveen said she felt the auction aimed to punish prominent female Muslim voices, including journalists and activists, who had called out hate speech against Muslims – such as a recent call by Hindu religious leaders, during a religious event in the Hindu holy city of Haridwar, in Uttarakhand, for a genocide of Muslims in India. “Many of us were on social media, drawing international attention to this hate speech and demanding police cases be filed against the perpetrators,” she said. “Then we are all put up for sale on this auction. I think it is an attempt to scare us, make us fearful to raise our voices so we keep quiet. But we are all fighting this together, we will be aggressive for justice.”Mountain rescue teams have urged day trippers to properly plan their walks after an “absolutely chaotic” Christmas period and warnings of blizzards on the way. A rescue group in the Lake District said there were 11 callouts during Christmas week, including one that involved 75 people looking for a man and his 11-year-old son on Scafell Pike. Richard Warren, the chair of the Lake District Search and Mountain Rescue Association, said his teams were called out a record 680 times in 2021 and the start of 2022 had been “just as busy”. Volunteers are braced for a potentially busy few weeks as people take to the outdoors as part of a new year health kick. A cold blast of weather could put the skids on those new year resolutions, however. The Met Office has put a yellow weather warning in place for the Lake District this Friday, with blizzard conditions and snow showers forecast. Snow is expected to fall across other high parts of the UK towards the end of the week, and there will be cold temperatures and blustery showers. In the Peak District, heavy snow showers are expected on Friday, followed by gale-force winds at the weekend. Warren said there had been two callouts on Christmas Day in the Lake District, and there had been a “very sad end to the year” when a man died after a medical episode on Skiddaw on New Year’s Eve. Volunteers have urged people to check weather forecasts and whether they have the right gear before they take to the mountains. “A lot of rescues are avoidable because people get lost with no map, compass or torch,” Warren said. “Really we want people to start thinking about what they are doing, when they are doing it and to check the weather.” Colin Price, a duty team leader for Edale mountain rescue team in the Peak District, said the start of 2022 had already been “super busy” and he expected huge numbers of visitors to return during the year. The pandemic led to a record 155 callouts in 2020, he said, with last year the second busiest on record. “We’re getting larger numbers within the national park and you can see it on a normal weekend – it’s more like a bank holiday weekend,” he said. Price said he welcomed the “broader mix” of people visiting the Peak District but some day trippers lacked the experience or equipment needed when walking on sometimes treacherous terrain. “The Peak District is there for everybody but maybe we’re getting people that are not quite as familiar with it, or so experienced, and it’s catching a few people out,” he said. He advised packing head torches, extra food and warm clothing for winter walks, and a compass and map for longer walks. In Snowdonia national park, volunteers were called out a record 237 times last year, of which 147 were in the warmer months between June and September. Barry Davies, the chair of Llanberis mountain rescue team, said it was vital for people to respect the environment and take care even when walking well-trodden paths. “We had four fatalities last year on Snowdon, so the mountain can be a risky environment,” he said. “The incidents vary from lost and lonely to people who become seriously injured just from a simple fall.”Boris Johnson should not be given an honour by the Queen, Keir Starmer has said, as he accused the prime minister of treating voters like fools and promised a new “contract with the British people” to uphold trust in a future Labour government. In a speech designed to kick off a new phase in Labour’s preparation for the next general election, Starmer said reports of Downing Street parties in defiance of Covid rules had not just exposed problems with Johnson’s own behaviour, but “the flaws of a whole style of government”. Starmer said Labour had given ministers “the benefit of the doubt” on Covid restrictions to support the country through a national crisis but warned that the government had lost “the moral right to set those rules” because of the alleged rule-breaking. He signalled an intent to move beyond just criticising the government and to present optimistic alternative policies, vowing: “I came into politics to make things happen, not just to talk about them. I don’t think politics is a branch of the entertainment industry. I think it’s the serious business of getting things done.” During a speech in Birmingham, the Labour leader said his new contract would give people the assurance that Labour was ready for power by focusing on security, prosperity and respect. Name-checking the three Labour leaders who have won elections – Clement Attlee, Harold Wilson and Tony Blair – Starmer said he would lead a “patriotic” party. “It’s normally the job of the opposition to criticise and oppose, but it can make us sound pretty miserable,” he conceded. “It can sound as if we don’t realise our own historical good fortune to have been born into a peaceful, creative, liberal democracy.” Starmer said the Conservatives’ recent plummet in the polls did not automatically mean voters would switch to Labour, and promised he had a strategy to show people over the next 12 months why his party was “worthy” of their support. “Trust has to be earned,” he added. “I am confident but not complacent about the task ahead.” Starmer said the number of Covid cases, which is almost double what it was during the third lockdown last year, was “cause for concern” but was hopeful that no extra restrictions would be needed. He criticised ministers over the rollout of jabs to children over the age of 12, and said better ventilation and mass testing was needed in schools to avoid them having to close again. The possibility of a more-transmissible variant or one resistant to vaccines was a “known threat”, Starmer said, adding that he would support cutting isolation from seven to five days if the government’s scientific advisers recommended it. He also said ministers should study “all available evidence” about whether a fourth vaccine may be needed to top up protection from Covid further, after Andrew Pollard, the chair of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, said it was “not sustainable” to keep topping up people’s immunity while millions around the world were still unvaccinated. Starmer also defended the awarding of a knighthood to Blair in the new year honours list, after a petition against the move surpassed 500,000 signatures. Asked if Johnson was worthy of an honour, he told the audience in Birmingham: “No. I’m sorry, I do not think the prime minister has earned the right to have an honour. I do think Tony Blair has.” Pressed by the Guardian on what policies Labour would use to woo back voters who had deserted the party since 2010, Starmer pointed to announcements made since he became leader nearly two years ago. He said the party’s stances on housing, employment rights and tackling climate change were “very strong, very Labour” and vowed that his contract would “build on that and take those ideas to the country”. Senior Labour figures are preparing for the possibility of a general election next spring. They said Starmer had reformed the party’s internal procedures, presented a strong case against the Conservative government and would during the course of 2022 move to outlining more positive policies to put it on an election-ready footing.Taiwan’s government is sharing cocktail recipes with the public after it reportedly bought 20,400 bottles of Lithuanian rum bound for China amid a row between Vilnius and Beijing. The state-owned Taiwan Tobacco and Liquor (TTL) said it made the purchase in December to support Lithuania after learning the shipment was going to be blocked by Chinese authorities. “TTL stood up at the right time, purchased the rum and brought it to Taiwan,” the company said in a statement reported by the South China Morning Post. “Lithuania supports us and we support Lithuania – TTL calls for a toast to that.” Lithuania is in an ongoing diplomatic dispute with Beijing, and has been hit with trade and other restrictions since it announced it would establish mutual diplomatic posts with Taiwan. The South China Morning Post said Taiwan’s finance ministry, which wholly owns TTL, and the de facto ambassador to Lithuania, Eric Huang, had learned China was going to reject the shipment, and informed TTL. TTL and the producer of the dark rum, MV Group Productions, have not responded to the claims. However, in a Facebook post on Tuesday, Taiwan’s national development council, the parliament’s policy planning agency, posted a list of rum-based cocktails and other recipes and urged people to be ready to buy the product in late January. The post called on people to “support Lithuania”, saying the two countries were very friendly and had helped each other during the pandemic. The Chinese government has for months been applying pressure and blocking trade with Lithuania, outraged over Vilnius allowing the word “Taiwan” to be used in the name of Taipei’s de facto embassy. Taiwan usually uses the word “Taipei” in naming its diplomatic offices. Beijing claims Taiwan as a province and is hypersensitive to any action which appears to support Taiwan’s stance of being a sovereign nation. In recent years Beijing has frequently blocked or restricted imports from countries it is engaged in diplomatic disputes with, including coal, wine, and lobsters from Australia, and pineapples from Taiwan. Taiwan’s government is working to strengthen relationships with friendly nations as it seeks to resist Chinese aggression, and has in the past enthusiastically supported those hit with trade restrictions, urging Taiwanese people to buy up the product.Two NHS trusts in Lancashire have declared critical incidents in their hospitals owing to staff absences, as the region’s health chief said officials were “bracing ourselves for a tsunami of Omicron cases”. Morecambe Bay NHS trust, which operates three hospitals across north Lancashire and southern Cumbria, made its move on Monday evening, and the trust that runs Blackpool Victoria hospital followed suit on Tuesday morning, saying its beds were at full capacity. They join at least six other trusts that are understood to have issued alerts over “internal critical incidents” in recent days, including United Lincolnshire hospitals NHS trust. In an internal memo, Morecambe Bay’s chief executive, Aaron Cummins, said “relentless and sustained pressure” caused by “unprecedented staff absences” would lead to operations and appointments being cancelled and staff being redeployed to allow the hospitals to maintain safe services for patients. The trust operates three sites: Furness general hospital in Barrow-in-Furness, the Royal Lancaster Infirmary, and Westmorland general hospital in Kendal. Barrow-in-Furness has the highest Covid infection rate of any local authority area in England, at 2,439.8 cases per 100,000 population. Both Lancashire trusts said staff absences were running at 10% or above, and high numbers of medically fit patients were unable to be discharged owing to the levels of coronavirus in the community. In a memo to colleagues, the Blackpool trust’s chief executive, Trish Armstrong-Child, wrote that “this has resulted in more people being admitted to hospital each day than we are discharging, which simply cannot be sustained as Covid infections continue to surge.” Blackpool teaching hospitals NHS foundation trust, which runs the Victoria hospital, Clifton hospital and Fleetwood hospital, said it was experiencing “high demand and long waits” for A&amp;E and other urgent care. In a statement, it said the declaration of a critical incident was “an attempt to alleviate the pressure we are under, including stepping down some non-urgent activity in order to deliver all of the things we can and need to do to provide the very best care possible.” Cummins wrote that one issue at his trust was that “seriously sick patients are waiting too long to be admitted and there are many times when we are operating on a one in, one out basis”. Sakthi Karunanithi, the director of public health for Lancashire, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the region was experiencing what London had been through at the beginning of the month. “We are bracing ourselves for a tsunami of Omicron cases in Lancashire,” he said.More than half a million people have called on the government to rescind the knighthood given to Sir Tony Blair, but Keir Starmer has defended the former prime minister, saying the honour was deserved. The Labour leader said Blair was a worthy recipient of the Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, received in the new year honour’s list. “I don’t think it’s thorny at all. I think he deserves the honour. Obviously I respect the fact that people have different views,” Starmer told ITV’s Good Morning Britain. “I understand there are strong views on the Iraq war. There were back at the time and there still are, but that does not detract from the fact that Tony Blair was a very successful prime minister of this country and made a huge difference to the lives of millions of people in this country.” Blair, who led Labour to three election victories, was prime minister during the allied military invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan. The petition on Change.org was created by Angus Scott, who wrote: “Tony Blair caused irreparable damage to both the constitution of the United Kingdom and to the very fabric of the nation’s society. He was personally responsible for causing the death of countless innocent, civilian lives and servicemen in various conflicts. For this alone he should be held accountable for war crimes.” The viral petition was not created on the parliamentary website, where petitions have legal standing. Petitions that are signed there by 10,000 people must receive a response from the government, and those signed by more than 100,000 people are considered for debate in parliament. Boris Johnson’s spokesperson said it had not been the prime minister’s choice to award Blair the honour. “Appointments to the Order of the Garter are a matter for Her Majesty the Queen, there is no involvement of the prime minister or government, so it wouldn’t be one for me to comment on,” he said. “I would point out every former prime minister before Tony Blair has received the Order of the Garter or Thistle.” The appointment, which is made by the Queen, was last bestowed on Sir John Major – Blair’s predecessor. Appointments to the Garter are in the Queen’s gift and made without prime ministerial advice. The Commons Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, has also defended the honour’s award. “Whatever people might think, it is one of the toughest jobs in the world,” he said, “and I think it is respectful and it is the right thing to do … They should all be offered that knighthood when they finish as prime minister.” Asked whether Johnson should receive the same honour, Starmer said it had not been earned. “I don’t think that this prime minister has earned the right to have an honour. I do think Tony Blair has,” he said.The Met Office has warned of heavy snow, bitter cold and localised blizzards as winter weather conditions return to the UK. Yellow weather warnings have been issued in northern parts of Scotland and England. Have you experienced snowfall in your area? You can share your pictures and experiences below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.How do I add texture to vegan pulse, pasta and rice dishes so my non-vegan family can’t complain it’s just mush? Signe, Brighton “It’s all about a drizzle, a dollop and a crunch,” says Bettina Campolucci-Bordi, author of Celebrate: Plant-Based Recipes for Every Occasion. “I add at least two to every meal, and that instantly creates different textures.” A drizzle could be something as simple as good-quality olive or flavoured oil (chilli, garlic, basil) or date syrup, while a dollop is essentially something creamy: “Hummus made from butter beans or chickpeas, a pesto or flavoured yoghurt, say.” As for the crunch, that’s “chopped toasted nuts, a chunky dukkah or za’atar, pomegranate, sunflower or pumpkin seeds, roast chickpeas flavoured with things like tandoori spice”. In short, Signe would be wise to adopt Campolucci-Bordi’s mantra of “more is better”. Another tactic for avoiding the mush factor is to consider how you chop your veg. “With vegetables that need more cooking, such as potatoes, chop them small, whereas if you’re adding courgettes to the same dish, chop them bigger, otherwise they’ll go soft and mushy.” For extra oomph on the texture front, Craig and Shaun McAnuff, whose latest book, Natural Flava: Quick and Easy Plant-Based Caribbean Recipes, is out this month, favour roasting their veg (“for an incredible crust on the outside and melty insides”) or grilling it (“it gives you that crispy texture and smoky flavour”). Vivek Singh’s texture tricks, meanwhile, include frying mustard seeds and urid lentils with curry leaves and spices in oil, then tipping the lot into a lentil broth. Another option, says the executive chef and founder of The Cinnamon Collection restaurant group, is to top lentil and bean dishes with raw, pickled or lightly sauteed vegetables (think chopped broccoli or cauliflower). “You can also experiment by adding chopped nuts, fried shallots, and puffed or toasted flaked rice to the top of big, hearty bowls of lentils and rice for extra substance.” Some spicy scrambled tofu wouldn’t go amiss, either. Singh also recommends khichdi to keep Signe’s family’s objections at bay. “It’s a traditional, home-style rice and lentil dish tempered with cumin, turmeric and vegetables [cauliflower, peas, carrots, chopped tomatoes].” He ups the ante by serving it with a roast aubergine relish: “Stuff two aubergine halves with cloves of garlic and rub with mustard oil. Char the aubergine over an open flame, turning frequently, until blackened evenly on all sides.” Once cool, remove and discard the skin and the garlic, chop the flesh and mix with sea salt, red onion, chillies, coriander and mustard oil. Finally, when all routes point to pasta, Shaun McAnuff is partial to a “creamy, crunchy” vegan mac and cheese. He caramelises onion, garlic and chilli, mixes that with cooked pasta and vegan “cheese” sauce, and seasons. “Spoon into a deep baking dish, top with vegan mozzarella and breadcrumbs [you could even use broken crackers], and bake.” His brother, Craig, meanwhile, is all about pesto made with callaloo, a leafy Caribbean green. “All you do is caramelise garlic and mustard seed, then blitz with callaloo [or spinach], nuts, avocado, scotch bonnet and spices.” Toss that through cooked pasta and top with a sprinkling of nuts (walnuts, almonds, cashews) for that all-important crunch. • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comThis is a nasty, brutish, not-short-enough action film; basically one of those home-invasion stories in which brutal criminals terrorise a family. In this case the crims are led by newly released convict Johnny (Mickey Rourke, looking more melted than usual) and the family is a nuclear set-up led by James Baker (Michael Jai White), a DEA agent with PTSD. Johnny and co are supposedly trying is to recover money from a bank robbery, hidden years ago. But in this generally reprehensible subgenre, it doesn’t matter why the baddies break in. What matters is that it entitles at least one member of the terrorised family to fight back using their unique skills and, inevitably, armed force. Conspiracy-minded viewers might wonder if some of these films aren’t subsidised by pro-gun lobbyists as a way to drum fear into the audience and maintain support for the right to keep huge home arsenals to ward against a danger with a vanishingly small probability in the real world. Produced, co-written and directed by Asif Akbar, The Commando contains a number of egregious implausibilities and cliches. For starters, Johnny’s henchmen are so stupid and bloodthirsty they can’t even wait for the occupants to leave the house before they invade. They just barge in while one of Baker’s daughters is having a small party. Several teens are shot, one while he’s having a wee and ends up spraying urine all over the most violent of the bad guys, Dominic (Gianni Capaldi, distantly related to Peter); this appears to be meant as a comic highlight. Finally, Baker and his wife come home and it ends, inevitably, with a series of fisticuffs, gunfights and brawls before good supposedly triumphs over evil, although one of the kids has been raped. Perhaps we are meant to infer she deserved it for throwing a party while her folks were away; that tells you everything about the intended audience for this pernicious nonsense. • The Commando is released on 10 January on digital platforms.Women who are operated on by a male surgeon are much more likely to die, experience complications and be readmitted to hospital than when a woman performs the procedure, research reveals. Women are 15% more liable to suffer a bad outcome, and 32% more likely to die, when a man rather than a woman carries out the surgery, according to a study of 1.3 million patients. The findings have sparked a debate about the fact that surgery in the UK remains a hugely male-dominated area of medicine and claims that “implicit sex biases” among male surgeons may help explain why women are at such greater risk when they have an operation. “In our 1.3 million patient sample involving nearly 3,000 surgeons we found that female patients treated by male surgeons had 15% greater odds of worse outcomes than female patients treated by female surgeons,” said Dr Angela Jerath, an associate professor and clinical epidemiologist at the University of Toronto in Canada and a co-author of the findings. “This result has real-world medical consequences for female patients and manifests itself in more complications, readmissions to hospital and death for females compared with males. “We have demonstrated in our paper that we are failing some female patients and that some are unnecessarily falling through the cracks with adverse, and sometimes fatal, consequences.” The findings have been published in the medical journal JAMA Surgery. Jerath added: “These results are concerning because there should be no sex difference in patient outcomes regardless of the surgeon’s sex. “On a macro level the results are troubling. When a female surgeon operates, patient outcomes are generally better, particularly for women, even after adjusting for differences in chronic health status, age and other factors, when undergoing the same procedures. Jerath and her colleagues analysed the records of 1,320,108 patients in Ontario who underwent 21 common surgical procedures performed by 2,937 surgeons between 2007 and 2019. They ranged from hip and knee replacements and weight loss surgery to removal of an appendix or gall bladder and more complicated operations such as a heart bypass, aneurysm repair and brain surgery. For each of the 1.3m operations they analysed, the sex of each patient and details of how their procedure had gone and also the sex of the surgeon who carried it out. They found that men who had an operation had the same outcomes regardless of whether their surgeon was male or female. However, women experienced better outcomes if the procedure had been performed by a female surgeon compared with a male surgeon. There were no gender differences in how surgery went for either men or women operated on by a female surgeon. Jerath added that while “there are some excellent male surgeons who consistently have good outcomes, what is concerning is that this analysis does signal some real difference among male and female surgeons overall where practice can impact general patient outcomes”. The researchers said the study was the first of its kind to examine the association between the sex of the patient, the sex of their surgeon and the outcomes of surgery. They looked at three types of “adverse postoperative outcome”: death, readmission to hospital and complications within 30 days. They found that for women, treatment by a male surgeon was associated with a 15% increased likelihood of a poor outcome than if they were treated by a female surgeon. However, men experienced no differences whether they were treated by a male or female surgeon. Similarly, women who were operated on by a male surgeon had a 32% higher risk of death than those whose surgery had been performed by a woman. For example, while 1.4% of women who had a cardiothoracic operation with a male surgeon died, fewer – 1% – did so when a female surgeon was involved. In both brain surgery and vascular surgery, while 1.2% of women who underwent either type of operation with a male surgeon died, again that proportion was much lower among those whose surgeon was female – 0.9% – giving a 33% higher risk of death. Overall, female patients also had a 16% greater risk of complications and an 11% greater risk of readmission and were 20% more likely to have to stay in hospital longer. Women had a higher risk of death, readmission or complications when a man performed the operation across many of the 21 types of surgery analysed. For example, while 20.2% of women who had cardiothoracic (chest) surgery by a male surgeon suffered some form of adverse reaction, a lower percentage – 18% – did so if their surgeon was female. The same pattern was seen in general surgery, brain surgery and orthopaedic surgery. Technical differences between male and female surgeons are unlikely to explain the findings “as both sexes undergo the same technical medical training”, said Jerath. “Implicit sex biases”, in which surgeons “act on subconscious, deeply ingrained biases, stereotypes and attitudes”, may be one possible explanation, she said. Differences in men’s and women’s communication and interpersonal skills evident in surgeons’ discussions with patients before the operation takes place may also be a factor, she added. And “differences between male and female physician work style, decision-making and judgment”. Fiona Myint, the vice-president of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, highlighted that 86% of consultant (senior) surgeons in Britain were men. “Surgery is still a long way from having a gender balance in its workforce. Women make up 41% of early stage surgeons but only 30% of higher trainees and 14% of consultants,” she said. Parenthood, “a lack of flexibility in [surgical] training schedules and rotas” and “negative attitudes to less than full-time training” all explain why many women do not become consultant surgeons, she added. Scarlett McNally, who has been a consultant orthopaedic surgeon for 20 years, said there was “increasing evidence of a different experience for women surgeons, with many being put off surgery and reporting historical ‘microaggressions’”. In addition, female patients may feel more at ease talking to a female surgeon before the operation, including steps they should take to improve their chances of a good outcome, such as stopping smoking to help ensure a bone graft takes, she added. McNally also cited “unconscious bias” – assumptions among senior surgeons, nurses, administrators and patients that female medical students or young doctors will not want to pursue a career in surgery – as a factor. “Having more female surgeons would improve all patients’ outcomes,” she said. The Royal College of Surgeons of England said the findings were “interesting. Much more detailed research is required looking at communication, trust and doctor-patient relationships.”Where does Prince Andrew drive to in his brand new, £80,000 Range Rover – seemingly his only appearances these days in anything that could be considered the outside world? The duke is often pictured motoring broodingly out of his Royal Lodge home in Windsor at the wheel of this high-performance vehicle, perhaps making his in-car security detail listen to a podcast about putting, or a funny song about a whoopee cushion. (The precise contours of Andrew’s cultural life have always remained a tantalising mystery.) Some local visits to his mother at Windsor Castle have been chalked up, as well they might be. But we’ll come to the duke’s ominous financial reliance on the Queen in a minute. Were The Artist Formerly Known as Airmiles to take an aimless intra-Berkshire spin this morning, he would be able to listen to news reports concerning the newly unsealed settlement his accuser reached with Jeffrey Epstein in 2009. Virginia Giuffre signed a $500,000 deal with Epstein, and Andrew’s lawyers believe her agreement not to sue anyone who could be described as a “potential defendant” could get HRH off the hook of having to face, in civil court, her claims that he sexually assaulted her on three occasions when she was a minor. (He denies everything, vehemently.) If this does succeed in persuading a judge to dismiss Giuffre’s current suit, then once again someone else’s money will have insulated Andrew from alleged self-created realities. It always seems to be someone else’s money, of course. In this case, it would be the $500,000 of a dead sex trafficker. However, other funds are available. Andrew’s mother is widely reported to be paying his legal bills for this increasingly grotesque saga, which will be running well into seven figures by now. What follows can only be speculation, with the duke’s case not due to be heard till later in the year. But having his legal fees quietly covered by the Queen would feel like the very upper limit of what a lot of people in this country would accept. There are, of course, many committed anti-royalists in the UK, but the British public don’t in the majority regard the 95-year-old sovereign as the sort of freeloader at whom they might scream: “We pay your wages!” The Queen’s various vast incomes have not been a hot topic of debate in recent years in whatever counts as middle England. But in the event that Giuffre’s case against Andrew proceeds and he loses it, and a multimillion-dollar payment has to be made, you get the feeling public attitudes would change overnight if the maternal bailout ran to forking out Andy’s damages for him. You can imagine people who are quite happy for the Queen to spend money restoring obscure Scottish castles and whatnot suddenly feeling less relaxed about it being spaffed on paying blood money for a sex offender. Whatever the accounting, I’m not sure any distinction between public funds and private income would be made by the average person. Anyway, that’s enough banging on about Andy’s mama. Not that I haven’t very much enjoyed the recent articles by gentlemen of a certain age who have FINALLY found a woman they care about in the long-running Epstein story. Unsurprisingly, perhaps – it’s the Queen! Here at last is a lady tangentially connected to the grimness whose honour and dignity actually matters, as opposed to those of the other ladies involved, whose tribulations they have at no point been interested in writing about. Even Ghislaine Maxwell has elicited more sympathy in some quarters than the actual victims of Epstein. And, indeed, the victims of Maxwell herself. Madam has now been found guilty of recruiting, grooming and trafficking teenage girls for sex with Epstein, not that you’d know it from the airtime still bafflingly given on both sides of the Atlantic to those such as her brother Kevin Maxwell. Ah, the classic “sex offender’s brother” interview slot. You probably remember it from other trials such as … no, sorry, I can’t put my finger on any. Drawing a big old blank here. In any case, what does Kevin Maxwell know about anything? Four hundred million pounds was stolen from the pension funds of a business empire in which he was the second-most powerful person, and a fraud trial acquitted him of having a clue about it. So I think broadcasters can spare audiences his “insights” on anything else, ever again. Infinitely more worth listening to are the victims themselves, who may be permitted to make victim impact statements at Maxwell’s forthcoming sentencing. Giuffre could be among them. The other thing worth listening to, alas, is the ongoing sound of silence where the mention of other men’s names should be. Despite the saga rumbling on for years, we still have little idea who all the other men involved in this seedy web were, and absolutely no indication that anyone in law enforcement cares enough to find out now that they have got their woman. I can’t help feeling those hoping Ghislaine will name names for clemency are being pretty optimistic. Given that Ghislaine believes Epstein was murdered in jail, as opposed to killing himself, it seems unlikely she would expose herself to what she would presumably regard as a likely similar fate, should she begin singing like a canary. Seemingly all of Epstein’s friends were power players, chosen for their use to him, and they must all have known rather a lot about his proclivities. Way back in 2002, Donald Trump was joking pointedly to New York magazine that Epstein liked them “on the younger side”. Beyond that, plenty of ageing Epstein buddies were involved in his web of abuse, accepting hospitality on “Paedo Island”, ferried in aboard his “Lolita Express” private plane. But they’ve all retreated into their money, their omertàs, and the timeworn knowledge that reckonings are for women and other little people. Epstein knew the code better than anyone, which is presumably why he took care in his 2009 settlement with Giuffre to exempt others from being named as “potential defendants” in the future. What a thoughtful legacy to his bros. And how remarkable that Prince Andrew should regard seizing it as his best defensive shot. Swerving court via a loophole provided by one of the leading international paedos of the age … Well, if that isn’t staying classy, then I really don’t know what is. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistA 60-year-old comic featuring the Incredible Hulk – in which the superhero is depicted in his original grey, rather than his signature green – has been sold for almost half a million dollars. The rare copy of Incredible Hulk #1, which was published in 1962, was bought by a private collector for $490,000 (£360,000). Comic Connect, an auction site which handled the sale, said it was the most expensive copy of the first Hulk story ever sold. Created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby, the comic reveals the Hulk’s origin story, in which the scientist Dr Bruce Banner is exposed to toxic gamma rays, and thenceforth transforms into the Hulk when he loses his temper. In his first outing, the Hulk is shown with grey skin, but Marvel changed the colouring to his now-signature green for the second issue, because the four-colour printing process at the time meant the grey came out differently on different pages. The issue is graded “very fine/near mint” on the comics grading scale. “Highly graded copies of Hulk No 1 are notoriously hard to find, due to the cheap paper used and the smudging of the grey colour on the front cover,” said Vincent Zurzolo from the comics site. Zurzolo predicted that the issue would “continue to gain in value”. “Vintage comic book values just keep going up,” he added. The Hulk has a long way to go, however, before he smashes the record set by his Marvel stablemate, Spider-Man. In September, a copy of the 1962 comic Amazing Fantasy #15, in which Spider-Man makes his debut, sold for $3.6m (£2.5m).A statue to the 19th-century fossil hunter and palaeontologist Mary Anning, who was once “lost to history”, is finally set to be unveiled in 2022 in her home town of Lyme Regis after a schoolgirl’s four-year campaign. Campaigners, who have overcome bureaucratic red tape and raised more than £100,000 in crowdfunding, have been granted planning permission to site the bronze in “the perfect spot”, overlooking Black Ven cliffs on the Jurassic coast in Dorset, where she made her pioneering finds. Evie Swire, 13, was nine when she first heard of Anning, born in 1799, who sold fossils to supplement her family’s meagre income and who is the subject of the film Ammonite, starring Kate Winslet. Disappointed there was no local tribute to Anning, who in life was largely ignored by the scientific establishment yet is now regarded as a significant female force in science, she began the Mary Anning Rocks campaign. But first the coronavirus pandemic, then disputes over where the statue should be sited, looked likely to thwart plans to unveil the work, by the sculptor Denise Dutton, on the 223rd anniversary of Anning’s birth in May 2022. Anya Pearson, Evie’s mother, said plans to place the statue near the giant anchor viewpoint on Lyme Regis seafront were resisted, and the project was then added to a long list of applications amid the pandemic. Another proposal, to place the statue on a cart road below the Marine theatre, was also rejected. “But now we finally have the perfect spot for her, facing Black Ven [cliff] and Golden Cap [hill]. Black Ven is where she found most of her fossils, and it is just the most evocative spot, looking out to sea,” said Pearson. ‘It is the same background view as that in the only portrait ever painted of Mary. So there is great connectivity. “It’s been a long battle, and at one point I really thought the whole project might be strangled by bureaucratic red tape. I thought the hard-part would be the fundraising, not getting planning permission. “But the local people really got behind it, and have been amazing,” she added. The clay model of Anning and her dog, Tray, which is one-and-a-quarter lifesize, is due to be cast in bronze in early 2022, with the unveiling scheduled for May. As part of the campaign, whose patrons include Sir David Attenborough, and the academic and broadcaster Prof Alice Roberts, the Mary Anning Rocks learning legacy will enable children from underprivileged backgrounds across the UK to visit the statue and go fossil hunting on the beaches, “discovering the next generation of Mary Annings”, added Pearson. Anning was responsible for many pioneering finds, including one of the first ichthyosaurus skeletons, and became immensely knowledgable in the then emerging field of palaeontology. But her finds were often credited to the male collectors to whom she sold her fossils. Her disappointment and frustration was evident in one surviving letter, in which she wrote: “The world has used me so unkindly, I fear it has made me suspicious of everyone.” She died aged 47. The planning application papers said that, despite coming from a poor background, Anning’s finds changed the way scientists thought about the origins of our planet and how life evolved on it. It read: “Throughout Mary Anning’s lifetime, her achievements have largely gone unacknowledged with her name having been eradicated from the historic archives due to her being an uneducated, working-class woman and an outsider to the polite and scientific community.” Anning had not previously been championed in the town, “because she was just not known about”, said Pearson. “If she had been male and upper class, a statue would have been raised over a hundred years ago.” “I really feel we have finally righted a historic wrong.”Just six years ago Forbes magazine declared her the “the world’s youngest self-made female billionaire” and the “next Steve Jobs”. Now, Elizabeth Holmes, 37, founder of the collapsed blood testing company Theranos, is facing decades in prison after being found guilty of conspiring to defraud her investors out of billions. Holmes, a university dropout with no medical training, had fooled regulators and some of the world’s richest people, including Rupert Murdoch, Henry Kissinger and Larry Ellison, into believing she had figured out a way to test for a range of health conditions with just a pinprick of blood. But the tests did not work, and the company was accused of often faking the results. One patient testified that a blood test revealed they were miscarrying when they were pregnant; another said they were given false-positive results for HIV. After a number of regulatory investigations, the company – which at one point was valued at more than $9bn (£6.6bn) – collapsed in 2018. On Monday a California jury convicted Holmes of four counts of wire fraud and conspiracy to commit wire fraud. Holmes had set her sights on becoming an inventor at an early age. She hoped to emulate her great-great-great-grandfather, who co-founded Fleischmann’s Yeast, which revolutionised the breadmaking industry in the late 1800s. At the age of nine, she told her father that what she “really want[s] out of life is to discover something new, something that mankind didn’t know was possible to do”. While a 19-year-old student at Stanford University, she thought she had found it. Working out of the basement of her shared college house, she founded Theranos in 2003. Brimming with self-confidence, she convinced her parents to let her drop out of university and cash in an education trust they had set up for her. She used it to rent a lab and hire her first employee. Holmes’s desire to improve medical testing was driven by a familial aversion to needles, that could cause her mother and her grandmother to faint at the sight of blood. “I really believe that if we were from a foreign planet and we were sitting here and said, ‘OK, let’s brainstorm on torture experiments’, the concept of sticking a needle into someone and sucking blood out slowly, while the person watches, probably qualifies,” she told the New Yorker in 2014 for a profile that said she had the potential to “upend the lucrative business of blood testing”. Holmes, who helped engineer the comparisons to her idol, Jobs, by dressing in black turtlenecks, quickly became a star on the public speaking circuit. Addressing a TedMed conference in 2014, she said getting a blood test should be easier, quicker and cheaper. It should be, she said, “a wonderful” experience. “We see a world in which no one ever has to say, ‘If only I’d known sooner’. A world in which no one ever has to say goodbye too soon,” she told the Washington DC audience. “The right to protect the health and wellbeing of every person, of those we love, is a basic human right. Yet in the United States today, healthcare is the leading cause of bankruptcy and the lack of it the leading cause of … finding out too late in the disease progression process that someone you love is really, really sick.” The top comment under the video on YouTube says: “She did a better job playing Steve Jobs than Ashton Kutcher” (Kutcher played Jobs in the 2013 biopic Jobs.) “Here was a photogenic, telegenic young woman posing as the female Steve Jobs,” recalled Margaret O’Mara, a historian of Silicon Valley who holds a professorship at the University of Washington. “It was an incredibly alluring narrative that everyone wanted to believe.” Not quite everyone. Holmes’s tall tales started to unravel in 2015 – soon after Theranos hit its record $9bn valuation – when the Wall Street Journal reporter John Carreyrou began an investigation into the validity of the company’s tests. When Carreyrou went to Holmes for comment for his story, she asked the Journal’s owner, Rupert Murdoch – a Theranos investor – to prevent its publication. “You personally went to the owner of The Wall Street Journal to try to quash the story,” Robert Leach, an assistant US attorney, asked her during the trial. “I did,” she replied. Carreyrou’s story was printed. Dozens more followed, leading to the collapse of the company and taking with it Murdoch’s $125m investment.The European Union’s top diplomat is visiting the frontline of Ukraine’s war with Moscow-backed separatists, amid intensifying diplomatic activity in response to Russia’s buildup of troops on the country’s border. Josep Borrell, the EU foreign policy chief, began a two-day trip to Ukraine on Tuesday, before US-Russia talks in Geneva on 10 January and Nato-Russia talks on 12 January. Borrell is meeting Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, during a trip intended to show solidarity with Kyiv, which aspires to join Nato and the EU. Tensions rose after Vladimir Putin last month set out security demands that Nato immediately rejected, including a veto on Ukraine entering the military alliance and a ban on troops and weapons along its eastern flank. The EU and US have accused Russia of stoking a crisis by massing tens of thousands of troops along its border with Ukraine. In an attempt to defuse tensions, Russian and US officials are to hold talks on 10 January in Geneva, where the US president, Joe Biden, and Putin met last year. Two days later, western countries will meet Russia in the Nato-Russia Council. Talks will continue on 13 January through the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, a body that includes the US, its Nato allies, Russia and former Soviet states. The EU is anxious not to be sidelined. “We do not want to be, and must not be, spectators that are not involved and over whose heads decisions are made,” Borrell told Die Welt last week, adding this was also the view of the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, with whom he had spoken before Christmas. Borrell, who has been pushing for more EU military cooperation, said Europe had to be involved in the talks. “European security is our security. It is about us. Two parties, the US and Russia, or Nato and Russia, simply cannot negotiate about this – even if Moscow imagines it that way. We are not in the postwar period. There are some European states that are not Nato allies. There must be no Yalta 2,” he said referring to the second world war meeting of allied powers that accepted Soviet domination of eastern Europe. More than 14,000 people have been killed in Ukraine’s still-smouldering conflict with Russian-backed separatists since 2014. Ukraine’s ambassador to London, Vadym Prystaiko, called on western countries to announce preemptive sanctions against Russia to deter an attack, in contrast to the preference for reactive action. He suggested measures “that can be really painful to Russia” such as switching off its access to the Swift international payments system. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, he said: “What Ukrainians are fearing the most” is that a “so-called big deal is baked somewhere behind our backs”. Western leaders, he said, should understand that Ukrainians have their own agenda. “The first item on this agenda is survival in the way we see it, to be close to western democracy.” Tensions have also forced non-Nato member Finland to restate its right to choose its security policy. In a new year message Finland’s president, Sauli Niinistö, said his country retained the right to join Nato, a point reiterated by the prime minister, Sanna Marin. “Finland retains the option of Nato membership,” she said. “We should uphold this freedom of choice.” Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, said last month that if Finland and Sweden joined Nato “this would have serious military and political consequences, which would require an adequate response on Russia’s part”. Nato foreign ministers will hold a special meeting on Friday to discuss Russia’s military buildup and broader security issues, officials announced.When people talk about modernising classic ballets, it usually means taking popular stories and creating new steps for them. But Tamara Rojo is trying the opposite. In her first creation for English National Ballet, Raymonda, she’s keeping the original steps and rewriting the story, turning an 1898 ballet set in the Crusades into a new production inspired by Florence Nightingale and the Crimean war. Rojo’s brainwave solves two problems that pop up when it comes to restaging older works. First, scenarios that have gone stale, sometimes peppered with casual sexism and racism – the original Raymonda is a young woman, engaged to a knight, who is pursued and kidnapped by an offensively cliched Arab baddie. Second, if you always reinvent the steps, you lose the “text” of the ballet itself, the very basis of the art form. As director of ENB since 2012, Rojo has been marching forwards, commissioning new work from contemporary choreographers such as Akram Khan, but she values the past too. “You’ve got an ever-shrinking repertoire of classical works,” says Rojo. “And the fact is that classical works are very important for our art form: the audience love to watch classical ballet and the dancers want to dance them, because it is a proof of their skill. You prove yourself through those very challenging technical roles. We can’t just chuck them away.” Raymonda was originally created by Marius Petipa, choreographer of Swan Lake, Sleeping Beauty and The Nutcracker, and according to Rojo there is no one to match him. “I have seen how that technique challenges you but also teaches you how to dance, it really does,” she says. “There’s nothing like the coordination that comes from dancing those roles. Even the most contemporary of choreographers want to work with dancers who have that skill.” The particular skills required of a dancer have changed since Petipa’s time. To make Raymonda, Rojo went back to the source, to look at scores held at Harvard University made by Petipa dancer Vladimir Stepanov, who developed his own system of ballet notation. She found the original version of the choreography very different from what you would see now. “The art form has evolved and dancers are unrecognisable in their abilities,” says Rojo. “The men then did almost nothing. The original Jean de Brienne [the heroic male lead] was in his 50s.” Ballerinas today are much “more lyrical, flexible”, she says. They are slender and their muscles longer than those of their predecessors. “We do more variety of movement now, legs all over the place,” says Rojo, “but some things, like hopping on pointe, have been lost. It requires a volume of muscle that ballerinas today don’t have.” The original Raymonda character has to do 32 jumps on pointe on one leg. “Today that is not something we enjoy doing as much,” says Rojo. So has she put those jumps in her new production? “No,” she laughs. “Some things I have adapted.” Rojo has choreographed some new material for the production alongside Petipa’s but sees herself more as a director. “More in line with what Rufus Norris or Nick Hytner or Michael Grandage do with the classical canon,” she says. “Taking it and putting it into a context that the audience might care about.” Erasing the xenophobia was the first priority, but shifting the backdrop from the Crusades to the Crimean war gave Rojo the chance to solve another problem – that of Raymonda herself – a weak character with little motivation behind her steps. “[In the original] she’s everywhere but nowhere,” says Rojo. “So I wanted to give her that agency and voice.” The most famous woman of the Crimean war is, of course, Florence Nightingale, who directly inspired Raymonda’s character. “Raymonda’s struggling to find the freedom to follow her calling,” says Rojo. “If you read Cassandra, the book Florence Nightingale wrote, she despises her mother and sister and the social networks and expectations around her, stuck in a world where she’s expected to marry. In a way, that’s Raymonda.” In Rojo’s ballet, Raymonda’s fiance, John, is a soldier in Crimea and she follows him there to be a nurse, where she meets John’s friend Abdur, a sophisticated Ottoman envoy, “and suddenly finds herself trapped in a three-way situation between her calling, her duties and something exciting and intriguing and different. And that’s where the ballet finds its tension.” Although it’s set 170 years ago, there’s still much that’s relevant. “The struggle of women, their career versus private life is still very much there, if you ask me,” says Rojo. Telling a story in dance is a tall order. There’s a reason ballet companies so often stick to well-worn tales, because the audience already knows what’s going on. “Narrative in ballet is difficult,” Rojo admits. “There’s no explanation, no pausing and telling you what happened in the other room, there are limitations. But when it works, there’s nothing like it,” she says. “Because it works on an emotional level rather than an intellectual level, when you get it right no other art form can touch ballet. And that’s what we’re always searching for, that miracle moment.” English National Ballet’s Raymonda is at London Coliseum, 13-23 January and at the Mayflower, Southampton, 30 November-3 December.As the Sydney Ashes Test rolls to the start line, the conversations about selections and form and conditions do not really matter. What matters is that it is miraculous this match is going ahead. England have almost an entire coaching staff wiped out by Covid. Australia have lost their Brisbane century-maker Travis Head, with three players named as cover. The Cricket Australia chief executive, Nick Hockley, is out and Glenn McGrath will miss at least part of his foundation’s fundraising efforts. In Australian domestic cricket, Big Bash teams are losing quorum to the virus. Yet the show will go on. Sydney is complicated, a town built on blood and corruption from the first days of its colonial founding. It is beautiful, with a beauty bought by wealth and subsidised by poverty. When you walk its hills at night it can be disarmingly gentle, the humid air curling around you, distant lights on quiet streets, the leaves of the Moreton Bay fig trees or the white-gold petals of frangipani unbearably lush. The harbour unwinds through the city’s core, unspooling in all directions, those waters captured in the words of Kenneth Slessor. To the east is the ocean coast and its storied beaches. To the west it becomes another city, growing ever outwards. In the past year, Sydney has also become the centre of Australia’s viral explosion. By now nobody can remember which wave this is, but a country that successfully held back a global inundation for nearly two years has now given in. Political leaders have sold the idea of a harmless variant and the fantasy that everybody getting sick and getting better will mean an end rather than just another waypoint on a road that has miles to run. For those in countries that have suffered worse and earlier, Australia’s situation may seem tame in comparison. But there has been an abdication of responsibility, leaving people to fend for themselves. It is in Sydney, as cases leap by the day and as leaders find ways to stop counting, that the fourth Ashes Test will be held. It is safe to say that had this series been played at any other time in the pandemic era, in any other country, between any other two teams, it would have been called off by now. England left South Africa in 2020 after one positive test from a worker at the team hotel. Australia gave South Africa an escalating list of demands in 2021 and still refused to tour. India left England early last September when the coach and a physio were infected. The suggestion above is not hypothetical. And yet, this is the Ashes, the main source of revenue for the two boards involved. England’s authorities gain nothing directly from a series played in Australia, but need the reciprocal goodwill to make sure Australia’s touring commitments in the other direction go unaffected. CA’s entire financial existence hinges on the quadrennial infusion from this tour, with broadcast deals in particular based on the popularity of even a one-sided contest. Ultimately it will not matter which players are available or where matches are played, as long as they are on television screens in sufficient quantity to meet the contract. There will be plenty of ticket revenue too, thanks to a New South Wales government that could most charitably be described as laissez-faire in its public health approach. Under current rules there will be no crowd caps, no requirement to wear masks aside from a few indoor areas, and no check-in required with the government app, which presumably means vaccination certificates will not be checked on entry. A large attendance is expected. So England’s players turn out for the crowd again, despite a week of shambolic preparation and the barrage of distraction from the situation they are in, with a team unchanged bar one bowling selection from the surrender in Melbourne. In fairness, there is little else on the selection front that could be done. The bigger question is how they can possibly find some confidence or motivation to tackle the rest of this series, rather than simply hoping to get it over with. The Australians in contrast should be less affected, coming into the fourth Test with the buoyancy of the first three when almost every move has paid off. Aside from replacing Head for one match, that team will be unchanged from a position of strength rather than weakness, with Scott Boland retained after his dramatic debut with the ball at the MCG. Ultimately, the Test will be seen as sport fulfilling its purpose as a means of distraction for people who want to stop thinking about problems outside the ground. Sport is always more than that, inextricably part of its wider world, and this match cannot be divorced from its context. It should be seen, too, for illustrating the way cricket’s richest countries treat each other, as opposed to those outside their tiny club. But it is happening. Sydney is, most of all, a town of glitz and cash, where success matters more than how it is achieved. The show will always go on.Israel has become the first country in the world to embark on a fourth Covid-19 vaccination campaign as part of efforts to stem rapidly rising infection rates caused by the Omicron variant. People over the age of 60 and healthcare workers who received their third shot more than four months ago became eligible for a second booster of Pfizer-BioNTech on Monday, after a limited rollout began last week for elderly people and those with compromised immune systems. Officials had previously said they would wait for more data on the efficacy of a fourth shot before making it more widely available. The Israeli health ministry said on Tuesday, however, that even though it believes the threat posed by Omicron is minimal, it had been forced to act more quickly in the face of skyrocketing infection rates. The Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, said on Tuesday that the preliminary findings of an Israeli study found a fourth dose of vaccine boosted antibodies five-fold after a week. The country recorded its sixth highest daily tally since the pandemic began on Monday with 10,644 cases – a 360% rise on the week before, although the spread of the new variant has not been accompanied by corresponding rises in mortality. “At the moment, I wouldn’t recommend it for younger populations. Our recommendation on a fourth vaccine dose was issued quickly and because there was no choice,” Dr Tal Brosh, the health ministry’s pandemic team coordinator, told Army Radio. “We couldn’t wait to examine this over time in orderly studies. We think that the risk is tiny.” Within a day of making it available, 100,000 people received or made an appointment to get the second booster. The rapid pace of infection has also led to worries over testing kit shortages, with health minister Nitzan Horowitz saying that Israel would adjust its criteria for compulsory testing and focus primarily on people at high risk. As a result, more Israelis “will be required to exercise personal responsibility and perform tests at home”, he said in televised remarks on Monday. In an attempt to avoid a de-facto lockdown and widespread disruption to schools and the economy, precautionary self-isolation periods for people who have been exposed to coronavirus have been scaled down. The rise in domestic transmission also appears to have rendered international travel restrictions moot, with curbs imposed in November set to be lifted. Foreigners from 199 “orange” states will be allowed to enter the country from 9 January provided they are vaccinated or have recovered from Covid-19. The UK, US, UAE and Turkey remain on Israel’s “red” list. Despite an initial world-leading vaccination programme, vaccine hesitancy within the ultra-Orthodox and Arab communities means that only around 70% of Israel’s 9.3 million residents has received two doses of vaccine to date. Israel was also fiercely criticised by the UN for not doing more to facilitate a faster rollout for Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, where full vaccination rates are lagging at around 31%.Consumer borrowing on credit cards jumped to its highest level in more than a year in November, pushing all forms of household unsecured credit to £1.2bn, according to the latest Bank of England data. The increase in reliance on loans and credit cards exceeded City forecasts of a £0.8bn rise and beat the £0.6bn average of the previous six months. Analysts said much of the increase reflected a more confident, pre-pandemic pattern of borrowing, but warned that many low income households had become more dependent on loans to cope with an inflationary squeeze on their finances from rising utility bills and the higher cost of the weekly shop. Households also cut back on the amount of money set aside in deposit accounts to £4.5bn in November, from an average over the previous 12 months of £11.2bn. The dramatic reduction in savings growth was seen as supporting the trend among some consumers to be more confident and spend a higher proportion of their income, while others on lower incomes reduced saving to cover higher bills. Martin Beck, the chief economic adviser to the EY Item Club, said that while some households cut back on saving and increased borrowing to cope with a squeeze on their household finances, “it also appears to be indicative of a more bullish consumer mindset”. The threat from the Omicron coronavirus variant would probably reverse the trends for higher borrowing and lower saving in December as households responded to increasing economic uncertainty, said Samuel Tombs, the chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics. “Saving likely will remain elevated at least until March, when Omicron should be on the retreat,” he said. “Meanwhile, the outlook for inflation to rise to about 6% in the spring suggests that households will save much less this year to sustain their current level of expenditure, given the outlook for falling real disposable income.” He added that a consumer boom led by a rapid reduction of pandemic-related savings “continues to look very unlikely” while much of the money is needed to offset higher prices. Figures from the Bank of England for mortgage borrowing approvals revealed a fall for the sixth consecutive month in November to a level close to their pre-pandemic, 2015-19 average. The decline to 66,400 approvals a month is expected to become the norm over the rest of this year, said Tombs, despite higher levels of buyer inquiries in November, according to the RICS residential market survey, that pushed house price inflation up by 10%. “Higher mortgage rates look set to subdue the housing market,” he said. “The average quoted rate for a two-year fixed-rate mortgage, with a 75% loan-to-value ratio, jumped to 1.52% in November, from 1.30% in October, and likely will increase to about 1.7% by March, once the full impact of the recent rise in banks’ wholesale funding costs has been seen.” The Bank of England increased its base rate last month from 0.1% to 0.25% and investors are betting that it rises to at least 0.75% by the end of this year. Threadneedle Street officials appear to have set aside concerns that Britain’s economic recovery from three pandemic-related lockdowns slowed in the second half of last year as the loss of trade from Brexit and global shortages of goods affected consumer spending. Central bank policymakers have stressed that they need to tackle rising prices with higher interest rates to dampen demand.One often overlooked aspect of the current pandemic is the effect that it has had on brands. The poor brands, who long ago settled on a cool-sounding name only to have it coopted by a deadly once-a-century health crisis. Remember Corona, the beer that people used to drink before the association with illness and death became too much to take? Remember Delta, the airline that people used to use before it reminded everyone that new Covid mutations are destined to consign humanity to a quivering wreck for decades to come? These are the real victims. Until now, the Omicron variant has escaped such a fate. This is because Omicron is such a stupid word that the only people who had ever adopted it as a name are an imposing German electrical diagnostic corporation and a Belgian death metal band, and neither one seems particularly bothered by the association. However, if you squint hard enough and pretend that you don’t know how to read, the word “Omicron” sort of looks a bit like ‘Omarion’. And that’s bad news for the R&amp;B singer of the same name who was once part of the band B2K. Because, for almost a full month now, Omarion has found himself on the receiving end of Twitter’s firehose. For a whole swathe of people online, Omicron is now “the Omarion variant”. If you catch it by surprise, you tweet a gif of Omarion on The Masked Singer. If you want to show how the virus spreads, you tweet a video of Omarion dancing through the streets after a woman. If you’re forced into self-isolation, you make a TikTok of Omarion dancing on the end of a lateral flow swab like an especially perky bogey. Through the thick of the outbreak, Omarion himself has apparently remained oblivious to this association. However, he has finally issued an official response. On New Year’s Day, Omarion uploaded three TikTok videos to help clear up any misunderstanding. “Hi, this is Omarion. I am an artist, not a variant” he explained. “So please be aware that, if you just so happen to run into me on the street, you don’t have to isolate for five days”. “While it’s important not to touch me and keep your distance, cause you know that’s how it’s supposed to be, you don’t need a negative test to dance to my music,” Omarion continued. On another video referencing his old boyband, he added that “The last time I had to do this was in 2000 when everyone confused Y2K with B2K”. Perhaps this is Omarion’s lot. Perhaps every 20 years, some awful catastrophe will befall humanity, and it’ll sound a bit like something vaguely related to something Omarion has done. Maybe in 2040 we’ll be crushed by an asteroid that will come to be colloquially known as Fat Albert, referencing Omarion’s 2004 movie. Or maybe aliens will arrive from the planet Kourtney and Khloe Take Miami, named after the reality show that Omarion appeared on for a single episode in 2019. Perhaps, even, we will be hit by a second pandemic, and science will inexplicably choose to name each new variant after a different disappointing R&amp;B album, and the most deadly wave will carry the title of Omarion’s 2014 record, Sex Playlist. What a way to go. Still, you have to imagine that, deep down, Omarion must be quite pleased that his name is now synonymous with an unimaginably virulent strain of Covid. Because now, when you Google the word Omarion, you get swamped by results about his jokey clarification. And that means that all other news about Omarion has suddenly become much harder to find. That time Reuters ran a news story about Omarion asking his fans to pray for him because he happened to be in London – uninjured and inconvenienced – during the 2005 terrorist attacks? Very difficult to find now. Not impossible, but very hard.Novak Djokovic will defend his Australian Open title after revealing he has secured a medical exemption for the tournament and he is on his way to Melbourne. The exemption ends weeks of speculation about the possibility of Djokovic being unable to compete in the opening grand slam tournament of 2022 since he had refused to divulge his vaccination status and had previously expressed doubt about taking a Covid vaccine. All Australian Open participants must either be fully vaccinated or apply for and secure a medical exemption in order to enter Victoria without undertaking the mandatory 14-day quarantine. “Happy New Year, everybody! Wishing you all health, love, and happiness in every present moment and may you feel love &amp; respect towards all beings on this wonderful planet,” Djokovic wrote on social media. “I’ve spent fantastic quality time with my loved ones over the break and today I’m heading Down Under with an exemption permission. Let’s go 2022 !!” Djokovic’s announcement has garnered mixed responses from some of his peers. “If it was me that wasn’t vaccinated I wouldn’t be getting an exemption,” said Jamie Murray at the ATP Cup. “But well done to him for getting clear to come to Australia and compete.” Alex de Minaur, Australia’s No 1 men’s player, said that he hopes that other players who applied for exemptions received the same treatment as Djokovic. “I just think it’s just very interesting, that’s all I’m going to say,” De Minaur responded. “But, hey, it is what it is. I just hope that the other players that I heard were cases as well, [I hope] they got exemptions.” Liam Broady, who is Great Britain’s ATP Cup captain in Sydney, said: “You have to trust that he does have a valid reason for the medical exemption.” Shortly after Djokovic’s announcement, the Australian Open confirmed he had received a medical exemption and they released a statement outlining the process. Two panels of experts were charged with reviewing the evidence, with the applications finalised by the Independent Medical Exemption Review Panel, a panel of experts appointed by the government. According to a Victorian state spokesman, the personal information of applicants is redacted in the process. The Tennis Australia CEO, Craig Tiley, told the Today Show on Wednesday morning that 26 players and staff had applied for a medical exemption but only “a handful” of applications were granted and that participants at the Australian Open had been subject to a more rigorous process than Australian citizens. “If they didn’t meet the guidelines, and there were many that didn’t, they were rejected,” Tiley said. “If they met the guidelines, for example – which a lot of people forget – one of those conditions is having had Covid in the past six months. So any person who met those conditions has been allowed to come in. There’s been no special favour, there’s been no special opportunity granted to Novak nor there would be to any tennis player.” Criteria listed by the Australian Technical Advisory Group as permissible reasons for a medical exemption range from those suffering acute major medical conditions to any serious adverse event attributed to a previous dose of Covid-19 vaccine. For those who have recently tested positive for Covid-19, vaccination can also be deferred until six months after infection. The reason for Djokovic’s exemption is unclear. While most of the top players have arrived in Melbourne in order to compete in the first week of competition, with some even landing before Christmas, Djokovic remained at his training base in Marbella after withdrawing from this week’s ATP Cup. His presence could prove a defining moment as he attempts to win his 21st major title, which would break the record he shares with Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer. Despite successful medical exemptions for Djokovic and some others, not all players were able to make the trip to Melbourne. Natalia Vikhlyantseva, a Russian player ranked 195th, announced her withdrawal from the Australian Open last month since she had been vaccinated with Sputnik V, which was developed in her home country but is not recognised by the Australian government.In 2017, most Brazilians were still unfamiliar with the name Jair Bolsonaro. But for Júlio Lancellotti, there was already cause for concern in the reactionary rhetoric of the man who would be elected president two years later under the slogan: “Brazil above everything, God above everyone.” “I am astonished that a homophobic person like Bolsonaro appears on the presidential ballot,” said the priest during mass on 7 March of that year at St Michael the Archangel parish in São Paulo’s East Zone. The sermon, in which he also preached against rape culture and sexism, was typical of the man who has devoted his life to fighting injustice, often finding himself targeted by conservative politicians as a result. An openly leftwing priest who embraces revolutionary ideas – the 72-year-old has demonstrated arm-in-arm with anti-establishment “black bloc” protesters and believes hotels should provide free rooms for homeless people – Lancellotti seemingly represents the antithesis of everything Brazil’s president stands for. He was even sued by Bolsonaro for moral damages because of his March 2017 mass (a judge dismissed the claim). But Lancelloti’s run-in with the authorities began long before Bolsonaro took office. As a novice in the late 1960s, he was expelled from the seminary for “bad behaviour”, as he describes it. He says the seminary where he first studied, in the city of Araraquara, was “very conservative”. His days were marked by censure and abusive punishments. “I was beaten with a bamboo stick, I was forced to kneel on corn grains … one day, a priest said I asked too much in class, that I was very critical. They kicked me out.” After this episode, Lancellotti spent years away from the priesthood. He graduated from a course in education in 1978, started working with juvenile offenders and soon became a thorn in the side of the authorities. “I refused to accept the torture I witnessed against young people. I felt I was being tested all the time by those who were aligned with the government,” he says. It was during these years that Lancellotti met progressive priests who were actively engaged with the children’s rights cause, and in doing so rediscovered a sense that social justice was possible within the Roman Catholic church. He resumed his theological studies and, in 1985, became a priest. Since 1996, Lancelotti has coordinated the pastoral commission of homeless people in São Paulo, which helps about 35,000 people in the district. He describes being pepper-sprayed, spat at, and punched in the stomach by São Paulo’s municipal guard while helping homeless people in 2018. Lancelotti says the Covid pandemic has worsened the living conditions of São Paulo’s homeless, while the ultra-conservatism of the Bolsonaro era has fuelled what the priest describes as “aporophobia” – a fear and rejection of the poor. In August, São Paulo state deputy Janaína Paschoal praised the military police after they blocked the homeless commission’s access to an inner-city area nicknamed Cracolândia – “Crackland”. Advocating for homeless people is the focus of Lancellotti’s activism, but not its only cause. He does not hesitate to take a stand for controversial groups such as those involved in black bloc tactics at demonstrations. “The best guys I have ever met. The purest, the truest. They have been tortured and criminalised unfairly,” says Lancellotti, who helped secure the release of some of the demonstrators from jail in 2013. Consequently, criticism against him comes from all sides. But of all Lancellotti’s critics, Christians are by far the most ferocious, the priest says. “The atheists are usually more human than those who claim to be Christians. Those who say ‘God above all’ are the same who put humans below everything.” He remains a popular figure for many. His phone rings throughout the day, and he is kept busy with calls – whether it is a media request or speaking to a fellow activist. An avid social media user, the images he posts while helping homeless people can bring happy results. “Families from all over Brazil have been able to find relatives who were believed to have disappeared,” he says. He has even inspired a federal bill. Approved by the senate on 31 March last year, the “Júlio Lancellotti bill” aims to ban the practice of putting stones and iron spikes in underpasses – a measure adopted by mayors to prevent homeless people sleeping there. Now back in the lower house and waiting to be revised, the bill is a reminder of the day Lancellotti took a sledgehammer to the stones that had been placed in a São Paulo underpass. Lancellotti’s present focus is on lobbying city hall to carry out a more responsible census. According to the priest, the last one in 2019 did not accurately record the number of homeless people in São Paulo – which leads to policies that are incapable of solving the issue. Envisioning a better future for Brazil is still hard for Lancellotti. “Anyone who takes office after this monster [Bolsonaro] won’t be able to restore everything he destroyed in culture, health and education – even in 10 years,” he says, adding: “The Bolsonarismo didn’t appear overnight, and won’t be beaten overnight.” In a country riven by violence and hatred, he concludes, the only way forward is through “dialogue and love”. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:He is a mysterious, up-and-coming artist whose work has been championed by the likes of Madonna and sells for up to five figures. But there were raised eyebrows when it was revealed that “Rhed” was none other than the singer’s eldest son, Rocco Ritchie. The 21-year-old, Madonna’s child with her ex-husband Guy Ritchie, has been said in reports to have quietly established himself as an expressionist painter, with a number of shows at the Tanya Baxter Contemporary gallery in Chelsea, west London, since 2018. But since PageSix unmasked Ritchie, opinion has been divided on whether his success is due to talent or the weight of his parents’ names. That Ritchie is Rhed is hard to argue with. Both are the same age, grew up in identical cities, and attended Central Saint Martins and the Royal Drawing School. In 2020, Madonna and Guy Ritchie even reunited at the Tanya Baxter Contemporary, alongside their partners and children, for a then unnamed exhibition. So what do we know of his work? Rhed uses thickly applied oils and gestural brushstrokes for his depictions of the human form, according to Tanya Baxter, the gallery’s curator. His inspirations include Lucian Freud, Francis Bacon, Paula Rego and Helmut Newton. While his subjects have “psychological tension”, he balances this by using a colourful palette and “playfully painting looming figures in the middle of the canvas, often set against a monochromatic abstract backdrop”, Baxter says. “Having an eclectic cultural background, with a childhood spent between New York and London, his paintings exude an engaging mixture of innocence and confidence,” she adds. Rhed himself has said he is “fascinated about the inner and outer world, especially where they meet”. The message of his paintings is that there is “beauty in the struggle of life” – more beauty, he is quoted as saying, than when life comes easy. The King’s Road gallery, which has likened Rhed’s work to Jean-Michel Basquiat and Banksy, promotes a number of positive reviews, including from Mervyn Davies, a former chair of the Royal Academy. “Good artists are those that turn energy into something beautiful that resonates with the eye,” Davies says. “Anyone can be a painter, but it is a question of making others think, and provoke feelings.” The arts writer Godfrey Barker called Rhed “an authentic, pure, and undiluted product of the 21st century … Rhed is not yet to be ranked with the Golden Youth who shook the world at Frieze in 1988. But he is to be mentioned in their company. He makes a powerful statement about Anxiety Now and points into the future.” The Guardian art critic Jonathan Jones was less enthusiastic, suggesting the artist had been put into the public eye too soon. “His paintings are clumsy adolescent efforts with no sign of originality or vigour,” Jones said. “Obviously that doesn’t mean he will not become a better artist with time. Painting takes work. It therefore seems a shame that Rhed has been put into the public eye when he’s just not, at this point, a real artist. These daubs are amateur stuff, vaguely imitating Picasso or Modigliani, that could have been done by a million young people.” The gallery, Jones added, “ought to be ashamed of cynically pushing this unready youngster on the market. They compare him with the street artists Banksy and Basquiat but to be honest, the only street they remind me of is the King’s Road where this kind of bad art is sure to sell to posh fools.” The White Pube, the collaborative identity of arts writers Gabrielle de la Puente and Zarina Muhammad, went further, saying: “It’s a shame when artists create work that looks like modern art instead of contemporary art. These paintings look like AI has scraped Modigliani, fauvism, b-side Picassos, and a more conspicuous Bacon style to create new works that feel old and flat and done. And the dramatic reveal: ‘suspiciously successful kid in art world secretly has incredibly rich famous parents’ isn’t surprising or new, but it is shit.” Rhed’s pieces are listed on Artsy for up to £24,000. Whether or not the world should have allowed Ritchie to continue using a fake name is yet to be determined. The Tanya Baxter Contemporary has been contacted for comment.Global stocks are rocketing, as 2022 got off to a good start on financial markets, with fears over the severity of the Omicron variant receding. Japan’s Nikkei jumped 1.77% to a six-week closing high in its first trading day of the new year, after a strong Wall Street performance on Monday and a softer yen boosted carmakers. The dollar rose to its highest level since 2017 against the yen, after US Treasury yields jumped with traders betting on an early Federal Reserve rate hike to combat red-hot inflation, running at an annual rate of 6.8%. Sterling has risen against the euro, on expectations of further UK interest rate hikes after December’s surprise rise from the Bank of England, while the European Central Bank is not expected to act on rates this year. The FTSE 100 index in London has risen to its highest level in nearly two years, adding 122 points, or 1.65%, to 7,507, by mid-afternoon on its first trading day of 2022. The pan-European Euro Stoxx 600 hit a fresh record high the second day in a row (Europe and Wall Street reopened on Monday), gaining as much as 1.1% to 495.46. The Dow Jones and the S&amp;P 500 on Wall Street have also reached new all-time peaks. Colin Asher, senior economist at Mizuho, told Reuters: As far as markets are concerned, Omicron is in the rear view mirror. The main focus was on a collapse in demand and now because demand has recovered so quickly, the focus is more on the supply… it will prolong supply chain delays and push prices higher rather than push activity down. Oil prices rose as much as 2% as oil producers from the Opec cartel and its allies, including Russia, agreed to stick with their planned increase for February, on the assumption that Omicron would have only a small impact on demand. Brent crude gained $1.25 to $80.21 a barrel while US light crude added $1.12 to $77.21 a barrel. Our main stories today: Thank you for reading, and Happy New Year! We’ll be back again tomorrow. Bye! - JK The US manufacturing survey from the Institute for Supply Management has shown weaker activity in the sector, with the main index falling to 58.7 in December from 61.1 in November. ISM highlighted “very robust orders,” though. The opening bell has rung on Wall Street, and the Dow Jones and the S&amp;P 500 have hit fresh record highs. The Dow rose 163 points, or 0.45%, to 36,748 while the S&amp;P 500 gained 15 points, or 0.3%, to 4,811 and the tech-heavy Nasdaq also added 15 points, or 0.1%, to 15,847. The FTSE 100 index in London has powered 120 points, or 1.6%, ahead to 7,505 while Germany’s Dax is up 1.1% at 16,200, France’s CAC is 1.56% higher at 7,329 and Italy’s FTS MiB has gained 1.2% to 28,066. The pan-European Stoxx Europe 600 has also hit a fresh record high, rising 1.1% to 495.46. Sweden’s Economic Crime Authority has charged Swedbank’s former chief executive Birgitte Bonnesen over alleged economic crimes in relation to a Baltic money laundering scandal that rocked the bank three years ago. The authority said in a statement that the former CEO was being charged with gross swindling as the primary count, or with serious market manipulation in the second instance, Reuters reported. Swedbank said last year it would not file claims for damages against its former top executive and board for the financial year 2019, when the Swedish banking group came under investigation over money-laundering breaches in the Baltics. When Bonnesen was sacked by Swedbank in March 2019, she was the second Nordic banking boss to be ousted within months amid money laundering allegations. Thomas Borgen resigned from Denmark’s largest lender, Danske Bank, last autumn. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones and the S&amp;P 500, which closed at record levels last night, are set for a record open, as worries about the Omicron variant subsided. Futures are pointing to a further 141 point gain for the Dow, a 15 point rise for the S&amp;P 500 and a 21 point increase for the Nasdaq. Over here, the FTSE 100 has climbed 108 points, or 1.47%, to 7,493. Germany’s Dax is 154 points ahead, a near-1% gain, at 16,174 while France’s CAC has added 103 points, or 1.4%, to 7,320 and Italy’s FTSE MiB has jumped 286 points, or 1%, to 28,017. Britain’s manufacturers have suffered a drop in export demand amid pressure from Covid and Brexit, according to fresh data that shows supply chain disruption and staff shortages held back the economy in December. Go-Ahead has halted the trading of its shares on the London Stock Exchange after the train and bus operator failed to file its financial results because of issues surrounding a £25m breach of Southeastern’s railway franchise agreement. Burger King has become the first fast food restaurant to launch vegan nuggets in the UK today. Shares in the embattled Chinese property developer Evergrande rose after being suspended. Ministers have greater powers to block foreign takeovers of British firms after new rules came into effect on Tuesday giving them more scope to unpick deals that have the potential to harm national security. The National Security and Investment Act, which enhances existing powers, is described by the government as the “biggest shake-up of the UK’s national security regime for 20 years”. The number of UK first-time homebuyers has hit its highest level since 2002, according to a new estimate. Despite the uncertainty generated by the pandemic and strong house price growth, the number of first-time buyer transactions in 2021 is estimated to be 408,300, according to Yorkshire Building Society. The US electric carmaker Tesla has been criticised for opening a new showroom in the capital of Xinjiang, a region at the heart of years-long campaign by Chinese authorities of repression and assimilation against the Uyghur people. Elizabeth Holmes, founder of Theranos, has been found guilty on four of 11 charges of fraud, concluding a high profile trial that captivated Silicon Valley and chronicled the missteps of the now-defunct US blood testing startup. Can London stock market shake off dinosaur image to boldly go? Bethany Beckett, UK economist at Capital Economics, has also looked at the £1.2bn rise in UK consumer borrowing in November, up from £800m in October and the eighth month of increases, and what it means for consumer spending. She says that the strength is unlikely to have lasted. The healthy rise in consumer credit in November adds to evidence that economic activity strengthened in the middle of Q4. But that feels like a distant memory now. Against a backdrop of surging Covid-19 cases, we suspect that households’ appetite for unsecured borrowing has dropped back since then. These data tally with the similarly big 1.2% month on month rise in retail sales in November and point to a pick-up in consumer spending ... It appeared that households were well on their way towards a return to more ‘normal’ borrowing and saving behaviour as the economy picked up some momentum. And the improvement wasn’t just limited to households: non-financial businesses took on £2.1bn more in loans, which marked a significant increase over October’s £0.6bn rise and was driven by a big rise in lending to large businesses. Mortgage borrowing also rose strongly, from £1.1bn in October to £3.7bn in November. But a large part of that was a rebound following unusually low levels of borrowing in October after the stamp duty holiday was phased out. Indeed, mortgage approvals ticked down, from 67,103 to 66,964 in November. Finally, the further fall in the annual growth rate ... in November offers some support to our forecast that current high rates of CPI inflation will be temporary. But the strong November data are old news now. We suspect that surging virus cases will have knocked borrowing since then. And with households facing a squeeze from higher inflation and taxes in the coming months, consumer spending may struggle to make much headway over the next few quarters. Laura Suter, head of personal finance at the stockbroker AJ Bell, says the spike in consumer borrowing in November suggests people started their Christmas shopping early. The nation got a head-start on its Christmas shopping this year, with the combination of Black Friday discounts, and worries about delivery delays and stock shortages all meaning that spending shot up in November. The nation is rapidly forgetting its frugal lockdown ways, with borrowing rising and the amount we’ve stashed away in savings falling, even compared to pre-pandemic levels. Brits turned to the plastic for their pre-Christmas shopping, with £900m added to credit card debt in November, taking total net borrowing in the month to £1.2bn – the highest level since lockdown eased in July 2020. It’s a stark contrast to November last year, when Brits actually repaid £915m of credit card debt rather than adding to borrowing. It even looks high when compared to the pre-pandemic December peak of £681m being spent on plastic in December 2019. The good savings habits many people got into during lockdown also showed signs of dwindling in November, with the amount saved into cash accounts below pre-pandemic levels. In November £4.5bn was saved in banks and building society accounts and another £200m with NS&amp;I – 60% lower than the average of the past 12 months. The average interest rate on those savings increased by just 1 basis point in the month, showing why the nation’s enthusiasm for saving might be wearing a little thin, as they are rewarded with such measly returns. We’ll see this interest figure tick up slightly in December’s data, following the Bank of England’s rate hike, but it’s unlikely to be enough to drive a savings revolution among the population. The EY Item Club forecasting group is cautiously optimistic about the UK manufacturing outlook this year. It highlights that manufacturing bottlenecks eased at the close of 2021, and expects the situation to continue to improve in the first six months of this year. Martin Beck, chief economic advisor to the EY Item Club, says: Some positive supply-side developments went alongside growth in input costs falling back from November’s record high, although growth in factory gate prices accelerated to a new survey peak. Whether these patterns continue has been made more uncertain by global restrictions put in place in response to the spread of the more transmissible Omicron Covid-19 variant. These restrictions are likely to slow the rate at which pressure on supply chains is reduced. However, if, as the EY Item Club expects, bottlenecks meaningfully ease during the second half of 2022, strong orders data and elevated backlogs should set manufacturers up for a decent 2022, even as consumer spending patterns continue their, currently interrupted, rotation back from goods to services. UK and European shares are still pushing higher, as optimism about Omicron is spreading. FTSE 100 index up 94 points, or 1.28%, at 7,479 Germany’s Dax up 0.66% at 16,125 France’s CAC up 1.2% at. 7,305 Italy’s FTSE MiB up 0.68% at 27,919 The survey also showed that Britain’s manufacturers have suffered a drop in export demand amid pressure from Covid and Brexit, writes our economics correspondent Richard Partington. The latest snapshot from IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply (Cips) showed growth in UK factory output was limited in December by Covid restrictions and Brexit weighing on orders and pushing up costs. According to the survey of 650 manufacturers, which is tracked by the government and the Bank of England for early warning signs from the economy, inflows of new work from overseas dropped for the fourth month in a row. While firms reported continued growth at the end of last year and a slight easing of supply chain delays, manufacturers warned that logistics issues, Brexit difficulties and the possibility of further pandemic restrictions at home and overseas had still damaged export demand at the end of the year. With new trade restrictions since leaving the EU and the impact of the pandemic, Britain’s exporters are set to be the slowest to recover from Covid-19 across major European economies, according to research by Euler Hermes. The Paris-based trade credit insurer forecasts UK exports won’t recover to pre-pandemic levels until 2023, leaving the UK lagging European counterparts with Germany and Italy expected to recover in 2021 and other nations in 2022. It comes despite an uptick in demand for manufactured goods across advanced economies as consumers turn to purchasing physical products while pandemic restrictions limit appetite for services. Ana Boata, head of economic research at Euler Hermes, said: “Our forecasts show that Brexiting in times of Covid-19 has hindered exporters’ capacity to benefit from the strong upswing in demand that lockdown has presented.” She said fresh post-Brexit border controls on UK imports at the start of 2022 would bring more disruption, while the Omicron coronavirus variant would add to severe uncertainty facing firms. “British exporters have been tasked with sailing increasingly perilous trade waters in recent years – another 12 months of headwinds could be enough to sink many.” Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, has looked at this in more detail: The small pick-up in the output index of Markit’s survey to 53.6 in December, from 52.7 in November, shows that the manufacturing sector’s recovery has not been slowed by Omicron yet, though the impact of the new variant likely will build in January, as worker absenteeism rises and global supply chains come under renewed stress. The new orders index edged up to 55.1 in December, from 54.5 in November, thereby remaining above its 30-year average, 52.7. Another month of strong employment growth and an improvement in suppliers’ delivery times enabled growth in manufacturing output to speed up and work backlogs to increase at the slowest rate since February. Supply chain disruptions, however, likely will worsen this month, given that Brexit customs checks have been bolstered and Omicron likely will lead to renewed factory closures in Asia. Meanwhile, the output price index edged up to a new record-high of 74.3 in December, from 74.0 in November, as manufacturers offloaded the burden of soaring energy prices. As a result, core goods CPI inflation looks set to rise further in the first half of 2022, contributing to the peaking of the headline rate at about 6% in April. Let’s return to the UK manufacturing survey. Rob Dobson, director at IHS Markit, which compiled the survey, said: UK manufacturing production rose at the quickest pace in four months in December, supported by increased intakes of new work, efforts to reduce backlogs of work and higher employment. While the uptick in growth is a positive step, the upturn remains subdued compared to the middle of the year, as supply chain constraints and weak export performance constrained attempts to raise production further. Manufacturers indicated that logistic issues, Brexit difficulties and the possibility of further Covid restrictions (at home and overseas) had all hit export demand at the end of the year. Although supply chains remain severely stretched, there are at least signs that the situation is stabilising, with vendor delivery times lengthening to the weakest extent for a year in December. This helped take some of the heat out of input price increases, but cost inflation remained sufficiently steep to necessitate the sharpest rise in factory gate selling prices on record. With restrictions and Omicron cases both rising, the growth and inflation backdrops could change again in the early part of 2022. Go-Ahead has halted the trading of its shares on the London Stock Exchange after the bus and rail operator failed to file its financial results due to issues surrounding a £25m breach of Southeastern’s railway franchise agreement, reports Mark Sweney. The transport group, which was stripped of the contract to operate the computer network in September, said that it is continuing to work closely with its auditor Deloitte to attempt to publish its results for the year to 3 July by the end of the month. In December the company, which apologised for “serious” failings in its railway business after it was found not to have declared more than £25m in taxpayer funding that should have been returned, said that the scandal would mean it would miss the six-month deadline for filing its annual results and have to suspend its shares under UK regulatory rules. The announcement of the impending trading suspension prompted a 25% fall in the company’s share price, which ended the year at 667p, giving Go-Ahead a market value of £288m at the close of the last day the company’s shares traded on New Year’s Eve. Go-Ahead’s shares were officially suspended on Tuesday morning. On the currency markets, the pound is trading close to two-year highs against the euro, as gilt yields rose on growing expectations that the Bank of England will raise interest rates again next month. The UK central bank surprised markets with its first rate rise in three years at its December meeting. In the eurozone, no rate increases are expected this year while in the US, markets are forecasting the first hike by May, followed by two more increases later this year. The pound reached 86.65p against the euro, the highest since February 2020, and slipped 0.2% against the dollar to $1.35. Oil prices are rising ahead of the monthly meeting of the Opec oil cartel, where major producers are expected to agree to stick to their planned supply increase. Brent crude is up 0.5% at $79.39 a barrel while US crude has advanced nearly 0.6% to $76.51 a barrel. Opec+, which includes Opec producers led by Saudi Arabia as well as allies including Russia, has raised its output target each month since August by 400,000 barrels per day. The independent housing analyst Anthony Codling said: Mortgage approvals flatlined in November 2021 at 66,964, just 139 fewer than in October 2021, very interestingly both months’ mortgage approvals were very close to the ten year average of 65,534. It appears that absent the stamp duty holiday activity in the UK housing market has quickly returned to normal. Perhaps, when it comes to moving home, macroeconomic events do not impact household decisions as much as we may believe. If you have changed job or your family has outgrown its current home, concerns about inflation and COVID are secondary, and if you have to move, you generally do. Separate figures from the Bank of England show that British consumers borrowed the most in 16 months in November. Consumer credit rose by a net £1.2bn, more than expected, most of which was borrowed on credit cards. It was the biggest increase since July 2020. Mortgage approvals were the lowest since June 2020 after the phasing out of a stamp duty holiday. Approvals for house purchase totalled 67,000 in November, close to the 12-month average up to February 2020 of 66,700. However, net mortgage lending to individuals increased to £3.7bn in November from £1.1bn in October, suggesting the housing market remains buoyant. Simon Jonsson, head of industrial products at KPMG UK, said: It is pleasing to see that demand for manufactured goods remains robust, but inflation across a broad range of factory inputs, plus trade friction, is biting into productivity. Supply chain challenges persist for many manufacturers, who will be hoping the impacts of Omicron don’t worsen the situation further. In the face of this challenge, manufacturers need to focus on how they can absorb, or pass on, these inflationary pressures. In 2022, productivity improvements will be key. Inflationary pressures may be the catalyst for accelerating technology investments, both on the factory floor and in the back office. UK factory activity grew more quickly than initially estimated in December and supply chain problems eased a little, according to a survey. The final reading of the IHS Markit/CIPS manufacturing purchasing managers’ index for December was 57.9, up from a preliminary reading of 57.6 and not far off November’s three-month high of 58.1. The survey said: Although a slight easing in supply chain delays helped lift output volumes and take some of the heat out of input price increases, logistic disruptions and staff shortages were nonetheless still stymieing the overall pace of expansion. Companies maintained a positive outlook at the end of 2021. The majority of firms (63%) forecast that production would increase over the coming 12 months, compared to only 6% anticipating a contraction. Optimism reflected expectations of renewed global economic growth, planned investment and hopes for less disruption caused by Covid-19, Brexit and supply chain issues. Inflationary pressures remained high. Prices charged by factories rose at their fastest pace on record. The report explained: December saw a further substantial increase in average input prices, with the rate of inflation staying among the steepest seen in the survey history. There were reports of higher costs for chemicals, electronics, energy, food products, metals, timber and wood. Freight, shipping and air transportation costs were also higher, while ongoing supply disruptions, raw material shortages and issues relating to Brexit and Covid-19 also led to higher prices paid. German unemployment fell more than expected in December, according to official data, suggesting that the jobs market in Europe’s largest economy remains resilient despite rising Covid-19 infections. The Labour Office said the number of people out of work dropped by 23,000 in seasonally adjusted terms to 2.405 million. Economists polled by Reuters had expected a decline of 15,000. The jobless rate fell to 5.2%, the lowest since March 2020, when Germany and other countries entered their first coronavirus lockdown. Labour Office head Detlef Scheele said: The labour market developed well at the end of the year. The recovery of the previous months continued. However, he cautioned that the jump in Covid-19 cases and renewed restrictions to contain the spread of Omicron increased uncertainty. Burger King says it has become the first fast food chain in the UK to sell vegan nuggets, as the industry tries to cash in on the popularity of plant-based alternatives. The world’s second-largest hamburger chain is launching the nuggets today. They are made from soy and plant proteins “to taste the same as their meat originals” and are certified by the Vegan Society, the company said. Two years ago, Burger King UK launched a plant-based burger that turned out not to be suitable for vegetarians due to the way it is cooked. Can the London stock market shake off its dinosaur image? It is facing a barrage of criticism, with global investors likening it to a “global backwater” struggling to attract and retain growth companies that excite investors and are building the 21st-century economy, writes my colleague Graeme Wearden, who tracks the markets closely. However, after a surge of stock flotations in 2021, including cutting-edge firms such as Oxford Nanopore, and new listing rules, London’s status as a global financial centre could brighten in 2022. Currently, the FTSE 100 index of blue-chip companies looks dated. Technology only makes up about 2% of the London market, compared with 20% across global markets. Airlines and travel stocks are surging this morning, amid relief that while Covid infections have reached new record highs, the Omicron variant may be less severe than feared. In London, British Airways owner IAG is the biggest riser on the FTSE 100 index, up 8.6%, while Premier Inn owner Whitbread is almost 3% higher. Oil giants BP and Shell also rose, as the optimism spread across energy, banking and other sectors. The FTSE is 1.1% higher at 7,467, rising to the highest levels since February 2020, as UK stocks caught up with the rest of Europe after yesterday’s bank holiday in the UK. The pan-European Euro Stoxx 600 hit a new record high this morning, after the S&amp;P 500 and Dow Jones on Wall Street closed at all-time highs last night. Europe’s travel and leisure index jumped 2.5% to its highest level in more than six weeks. Ryanair and the Hungarian airline Wizz Air both jumped 8%. Wizz Air said it carried 2.6 million passengers in December, up nearly 300% from a year earlier, and it announced it would launch new routes from its Gatwick Airport base to 14 destinations including Faro and Catania. French inflation remained at 2.8% in December, against expectations of a small uptick to 2.9%, according to the Insee statistical agency. By comparison, inflation is at 5.1% in the UK, and 6.8% in the US. Europe’s Stoxx 600 has hit a fresh all-time high, rising 0.7% to 493.3. Germany’s DAx is up 0.3%, France’s CAC rose 0.8% and Spain’s Ibex gained 0.7%. And we’re off: The FTSE 100 index in London has jumped more than 1% to 7,461 in the first couple of minutes of trading, a gain of 77 points. The more domestically-focused FTSE 250 is also over 1% ahead. Iris Pang, chief economist for Greater China at ING, has looked at the Chinese PMI data. The Caixin manufacturing PMI confirmed the expansion of activity shown by the official PMI a few days back. This follows a turn in policy direction from aggressive reform to stabilisation. We shall see more growth from various industries in 2022 with a highlight being green objectives. We expect that domestic demand for manufacturing should go up in 2022. Within China, Covid cases have been contained in Xi’an, and there have been only around 100-200 daily cases, which is not particularly worrying. The Chinese New Year begins on 1st February this year. We expect retail sales and transport spending to increase from last year’s holiday period. Real estate developers have restarted sales and construction is back to normal levels. This should provide some support for both manufacturing and non-manufacturing activity. Export demand should also increase slightly. Although Omicron is a concern, we see that retail and job markets in the West have picked up. This should provide some support for growth for China’s exporters, but there is lingering uncertainty stemming from the difficult relationship between China and the US. Shares in embattled Evergrande rose after the Chinese property developer resumed trading on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange on Tuesday, reports my colleague Mark Sweney. China’s second-biggest developer halted trading on Monday after receiving an order from authorities at Danzhou city in Hainan on 30 December telling it to demolish 39 under-construction buildings at the Ocean Flower Island project. The struggling company, which has seen its market value plunge almost 90% over the last year, saw its stock rise by almost 2% in trading on the Hang Seng on Tuesday. “The company will actively communicate with the [Hainan] authority in accordance with the guidance of the decision letter and resolve the issue properly,” Evergrande said in a filing to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. It comes after Evergrande said its sales for 2021 plunged 39% from the year before to $69.5bn (£51.6bn). Evergrande is struggling to repay more than $300bn (£222bn) in liabilities by selling assets and shares. Nearly $20bn of international market bonds were deemed to be in cross-default by ratings firms last month after it missed payments. The property developer missed new coupon payments worth $255m due last Tuesday though both have a 30-day grace period. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. It’s the first day of trading in London today, as UK stock markets were shut for the New Year’s bank holiday yesterday. Stock trading will start in about half an hour. Oil prices rose slightly this morning before dipping 0.3%, ahead of the Opec oil cartel’s monthly meeting. China’s factory activity grew at its fastest pace in six months in December, indicated by the latest Caixin/Markit manufacturing purchasing managers’ index. The overall index rose to 50.9 in December, from 49.9 in November. Other Asian indices also pointed to expansion. Many Asian stock markets rose, with Japan’s Nikkei up 1.77% while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng dipped 0.3%. In Germany, retail sales rose unexpectedly in November, according to official figures released at the crack of dawn. Sales were up 0.6%, beating expectations of a 0.5% drop. Germany’s Federal Statistical Office said turnover in retail trade recorded a new record high in 2021, although clothing retailers suffered losses for the second year of the pandemic. European shares bounced to record highs on their first day of trading yesterday, with traders betting on steady economic recovery despite the surge in Covid infections caused by the Omicron variant. Europe’s benchmark index, the Stoxx 600, hit a record intraday high of 491.73 points and later closed at 489.99, up 0.45%. It recorded a 22.4% rise last year, its second-best annual performance in more than a decade. The US, French and German stock markets all had a stellar year in 2021 and outpaced the UK’s FTSE 100 index, which rallied 14.3%, its best year since 2016, as UK stocks recovered from the pandemic shock of 2020. Despite the recovery, the FTSE 100 ended the year 6.5% below its peak of 7,903 points, which was set in May 2018. On Wall Street, the S&amp;P 500 index jumped by 27% in 2021, achieving 70 record closing highs. Apple became the first US company to be valued at over $3tn on Monday as the tech company continued its phenomenal share price growth, tripling in value in under four years. Tesla jumped 13.5% after reporting breath-taking car sales last quarter and last year. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at Swissquote, says: Globally, there is a lot of news regarding the rising omicron cases, but there is also a lot of news that the omicron cases are not as deadly as the previous variants of Covid. And investors prefer focusing on a glass half full rather than a glass half empty at the start of the year. However, many market strategists are cautious about 2022, predicting measly increases of 4% to 7% for the FTSE 100. Inflation has jumped to 5.1% in the UK and 6.8% in the US and is set to go even higher, meaning interest rates are on the rise, while China is expected to spoil the party with tighter credit and regulations. In the US, Elizabeth Holmes, founder of Theranos, has been found guilty on four of 11 charges of fraud, concluding a high profile trial that captivated Silicon Valley and chronicled the missteps of the now-defunct blood testing startup. The Agenda 7.45am GMT: France inflation for December (forecast: 2.9%) 8.55am GMT: Germany unemployment for December 9.30am GMT: Bank of England mortgage approvals and consumer credit for November 9.30am GMT: UK Markit/CIPS manufacturing PMI for December 3pm US ISM Manufacturing PMI for DecemberName: Wordle. Age: Nearly three months old. Appearance: Thirty empty boxes in six rows; the rest is up to you. What am I supposed to do? Guess the word. What word? That’s for you to find out. Is this some kind of game? Yes, and it’s been hugely popular since just before Christmas. More than 300,000 people play it daily, and even more are talking about it. Which is incredible, given that it only launched in mid-October. How does it work? You take a wild stab at guessing a five-letter word by entering characters in boxes. Colour-coding shows you which letters you have got right, which you got wrong and which are right but in the wrong position. Then you guess again. Sounds simple. I mean, eventually I’m going to figure it out. Not necessarily – if you can’t get it in six tries, you lose. I’ll just start again. Sorry – only one word, and one go, per day. But I want to play now! You’ll just have to wait. And who invented this madness? Reddit software engineer Josh Wardle. Wardle made Wordle? He created it for his partner, who likes word games. That’s nice. Then he put it online. It was slow to take off initially, but in December, Wardle tweaked the game to allow players to share their results (but not the answer) on social media. After that, it exploded. Is that what those mysterious coloured boxes I keep seeing on Twitter are? Yes – they create a certain amount of intrigue. If it’s so addictive, why isn’t he letting people play it all day? Limited availability is part of the attraction. “It’s something that encourages you to spend three minutes a day,” Wardle told the New York Times. “And that’s it. Like, it doesn’t want any more of your time than that.” While I applaud the success of this daily brain exercise, I think he might have a hard time monetising it. He doesn’t want to. Sorry, I’m not sure I understand. “It’s not trying to do anything shady with your data or your eyeballs,” says Wardle. “It’s just a game that’s fun.” Yeah, still don’t get it. Wordle is Wardle’s gift to the world. End of story. I smell a conspiracy. Of course you do. Do say: “That’s fine, I didn’t want another go anyway.” Don’t say: “I’ve got an idea for a new game – it’s like Wordle, but with loads of ads.”No wonder journalists have slated it. They’ve produced a hundred excuses not to watch the climate breakdown satire Don’t Look Up: it’s “blunt”, it’s “shrill”, it’s “smug”. But they will not name the real problem: it’s about them. The movie is, in my view, a powerful demolition of the grotesque failures of public life. And the sector whose failures are most brutally exposed is the media. While the film is fast and funny, for me, as for many environmental activists and climate scientists, it seemed all too real. I felt as if I were watching my adult life flash past me. As the scientists in the film, trying to draw attention to the approach of a planet-killing comet, bashed their heads against the Great Wall of Denial erected by the media and sought to reach politicians with 10-second attention spans, all the anger and frustration and desperation I’ve felt over the years boiled over. Above all, when the scientist who had discovered the comet was pushed to the bottom of the schedule by fatuous celebrity gossip on a morning TV show and erupted in fury, I was reminded of my own mortifying loss of control on Good Morning Britain in November. It was soon after the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow, where we had seen the least serious of all governments (the UK was hosting the talks) failing to rise to the most serious of all issues. I tried, for the thousandth time, to explain what we are facing, and suddenly couldn’t hold it in any longer. I burst into tears on live TV. I still feel deeply embarrassed about it. The response on social media, like the response to the scientist in the film, was vituperative and vicious. I was faking. I was hysterical. I was mentally ill. But, knowing where we are and what we face, seeing the indifference of those who wield power, seeing how our existential crisis has been marginalised in favour of trivia and frivolity, I now realise that there would be something wrong with me if I hadn’t lost it. In fighting any great harm, in any age, we find ourselves confronting the same forces: distraction, denial and delusion. Those seeking to sound the alarm about the gathering collapse of our life-support systems soon hit the barrier that stands between us and the people we are trying to reach, a barrier called the media. With a few notable exceptions, the sector that should facilitate communication thwarts it. It’s not just its individual stupidities that have become inexcusable, such as the platforms repeatedly given to climate deniers. It is the structural stupidity to which the media are committed. It’s the anti-intellectualism, the hostility to new ideas and aversion to complexity. It’s the absence of moral seriousness. It’s the vacuous gossip about celebrities and consumables that takes precedence over the survival of life on Earth. It’s the obsession with generating noise, regardless of signal. It’s the reflexive alignment with the status quo, whatever it may be. It’s the endless promotion of the views of the most selfish and antisocial people, and the exclusion of those who are trying to defend us from catastrophe, on the grounds that they are “worthy”, “extreme” or “mad” (I hear from friends in the BBC that these terms are still used there to describe environmental activists). Even when these merchants of distraction do address the issue, they tend to shut out the experts and interview actors, singers and other celebs instead. The media’s obsession with actors vindicates Guy Debord’s predictions in his book The Society of the Spectacle, published in 1967. Substance is replaced by semblance, as even the most serious issues must now be articulated by people whose work involves adopting someone else’s persona and speaking someone else’s words. Then the same media, having turned them into spokespeople, attack these actors as hypocrites for leading a profligate lifestyle. Similarly, it’s not just the individual failures by governments at Glasgow and elsewhere that have become inexcusable, but the entire framework of negotiations. As crucial Earth systems might be approaching their tipping point, governments still propose to address the issue with tiny increments of action, across decades. It’s as if, in 2008, when Lehman Brothers collapsed and the global financial system began to sway, governments had announced that they would bail out the banks at the rate of a few million pounds a day between then and 2050. The system would have collapsed 40 years before their programme was complete. Our central, civilisational question, I believe, is this: why do nations scramble to rescue the banks but not the planet? So, as we race towards Earth system collapse, trying to raise the alarm feels like being trapped behind a thick plate of glass. People can see our mouths opening and closing, but they struggle to hear what we are saying. As we frantically bang the glass, we look ever crazier. And feel it. The situation is genuinely maddening. I’ve been working on these issues since I was 22, and full of confidence and hope. I’m about to turn 59, and the confidence is turning to cold fear, the hope to horror. As manufactured indifference ensures that we remain unheard, it becomes ever harder to know how to hold it together. I cry most days now. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistSouthampton have been taken over by a consortium backed by the Serbian media magnate Dragan Solak that plans to make the Premier League club a cornerstone of a Red Bull-style portfolio of teams across the world. Solak, the founder of the United Group, a telecoms and media provider in south-east Europe, is the lead investor in a deal completed by a company co-founded by the former Brentford co-director of football Rasmus Ankersen. Ankersen left Brentford and his post as the executive chairman of the Danish club FC Midtjylland in December to set up the sports investment firm Sport Republic, which has bought a controlling 80% stake in Southampton. Solak has partnered the Danish investors Ankersen and Henrik Kraft with the aim of purchasing more clubs in a model similar to the one employed by the owners of Manchester City, RB Leipzig – where the Southampton manager, Ralph Hasenhüttl, worked previously – and Barnsley. Kraft said they planned to be active owners but “will not be starting any revolutions”. Solak described the acquisition of Southampton as the “first step towards execution of our investment strategy”. He said: “My partners and I have experience in long-term investments in the sports and entertainment industry and Sport Republic has been founded to combine this expertise and deliver something unique to the market. Southampton will be a cornerstone of the organisation we plan to build.” Ankersen and Kraft, who has spent the past 20 years in the technology industry, are expected to be on Southampton’s board. Sport Republic aims to apply “proprietary intelligence and data analytics to help sports businesses and sports technology companies reach their full potential”. Ankersen was an integral part of Brentford’s impressive rise to the Premier League, implementing a data-driven recruitment strategy. The takeover marks the end of the reign of Gao Jisheng, after almost four and a half years as the majority shareholder. Gao bought an 80% stake for about £200m in August 2017. The Chinese businessman has been keen to sell for the past 18 months, only for interested parties to withdraw. His investment in the club has been extremely limited but Hasenhüttl has repeatedly steered the team away from relegation. The former majority owner, Katharina Liebherr, retains her 20% stake and the chief executive, Martin Semmens, will remain in post and continue to oversee the day‑to‑day running of the club. Liebherr, her advisers, Semmens and the managing director, Toby Steele, oversaw the takeover process. Southampton, who visit Swansea in the FA Cup third round on Saturday, are 14th in the Premier League. The first league game of the new era will, neatly, be against Brentford next Tuesday. Semmens said Southampton had found the “perfect solution” for the club. “Sport Republic is being built to provide a network of people, clubs and technology that allows the clubs within it to grow every day and gain the advantages you need to be successful,” he said. “As a club, we have never wanted to buy success but to earn it.”Schools in England could suspend the teaching of specialist subjects such as music as part of emergency timetable changes to cope with soaring Covid-related absence rates among staff, headteachers have been advised. As the new term got under way, most primary schools managed to reopen, but some heads reported difficulties as a result of sick staff and pupils having to isolate, and warned that the situation could deteriorate fast. In secondary schools, mass Covid testing is under way as part of a staggered return for pupils over the next few days. Parents at some schools, however, have already been advised their children will move to online lessons because of a shortage of staff due to sickness. Head teachers raised concerns about the supply of lateral flow tests after an email from the Department for Education (DfE) received on Tuesday morning said orders for additional tests should be placed by 5pm the same day in order to secure deliveries next week. If placed after 5pm, they would be not delivered until the following week, starting 17 January . Secondary schools have been asked to carry out on-site tests of pupils initially, after which pupils and staff are required to test at home twice a week to try to limit the spread of the virus in schools. “Given that some schools haven’t gone back and others have only returned today it’s very short notice,” said one head teacher. “We’re OK for tests at the moment, but this is the fastest turn around yet.” The DfE said schools were asked to place orders ahead of Christmas and 31m tests were delivered to education settings in the final weeks of last term. A further 17.6m kits will be delivered by the end of next week and schools can request emergency supplies if required. Earlier this week, the department suggested that headteachers, faced with high levels of staff absence, should combine classes and teach in larger groups in order to keep children in school. It has now emerged that heads might also consider temporarily suspending the teaching of specialist subjects including music and relationships, sex and health education (RSHE) in order to free up staff for other teaching, according to a Tes report. Ian Bauckham, who chairs the Office of Qualifications and Examinations Regulation (Ofqual) and is also chief executive and director of the Tenax Schools Trust, outlined the proposal as part of a “case study” on a DfE portal for headteachers, seen by Tes. While high absence levels can be managed to a certain degree, Bauckham wrote, “a point is also reached where resources can be stretched too thinly and alternatives, however undesirable, become necessary”. Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said any such move would depend on absence rates. “It is likely that where schools are experiencing particularly severe shortages of staff they will need to take other action such as combining classes or sending home classes or year groups to learn remotely for short periods of time.” Parklands high school in Chorley, Lancashire, is one of a number of schools to move to blended learning this week because of staff off sick. A statement from the school reported in local media said: “Unfortunately, due to an increase in staff absence due to Covid, we have had to take the difficult decision to revert to blended learning, with one year group working from home each day this week.” Bauckham and the DfE have been approached for comment.There’s no rest for the wicked, eh? While a lot of people have spent the past few weeks trying to do as little as possible, it has been go-go-go for the Trump family. Donald, Ivanka and Donald Jr have been issued with subpoenas as part of a fraud inquiry into the family’s businesses. Melania, meanwhile, has been busy building a business of her own. The former first lady, turned crypto queen, has jumped on the non-fungible token (NFT) trend: last month she was flogging a digital painting of her eyes titled Melania’s Vision (and promising an unspecified portion of the proceeds from her digital ventures would go to children ageing out of foster care). The price? One SOL (Solana, the cryptocurrency, is worth about £128). Now, she has released a picture of herself dressed in white for a starting bid of just 1,415.86 SOL (£180,000). Melania’s NFT venture isn’t her first brush with entrepreneurship. She had a jewellery line and once developed a skincare range called Melania Trump’s Caviar Complexe C6™ with Lipid Matrix Receptor™ Technology. She tested her caviar creams on her then seven-year-old son Barron (“It smells very, very fresh … He likes it!” Melania told reporters at the time). Alas, no one else got a chance to use them due to a complicated lawsuit that killed the product before it got to the shops. Will the NFT project fare better? I don’t know how many SOLs Melania has collected so far, but she has certainly generated a lot of WTFs. “This is not exactly using her platform for larger global or domestic impact,” one former White House official complained to CNN. “This is ostensibly a quick moneymaker.” Rubbish: it is obviously a quick moneymaker. But I don’t really care, do you? I reckon it is better for everyone if Melania spends her time flogging digital art and tweeting about bitcoin (which is how she spent her Monday). At least she isn’t trying to make a “global impact” via some charitable foundation that could be a veiled tax-avoidance scheme. The world has been affected enough by the Trumps, thank you very much. •Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistMEET THE NEW BOSS, SAME AS THE OLD BOSS? The Fiver was in a state of suspended animation during the Christmas break, a bit like Percy Pig but in reverse. But now we’re back, baby! And we’re back, baby, just in time to report that everything is pretty much exactly the same as it was before. Manchester City are still a shoo-in for the league. Norwich remain near-certainties to go down. And the stuff being served up at Old Trafford would make a Goodison season-ticket holder reconsider complaining about the fare Rafa’s slopping in front of them. Context, you see. There’s always somebody worse off than you. Yesterday evening, Manchester United tribute act Manchester United really excelled themselves with a performance of such abject poverty that comparisons were instantly drawn with those Late Solskjærian fiascos, only this time there was even less hope. A miserable state of affairs, given the club had added some fresh new hope only last month with the appointment of Ralf Rangnick. But hope is a nebulous concept, quickly evaporating if it doesn’t catch alight, and now look where everyone is. In a deep funk, only five games into the new manager’s reign, is where everyone is. Which doesn’t exactly seem fair, but Big Cup qualification is looking far from a given, and this is the impatient way of super-club football in the modern world. Oh Ralf! How could you! “If I say we are 100% convinced we will finish in the top four, I don’t know if people will believe that,” Rangnick correctly stated after the match, an observation designed to prove his comprehension skills to sceptical fans who’d earlier loudly booed his substitution of Mason Greenwood with 2020’s Bruno Fernandes. Luke Shaw went one step further in telling it like it is, by claiming he “didn’t think we were all there together”, suggesting the squad are seriously missing a Roy Keane figure who would give those dragging their feet a proper what-for, and issue beneficial advice while he was doing it. To be scrupulously fair, the Bootleg Red Devils didn’t do a great deal of conspicuous moaning about all the misplaced passes last night, which is an improvement of sorts, in that it at least saves some emotional energy. But there were few other plus points, as Wolverhampton wandered around Old Trafford with the sort of assured superiority not seen from them since the days of Stan Cullis, or at least 1980, which is when they last won there. Phil Jones was impressive, even if his clearing header led directly to João Moutinho’s winner, but if someone who hasn’t featured for 708 matches turns out to be your star man, you can be sure things aren’t running quite as smoothly as you’d ideally like. Oh Phil! Oh Ralf! Oh Ole! Oh José! Oh Louis! Oh David! How could etc. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I had hoped to rediscover the joy in playing football but it was not to be, as I don’t feel comfortable in the world of football. I don’t want to be part of it any longer. I will take time to discover what my interests are and what I will take up” – Former Brighton midfielder Davy Pröpper announces his retirement from football, aged 30, having “lost the love of the game” only six months after returning to join PSV. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Wolves wreck it for Ralf and are Barcelona back? Join Max Rushden, Barry Glendenning, Paul MacInnes, Lars Sivertsen and Sid Lowe for the latest Football Weekly pod. RECOMMENDED LOOKING David Squires’s hot take on the Lukaku-Tommy T stand-off. FIVER LETTERS “As a belated New Year’s resolution, can I suggest An End to Whataboutery? There’s been plenty of it about this weekend, with my fellow Arsenal fans doing a lot of especially petulant bleating. I don’t mind cathartic grumbling: that’s fine. But massed whingeing is shrill, unpleasant and undignified. Enjoy the good stuff. Celebrate the talent. There’s plenty to like” – Charles Antaki. “So. The most competitive Premier League season in years lasted about 19 games. And now it looks like it’ll be three out of the last four for the current champions. In unrelated news, at mid-season, it’s a nailed down 10 in a row in the Bundesliga, eight in nine in France and two in three in La Liga. It looks to me that the Fiver’s Stop Football campaign has worked… just not in the way we €xp€ct€d. Are congratulations in order?” – Adam Uncamas. “In light of Plain Old John Terry’s New Year gongs apoplexy, I propose we rename him OBEJT – Old Brave England’s John Terry” – Darren Leathley. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Darren Leathley. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Romelu Lukaku has rejoined the Chelsea squad after talks with Tommy T following his loose-lipped riffing on returning to Internazionale and other disgruntlements. It is thought senior Chelsea suit Marina Granovskaia was involved in the requisite banging-together of heads. Talking of huffy Chelsea managers past and present, Antonio Conte insists he has nothing to prove when he takes Spurs to Stamford Bridge for Wednesday’s Rumbelows Cup semi-final. “We did a really good job and I think in my position I mustn’t prove anything to anyone,” he parped. In Episode One of many, Kieran Trippier looks set to become the first major signing for Eddie Howe, with Newcastle confident of completing a deal for around £25m. Napoli captain Lorenzo Insigne is off to USA! USA!! USA!!! Well, Canada actually, with Toronto FC handing the 30-year-old a basic wage of €11m a season for five years, with another €5m in potential add-ons. Woof! Another takeover! Southampton are the latest club in the crosshairs, with Gao Jisheng expected to sell the 80% stake he bought in 2017 to Serb media magnate Dragan Solak. Wrexham owners Ryan Reynolds and Rob McElheney have donated £10,000 to a charity fundraising page after the stillbirth of the baby son of midfielder Jordan Davies and his partner Kelsey Edwards. Innocent cash-strapped victims of circumstances Barcelona insist they’re back as big players in the transfer market after announcing the signing of Ferran Torres from Manchester City after discovering €55m down the back of the sofa. “Everybody in the world should get ready, as we are back as big players in the market,” roared Barça head honcho Joan Laporta, three months on from the club announcing itself to be “technically bankrupt”. Wazza continues to work his marvels at Wayne Rooney’s Derby County, with the Championship’s bottom club storming back to draw 2-2 at Reading on Monday with two goals in the last five minutes. Yesterday’s Championship roundup is here. STILL WANT MORE? Transfer season is upon us, which means you’ll want to be perusing both our men’s and women’s transfer interactive, with all the latest deals from Europe’s top leagues. Oh, and the Rumour Mill is back, with all the transfer news that’s fit to print, and plenty that isn’t. Ten things we learned from the first Premier League “matchweek” of 2022. Tactics Tommy T appeared to have the perfect formula at Chelsea but his team have regressed to Lampardian ways lately, notes Jonathan Wilson. It’s Sid Lowe on Getafe being Real Madrid (and why they have been inspired by Crystal Palace). Footballers have political power and must use it, says Philipp Lahm in his latest column. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! BY ALL MEANS ENJOY YOURSELVES, BUT ENJOY YOURSELVES BY BEING EFFING DISCIPLINEDDowning Street has expressed concern over moves to end the prosecution of young people caught with cannabis in some London boroughs, under a pilot scheme being developed by Sadiq Khan. The mayor of London is understood to be developing a plan based on a successful model from Thames Valley police that would offer classes or counselling, rather than arrest, to under-25s caught with small quantities of cannabis. Khan’s office said the plans for three boroughs to trial the approach were still in development and that they did not have the powers to fully decriminalise any drugs. The pilot is yet to receive approval from the mayor’s office for policing and crime. Both Downing Street and the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said they did not endorse any further decriminalisation of drugs. Boris Johnson’s spokesman said illegal drugs “destroy lives and fuel violence”. The spokesman said: “We have absolutely no intention of decriminalising dangerous and harmful substances for recreational use. Decriminalisation would leave organised criminals in control, while risking an increase in drug use, which drives crime and violence which blights our streets.” Starmer said of the plans, first reported by the Telegraph, that he would not endorse any changes to the law. “I’m not in favour of us changing the law or decriminalisation. I’m very clear about that,” he said. He added he would “look at” the pilot Khan was proposing, “but I’m very clear that we’re not in favour of changing the drugs laws.” A spokesman for the mayor of London said: “This limited trial, which is still in development and has yet to be approved by City Hall, would involve three of London’s 32 boroughs and would only apply to 18 to 24-year-olds found in possession of a small amount of cannabis. It would not apply to any other drug. “The idea of the scheme, which is already used by other police forces across the country, would be to divert young people who are found with a small amount of cannabis away from the criminal justice system and instead provide help and support. This has been shown to reduce reoffending. “Reducing crime is the mayor’s top priority and he will continue to explore and implement the most effective solutions to help to divert young people away from drug use and crime for good.” New approaches to tackling illegal drug use has been a priority for Khan’s second term in office. He has commissioned a review by independent experts into the feasibility of decriminalising cannabis. Though he has no powers to change their status legally, he is expected to give a mayoral endorsement to any proposals from the review, including full decriminalisation if that is recommended, which would be likely to spark a wider conversation. The commission is examining how countries around the world have tackled problems with drug use and addiction, including looking at evidence from Portugal, where possession and consumption of drugs have been decriminalised since 2001. The mayor will receive recommendations for City Hall, the government, the police, the criminal justice system, and NHS and treatment services. The illegal drug trade in the UK is estimated to cost society £19bn per year, according to the mayor’s office. About 41,900 people across England and Wales were charged with drug-related offences last year.Bored Ape #79 looks almost as bored as I feel when I think about NFTs (non-fungible tokens) and their supposedly seismic impact on art. My jaw slides, my eyelids hang down and I want to pick lice from my fur. Even though I can identify with Bored Ape #79, I won’t be buying it, unlike Eminem who has bought another in this highly fashionable NFT “art” brand that looks slightly like him. It’s called EminApe and sports a military-urban peaked cap above its enervated face. He reportedly paid around $450,000 (£334,000) for it. Just in case, like me, you have spent the last year averting your gaze with a sigh whenever another news item about NFT art wafted an unmistakable aroma of bull your way, here is a quick reminder of what Eminem gets for his near half-million – which, by the way, is far from the highest anyone has paid for one of these nihilist monkeys. He owns a unique unit of data recorded in a digital blockchain, which permanently records its provenance or sales history. It’s a way of restoring the idea of an “original” one-off artwork to the endlessly reproducible, copyable realm of the internet. Anyone can grab Eminem’s ape image online, but he owns the “original” and has the blockchain provenance to prove it. Someone was going to monetise digital culture eventually. And theoretically, from an artist’s point of view, that has to be a good thing – right? Suddenly, creators don’t have to settle for feeble fees from Spotify or see their images circulate free of charge. They can clean up. Rags to riches stories have helped to make the NFT art market the sentimental bag of air it is. Struggling unknowns find themselves selling NFTs for wildly escalating prices, outsiders who never got near success in the established art world suddenly leap to fame, and the art world, never slow to jump on a bandwagon, has joined in the fun with Christie’s selling a JPEG file by Beeple for $69m last spring. The Bored Ape boom, however, should put an end to any romanticism about NFT art. It puts the consumer experience first and has absolutely nothing to do with empowering artists. It’s all about the collector’s ego. For Eminem doesn’t just get a “unique” masterpiece of digital “art” for his money. Purchasers of an NFT from the Bored Ape collection also become members of the Bored Ape Yacht Club, a “swamp club for apes” where the cool dudes who fork out heaps of cryptocurrency for a monkey cartoon can hang out together. This is part of the well-planned strategy that is making Bored Apes a marketing sensation – and a mockery of all the inflated claims uncritically spouted about NFT art. The Bored Ape Yacht Club could even be a satire on the NFT craze, were it not such a lucrative example of it. This is a totally cynical creation. The Club offers a new level of exclusivity, a virtual social club, on top of its promise of exclusive digital ownership. It seems the kind of fake cool meeting of pop culture and money that might attract the insecure Kendall Roy in the TV drama Succession – “Bored Apes are cool, right? Yeah they’re cool. See you in the Yacht Club to dish out more stuff on my dad!” Yet real-life celebrities are queuing up to join including Jimmy Fallon and rapper Post Malone. If they get bored posting graffiti in the club toilet (this is one of the perks) they can purchase a “serum” that allows them to remix ape designs to produce a Mutant Ape. It’s all so neatly designed, so smoothly negotiable, so stylishly moronic, it makes the early (as in, early 2021) NFT art sensations look frightfully naive. The anonymous inventors of the Bored Ape were two literary loafers – they claim to have bonded over the novels of David Foster Wallace – who then hired a graphic designer to create the ape design. The Bored Apes are framed as portraits in an ironic nod to high art. But they’re not art of any bite or originality. The ape is a very ordinary and derivative bit of comic book design, heavily indebted to inspirations ranging from Jamie Hewlett to Rick and Morty. It isn’t art that’s being sold here but attitude. The attitude says it all. Bored, emptied out, wrecked, and proud of it. That’s how the NFT art investors all feel, apparently. And so they should. NFTs are not good for art. They are not liberating for artists. Instead, as the Bored Ape Yacht Club makes horribly obvious, they serve nothing but money. They are just simian poker chips that celebrate the thrill of the market. A purer form of capitalism has never existed.We would like to hear about your favourite travel book – something you have read that has allowed you to escape for a moment, at a time when actual escape has been difficult. Whether it is a tome by Eric Newby, a journal about travel in Victorian times by Mary Kingsley, one of Bill Bryson’s popular classics or a more recent adventure by Helen Lloyd, what has transported you into distant realms and why? Maybe it sparked the trip of a lifetime, or has got you plotting your next adventure? If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on Tuesday 11 January 2022 at 9am GMT Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereHospitals workers in New South Wales have vented their anger at being left on the frontline with seriously depleted levels of staffing amid a major surge in Covid cases, as nurse-to-patient ratios are cut and others face shortages on their intensive care wards. “The light at the end of a tunnel is a fricking train at the moment,” said Gil Wilson, a senior nurse at the Lismore Base hospital and a NSW Nurses and Midwives Association delegate. “We can’t see an end to this.” The regional hospital, which serves a large area of northern NSW as the main Covid treatment centre, recently added an 18-bed intensive care unit. Staffing levels, though, didn’t increase in tandem. “Why didn’t we change it to be able to be staffed to be able to take, say, 10 or 12 ventilated patients?” Wilson, who has worked as a nurse for 32 years, said. “Now we’re only staffed to take four and that’s why I’m going into pulling an extra shift this afternoon.” Northern NSW includes some of the state’s anti-vaccination pockets. The Byron Bay region, for instance, was only about 85% double vaccinated as of 20 December, among the lowest rates in the state, according to federal government statistics. ICU nursing requires skills that can’t be whipped up “with a couple of days’ training”, Wilson said. Such nurses “operate the machine that’ll breathe for you, they calibrate the machine so it can replace your kidneys, they can operate multiple drug infusions to keep your heart and other organs functioning, and monitor you the whole time”. Covid has also made life harder for staff, who have to don full personal protective equipment “sweating your arse off for a full eight-hour shift”, he said, adding “it requires a great deal of effort to turn somebody who has a breathing tube in and a heap of other tubes”. On Tuesday, NSW set a record for daily cases with 23,131 new infections reported – almost 28% of those who came forward for testing in the previous 24-period. Those in hospital with Covid jumped 16% on the previous day, to 1,344, while those in ICU rose almost 10% to 104, the state government said. Hospital staff said that existing service levels were barely meeting current needs even before an expected spike in new hospitalisations in the coming weeks. The NSW health department was approached for comment. At Sydney’s Royal Prince Alfred hospital, as many as seven ambulances were lined up at the emergency department on Tuesday afternoon, with a makeshift tent providing cover for an overflow of about a dozen would-be patients. “It’s going smoothly,” one security guard said. “The tent is for priority patients.” Hospital staff, though, declined to comment directly to Guardian Australia. “Not interested,” said one hospital worker when approached. “I’m in a hurry.” A NSW Health spokesperson said the department had more than 140,000 staff, and that since 2011 it had increased the workforce by almost 25,000 full-time equivalent staff, with a further 8,300 full-time workers to be added. “All local health districts have well-developed workforce surge and demand management plans in place, and our networked hospital system ensures patients can be transferred or redirected to other hospitals where necessary, including private hospitals,” the spokesperson said. The Northern NSW district had “sufficient intensive care beds across the three major hospitals in Grafton, Lismore and Tweed, with plans in place to surge staffing and ICU capacity, if and when required”. Michelle Rosentreter, an ICU nurse at another major metropolitan Sydney hospital and also a NSW Nurses and Midwives Association delegate, said emergency departments had become the “Covid frontline”. “We would argue that the frontline is actually your GPs and their community testing clinics, access to free rapid antigen tests or PCR testing,” Rosentreter said. “As they start to close down – which is what the government is doing because it’s obviously costing them too much money to look after public health – those consumers come in directly to the emergency departments. “That’s putting an incredibly big strain on our hospitals because our workforce is significantly reduced. We don’t have the capacity to constantly treat these numbers.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Ideally, one nurse should serve three emergency department beds at most, with as many as 20 patients processed per shift. “At the moment, it’s one [nurse] to 10, one to 20 [beds]” at Rosentreter’s hospital. Rosentreter has herself been waiting for five days for the results of a PCR test to be returned after her daughter – also a nurse – contracted Covid. Staff who are not showing symptoms have been recalled to work but there remains “a huge risk” they will infect others, whether patients or staff, she said. “There’s no setup in the workplace for them to remove the mask in order to have a drink of water or have something to eat,” she said. “So basically, you do your whole shift and avoid everybody, keeping on your PPE.” While the health system had some surge capacity, in order to cope with winter flu outbreaks, there had been insufficient investment for a long period, she said. “Our political leaders always told us we have a very robust, healthy and well-ranked health system. But in reality, it has been a system over the years, pre-pandemic, that has been grossly under-resourced with shackles on recruitment and budgets. “We’re looking at the real face of burnout now. Desperation is it. I think that’s the perfect word.” Do you know more about pressure in the healthcare system? Contact peter.hannam@theguardian.com. You can remain anonymous.The federal government has pledged $316.5m for a new Indigenous cultural precinct in Canberra that would include a long-awaited national resting place for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander ancestral remains. The proposed centre, to be called Ngurra, which means home, country or place of belonging in different Aboriginal languages, will incorporate a learning and knowledge centre and the relocated Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (Aiatsis). It will be built on the shores of Lake Burley Griffin on Ngunnawal country in Canberra within the parliamentary triangle that includes other prominent national institutions. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the centre would become a “place of national pride and significance” and hailed its proposed location as demonstrating the “importance and reverence this institution should hold”. “Ngurra is the realisation of a long-held desire to have a home for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures and histories at the heart of our nation,” Morrison said. “It will be a national landmark of the highest order, standing proudly for us all to celebrate, educate, reflect and commemorate.” A national resting place for ancestral remains was formally recommended to government in 2014 when an advisory committee for Indigenous repatriation completed the national resting place consultation report. Two parliamentary committees have since endorsed the recommendation. The project, which underwent a $4.7m business case process after the May budget, would be built “fully in accordance” with the proposal developed by Aiatsis. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Aiatsis chief executive, Craig Ritchie, said he was “super excited” the project was going ahead and he hoped work could begin by the end of the year. He said the aspiration of the precinct was to shift the story of Indigenous Australia away from a focus on disadvantage to one that highlighted the “richness of our cultures, the sophistication of our world views and its relationship to country and place”. “There is a deeply ingrained way of thinking about Indigenous Australia that is defined by disadvantage, and that challenge is real, but it is not who we are,” Ritchie told Guardian Australia. “We wanted the opportunity to do more than just recite grievances, but really showcase the brilliance of First Nations cultures in a way … that all Australians have access to.” Morrison said the centre would give Australians and international visitors “a deeper appreciation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ diversity and cultures, and the richness this offers our country”. “This new world-class facility will contribute to our continuing journey of reconciliation, where Indigenous Australians can tell their stories, in the way they want, for all visitors to have a greater understanding of our shared history,” the prime minister said. The minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, said the new learning and engagement centre – and the exhibitions, research and curation that would occur at Ngurra – would result in “significant acts of truth-telling”. “At its heart will be a national resting place where the remains of Indigenous Australians taken from their country will be cared for until they are able to be returned to their communities,” Wyatt said. “In instances where provenance has been forgotten or erased, they will be cared for in perpetuity with dignity and respect.” The relocation of Aiatsis, which has spearheaded the project, will also make accessible the world’s largest collection of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural and heritage items. “Ngurra will provide a new perspective on our shared history, as a significant moment for truth-telling, and a new place where the diversity of Indigenous Australia and one of the world’s oldest living cultures will be celebrated,” the minister said. The earmarked site is on Commonwealth Place on the primary axis in the parliamentary triangle – between Old Parliament House and the Australian War Memorial. An architectural design competition will be held to find an “iconic design” that “reflects Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ aspirations, achievements and deep connection to country”.An “unprecedented” number of people have withdrawn from Australia’s overseas diplomatic postings during the pandemic, an internal government document has revealed. At the same time, a drop in the number of Australians travelling abroad “has not led to a reduction in consular cases around the world”, according to the detailed briefing provided to the new head of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, which was released under freedom of information laws with some pages redacted. Officials also said the department wanted to “tell a more compelling story about its value in delivering government priorities” – a phrase that is likely to be code for ensuring it can win budget battles for extra funding and to avoid budget cuts. Australia already has a smaller diplomatic network than similar countries, the document shows. The 51-page incoming operational brief was prepared for the new secretary, Kathryn Campbell, who took up the post in July. It shows the number of positions at Australian embassies and high commissions has declined in recent years, with Dfat employees on overseas postings dropping from 897 in June 2017 to 833 in June 2020. Dfat reduced the number of positions for locally hired staff at Australia’s 113 overseas missions from 2,419 to 2,106 over the same period. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In an implicit warning against cuts, the document said: “Our global network is smaller than those of comparable economies and, on current number of posts, we are second last in the G20 (Saudi Arabia ranks last) and 20th in the OECD (behind countries such as Belgium, Hungary, Greece and Chile).” The document said Australia was focused on the Pacific, with the opening of new posts in the Marshall Islands, French Polynesia and Niue over the past two years. “In the midst of heightened strategic competition in the Indo-Pacific and an international order under intense stress, a strong diplomatic network is essential for protecting and advancing Australia’s national interest.” The document gives an insight into how the pandemic has “reshaped the department’s operations, both in Australia and across the overseas network”. “The overseas network is under pressure following an unprecedented number of posting withdrawals and declining interest in postings in the Covid-19 environment,” the department told Campbell, the former head of the Department of Social Services. “As at 8 July 2021, 148 staff had terminated their posting early, or withdrawn before deployment, due to Covid-19 related concerns.” As of the same date, there were 40 active Covid cases and 554 recovered cases across all Australian government staff posted abroad, accompanying dependants, locally engaged staff and contractors in the overseas network – a significantly higher number of known cases than the ABC reported in April. “Extended lockdowns, sustained workload pressures, and limited or no opportunities for respite or travel to Australia, are a feature of many Covid-era postings,” the document said. Workload pressures and a lack of travel options had reduced the use of annual leave, “adding to fatigue and risk of burnout”. The document did not go into detail about the department’s handling of tens of thousands of Australians stranded abroad during the pandemic, although it noted the Australian National Audit Office was investigating the issue, including “our capacity to learn from our response”. It cited the $120m promise in the May 2021 budget to increase Australia’s consular capacity and provide support to vulnerable citizens affected by travel restrictions. Dedicated staffing for consular and crisis response services had increased to 210 staff. “Individual consular cases remain at the pre-pandemic level of about 1,200 cases active (or open) on any given day: comprising approximately 350 welfare cases, 170 deaths, 240 arrests and 240 prisoners. The most sensitive of these cases require careful, daily management.” The consular emergency centre responded to about 7,000 calls, 4,000 emails and hundreds of text messages each month, it said. The department manages 280 active social media accounts globally, with a total of about 4.6 million followers, according to the document. During the pandemic the department scaled up “the provision of regular high-quality social media content” for use by Australian embassies. “The Dfat you are inheriting is very different to that which your predecessor took up in 2016,” the department told Campbell, who took over from career diplomat Frances Adamson, now the South Australian governor. The document said Dfat was a leader across the Australian public service on gender equality, but analysis of five years of data showed increases in the number of staff who identified as LGBTI or as Indigenous were “starting to flatline”. The number of staff who identified as having a disability had “stagnated” around 3.5%, and the number of employees from non-English-speaking backgrounds had fallen. “As the department responsible for representing Australia to the world, we should reflect the community we represent and the global environment in which we operate,” the document said. Large portions of the section on integrity and fraud control were redacted, but the document said the department faced “changing and increasing risks”, and more than 90% of fraud cases were reported from the development program. A section of the document about freedom of information was also partly redacted, as disclosure would “have a substantial adverse effect on the proper and efficient conduct of the operations of an agency”. The uncensored part noted the department had processed 18% more FOI requests in 2020-21 than the year before, but it was “defending a further 42 decisions before the Information Commissioner, and two complex matters before the court”. Campbell was also given a detailed policy brief, but this was blocked from release on the basis it would damage Australia’s international relations.This week, Scott Morrison insisted the provision of rapid antigen tests for those without symptoms or who have not been told to get tested by authorities should be left to the “private market”. Having referred to what he called more “casual uses” of rapid tests, the prime minister said: “We’re at another stage of this pandemic now where we just can’t go round and make everything free.” While some state governments – principally New South Wales and Victoria – last week said they wanted to distribute rapid antigen tests free to the general public, they later watered down these commitments. However, some governments overseas have taken a very different approach when it comes to rapid tests. Here are some examples. United Kingdom Perhaps the best known example to most Australians, the UK government offers people access to free self-administered rapid antigen tests through the National Health Service. They are provided free through local pharmacies, with residents able to obtain a “collect code” and then pick them up. Individuals can also grab two packs of seven rapid tests from community locations such as libraries. And they can also be ordered through a home delivery service. The NHS website notes people might wish to do a free test when they “mix with people in crowded indoor places” or “visit someone who is at higher risk of getting seriously ill from Covid-19”. These are examples of what the Australian government views as “casual uses” for such tests. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Some Australians in the UK have noted the contrast between the two systems. “It’s been so good that they’re free,” says Jordan Marshall, an Australian living in London. “My partner’s a paramedic so we’ve been quite proactive about testing.” Marshall says she’s probably used about 20 rapid tests over about three months, with many of those in the lead up to Christmas. “While there’s been supply issues, the fact that we can get boxes delivered to the house means you can have greater level of confidence you’re not out there spreading it in the community,” she says. Singapore The Singaporean government sent households 10 free rapid antigen tests in the mail between October and December. It undertook a similar process, providing six tests per household, between August and September. The government also has a program that offers free rapid testing kits to employers, who then provide them to workers. By October, 11,000 businesses had signed up, reports the Straits Times. Tests that are sold at retailers are also now considerably cheaper than those currently on offer in Australia, where tests had cost between $10 and $15 each, but have since exploded to as much as $30 to $40 a pop in some cases. From 10 December, it was reported that Singaporean retailers were stocking “Flowflex” tests at $5 each, while a pack of five cost $24. Malaysia Home rapid test kits are considered a “controlled item” in Malaysia and supply is controlled by the government. They are sold at pharmacies with a capped price of $6.60, though they are often cheaper than that. Aliya Ahmad, a Pakistani Australian visiting her parents who live in Malaysia, says tests tend to cost between $2 and $6 each. “The pharmacies and chemists are all over the place, at least in the city where I live,” Ahmad says. “Also, while I can only really speak for what I’ve been observing myself, it seems like general practice to take one before going to a big gathering or a house with elders.” France Since late last month, France has made self-administered rapid tests available at supermarkets. They are subject to price controls, meaning they cannot cost more than $8 per test. The government urged residents to use the tests before New Year’s Eve celebrations. Portugal Rapid antigen tests administered in pharmacies are free. Citizens can obtain four of these tests per month, though this was expanded to six tests in December during the lead up to Christmas. Self-administered rapid antigen test kits are also available in shops, generally for about $4-6 per test. A negative rapid test is required to enter some venues throughout Portugal. Canada Some Canadian provinces, such as Nova Scotia and Saskatchewan, have offered free rapid tests through local distribution centres. In the case of Nova Scotia, 400,000 tests were reportedly handed out in December through local libraries (the population is about 970,000), though the initiative concluded late last month. Ontario, home to Toronto, is offering a free take-home rapid test to residents as part of a holiday testing blitz that will last into this month. The federal government also has a program offering free rapid tests to businesses. Germany Germany offers free rapid antigen tests once a week at testing centres. Self-administered take-home kits are also available at pharmacies and, according to Bloomberg, were on sale for as little as about $2.50 in November. United States The US has been hit by a shortage of rapid tests in many places and costs are broadly comparable with Australia. In some cities, free tests are available to the general public for pick up, subject to supply. For example, Washington DC residents can pick up a free home rapid test from local schools. The Biden administration intends to distribute 500m rapid test kits free of charge to people to use at home. It’s expected the tests will be sent out from this month. Free doesn’t always mean available It should be noted that, like Australia, many of these countries have been hit by supply shortages. The Guardian reported that the UK’s free rapid tests system has been hit by supply issues that frustrated residents over the holiday period. And, unlike some other countries, high-quality PCR tests do remain free in Australia, though the government is now trying to limit them to people who are symptomatic or high-risk close contacts. With the Australian system under massive pressure, it has become incredibly hard to get a test and some results are taking as long as five days to come back. National cabinet is expected to determine concessional arrangements that might give some Australians access to cheaper rapid antigen tests on Wednesday. Some states are also set to provide more details about their plans to distribute some free rapid tests, though these will likely only apply to certain vulnerable groups.The Catholic church’s failed attempt to argue it was not responsible for a priest’s abuse of a five-year-old, because it took place during after-hours “social” visits, has been slammed as “ruthless” by the survivor and an “affront to common sense” by a judge. Last month the Victorian supreme court handed down a judgment finding the current diocese of Ballarat was vicariously liable for the abuse of the boy, who cannot be named, by Father Bryan Coffey in Port Fairy in the early 1970s. The survivor’s lawyers, Ken Cush &amp; Associates, say the ruling is a landmark win that will help countless others. Coffey abused the boy during pastoral care visits to his home on two occasions in 1971. The critical issue in the case was whether Coffey, an assistant parish priest, could be considered a formal employee of the diocese at the time, thereby making it vicariously liable for his actions. The church argued that Coffey was not a formal employee and so it could not be held liable for his actions. It also said Coffey’s home visits were “social outings” not connected to his work for the church. The judge in the case, Justice Jack Forrest, described the suggestion as “sheer nonsense”. “It is, in my view, both inconceivable and an affront to common sense to suggest (as the Diocese put it) that these visits to parishioners’ houses and [the survivor’s] home were unconnected with Coffey’s pastoral role within the Church and merely social outings separate to his role as an assistant priest,” he said. The court found the abuse occurred and that the diocese was vicariously liable for Coffey’s actions. Forrest found Coffey was not a formal employee of the church, given the absence of any formal employment contract or arrangement, and the lack of immediate control or supervision by the diocese of his work. But he found the diocese was still vicariously liable for the abuse due to the close nature of the relationship between the bishop, the diocese and the Catholic community in Port Fairy; the diocese’s general control over Coffey’s role and duties; and the fact that Coffey had a pastoral role in the town, which included home visits. The court found the relationship between the survivor, his family, Coffey, and the diocese was one of “intimacy and imported trust in the authority of Christ’s representative, personified by Coffey”. “I am also satisfied that Coffey’s role as a priest under the direction of the Diocese placed him in a position of power and intimacy vis-à-vis [the survivor] that enabled him to take advantage of [the survivor] when alone – just as he did with other boys,” he said. Forrest found that the survivor had failed to prove negligence on the part of the diocese, given there was no evidence it had any actual knowledge of Coffey’s misconduct or any evidence that would lead to an inference that the diocese should have known of Coffey’s proclivities. The court awarded the survivor $230,000. In an interview with Guardian Australia, the survivor said the church’s approach to the case had caused him significant distress. “They weren’t giving anything away,” he said. “They wanted to drag me through it, and they dragged me through it.” He had been cross-examined for three days and forced to relive painful memories, including the sudden death of both of his parents in a car crash in 1985, in a way he thought was irrelevant to the case. The argument that the home visits were not connected to Coffey’s work as a priest, the survivor said, was “ruthless”. “That really upset me, because you know, I was always brought up that a priest is a priest, 24 hours a day,” he said. “We always had priests and nuns visit the house, and the nuns were never out of their habits when they came to the house. The priest was never out of his clerical tie when he visited the house. “They just tried to argue their way out of it.” A Ken Cush &amp; Associates special counsel, Sangeeta Sharmin, said the ruling, for the first time, provided a binding authority that allowed a diocese to be held vicariously liable for the abuse conducted by its priests. “This verdict, along with the courage our client has shown in fighting for the rights of that five-year-old version of himself, will help countless other victims of church abuse in the future,” she said. “As it should be, because dioceses need to take responsibility for the men they placed in these communities, asked their congregations and donors to trust, and who people looked to for spiritual guidance. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The argument will no longer be able to be used as a shield by Catholic institutions, and our efforts in striving to give abuse victims a voice has finally culminated in this landmark decision.” The church and the office of the current Bishop for Ballarat, Paul Bird, were contacted for a response. It is unclear whether the church will appeal. • In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines International“Our healthcare system remains strong,” says our premier. It’s hard to explain that to the 91-year-old woman who slept in a chair last night in the emergency department I work at. Or the patient with cancer, receiving chemo, stuck at the cancer treatment centre for more than 24 hours, her journey delayed because she had became a close contact while waiting for a bed. Or the patient with suicidal ideation, who has been scheduled under the Mental Health Act, was told they have Covid-19, and is being forced to wait indefinitely for days as there are no beds at the specialised mental health facility. Or the ever-growing number of Covid-positive and suspected Covid-positive patients we are treating in a makeshift tent – literally a tent that has been set up outside the front of the department, as there is no room inside. No, Mr Premier. As a nurse working in an New South Wales emergency department, I can tell you our healthcare system no longer remains strong. After two years of fighting the pandemic, the foundations of our healthcare system have been washed away. We do not have the capacity to treat the influx of Covid-positive patients. In addition to the Covid patients who require hospitalisation due to the virus, the usual presentations to ED haven’t stopped – there are still all the patients suffering strokes, heart attacks, lacerated hands from broken beer bottles, broken legs from motor vehicle accidents, pregnant women with abdominal pain, children with burns from scalding water – and they all happen to have Covid-19. These patients require treatment in a separated area from the rest of the ED patients to avoid a situation where patients come to hospital and catch Covid-19. This area is over capacity. At times, we have to add additional chairs in the corridor to keep up with the demand. Ambulances have had to wait over an hour to offload their Covid-positive patients as there is simply no room. Despite the influx of patients the nursing ratio does not change, creating an unsafe working environment. We are working with skeleton staff as so many senior colleagues have called it quits after having been worked into the ground over the past 24 months. It has become the norm for us to be asked every shift to do overtime or to come in on our days off. We do it, not for the extra money, but out of guilt and solidarity for our colleagues so they are not left to work a shift with deadly nurse-to-patient ratios. It is not uncommon for shifts to be so short-staffed that they have only one third of the nurses required rostered on. It is not a sustainable work model. Compounding the issue now is the growing number of staff members who themselves are testing positive. Adding to the situation is the issue of the staffing skill mix, which has become dangerous. To scrape through each shift, we are reliant on agency staff or staff being sent from other areas of the hospital to work in areas where they lack the specialised training. It is just not safe. The working conditions in hospitals has deteriorated throughout the pandemic. Beds replaced with chairs to make way for the growing number of patients. Tents erected outside, exposed to the elements, to make additional space to treat the ever-growing number of Covid-confirmed and suspected patients. Nurses having to work outdoors, in over 30-degree heat, in direct sunlight, in blue plastic gowns, gloves, goggles, N95 masks and a face shield. Simple procedures take twice as long and are twice as difficult to complete due to infection control procedures. We feel defeated: we are not able to provide the level of care we could pre-pandemic. What is most wearing, though, is the lack of recognition from our leaders about how hard this pandemic is for the nursing workforce. Every day of this pandemic, we have been expected to come to work without any additional hazard pay for putting ourselves on the front line of this deadly virus. With this latest wave, we have been begged to cancel our leave and extorted to dig deeper as our “community has needed us now more than ever”. Now we are told that we are exempt from isolating when we become a close contact. Yet when will our politicians care for us? When will our politicians stop calling us “healthcare heroes”, as if we are superheroes able to work through any catastrophe, and stop ignoring our pleas for mandated nurse-to-patient ratios to ensure patient safety, and listen to our request for a fair pay rise following the wage freeze imposed on us in 2020? I worry for my colleagues and the profession that I have grown to love. We have already lost so many of our best senior nurses and paramedics over the past few months due to the fatigue of this pandemic. I just know that with this fourth wave of infections, we are going to lose many, many more. My colleagues and I are beyond fatigued. We feel hopeless, we feel scared. There is nothing left for us to give. The author is a nurse in an emergency department in SydneyStill Life is a quiet British film with a mighty heart. Written and directed by Uberto Pasolini (best known as a producer of The Full Monty), it tackles the subject of loneliness with the lightest of touches. John May (Eddie Marsan) is a man who notices. His job at a local London council depends on it: part detective, part chief mourner, it falls on him to track down the next of kin of residents who died intestate and, invariably, alone. Over 22 years, May’s role has expanded to include organising, attending and writing the eulogies for the funerals of his “clients”. He pieces together their lives by observation – a birthday card here, a dent in a pillow there – and creates a life for them in words and music. Marsan inhabits the role of May with very few words and even fewer gestures. His presence is a stillness in the centre of the camera lens while life in all its noisy chaos goes on around him. Background noise is turned up a notch – traffic, bird song, distant voices – as if to emphasise the quietness of his own life. Marsan himself is probably one of the best character actors you’ve never heard of. Known in the UK for his television and film appearances – including in Mike Leigh’s 2008 feature Happy-Go-Lucky, and in the US for crime drama Ray Donovan – he received the best British actor award at the 2014 Edinburgh international film festival for his portrayal of May, his first role as the romantic lead. Romance is not a part of May’s daily life. He lives alone in a tidy council flat devoid of any personal touches. He is shocked to learn that his latest client – left for weeks before being found – lived opposite him. “A loner,” says his unsympathetic boss Mr Pratchett (The Crown’s Andrew Buchan). “You know the type.” The death of this fellow loner – William Stoke – affects May more than any of the others. When May is “let go” from his council job shortly after, he asks for more time to arrange a suitable send-off for Stoke. Pratchett grudgingly allows him a few days, unpaid, to complete this last case. May’s dogged research leads him to an estranged daughter named Kelly (Downton Abbey’s Joanne Froggatt) living in Truro, Cornwall. She too lives alone, and the two strangers share the unspoken empathy of lonely people. They meet up again at a cafe a few days before the funeral to go over the arrangements. Kelly Stoke can hardly fail to be touched by the thoughtfulness of the man sitting across from her. As her train leaves the station, she asks John if he would meet her after the funeral for a cup of tea. From that moment on, May’s demeanour changes. His blank expression takes on a sweetness bordering on a smile. For the first time, a gentle guitar score can be heard above the now-muted sounds of the train running on its tracks and the cries of children in the park. He is now an active participant in the world that surrounds him, not a passive onlooker. The camerawork in Still Life conveys the loneliness of the main character and that of his “charges” in this dialogue-light film. Its title is reflected in the painterly still shots and vignettes of the empty spaces they leave behind. Small gestures take on a poignancy that makes parts of it almost unbearable to watch. The final controversial scene has divided reviewers and led to accusations that it undoes all the goodwill built up to that point. The sceptical are outraged and the sentimental are moved by it: either way, it’s worth investing the 88 minutes it takes to reach the end of this moving, unpretentious gem of a film.Nick Kyrgios will arrive in Sydney later this week with a lowly rankings status he has not borne since his stunning breakout performance at Wimbledon back in 2014. The Australian started a summer critical to his ability to retain a place on the main ATP Tour in unfortunate circumstances when forced to withdraw from a tournament in Melbourne on Tuesday. It means he will slide outside the top 100 for the first time since his run to the Wimbledon quarter-finals as a teenager ranked No 144 eight seasons ago. On a live estimate Kyrgios now sits at 115, but it is possible that will dip further by the next official rankings release on Monday, just a week out from the Australian Open. The 26-year-old cited asthma as the reason for his inability to take to the baseline against Slovakian Alex Molčan at Melbourne Park in an ATP 250 tournament on Tuesday night. “I’m really sorry that I’ve had to pull out from this Melbourne Summer Set event,” he said in a statement. “I have been feeling run down and unwell for four days. I have had several Covid tests over the last few days which all came back negative. I don’t feel 100% so I need to take this week to be ready for Sydney next week.” Melbourne can be a problematic city for asthmatics and breathing issues are not to be trifled with, particularly when the pandemic is raging again in Australia due to the Omicron variant. It is hoped the six-time ATP Tour titlist will be able to take his place as a wildcard in another ATP Tour tournament in Sydney. But there are several ramifications resulting from his withdrawal from the season-opening match. His fans in Melbourne miss an opportunity to see an athlete who, at his peak, is an entertainer blessed with the weapons to trouble any of his peers on the tour. As per his profile, the Canberran had been allotted the prime-time match on Rod Laver Arena despite the all-star card for events being held in Melbourne in the opening week. Reigning Australian Open champion Naomi Osaka, dual Wimbledon champion Andy Murray and 20-time major winner Rafael Nadal were among the champions in action on Tuesday. But Kyrgios retains box-office appeal, particularly in Australia, and the host broadcaster was clearly keen to showcase the local star in front of the biggest possible audience. It means that unless Kyrgios can find some momentum in Sydney, he will return to Melbourne short of match-fitness following two restricted seasons in 2020 and last year. This could be problematic given the 2015 Australian Open quarter-finalist finds himself in a fight to stay in touch with the top 100, let alone return to it. The right-hander has demonstrated in the past he is more than capable of performing off an interrupted preparation. Despite limited match play leading into the Australian Open last February he was able to make it to the 3rd Round. The former world No. 13 edged talented Frenchman Ugo Humbert, who defeated Daniil Medvedev in an ATP Cup rubber this week, before testing US Open champion Dominic Thiem in an engrossing encounter on his favourite court at Melbourne Park. Kyrgios said recently that he is not motivated by his ranking. Nor, as he has stressed many times, is he driven by a desire to claim a grand slam title. But the Australian’s best tennis has traditionally come on the biggest stages in sport, with the enigmatic right-hander riffing off the energy he can draw from crowds that flock to see him. The problem is he may not feature on those stages for some time, and instead find himself in off-Broadway tournaments around the world, unless he performs well over the next three weeks. The Laver Cup star has 90 ranking points to defend at the Australian Open and should he fail to make a run next week in Sydney, or make at least the 3rd Round at Melbourne Park, Kyrgios will find himself firmly in the rankings wilderness. No matter the talent of a player, being ranked outside the top 100 can be a difficult spot to rebound from, as he will know from the trevails of at least a couple of his close friends on the tour. Andre Agassi managed to do so, using his extraordinary ethic to effectively reignite his career when enjoying stunning success in his 30s, but he is an exception. Murray, who returned from a career-threatening hip injury in February last year using a protected ranking, is finding it a tougher task. Despite some good signs at times during the 14 singles tournaments he played last year, the Scot was only able to rebuild his ranking to 134 by the end of the 2021 season and was beaten in Melbourne by Facundo Bagnis 6-3 5-7 6-3 in the opening round on Tuesday. Thanasi Kokkinakis, another who showed great promise as a teenager, produced some strong results when playing almost an entire season for the first time in years. Yet the South Australian was only able to improve his ranking to 171 in 2021, in part due to the rankings protections the ATP put in place during the pandemic. While Murray was able to play on the main tour using an injury-protected wildcard and wildcards, Kokkinakis spent much of the season on the secondary Challenger tour. Because of his profile, Kyrgios would also draw sponsors’ invitations to smaller ATP Tour tournaments. But if he is unable to succeed this summer, it is plausible one of Australia’s brighter talents will be forced to qualify for the next grand slam at Roland Garros in late May.Waters off Sydney are undergoing an extreme marine heatwave with temperatures likely at their highest levels on record for January. Satellite data is showing the ocean surface off the coast of Sydney at 3C above normal, with swimmers and surfers reporting conditions that feel more like February and March than early January. Prof Moninya Roughan, an oceanographer at the University of New South Wales and an expert in marine heatwaves, said the hottest water was covering an area of about 200sq km. Roughan is waiting until new data becomes available in the coming weeks from a long-term ocean temperature monitoring station at Port Hacking, where temperatures have been observed since the 1950s. But she said: “It appears now to be reaching those record levels and will likely be the hottest January on record. It’s an extreme marine heatwave.” She said there were three factors behind the extra heat. Global heating was pushing up background temperatures in the ocean, a La Nina weather system was helping transport warmer waters south, and atmospheric conditions were also playing a role. “Marine heatwaves are having severe consequences on ecosystems and they can kill habitats,” she said. She said the warm belt of water off Sydney was still attached to the East Australian Current – the 100km-wide belt that runs south from the Great Barrier Reef in Queensland to the area off Sydney. She expected a large eddy would break off from the tip of the current and take warmer waters south of Sydney. “I expect that water will hang around and push south over the coming months,” she said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Prof Rob Harcourt, a marine ecologist at Macquarie University in Sydney, regularly surfs off Sydney beaches. “It’s been over 21C in the water for over a month now. Everyone that surfs has been talking for weeks about how it’s felt more like February and March than December [when the heat started to build].” He said the warmer water was likely bringing bull and tiger sharks into the area and also farther south. Other species would also likely be arriving on the warmer waters. Harcourt said while some species may benefit from warming oceans, the change in ocean temperatures along the eastern coast of Australia was dramatic. “A lot of animals will do poorly. A lot of animals that live in cooler waters, like seals and sharks, have a habitat that’s shrinking fast and the implications are hard to measure, but it’s likely to be dramatic.” He said in recent weeks whale sharks had been spotted north of Sydney and tiger and great white sharks had been seen feeding off a sperm whale carcass on the state’s far south coast. “Whale sharks do come down the coast but they’re rare,” he said. He said warm water arriving on the current was nothing new, but this arrival was particularly early and was unusually warm. Research in the journal Nature has found marine heatwaves around the globe are becoming more frequent and are lasting longer. Separate research suggests the southern points of the East Australian Current are also warming faster than the area farther north.In mid-June 2020 in Melbourne, Asher’s next door neighbour complained about the plants their 12-year-old son was growing in an empty car space in the apartment complex. The body corporate threatened to fine them. In the midst of solo parenting their son through lockdown number two, it was the last straw. Asher decided to move out. To the country. It wasn’t an easy decision - it meant leaving behind the career they’d carved out over a decade, but “it’s a compromise and being a parent is a relationship that’s two-sided”. The pandemic completely upended Asher’s plans for their son, and themselves. And while not all of us have moved the world for our kids, there are many things about the past two years that may well have changed how we parent, and our relationship with our children, permanently. John, a father of three from Melbourne, remembers back in the very anxious early days his 10-year-old daughter asked if they were going to die. He cried. “We changed then. Less news. More time spent focusing on our kids’ welfare.” Many parents are hollowed out by the anxiety they’ve carried for their children for the past two years while trying to mask their own. Hushed conversations about vaccines, diving to turn the news down as a kid’s eyes grow wider, attempting to empathise with a childhood plight we never had to deal with. There’s nothing quite like the rictus smile of a parent attempting to convince a child that another Zoom birthday is a really good time. “This is one of those times when the experience that children are having, parents are dealing with it themselves at the same time,” says the CEO of the Australian Childhood Foundation, Dr Joe Tucci, a psychologist and social worker. “It’s a lack of being able to control and plan, and we’re dealing with this existential threat in front of, and alongside, our children. As a result, parenting has become a far more adaptive process.” But as parents continue to grapple with the fallout of trauma – their own and their kids’ – some are realising that what they’ve learnt over the past two years has real and lasting value. ‘You pick up things you never noticed’ “The pandemic reset the importance of just being able to spend time with your children,” says Nick Tebbey, national executive officer of Relationships Australia. “People drew real strength from that, and were almost surprised by how much they enjoyed their time together.” The national body, in partnership with Griffith University in Queensland, are in phase 2 of the Australian component of their Families Unlocked study to “look deeper at the medium- to long-term impacts of the pandemic on relationships and family life”. Some of the initial findings of the study show that while around two-thirds of people were anxious about their children’s wellbeing, those sorts of feelings weren’t mutually exclusive from a feeling of “we like being together”. “One of the things that we’re told over and over again is that people don’t want to lose that time,” says Tebbey. “Irrespective of all those other pressures and concerns and anxieties, there was something there that people really held on to.” Of course, not every family cuddled around a jigsaw together, and as has been well established, some experienced an uptick in acute stress, financial pressure and domestic violence during lockdowns. But the desire for a continuation of more time with kids, regardless of their age, seems to cut across the vast majority of parents, even accommodating for the vastly different experiences of the pandemic. For many, Tucci says, the pandemic has reminded us that time together can be a sanctuary, not just for kids but for their parents. “And doing nothing together is even better,” he says. “There was a dad that I would see at the park near our house quite regularly during lockdowns. All he was doing with his three-year-old was lying down in the grass. They’d pick up a leaf and then they’d put it into a pile, and then they’d pick up another leaf and put it into some other pile. This is all they did. The kid was delighted.” Some parents speaking to the Guardian had thought a lot about why they actually liked having their kids at home, given it was often also stressful and unpredictable. Some had a sense of making up for lost time, given their kids had spent a lot of time at daycare, other parents of older kids realised they genuinely enjoyed their teenagers’ company. Tebbey says there is now a much broader awareness of mental health among parents. They’ve been present to read the ripples, to observe their children far more closely. “Parents have become more attuned to their kids’ needs … because they’ll have noticed that small things set them off,” says Tucci. Patrick, a father of a seven-year-old, definitely feels “like I understand my kid more”. After home schooling one-on-one, “you pick up things you never noticed”. Intuition and letting go A 2021 study shows Australian fathers stepped up to do more childcare and housework during the pandemic, and as a result, more evenly shared the stresses and anxiety that comes with those roles too. Pre-pandemic, Patrick’s wife was the primary carer, but that changed to half and half during lockdown. Whether the more evenly distributed roles remains a trend across parents remains to be seen, but so far for Patrick it’s sticking. As for what Patrick learned about his son, who is autistic, the year taught him that his son is capable of more than he had thought. “Even small things to prove his independence, like getting his own dinner or being able to speak in more complex ways.” For Patrick, it’s been a wonderful thing to watch. “He is more capable than I give him credit for.” Extra time together taught Patrick to change his expectations of his son, and many other parents told the Guardian their kids surprised them in different ways, including realising they could be vulnerable around their children without the sky falling in. Emily, a single mother of an 18-year-old and a 10-year-old who did her fair share of home schooling while in lockdown in regional Victoria, feels like she’s learnt “to be more honest with my kids about my own feelings and circumstances”. “It’s been a realisation for parents to know how much their children know,” Tucci says. “You suddenly realise how much your life is on show to them.” Emily reckons she’s a more intuitive parent than she was, more inclined to centre her children’s needs. “Don’t want to go to school? Maybe that’s OK.” This is big for someone like Emily. She comes from a “very, very education-oriented” family – her parents are both teachers – but the past two years has taught her “the importance of understanding my kids as individuals rather than as part of the education system as a whole”. “A lot of parents gave up trying to maintain that school frenzy of doing everything,” Tucci says. “And schools were gentler, too. They just sort of … slowed down. They were noticing what their children needed and their children just needed space. They needed time. They needed to play and they needed relationships, which is what kids have always needed.” This combination of letting go and a faith in intuition may have resulted in a renewed sense of confidence among parents in their own skills. In a global study of more than 5,000 people across the US, UK, France, Germany, India, Singapore, China and Brazil, 61% said they felt much or somewhat more confident in their parenting skills now than before lockdowns. “Certainly during the pandemic, you could never subcontract out your responsibilities for your children to their teachers or their social groups or anything,” says Tebbey. “It really came down to you as the parents. We’ve seen now that we can play that more active role and be more invested in what our children are going through.” But can parents continue to carve out time, and go gently, as the world around them rapidly speeds up again? “If there’s opportunities for companies and businesses to think creatively about different work weeks or work hours for parents, for families, it’ll benefit everybody,” says Tucci. The Australian Childhood Foundation’s 2020 report A Lasting Legacy: the impact of Covid 19 on children and parents highlights the need for governments at all levels to have “a stronger focus on parental well-being and family functioning”. Support should come in different forms – ranging from online resources to connection with other parents through online communities, to professional advice at times when parents need it. “It’s a potential legacy,” Tucci says. “I don’t think parents did relax our expectations. We broadened our expectations. Now we can appreciate that ability to do stuff that’s just nonsensical, like just putting leaves into piles.” After a rocky start with the move, Asher’s son’s new veggie patch is thriving. And Asher felt their relationship with their son shift. He saw the effort Asher was making with the relocation – the tradies, movers, re-enrolling in school – and began helping. “Unasked. Sometimes bringing in laundry or helping with dishes.” “We grew closer,” says Asher. “I’m not sure if he knew before that he’d always come first no matter what. I think he thought he was part of my whirlwind, but didn’t know he was central to it all.”Around one in 10 Australians – 2.7 million people – suffer from asthma, a chronic condition involving inflammation and narrowing of the airways. This can cause breathing difficulties, wheezing, chest tightness and coughing. Understandably, fear of triggering symptoms often leads to exercise avoidance. Some people avoid it due to a high symptom burden; others have exercise-induced asthma. Even people not in these categories live in fear of exacerbating symptoms, says Dr Sarah Valkenborghs from the University of Newcastle. But this can be a catch-22. “With avoidance of sport and exercise comes de-conditioning,” says exercise physiologist Bridget Nash from Body Smart Health, adding that physical inactivity can also worsen symptoms. “For anyone with asthma, it is highly recommended to continue regular exercise to avoid this deconditioning cycle.” All people with asthma should benefit from an exercise program when taking the right precautions, according to the Australian Association for Exercise and Sports Science. Some might even excel – about 7% of Olympians overall and 25% of Olympic swimmers have asthma. Here are some general recommendations for taking the plunge – but it’s important to first consult with a health professional for individually tailored advice and an asthma management plan. The move: diaphragmatic breathing Most research on exercise for asthma has focused on aerobic activities. But Valkenborghs says increasing muscular strength will also deliver a multitude of benefits and is considered relatively safe. “The thing with strength training is you don’t increase your breathing that much at all.” The most relevant study on strength training for asthma found that diaphragmatic breathing was as effective as aerobic exercise in improving lung function. This involved putting weights on the stomach and breathing deeply from the belly to lift the weight up and down. “A lot of individuals with asthma take shallow breaths, using the muscles of the neck to expand the lungs rather than taking deep breaths using the diaphragm,” Nash says. She recommends the upper body strengthening exercises lat pulldown or row through to her clients to promote better and deeper breathing. The class: yoga or pilates Indoor classes may help avoid potential outdoor triggers such as cold air, pollution and pollen. Yoga or Pilates are good choices, according to Nash. “Slowing down and focusing on good-quality breathing will help make sure we are getting those deep, full breaths in,” she says. “As you start to feel more confident, you can start to incorporate with some moderate-intensity strength training to help with global strength and other co-morbidities.” Aerobic exercise is highly recommended for improving asthma-related outcomes such as quality of life, asthma control, air flow, lung function and inflammation. When ready to move to more vigorous activities, Valkenborghs says spin and Hiit classes are a good option; or aqua aerobics, which would be ideal for people whose symptoms aren’t triggered by chlorine. For any aerobic exercise, she says, a 10–15-minute warm-up with low to moderate activity can help prevent sudden irritation to the lungs. The activity: walking There are plenty of free activities, of course. Even walking is very beneficial, says Valkenborghs, especially for someone with asthma who wants to embark on an exercise program and is a bit deconditioned or unfit. “It’s low risk for inducing asthma and can prepare the muscles and bones for future high-intensity exercise.” As physical activity and fitness levels improve, they can start increasing the intensity by progressing to low-level interval training with intermittent walking and jogging, and later building up to a continuous jog or run, stop, run, stop. Cycling is also a good option. Swimming is ideal, especially at the beach for people triggered by chlorine. The air above the water contains virtually 100% humidity and in warm weather can provide minimal provocation to the lungs. The hard pass: scuba diving Scuba diving has long been a definite no-no for people with asthma, says Valkenborghs, although a small percentage of people with well-managed symptoms might get a doctor’s clearance. Nash says make sure to have your Ventolin when trying a new activity, and seek professional advice on breathing techniques.Sometimes on a Monday or a Tuesday after work, I could really do with a G&amp;T. Or a solitary chilled beer. Sometimes it’s just that kind of night. But if it’s a Monday or a Tuesday, the rule is this: no. Not after a hard day. Not out with friends. Not if there’s a half-full bottle of impeccably chilled pinot in the fridge. No. Which isn’t to say that Wednesday to Sunday is a raging bacchanalian festival of booze. Rather, designating two unchanging, no-excuse-accepted alcohol-free days a week has had positive knock-on effects through the week. There are fewer times I drink alcohol at all, even on my “permitted” days, and on those days I do have alcohol I drink less. I thoroughly enjoy a glass of this or that, but sticking within the government’s not-long-ago revised down alcohol guidelines is easy. Drinking alcohol in Australia is often an all-or-nothing affair: teetotal rates (up until last year) have been steadily climbing, while a quarter of us exceed the single-session recommended limits at least once a month. It’s the latter kind of event which often leads one to swear off the stuff – particularly after the revelry of the new year. Abstinence, surely, must be the answer! An alcohol-free January! No – dry July! And so the months roll. But, for those who do not have problematic drinking levels, yet want to reduce their alcohol intake, what of a half-arsed abstinence? “Any reduction in alcohol consumption can have short- and long-term physical and psychological benefits,” says Dr Nicole Lee of the National Drug Research Institute at Curtin University. “With people who drink regularly, when they reduce their drinking many find they sleep better, they can think more clearly during the day and they lose a bit of weight. Your heart, liver, stomach and brain will thank you.” While any reduction is good, Lee says that we should probably aim for a little better than my two-day rule. Ensuring three or four days a week are alcohol-free would make keeping within the recommended weekly intake easier. “Everyone is different,” she says. “Whatever helps you to maintain a reduction in drinking days is a good thing. You might need to try a few different strategies before you find one that’s right for you.”When the world first met Angus and Julia Stone, it was as a duo. The sibling act began releasing gentle folk-pop music in 2006, swiftly finding global success with hits like Big Jet Plane. The pair still make music together (their latest album, Life is Strange, arrived in 2021) but also have solo projects. Apart, their sounds have diverged: Julia released a record full of bright, shimmering pop music in April 2021 while Angus makes blissed-out rock as Dope Lemon. This Friday 7 January, Angus returns with his third album under the moniker, titled Rose Pink Cadillac. Essential to every record Angus makes is a particular guitar: a 1960s Telecaster given to him by his father. Here, Stone tells us about that “holy grail” instrument, as well as the story of two other important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire When we last toured the States, [Apple co-founder] Steve Wozniak would fly in to different shows we were playing. It was so cool seeing him at the front of the barrier – the biggest legend to walk Earth, singing all the lyrics to the tunes we had written. There was one show where we were chilling backstage and Steve came up and told me he wanted me to have something special, which he only had a few of. It was four [fake] $2 bills he had created back in the day. They have sneaky little markings on them that he only told me about. They look like a real bill – down to a tee – and would pass if put in circulation, but because they were created by the man that invented Apple, they are very precious to me. He’s a legend, by the way – salt of the earth and a good storyteller. After shows, backstage, there would always be a group around him as he spoke. It was dope to see the legend live on. I’d also have to grab a special gift given to me by my beautiful sister Julia on my 30th birthday. It is a geometric crystal hanging light, made by an incredible artist called Asaf Zakay. It’s worth its weight in gold but it also signifies our time together, spending our 20s travelling the world and sharing what we created. It’s a piece of magic – a little portal to our relationship as brother and sister. My most useful object A gift given to me by my parents for my 21st. I grew up with this guitar that was basically regarded around the house and town as the holy grail of guitars: a unique 1960s Telecaster. I have never seen another like it in my many years on the road and we’ve been around some of the world’s most storied guitarists who would gawk at it. When we toured with Fleetwood Mac, Lindsey Buckingham and the gang were tripped out. It was my dad’s very first guitar that he bought off his guitar teacher. It lives on basically every record I’ve ever released. It’s become a defining sound of my albums and will stay that way for many more to come. The item I most regret losing The item I most regret losing is a cowboy boot someone nicked from backstage in Amsterdam. They only took one, which was strange. So I have the other to be like “damn, one day we will reunite you with your comrade”. I hope whoever took it has some flowers growing in it, on a windowsill, somewhere in a small cobblestone street in Holland, and are enjoying it as much as I enjoy the one I have at home.Confirmed daily Covid cases in the UK have hit another record high, with 218,724 reported in the past 24 hours. The latest figures – which reflect infections picked up by testing – bring the UK total for the past seven days to 1,269,878, up 51% on the week before. The true number of infections is estimated to be substantially higher as not all infections are captured by the testing programme. The highly transmissible Omicron variant has fuelled a sharp rise in coronavirus cases since early December. After taking hold in London and other urban centres, it has spread rapidly around the country. The number of daily Covid cases in the UK is now triple that seen at the height of last winter’s wave driven by the Alpha variant, first spotted in Kent. The official figures continue to be affected by disruption over Christmas and the new year, with Tuesday’s data for Northern Ireland covering a four-day period, and for Wales covering a two-day period. However, the data shows that 148,725 cases were reported on Tuesday in England alone, up from 137,541 the day before but below the recent high of 162,572 reported on New Year’s Day. The figures do not include cases that are reinfections. The data released on Tuesday shows there were 15,044 Covid patients in hospital in England, up from 9,546 the week before. The number has also risen in Scotland over the same period, from 599 to 1,147. Data was not reported for Wales or Northern Ireland on Tuesday. While hospitalisations have risen steeply with the Omicron wave, immunity conferred by vaccines and past infection, combined with the variant being intrinsically milder, has kept daily admissions and bed occupancy substantially lower than during the peak last January. In last winter’s Covid wave, before mass vaccination, daily UK admissions exceeded 4,500, while the number of people in hospital with Covid neared 40,000 at the peak. There are early signs in London that cases have plateaued and may even be falling among 18- to 59-year-olds. But cases continue to rise in people aged 60 and over. It is unclear whether hospital admissions will increase substantially as Omicron infects these older, more vulnerable people, or whether the high uptake of Covid boosters will protect them enough to keep admissions down. Further uncertainty remains over the impact of mixing over Christmas and the new year. Many infections picked up in the past two weeks will not have had time to progress to severe disease, if they are going to, and feed through to hospitalisations. The picture will become clearer in the next two weeks and public health officials are watching London hospitals, in particular, for the first sign of high hospital admissions among older people. The government said a further 48 people had died in England, Northern Ireland and Wales within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19. The numbers for Covid deaths in Scotland were not updated. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 174,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate.Spain and Belgium have almost treble Europe’s average number of robberies, topping its robbery league, according to a Eurostat report. The figures, compiled from 2016-2019, before the pandemic, show robberies fell in Europe by 11% over the period, with an average of approximately 55 for every 100,000 people. In Belgium there were 146 police-reported robberies per 100,000, with 134 in Spain. The UK, at that point still in the EU, came third, with a score of 132, with Portugal fourth at 108. Hungary, at 7.4 per 100,000 people, had the lowest number of reported robberies. The Eurostat report covers the EU, the EFTA countries, as well as some EU candidate countries and potential candidate countries. While current pan-European figures have yet to be compiled, the pandemic, through a combination of lockdowns and the collapse of tourism, has seen a drastic fall in most crimes in countries with high crime rates, while it has had less impact on countries where crime was already low, such as Hungary. This has especially been the case in Spain where, compared with 2019, street robbery in 2021 fell by 34% and robbery with violence by 22%. In Barcelona the figures were 56% and 32% respectively, twice that of Madrid. As Barcelona is Spain’s – and, indeed, Europe’s – bag-snatching capital, this suggests the decline in tourism has been a decisive factor. In 2018 crime was up 17% in Barcelona, the highest increase in Spain, with an average of 12 robberies an hour, most in areas popular with tourists, according to Spain’s interior ministry. Other factors are Spain’s high youth unemployment, with more than 40% of under-25s unemployed in some regions. The relative impunity regarding petty theft is also seen as a contributing factor. The theft of goods worth less that €400 is treated as a misdemeanor punishable with a small fine. Repeat offenders are simply fined again as the offences are not cumulative. Nonetheless, the Economist’s 2021 Safe Cities Index ranked Barcelona as the fourth safest city in Europe and 11th in the world. Copenhagen was listed as the world’s safest. While robbery and pickpocketing have decreased dramatically during the pandemic, Spain’s drug-related crime is up 10% and sexual offences rose in 2021 by 9.2%, government statistics show. The 4.8m thefts across Europe in 2019 was the lowest figure since 2010, while the 1.1m drug-related crimes were the highest since 2008. Car thefts and homicide were down while there was an increase in assaults and sexual crimes. Some 36% of all intentional homicide victims in 2019 were female, with over 40% in Germany, Croatia, Denmark and the Czech Republic.The former chief executive of Swedbank has been charged with fraud, market manipulation and the unauthorised disclosure of inside information, after an investigation into a large-scale money laundering scandal in the Baltics. Birgitte Bonnesen, who was sacked as chief executive two years ago when the scandal came to light, “repeatedly spread misleading information” that the bank did not have any issues with its anti-money laundering (AML) processes in Estonia, according to Sweden’s Economic Crime Authority. Thomas Langrot, the chief prosecutor and head of the investigation, said Bonnesen either intentionally or through gross negligence disseminated misleading information about the state of the bank’s anti-money laundering measures. This was despite Bonnesen having access to unpublished information about “extensive and serious shortcomings” about the system and information about “extensive suspicious transactions/customers”. An official report by law firm Clifford Chance, commissioned by Swedbank, found that the bank had carried out €37bn (£30bn) of transactions with a high risk of money laundering between 2014 and 2019. Langrot said there was evidence of a “cover-up” at Swedbank to stop the money laundering problems becoming public. “I have chosen to primarily prosecute for gross fraud, but there is a secondary claim regarding gross market manipulation,” said Langrot. “The misleading information gave a false impression that Swedbank did not have, or had, problems with AML processes in the bank’s operations in Estonia.” Last year, Swedbank said it would not file claims for damages against its former top executive and board. Swedbank and Danske Bank, Denmark’s biggest bank, remain under criminal and civil investigation by US regulators over money laundering scandals amounting to hundreds of billions of euros through their branches in the Baltics. Thomas Borgen resigned as chief executive of Danske Banke in 2018 after admitting that the vast majority of the €200bn flowing through its Estonian branch was laundered cash flowing illegally out of Russia, the UK and the British Virgin Islands.One of the biggest television wishes I harbour for this year is the end of true-crime documentaries. Ever since Netflix’s Making a Murderer hit big in 2015, the genre has found itself crashing from new low to new low. The majority of true crime shows since then have been grubby and exploitative – so quick to rush towards sensationalist thrills that they teeter on the brink of idolising criminals at the expense of victims. If I never watched another true-crime documentary, I’d be the world’s happiest boy. So it’s irritating to discover that the first big true-crime documentary of the year is one of the best I’ve seen. The Hunt for Bible John (BBC Two) is technically not new – it aired on BBC Scotland late last year – but its BBC Two debut this week should bring it wider attention. If it does, it will be absolutely warranted. The Hunt for Bible John tells the story of Scotland’s most notorious series of murders. In 1968 and 69, three young women were killed. All three had been dancing at Glasgow’s Barrowland Ballroom, and all three were found beaten and strangled. The nickname came from witness reports of the killer quoting from the Bible. The murderer has never been caught. In other hands, this could easily have become just another true-crime documentary, trading on nothing but cheap gratification and bloodlust. What’s so impressive here is how keenly the series wants to fit the murders into a wider societal context. A long introductory tract is dedicated to the state of Glasgow in the 60s. Grim and dark and still bomb-damaged from the war, it is a city in total collapse. Running water is scarce, open drains burble human effluent in the streets. The one escape, we are told, is dancing. This took place in venues such as Barrowland: dark, heady clubs where young men and women could meet and forget the outside world. The clubs were a hive of anonymity – married men apparently made a point of visiting, twisting off their wedding rings in the toilets then hitting on girls under assumed identities – which provided perfect cover for Bible John – a tall, well-spoken man who reportedly liked to recite Old Testament verse. Reportedly is the key word. The secret of The Hunt for Bible John is that it isn’t really about Bible John – we’re shown a handful of suspects, but they’re quickly tossed aside – but about how utterly out of their depths the detectives were. The purported iniquity of the dance clubs meant that witnesses were loth to reveal themselves. The media coverage of the murders quickly whipped up a fearful hysteria that spread across the city. To this day, nobody can be completely sure if all three murders were committed by the same man. The best parts of The Hunt for Bible John show the police’s desperate attempts to try anything that could bring the murderer to justice. For the first time in Scottish history, newspapers ran an artist’s impression of Bible John. He was the subject of one of Britain’s first photofits. Places of worship were scoured, since you can’t get a nickname like Bible John without regularly attending church. They created a psychological portrait of the man. They flew in a clairvoyant from Belgium. Anything that could possibly stick was tried, and all to no avail. Fans of David Fincher might know where this is going. One key touchpoint here is Zodiac – a film about another real-life serial killer who was never caught – with the show even going as far as to use songs from its soundtrack. Another is Mindhunter, Fincher’s series about the birth of the FBI’s Behavioural Science Unit. Mindhunter depicted a crucial turning point in the understanding and capture of serial killers as we know them; their compulsions, their motivations, their patterns. If Glasgow detectives had had the benefit of this expertise, Bible John might not have managed to evade justice so effectively. But his murders took place just before this development, in a city that had been all but written off. The police never stood a chance. With everything we have now – improved knowledge of serial killers and advances in forensic technology – surely many, if not all, of these murders could have been prevented. This is the real message of The Hunt for Bible John, and it’s chilling. Less than a week in and we already have the best true-crime documentary of the year. Now, please: nobody make me watch any more of them. The Hunt for Bible John is on BBC Two on Tuesday 4 January at 9pm and is available via BBC iPlayer.Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert returned to his first Late Show of 2022 – “an unprecedented third straight year of 2020” – with an update on Covid’s Omicron variant, which surged across the US over the holidays. In the past week, the US logged more than 400,000 new cases of Covid each day, tripling from two weeks ago. “That is awful – the only thing that should be tripling over the holidays is my BMI,” he joked. The Omicron surge wreaked havoc on holiday travel – airlines cancelled more than 12,000 flights between Christmas Eve and New Year’s Day, and New York City suspended several subway lines due to staffing issues. “What? Closing the subway because of the germs is like closing Broadway because of jazz hands,” Colbert observed. Partly in response to widespread staffing shortages, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) last week cut the isolation time for Americans who test positive from 10 days to five. “They also say you can swim right after you eat, breaking a mirror only gives you four years bad luck, and stepping on a crack won’t break your mother’s back, but her back will just be very disappointed,” Colbert quipped. Some have raised suspicions about the timing of the policy change, as just days before the announcement, the CEO of Delta Air Lines asked the CDC for a five-day isolation guidance. “Well, that’s just longstanding policy: if your business is named after a variant, you get to make one rule,” Colbert joked. Seth Meyers On the Late Show, Seth Meyers celebrated Twitter’s permanent suspension of Georgia representative Marjorie Taylor Greene’s personal account for repeatedly posting Covid misinformation. Greene, a rightwing extremist and conspiracy theorist, had tweeted recently that vaccines were “failing and the Democrats are tyrants … The entire effort should be focused on life saving treatments and returning life to normal … Wide open. No masks. No mandates. No discrimination.” “We all want to get back to normal!” Meyers exclaimed. “You’re the ones who want to live with this endless cycle of misery and death and just let a highly contagious respiratory virus ravage the country. That’s not normal. The rest of us just want to slow the spread of Covid and get back to something that’s actually normal. “Regardless of how you feel about the ethics of kicking politicians off Twitter, it’s just a huge quality of life improvement, like when Trump got kicked off Twitter,” Meyers added. “Trying to live in a world where people like Trump and Greene are constantly screaming insane shit on Twitter is like trying to have a conversation with a friend on the street next to a jackhammer.” Jimmy Fallon And on the Tonight Show, Jimmy Fallon also rang in the new year with a sense of pandemic dread. “I like having new year’s resolutions because you can just make them up as you go, sort of like the CDC rules on Covid,” he joked. The host also remarked on the blizzard which hit Washington DC on Monday, stranding Joe Biden on Air Force One when the runway’s mobile staircase got trapped in snow. “The last time DC was hit with that much whiteness it was January 6,” said Fallon. “Seriously, there hasn’t been that much white powder since Jeff Bezos’s new year’s party.” Fallon then returned to the CDC’s recommendation change for Covid isolation from 10 days to five days. “A lot of Covid regulations keep changing the longer the pandemic goes on,” he said. “For example, back then, doctors said to cough directly into your elbow. Now doctors say ‘just have fun out there’. “Also back then, you had to wash your hands for as long as it takes to sing Happy Birthday twice,” he joked. “But now you can sing it at the speed Applebee’s employees do when you can tell they’re not really into it.”The festive season is over and for rugby’s administrators a pivotal month awaits. Covid infection rates and strict travel regulations are threatening to disrupt the start of the 2022 Six Nations championship and the European club pool stages with crucial talks between unions and governments in full swing this week. A nervous, knife-edge January looms. What, say, are the odds on thousands of English and Welsh fans being encouraged to travel en masse to Edinburgh and Dublin, respectively, for round one of the Six Nations in just over four weeks’ time? Or being sufficiently free of Omicron to do so? With no slack in rugby’s absurdly congested fixture calendar, the games are set to go ahead as scheduled but no one can be sure how many spectators will be present. Despite the strict crowd restrictions now in place across Scotland, Ireland and Wales, Six Nations organisers insist it is premature to speculate about staging games behind closed doors. But as things stand, only 500 people are allowed at outdoor sports events in Scotland while in Ireland the maximum figure is 5,000. While hopes are high for an improved situation by March and April, unleashing thousands of travelling Six Nations fans next month may undermine that ambition. In France, moreover there have been other significant developments. Not only have crowd sizes been limited to just 5,000 outside and 2,000 inside for the next three weeks – coinciding with rounds three and four of the Champions Cup – but stricter measures around vaccination are set to come into effect from 15 January. From Saturday week it will be a requirement in France to show a vaccine pass to attend a game as a spectator, official, staff member or, significantly, as a player. No longer, as things stand, will unvaccinated individuals be allowed in on the basis of a recent negative Covid test. Which means some high‑profile players on both sides of the Channel will have to get themselves jabbed or they will not be welcome inside the ground, let alone the field of play. It is clearly a potential game‑changer for some. Premiership Rugby says 96% of their players and management are now double vaccinated while the comparable figure in France is said to be 98%. With expanded player squads eligible for Europe this season, however, that still leaves several dozen individuals unvaccinated and, barring a softening of the rules, unavailable. What will this mean for those clubs with big European pool games in France over the next fortnight? Bath, Sale and Scarlets are all in France for Champions Cup fixtures next weekend and Cardiff, Connacht, Northampton and Exeter are due to travel across the Channel in round four. Newcastle are also due to play Challenge Cup games in Biarritz and Toulon on successive weekends; what a perfect working holiday that might have been in other circumstances but, on cost grounds, Falcons plan to commute to both games rather than stay put. At least one of the aforementioned teams, the Guardian understands, are in the clear because 100% of their players are fully vaccinated. Which places them in a different league from some other sports. Before Christmas the English Football League revealed that 25% of its players did not intend to get a vaccine, with only 59% already double vaccinated. Let’s just say the unvaccinated minority might be wise to hesitate before accepting an 11th-hour January transfer window offer from France. Back on planet rugby logistical talks have been continuing. Some interesting contingency plans have also been floated. There have even been discussions about moving affected games to another country, possibly Ireland, though nothing has yet been rubber‑stamped. Would something such as that be feasible? Imagine if multiple teams and their entourages were holed up in the same hotel bar for 10 days? Fun but possibly not exactly what the doctor ordered. Then again, if infection rates keep rising across Europe over the next fortnight, who knows? The testing uncertainty was already mounting even before the most recent Premiership screening figures were announced. Between Christmas Eve and 30 December 4,446 lateral flow and PCR tests were taken by Premiership players and management as part of the league’s Covid-19 screening programme. No fewer than 55 people from 11 clubs tested positive, while Bath’s first game of the year, away at London Irish on Monday, was called off after a “significant number” of their playing squad were ruled out. It was a reminder that, in the great scheme of things, rugby cannot entirely control its own destiny. The financial drip-drip effect of all this disruption is also increasingly hard to ignore. The tightened salary cap is already squeezing player salaries and employment opportunities and clubs badly need the matchday income that has latterly been flowing back. To see 70,000-plus tickets sold for the Big Game at Twickenham last week was to be forcibly reminded of what the past two Premiership finals have lacked – and what the Six Nations again risks losing. To attend the Exeter v Bristol game on New Year’s Day was also to experience the stark contrasts in health and safety interpretations around the UK. No one checked any of our family’s Covid passes on the way in, barely 20% of the 14,100 attendance were masked and our narrow, cheek-by-jowl seats behind the posts made social distancing a forlorn dream. Was it: a) an enticing vision of an imminent “normal” life or b) a super-spreader paradise? Rugby’s custodians can only pray the former wins the day. • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe and receive the full email, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Only 7% of confirmed victims of trafficking from overseas have been granted leave to remain in the last five years according to new data disclosed to the Guardian. A Home Office data shows that 447 out of 6,066 confirmed trafficking victims who requested leave to remain between April 2016 and June 2021 were granted it – 7%. Meanwhile, 4,695 confirmed trafficking victims had their applications for leave to remain in the UK rejected, according to the response to a freedom of information response request by the Scottish Refugee Council (SRC). In the remainder of cases a decision is still pending. The government has repeatedly pledged to protect trafficking victims. But charities have documented that some of those removed from the UK and returned to their home countries have fallen back into the hands of their traffickers or have been vulnerable to being picked up by new traffickers. A landmark high court judgment in October 2021 said that all confirmed trafficking victims should be granted leave to remain in the UK. Ahmed Aydeed of Duncan Lewis Solicitors, the lawyer who brought the high court case, expressed concern about the new trafficking data. “Victims of trafficking, experience a profound loss of their sense of safety and security. A reliably safe environment is a pre-requisite for recovery. By refusing, en masse it seems, leave to remain to victims, the home secretary is re-traumatising survivors and putting them at risk of being re-trafficked.” The SRC has also obtained freedom of information data which reveals that the delay in processing asylum claims has reached the highest figure for two decades with 83,733 people waiting for an initial decision on an asylum claim with 56,520 of them – including 3,796 Afghans – waiting for more than six months for an initial decision. The SRC says the newly released data is evidence of a system that is failing asylum seekers and victims of trafficking. They have shared the data ahead of the second reading of the nationality and borders bill in the House of Lords on Wednesday. SRC campaigners have urged the Lords to vote down the controversial bill which proposes “offshoring” asylum seekers to third countries while their claims are processed and imposing criminal penalties on asylum seekers who travel across the Channel in small boats to claim asylum in the UK. The new bill also proposes narrowing the grounds for discretionary leave to remain for trafficking survivors which has led to fears among anti-trafficking campaigners that very few modern slavery survivors will be allowed to remain in the UK. Graham O’Neil of the SRC said: “There is a real crisis in the chronically slow asylum decision system that awaits them. It entraps women, men and children into state-enforced poverty limbo for years. This is even when they are from high refugee recognition countries like Afghanistan, Syria and Iran. We urge the Lords to dismantle the bill, and for the government to scrap it, and invest in swifter better asylum decisions.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “A significant proportion of asylum claims in the last year should have been made in a first safe country, rather than people risking their lives making dangerous crossings, facilitated by people smugglers. “This, as well as an overall increase in claims, has led to asylum applications taking longer to be resolved and impaired our ability to focus resources on those who come to the UK via safe and legal routes and are in genuine need of our protection. “The government is committed to tackling modern slavery and providing support and protection to the victims of this heinous crime. The nationality and borders bill will go further than ever before in putting modern slavery victims’ rights into law, including granting temporary leave to remain for victims.”A Paraguayan military officer has died after being attacked by a deer that ran an antler through his chest while he was serving in a security detail at the presidential residence in the capital, Asunción. Infantry assistant sergeant Víctor Isasi Flecha, 42, died on Monday night as a result of “piercing injuries” caused by the animal, said a statement from the military forces of the South American country. The deer was an axis deer from India, which had been donated to the presidential residence, the director of wildlife at the ministry of the environment, Frederick Bauer, told media. An infantry spokesman, Víctor Urdapilleta, said that closed circuit cameras captured the moment when the soldier approached the deer and he was attacked. “For unknown reasons he approached the area where the animals live and that’s where he was attacked. There has never been any such attack before,’” Urdapilleta told the newspaper ABC Color. Flecha appeared to have made a movement which startled the animal, Urdapilleta said. He was declared dead in a military hospital. Urdapilleta said there was no history of a similar attack by animals routinely kept in the presidential residence, which have included ostriches and ponies in previous administrations. The animals are kept in a restricted area and are not in routine contact with visitors to the residence, which is located in a residential area of the capital city.A jury has been urged to “be on the right side of history” by acquitting four defendants accused of criminal damage over the toppling of the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston. In closing speeches at Bristol crown court on Tuesday, barristers for the accused argued that the statue, which stood over the multicultural south-west city for 125 years, was so indecent and potentially abusive that it constituted a crime. “Make no mistake members of the jury, your decision is not just going to be felt in this court room or this city,” said Liam Walker QC, representing Sage Willoughby. “It will be reverberate around the world. I urge you all to be on the right side of history.” Rhian Graham, 30, Milo Ponsford, 26, and Sage Willoughby, 22, are accused with “others unknown” of helping to tie ropes around the statue’s neck and using them to pull it from its plinth in Bristol during a Black Lives Matter protest on 7 June 2020. They are on trial alongside Jake Skuse, 33, who is accused of helping roll it to Bristol harbour, where it was thrown into the River Avon. All have argued that their actions were justified by the offence the statue caused. “Each of these defendants were on the right side of history, and I submit, they were also on the right side of the law,” said Walker. “Colston’s deeds may be historical, but the continued veneration of him in this city was not. The continued veneration of him in a vibrant multicultural city was an act of abuse. “Colston’s statue normalised abuse. It condoned the shrugging acceptance of racism. It celebrated the achievements of a racist mass murderer. The continued existence of that statue was a racist hate crime.” Tom Wainwright, representing Ponsford, suggested that the historical significance, and hence the value, of the statue had been increased by its toppling – that rather than destroying history, those on trial had “created history”, while at the same time correcting the record on Colston’s crimes. “You may think it would bring the criminal justice system into disrepute if a person were convicted of criminally damaging something by adding value to it, by improving it,” Wainwright said. “Ask yourselves: what value did this statue have before 7 June 2020, and what value does it have now?” Closing for the crown, William Hughes QC told jurors that it was not Colston who was standing trial. “We made it clear when we first addressed you at the start of this case that we didn’t dispute that Edward Colston’s history was awash with his hands-on involvement with the slave trade,” Hughes said. “You have heard detailed, highly emotive evidence in that regard from David Olusoga. We are not apologists for Edward Colston but he and those of his ilk are not on trial.” Hughes said that despite the wide-ranging evidence heard of Colston’s, and Bristol’s, involvement in the slave trade; the impact of the statue on the city’s current black residents; and the failure of local politicians to take action, the trial was “not a public inquiry”, not about politics or emotions. “This trial is about cold hard facts and it is fundamentally about the rule of law,” Hughes said. “If we can simply pull down what offends us regardless of the views of others then what statues, institutions or buildings are next, you might ask.” Skuse, Graham, Ponsford and Willoughby all deny criminal damage. The trial continues.Reinfections should be included in Covid figures for the UK as soon as possible, scientists have said, amid warnings that up to 15% of Omicron cases could be people who have had coronavirus before. At present, daily Covid case figures – which reflect the number of infections picked up by testing – do not include reinfections for all countries of the UK. While figures for Wales do include multiple cases for the same person, provided the positive tests are more than 42 days apart, this is not the case for England, Scotland or Northern Ireland. However scientists have said that with the proportion of cases that are reinfections growing, such figures should be urgently updated. “The reinfection rate was fairly low with Delta, but is higher now, both because prior infection provides little protection against Omicron, and there is a bigger pool of people with prior infection,” said Prof Sir David Spiegelhalter, a statistician at the University of Cambridge. According to a report released by researchers at Imperial College London last month, the risk of reinfection with Omicron is more than five times higher than with Delta. Speaking on the Today programme on Tuesday, leading epidemiologist Prof Neil Ferguson of Imperial College said between 10% and 15% of Omicron cases are reinfections. The figure chimes with data released by the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), which found that of 116,683 people identified as having an Omicron infection in England between 1 November and 18 December last year, 11,103 – or 9.5% – had previously tested positive for Covid more than 90 days ago, and hence would be identified as being reinfected. The Guardian understands that reinfections were not included in the case figures published on the government’s dashboard at the start of the pandemic as it was uncertain at the time whether it was possible to be reinfected and, if it was, the interval between infections. Tim Colbourn, professor of global health systems, epidemiology and evaluation at University College London (UCL), said the case data should now be updated. “I think reinfections should be added to the dashboard as soon as possible as they will be a growing proportion of cases going forwards,” he said. “10-15% now sounds plausible and I’m sure the [proportion] will increase over the coming weeks as immunity from prior infection and vaccination wanes.” Prof Christina Pagel, director of UCL’s Clinical Operational Research Unit, agreed that the proportion of all Covid cases that are reinfections will continue to grow, although the rate of rise is going to be modest now that Omicron is the dominant variant in the UK and the lower reinfection rates with Delta are no longer part of the overall case picture. Pagel added that in order to understand how quickly an immune-evasive variant is spreading, it is important to include reinfections. “As more and more people get infected, given current policies, over the longer term it’s going to be rare to find someone who’s never had Covid,” she said, although she added many people who have had an infection will never have had a test. The Guardian understands the UKHSA is planning to include reinfections in case data from the end of the month, though Pagel – who is not involved with the dashboard –said the task is not simple. “My understanding is that most of the complex, interlinked data tables that underlie the dashboard need to be changed to include reinfections and that is just a massive job,” she said.Weather forecasters are predicting the UK’s first widespread frost of the winter with overnight temperatures expected to dip below freezing on Wednesday and into Thursday. Later in the week many parts of western Scotland, north-west England and Northern Ireland could be affected by treacherous icy conditions and snow as wintry showers arrive from the west. The warnings are in marked contrast to a spell of mild weather, with record new year temperatures across the UK thanks to a flow of warm subtropical air from the Azores. The highest on New Year’s Eve, 16.5C (61.7F), was recorded in Bala in north Wales. On New Year’s Day 16.3C was recorded in St James’s Park, central London, provisionally setting a record, the Met Office said. The cold weather forecast this week is much more in line with what is expected at this time of year, forecasters said. Yellow weather warnings were issued by the Met Office for Wednesday and Friday. The Wednesday warning is for snow showers and icy stretches in the north of Scotland with 10-15cm of snow possible in higher places. The Friday warning is for sleet and snow showers covering the north-west of England and western parts of Scotland and Northern Ireland. It could mean difficult driving conditions and disruption to travel. Richard Miles, a meteorologist at the Met Office, said the fall in temperatures into Thursday would give the UK the first widespread frost of the winter. “It’s going to be colder than we have been used to over the last couple of days and Christmas,” he said. “We are going into a period when temperatures will be dropping quite a bit.” For some, bitterly cold temperatures arrived on Tuesday morning with -6C recorded in Shap, Cumbria. Many people in County Durham and Northumberland woke up to fresh snowfall. On Tuesday snow and strong winds in northern Scotland brought difficult travel conditions and disruption to a number of ferry services. On one of the busiest routes, between Ardrossan in North Ayrshire and Brodick on the Isle of Arran, services were cancelled from mid-morning. Many areas of the UK remain at risk of flooding. In England, there were 47 flood alerts and four flood warnings on the east coast on Tuesday afternoon as a result of higher than normal tides. In Scotland, there were six flood alerts and six warnings. In Wales, a flood alert for the north Wales coast, from the Dee estuary to the east coast of Anglesey, was due to remain in place until Wednesday. Looking towards the weekend forecasters said temperatures were expected to rise slightly, but the picture remained unsettled with wintry showers expected for some. The Met Office on Tuesday issued a yellow weather warning of icy patches for northern England. In northern Scotland, a yellow warning was given for snow showers and ice, while “very strong winds” in the far north were expected to bring travel delays and short-term power cuts.European gas prices have risen by more than 30% on Tuesday, adding to mounting concerns about the cost of heating a home, as supplies that usually come into Europe from Siberia continued to flow eastwards for the 15th day in a row. The Kremlin has repeatedly denied using Russia’s vast gas resources to turn the screw on Europe, after gas coming through the Yamal-Europe pipeline reversed direction three days before Christmas. Data from the Mallnow metering point on the German-Polish border on Tuesday showed that the eastwards flow of gas has increased, with volumes hitting almost 9.9m kilowatt hours an hour (kWh/h), up from 5.8m previously. Eastbound volumes via the Yamal-Europe pipeline hit almost 9.9m kWh/h at the Mallnow metering point on the German-Polish border on Tuesday morning, the data showed, up from 5.8m previously. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said last month that Germany was reselling Russian gas to Poland and Ukraine rather than relieving price pressure, blaming German gas importers for the reversal of flows and soaring prices. The German government has declined to comment on Putin’s remarks. The benchmark Dutch front-month gas contract was up 32% at €95.20 (£79.40) a megawatt hour (MWh) by mid-afternoon on Tuesday, with the day-ahead contract up €29 at €95.50 MWh. The UK’s wholesale natural gas benchmark, the National Balancing Point, was up 38% at 236p a therm. Europe has been at the heart of an energy crisis since last year, when the lifting of Covid-19 restrictions put huge demands on depleted stocks of natural gas. Benchmark prices have more than quintupled since January 2021, squeezing consumers and companies and threatening the region’s economic recovery. In the UK, energy suppliers have warned that average gas bills could rise to more than £2,000 a year in April, when a cap on prices is revised upwards, piling pressure on the government to act to bring prices down amid a broader cost of living crisis. Expectations for colder weather in Europe were contributing to upward pressure on prices, but the low Russian gas flows were the main driver, a trader said. Separately, the Opec+ cartel of oil-producing nations resolved to press ahead with plans to increase output, signalling their optimism that the Omicron variant of Covid-19 will have only a short-term impact on global growth. The 23-member alliance, led by Opec member Saudi Arabia and non-member Russia, stuck to a plan for a modest output increase of 400,000 barrels a day in February. The increase is part of a gradual unwinding of the 10m barrel-a-day production cuts made in 2020 as travel and transport slowed dramatically. Brent crude rose 50% last year as the global economy began to recover from the depths of 2020 and has rallied so far in the early days of 2022, trading 2% up above $80 (£59) on Tuesday. The US had urged Opec and its allies, led by Russia, to increase output to help keep a lid on prices in order not to dampen the nascent demand for fuel and slow that recovery. While the oil-producing nations opted for a slower increase than the US has called for, any rise in the volume of crude they pump indicates confidence that Omicron is not causing demand for fuel to plummet. In a technical report, Opec said the variant would be “mild and short-lived” and was upbeat about economic prospects. “This is in addition to a steady economic outlook in both the advanced and emerging economies,” the joint technical committee report said.Emma Watson has been accused of antisemitism by Israel’s former ambassador to the United Nations after she posted a message of support for the Palestinian cause. Watson, best known for playing Hermione Granger in the Harry Potter films, posted an image on Instagram showing a photograph of a pro-Palestinian protest with the banner “Solidarity is a Verb” written across it. It was accompanied with a quote about the meaning of solidarity from the intersectional feminist scholar Sara Ahmed. While the post elicited widespread support from Palestinian activists, it drew strong criticism from Israeli officials. The most combative was Danny Danon, who formerly held the posts of science minister in Benjamin Netanyahu’s government and Israeli ambassador to the United Nations. Sharing Watson’s post on Twitter, Dannon said: “10 points from Gryffindor for being an antisemite.” Israel’s current ambassador to the UN, Gilad Erdan, was also critical. “Fiction may work in Harry Potter but it does not work in reality,” Erdan wrote. “If it did, the magic used in the wizarding world could eliminate the evils of Hamas (which oppresses women and seeks the annihilation of Israel) and the PA (which supports terror). I would be in favor of that!” PA refers to the Palestinian Authority. Danon’s comments were met with a backlash, including from Leah Greenberg, a co-executive director of Indivisible Project, a non-profit organisation founded in 2016 in response to the election of Donald Trump. “A perfect demonstration of the utterly cynical and bad-faith weaponization of antisemitism to shut down basic expressions of solidarity with the Palestinian people,” she wrote. The Tory peer Sayeeda Warsi called Danon’s comments “appalling”. “These constant attempts to stifle any and all support for Palestinians must be called out,” she said. Watson, 31, is an outspoken feminist who has used her platform to support a number of high-profile causes, earning her a spot on Time magazine’s list of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2015. In 2014 she was appointed as a UN women’s goodwill ambassador and delivered an address at the UN headquarters in New York to launch HeForShe, a campaign that urges men to advocate women’s equality. A year later Malala Yousafzai told Watson she had decided to call herself a feminist after hearing her speech. Watson was appointed to a G7 advisory body for women’s rights in 2019, consulting with leaders on foreign policy. During Cop26 in Glasgow last year, Watson gave climate activists access to her Instagram account. Her bio still says the account “has been taken over by an anonymous Feminist Collective”. The image posted by Watson’s account was originally created by the Bad Activist Collective during clashes last year in which Israeli jets bombed Gaza in response to rocket attacks. At the time other celebrities including Bella Hadid, Dua Lipa and Susan Sarandon expressed their solidarity with the Palestinian cause. Ahmed’s full quote, cited in part by Watson, said: “Solidarity does not assume that our struggles are the same struggles, or that our pain is the same pain, or that our hope is for the same future. Solidarity involves commitment, and work, as well as the recognition that even if we do not have the same feelings, or the same lives, or the same bodies, we do live on common ground.” Watson’s post has been liked by more than a million users and attracted more than 100,000 comments – many of which include either Palestinian or Israeli flags.The American social entrepreneur Phil Harvey, who has died aged 83, made contraception affordable for hundreds of millions of people in the developing world with subsidies provided by the profits from Adam &amp; Eve, the sex shop company he founded in 1970. A committed libertarian, Harvey also used his considerable resources to champion the right to sexual healthcare and free speech in the US. While working in the Punjab in India in the 1960s for the charity Care International, Harvey became deeply uncomfortable about the way western countries distributed aid. A woman in a threadbare sari knelt before him in gratitude for the food he was doling out, and he became determined to find a way to give aid that did not humiliate recipients. He also began to think that the most urgent need for people in developing countries was better access to family planning, and that the distribution of contraception was inherently a marketing rather than a medical issue. He theorised that the most effective way to distribute condoms might be to use social marketing techniques. This meant bypassing doctors and clinics and subsidising their sale in ordinary shops or market stalls, promoted through local advertising campaigns. Returning to the US in 1969, Harvey studied public health at the University of North Carolina, where he met a British doctor, Tim Black, who shared his zeal for family planning. Keen to test out Harvey’s social marketing ideas, they decided to see if they could persuade people in the US to buy condoms through the post, and ran eye-catching ads in 300 college magazines with slogans such as “What will you get her this Christmas – pregnant?” It was a risky business as it was illegal at the time to send contraceptives (deemed an “obscene product”) through the US postal system. However, an avalanche of orders arrived and no prosecutions ensued. Emboldened, in 1971 Harvey founded Adam &amp; Eve, the first mail-order contraceptive business in the US, which he soon expanded to include the sale of erotica and sex aids and which now has a chain of retail stores. Business boomed, and using the proceeds from Adam &amp; Eve, Harvey and Black founded Population Services International (PSI) a non-profit organisation that started a social marketing programme to sell condoms in Kenya. Adam &amp; Eve customers had no idea they were subsidising cheap contraception abroad, and Harvey saw no reason to advertise the connection, arguing that altruism exists in a different part of the brain from wanting to have a good time on a Saturday night. When it came to starting up foreign programmes, he was also a hands-off manager, believing in hiring the best people locally, setting out his vision, and then allowing them to use their initiative to achieve the desired result. Harvey stepped down as leader of PSI in 1977, believing it was wrong for the founder to stay at the helm indefinitely. By that time he was in any case involved with a second organisation: Marie Stopes, now MSI Reproductive Choices. The London family planning clinic had run into financial difficulties and in 1976 Harvey and Black rescued it, buying up its original clinic in Whitfield Street. Harvey became a long-term board member, helping it to grow from providing 150,000 women annually with contraception and safe abortions in the 70s to more than 12 million a year today. Finally, in 1989 Harvey founded DKT International, named in honour of his friend Dharmendra Kumar Tyagi, an official in charge of India’s family planning programme. It operates in a similar way to PSI, has subsidised the sale of more than one billion cheap contraceptives in 90 countries, and is active in sex education and HIV prevention. Harvey was born in Evanston, Illinois, to William, a farm tool supplier, and his wife, Lucy (nee Smith). The youngest of five siblings, taciturn, private and a deep thinker, he went to Harvard University in 1957 to study Slavic languages and literature. In 1963 he joined Care International to work in India, spending several years with the organisation before returning to the US and branching out with Black. As head of Adam &amp; Eve and a committed libertarian, Harvey soon became embroiled in legal battles to defend people’s access to sexual healthcare. In 1977 he challenged a law in New York state that prohibited the advertising and display of contraceptives. The case went to the supreme court and he won, arguing that advertising was protected by the first amendment and the right to free speech. In 1986 Adam &amp; Eve’s offices were raided by the police and Harvey was charged with disseminating obscenity. Ronald Reagan’s administration hoped to close down the adult entertainment industry and filed lawsuits against the company in many different states, trusting that the financial burden would make it buckle. But Harvey fought back, winning a lawsuit against the justice department in 1990 on the grounds that it had abused its power. In 1987 he had also successfully challenged Reagan’s Mexico City policy, known as the “global gag”, which aimed to prevent any organisation that received a grant from the US Agency for International Development from performing, referring to, or even speaking about, safe abortion care. To the end of his life Harvey supported organisations that fought to oppose government control of people’s private lives. He also founded the DKT Liberty Project, which campaigns on issues such as stopping the government from confiscating people’s assets, helping patients access medical marijuana, and safeguarding the right to free speech. He wrote about his work and philosophy in books that included Let Every Child Be Wanted (1999) and The Government vs Erotica (2001). He was also a novelist, writing, among other titles, the psychological thriller Show Time (2012). In 1990 Harvey married the artist Harriet Lesser. She survives him, as do her two children from a previous relationship, and three grandchildren. • Philip Dow Harvey, social entrepreneur, born 25 April 1938; died 2 December 2021Voyeurs who record images of breastfeeding women without permission and domestic abusers who escape jail because of time limits on prosecutions are being targeted by proposals put before parliament on Tuesday. A new offence of breastfeeding voyeurism, with a maximum sentence of two years, has been included by the Ministry of Justice in an amendment to the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill. It follows a campaign led by Stella Creasy, the Labour MP for Walthamstow, who was photographed while feeding her four-month-old baby daughter on a train in north London. She has been working with Jeff Smith, the Labour MP for Manchester Withington, on a campaign under the slogan Stop the Breast Pest. Creasy told the Guardian last year she was breastfeeding on a train when she noticed a teenage boy laughing and taking pictures. “He had his phone out and I thought he was playing with his phone, and then I realised with horror that he was taking photos,” she said. “You feel exposed. I don’t think he can have got very much of a picture, but the sheer horror at the point when you’re focused on trying to support your newborn baby … and somebody is doing that, it was vile. Because I felt quite vulnerable, I just got off my train as soon as I could.” The new offence of breastfeeding voyeurism, which would apply in England and Wales, is one of two new amendments to the police, crime, sentencing and courts bill. There will be a two-year maximum sentence for those caught and prosecuted. Under a separate amendment, victims of domestic abuse will be allowed more time to report incidents of common assault or battery against them. Currently, prosecutions must commence within six months of the offence. Instead, this requirement will be moved to six months from the date the incident is formally reported to police – with an overall time limit of two years from the date of the offence to bring a prosecution. The government’s decision follows similar proposals put forward by Yvette Cooper, Labour’s shadow home secretary, who tabled an amendment to the bill in the Commons last year. It followed the release of figures which showed that over 13,000 domestic abuse cases have been dropped by police over the last five years due to the time-limit. Welcoming the government’s amendments, Cooper said it is one of many measures Labour is pushing for to tackle violence against women and girls. Domestic abuse is often reported late relative to other crimes. The change is supposed to ensure that alleged victims have enough time to seek justice and that perpetrators answer for their actions. Dominic Raab, the lord chancellor and justice secretary, said: “We’re giving the victims of domestic abuse longer to report the offence to the police – so abusers don’t evade justice. “And we will introduce a new offence to stop people filming or taking photos of mothers breastfeeding without their consent – because no new mum should be harassed in this way.” The Voyeurism Act made it illegal to take a photograph under a person’s clothing without their consent but it does not specifically cover women who have to remove clothes to feed an infant. Nicole Jacobs, the domestic abuse commissioner, said: “It is important that all domestic abuse victims have the time and opportunity to report to the police. This is especially important following Covid restrictions, when many victims faced additional challenges to seeking help and reporting domestic abuse.” Reacting to the decision, Creasy said: “That breast pests can now be stopped is testament to the hard work of campaigner Julia Cooper, Jeff Smith, Lady Helene Hayman and Lord Pannick. We all worked across both the Lords and Commons to make the government listen to our call for change.”The only politician ever to beat Barack Obama will retire from the US Congress at the end of the year. Bobby Rush, a Democratic representative from Illinois, faced Obama in a House primary in 2000 – and beat him by more than 30 points. Obama went on to win a US Senate seat in 2004 and become America’s first Black president five years later. Rush said Obama, then 38, “was blinded by his ambition” and moved too soon, against the wrong target. Obama said he had his “rear end handed to me”. Rush, 75 and first elected to Congress in 1992, is a minister and social activist who co-founded the Illinois Black Panther party and was described by Politico on Monday as “a legend in Chicago politics”. In a video, he said: “I have been reassigned. Actually, I’m not retiring, I’m returning home. I’m returning to my church. I’m returning to my family. I have grandchildren. I’m returning to my passion. “I will be in public life. I will be working hand in hand with someone who will replace me.” Rush’s district is solidly Democratic but political rune-readers still found worrying signs for the national party. Rush is the 24th Democrat to announce that they will not run in 2022. Only 11 Republicans have said the same. Two of those, Adam Kinzinger of Illinois and Anthony Gonzalez of Ohio, voted to impeach Donald Trump over the Capitol riot and subsequently concluded they had no place in a party he dominates. Republicans are favored to take back the House in November – despite their supporters having physically attacked it, in an attempt to overturn the presidential election, on 6 January last year. Rush made headlines during his time in Congress. In 2012, after the shooting death in Florida of the Black teenager Trayvon Martin, he showed solidarity by wearing a hooded sweatshirt on the House floor. “Racial profiling has to stop,” he said. “Just because someone wears a hoodie does not make them a hoodlum.” It earned Rush a reprimand for violating rules regarding wearing hats in the chamber. Martin’s father, Tracy Martin, praised Rush and told the Washington Post: “This is something that needs to be talked about … This is a country of freedom of speech.” Rush could raise eyebrows with sharp comments, as when he dismissed an anti-violence plan by an Illinois Republican senator, Mark Kirk, as a simplistic “white boy” solution to a complex problem. He also pushed legislation designating lynching as a hate crime, named for Emmett Till, a Black Chicago teen whose killing in 1955 fueled the civil rights movement. Born in Georgia, Rush served in the US army and became involved in civil rights campaigning. In 1969, he was arrested and convicted on a weapons charge. In his video on Tuesday, he said: “My faith tells me that there’s a reason I’m still here. By all rights, I should have been murdered on 5 December 1969, the day after the police assassinated [the Black Panthers leader] Fred Hampton. “They came for me the next day, shot down my door, but by the grace of God my family and I were not home.” Elected as a Chicago alderman, he made an unsuccessful bid for mayor before entering Congress. Just before the 2000 primary against Obama, one of Rush’s sons was shot dead. Rush subsequently focused on gun control. He is also a cancer survivor. “I am not leaving the battlefield,” he said. “I am going to be an activist as long as I’m here in the land of the living, and I will be making my voice heard in the public realm – from the pulpit, in the community, and in the halls of power.”Lawyers for Prince Andrew and Virginia Giuffre, who has long accused the royal of sexual abuse, faced off in Manhattan federal court on Tuesday, in his attempt to dismiss her civil lawsuit. The arguments via videoconference came a day after the unsealing of a 2009 settlement between Giuffre and the late financier and sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. The judge, Lewis Kaplan, questioned lawyers for Andrew closely over their claim that the settlement means Giuffre’s lawsuit should be dismissed. He also promised “a decision pretty soon”. Giuffre, who accused Epstein and his ex-girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell of sexual abuse and forcing her into sex with Prince Andrew at age 17 – an accusation he vehemently denies – received $500,000 in her settlement with the late financier. Using Giuffre’s maiden name, the settlement contains a provision releasing “second parties and any other person or entity who could have been included as a potential defendant … from all, and all manner of, action and actions of Virginia Roberts, including state or federal, cause and causes of action”. Andrew, who is not mentioned in the settlement, has contended that this clause bars Giuffre from suing him. On Tuesday morning, reporters missed up to 15 minutes of arguments. A teleconference number only provided audio at 10.15am, after proceedings began. The judge, Lewis Kaplan, asked Andrew’s lawyer, Andrew Brad Brettler: “What is a ‘potential defendant’?” Brettler said: “A potential defendant is someone who could have been named in this lawsuit but was not. Prince Andrew could have been sued in the 2009 Florida action. He was not. Therefore, he was a potential defendant and releasee.” Later, Brettler said: “I don’t even understand how there could be any question as to whether ‘other potential defendants’ had a meaning. Clearly, Ms Giuffre intended to release a broad category of individuals including royalty, including businessmen.” Brettler also said Epstein “would never want to have to be dragged into a lawsuit were she to sue Prince Andrew later”. Kaplan responded: “We don’t have Mr Epstein here to say that’s in fact what his view was.” The judge also said Epstein might have wanted to grant the broadest release possible, or might have intended to provide the narrowest release possible. He also questioned how enforceability could apply to other parties if they didn’t know about the agreement, which included a confidentiality provision. “Arguably,” he said, “it would be that Epstein and Giuffre had an agreement between themselves that there was a release to other potential defendants, whatever that means, but they weren’t to know about it”. Apparently speaking rhetorically, the judge added: “The only people who could enforce it were Epstein and Giuffre.” Epstein, who also counted former presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump among influential associates, killed himself in custody in New York in 2019. Maxwell, 60, was convicted on sex trafficking charges last month. Her lawyers have said they will appeal. Andrew has been dogged by his links to Epstein and Maxwell and by the Giuffre suit. On Tuesday, Brettler reiterated what was said in a 29 October court filing. “Giuffre settled her sex-trafficking and sexual-abuse claims against Epstein in 2009,” the filing said. In doing so, she provided Epstein with a general release of all claims against him and numerous other individuals and entities. “To avoid being dragged into future legal disputes, Epstein negotiated for this broad release, insisting that it cover any and all persons who Giuffre identified as potential targets of future lawsuits, regardless of the merit – or lack thereof – to any such claims.” That filing also said: “Because Prince Andrew is a senior member of the British royal family, he falls into one of the expressly identified categories of persons, ie, royalty, released from liability under the release agreement, along with politicians, academicians, businessmen and others allegedly associated with Epstein. “As a third-party beneficiary of the release agreement, Prince Andrew is entitled to enforce the general release contained therein.” David Boies, appearing for Giuffre, argued that the parties on the agreement could handle their agreement as they jointly wished, “at least so long as the third party has not reasonably relied to their detriment on what they have promised”. Boies also said there was no “reasonable” evidence Andrew knew about the agreement before being sued by Giuffre. As part of the litigation, Giuffre’s lawyers have requested documents including proof of Andrew’s now famous claim that he cannot sweat. Giuffre has alleged that the prince was “sweating profusely all over me” at a London nightclub on an evening when, she claims, they had sex. Andrew told the BBC that could not be true, saying: “I have a peculiar medical condition which is that I don’t sweat or I didn’t sweat at the time.” He also said that on the night cited by Giuffre, he brought his daughter Beatrice to a late-afternoon children’s party at a Pizza Express restaurant in Woking, Surrey. The prince says he was then at home with his children all night. Oral arguments in the attempt to dismiss Giuffre’s case took place amid sustained and damaging fallout over Andrew’s links to Maxwell and Epstein. Maxwell, the daughter of the late British press baron Robert Maxwell, was convicted on five counts for luring girls as young as 14 into Epstein’s orbit for him to sexually abuse. At the end of the proceeding on Tuesday, Kaplan told lawyers: “You’ll have a decision pretty soon.”About 100,000 workers in key industries in England will be told to take Covid tests on every working day to catch infections early and avoid the virus spreading to colleagues, Boris Johnson has said. As UK confirmed cases rose to a new record of nearly 219,000, the prime minister acknowledged the NHS was now on a “war footing” – but insisted there was no need for tighter restrictions in England. “We have a chance to ride out this Omicron wave without shutting down our country again. But the weeks ahead are going to be challenging,” he said. Speaking at the first Downing Street Covid press conference of 2022, Johnson said lateral flow tests – which have been in short supply for many in recent weeks – would be sent directly to workplaces for “critical national services” including food, transport and border staff. All key workers in these industries in England would be asked to test themselves every work day. Measures such as tests for key workers would help the country “find a way to live with this virus”, despite the very rapid spread of the Omicron variant, he said. It came after confirmed daily Covid cases in the UK hit another record high, with 218,724 reported in the past 24 hours. “Anyone who thinks our battle with Covid is over is, I’m afraid, profoundly wrong,” Johnson said, referring to the total. “This is a moment for the utmost caution.” Johnson said the government would continue in England with its plan B counter-measures, covering mask use in shops and on public transport, a guide to work from home where possible, and some use of vaccine passports. The public had “responded and changed their behaviour”, Johnson said, meaning the new regime had helped. The prime minister urged people to get booster vaccinations, saying that in the coming weeks it would “increasingly become the norm” for other countries to require these for entry. Asked whether he was confident there would be no need for further restrictions, Johnson said that while he was hopeful this would be the case, this depended on “whether the virus behaves in the way that perhaps it has behaved in South Africa”, where Omicron was first identified and where it has appeared less severe. Answering the same question, Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, said that while Omicron had so far mainly affected younger people, it was now “moving up the age range”, meaning matters could change. Sir Chris Witty, England’s chief medical officer, said that while Omicron was expected to cause fewer people to need intensive care treatment, the NHS still faced “very substantial pressure” on its services, exacerbated by staff absences.Book now Strong dialogue is something we might be able to participate in in real life, but capturing it on the page requires significant thought and skill. It’s a notoriously difficult aspect of the writing craft and something agents and editors look out for when assessing the quality of a manuscript. So how can you capture conversations between your characters that are not only compelling, but drive your story forward? Emma Claire Sweeney, award-winning novelist and director of the Ruppin Agency Writers’ Studio, will lead a new masterclass that will unlock the secrets of impactful dialogue. With her, you will work through a series of useful techniques that have the power to transform your dialogue in an instant. By examining virtuoso conversations, you will glean tips for making your own dialogue sing. You will also be invited to ask questions about your characters and their relationships, such as: What’s at stake during this exchange? What strategies will they use to get what they want? What is the relative status of the speakers? What is the subtext? You will experiment with a wide range of approaches, ultimately coming away with a valuable toolbox of techniques to choose from when you next need your characters’ exchanges to rise out of the page. This course is for … Writers of all levels and abilities, at any stage in their process Course content What is dialogue and why is it so important? Your characters: who are they and what is their relationship to one another? Assessing what’s at stake during an exchange between your characters Strategies your characters might use to get what they want from an interacting Examining the relative status of speakers Exploring subtext Tutor profile Emma Claire Sweeney is the director of the Ruppin Agency Writers’ Studio, a nationwide mentoring scheme, and is also a lecturer in Creative Writing at the Open University. She was named as both an Amazon Rising Star and a Hive Rising Writer for her debut novel, Owl Song at Dawn (Legend, 2016), which went on to win Nudge Literary Book of the Year. She has also won Society of Authors, Arts Council and Royal Literary Fund awards, and has written for the likes of The Paris Review, TIME, and The Washington Post. Margaret Atwood described A Secret Sisterhood: The hidden friendships of Austen, Brontë, Eliot and Woolf (Aurum, 2017), the non-fiction book that Emma co-write with Emily Midorikawa, as a great ‘service to literary history’. You will be sent a link to the webinar 2hrs before the start time of 6.30pm (GMT). Details Book now Date: Tuesday 8 March 2022 Times: 6.30-9pm (GMT) Price: £65 plus £3.12 booking fee This masterclass is available globally. If you are joining us from outside the United Kingdom, please use this time zone converter to check your local live streaming time. Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest classes and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog. Information on Guardian Masterclasses To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here. By enrolling on this masterclass, you’re helping to support the Guardian, and this allows us to keep our quality reporting open to all. All Guardian Masterclasses are fully accessible - but please contact us if you have any queries or concerns. Returns policy Once a purchase is complete we will not be able to refund you where you do not attend or if you cancel your event booking. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.Whoever it was that likened the single Chaise Longue from Wet Leg’s forthcoming debut album to “the funny track at No 6 in John Peel’s Festive 50, for those old enough to remember such things” (Abba to Zappa: pop, rock and classical music to look forward to in 2022, 30 December) may be interested to learn that since John’s death the internet station Dandelion Radio has continued his annual tradition. In the latest poll, unveiled in December, Chaise Longue was in fact voted No 1. Keith Latheron Evenley, Northamptonshire • In your article (UK has warmest New Year’s Eve on record as temperatures top 15C, 31 December), the Met Office is quoted as saying a record temperature high of 15.3C for New Year’s Eve was reached at Coningsby, Lincolnshire. I can beat that – my thermometer recorded a temperature of 16.7C in the shade at the back door of my house in Kentish Town! Alan Lloyd London • I’m not deadheading my still-blooming climbing rose (Letters, 2 January) for fear of immediately promoting new buds and blooms, which would be just too depressing. Margaret Davis Loanhead, Midlothian • My mother, who was born in 1919, told me that as a small child she was taken into the basement of a Liverpool bank to see the manacles where slaves had been held (Letters, 2 January). It made a deep impression on her. Kate Grebenik Kidlington, Oxfordshire • Ah! At last I understand the meaning of levelling up (Labour lambasts reported £330k award of public money to repair peer’s road, 29 December). Dave Rowsell Gowerton, Swansea • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Your report (‘Not if … but when’: Sinn Féin on path to power in Ireland, 28 December) refers to Sinn Féin as a party “founded in 1905”; this unfortunately omits important context in understanding modern Irish politics. The Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921 was negotiated and supported by the British government and an Irish delegation led by Arthur Griffith, the founder of the original Sinn Féin party of 1905. Following intense debate, the treaty was passed in the Irish parliament (Dáil Éireann) in January 1922 to establish the Irish Free State. In the June 1922 general election, almost 80% of votes cast were for pro-treaty candidates. The successful pro-treaty Sinn Féin party elected WT Cosgrave as president of the Irish Free State and the party changed its name to Cumann na nGaedheal (Association of the Irish), the precursor to today’s Fine Gael (Family of the Irish). Most of anti-treaty Sinn Féin were led by Éamon de Valera to become today’s Fianna Fáil. The small remaining rump of Sinn Féin maintained a policy of abstentionism to the Irish parliament, leading to a split in 1970 – those wishing to take their seats became Official Sinn Féin, and then the Workers’ party. Those wishing to maintain abstentionism called themselves Provisional Sinn Féin, which included a young Gerry Adams. By 1986, the Adams wing ended its policy of abstentionism and adopted a shorter name that no other party was using: Sinn Féin. Councillor David McManus Fine Gael, South Dublin county council • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As one who, over the past half-century, has supported many of the green and social justice issues to which you refer in your editorial (The Guardian view on climate activism: between obedience and resistance, 29 December), I would suggest that there is one vital aspect that remains unacknowledged. While I personally have not engaged in direct disruptive action, I can see why some feel that they need to do more. The media, by and large, take no notice of polite expressions of concern. Even marches in the hundreds of thousands are regularly ignored. It is widely believed that only more extreme action attracts news coverage. Might not progressive and socially responsible media such as the Guardian help here, by reporting, in a timely manner, more of the peaceful demonstrations by thoughtful people of their concerns about the green agenda, human rights, responsible politics etc? It would be good to know that extreme action is not (in the minds of some) excusable, because the views of concerned citizens will be reported without recourse first to potentially perilous or illegal behaviours. If the new intended legislation on demonstrations comes into force, the onus will lie even more on media outlets to report widely held green, social and ethical concerns in ways that do not require a minority of worried citizens to put themselves and/or others at risk. Journalistic commentary on threats to our planet, politics and human rights is always welcome, but surely not all valid concerns need to become risky, action-packed drama before they can become reportable as news? Hilary Burrage London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Andy Beckett points out the risks in Keir Starmer’s talk of “the national interest” (Is Keir Starmer’s professed patriotism a strength or a weakness?, 31 December). He acknowledges that Clement Attlee successfully rode his patriotism to electoral success in 1945. But where Attlee’s patriotism seemed a genuine conviction, there’s been an expediency to Labour leaders draping themselves in the union flag lately. It comes across as a panicky reaction to bad opinion polls rather than a genuine love of country. The British public can sense this disingenuousness and they don’t take kindly to it. Where the left falls down is that, in its rush to be ostentatiously progressive, it has abandoned the field of patriotism and allowed it to be churned up and rehashed in the shape of a slightly nasty nativism à la Priti Patel. Unless Labour actively makes a different case, though, rather than simply playing dress-up, Starmer can scream until he’s red, white and blue in the face. Nobody will take him seriously so long as the only vision of patriotism is the one presented by the send-them-back brigade of Tory ministers, because they might as well vote for the people who really believe it. There is hope for Labour yet; Starmer can still seize the initiative. He should stake the progressive left claim to patriotism, pointing out that Britain at its best is so much better than the parochial, them-and-us fortress of Tory hard-right dreams. This is the Britain that millions from different parts of the world have come to call home, the Britain that (even now) has a genuine claim to be a world leader in international aid, the Britain of vaccine pioneers, of community volunteers, of villages opening up their homes to refugees. Labour has so far missed a trick in not associating these things with what the UK can be as a nation. If it does so, Labour can start to redefine patriotism and reconquer the ground it abandoned to the Tories. Dr Hamid Khan London • In a good article, Andy Beckett refers on several occasions to Starmer’s patriotism. However, to which country or state is that patriotism attached? The article has a photograph of Starmer wearing an England football top. In less than 20 years, Labour has fallen from the majority party in Scotland to a single Westminster seat. Labour has never organised in Northern Ireland, where the “patriotic” parties are all unionists, whose preference is the Tories. In Wales, although Labour has most Westminster seats, it is in power in the Senedd due to a deal with Plaid Cymru and increasingly stresses its Welshness. So, Starmer’s patriotism seems to be an English nationalist patriotism. Increasingly, people in the four countries identify as English, Irish, Scots or Welsh, rather than British. But Labour has for decades been scared of saying what Englishness/Britishness connotes other than the royal family, the imperial history, war and the union flag. As far as the section of the public to whom these things matter are concerned, the Tories and parties further right do these things more convincingly. So, I think Mr Starmer will be “one of Labour’s patriotic failures”. Alasdair Macdonald Glasgow • If Keir Starmer listened to Nesrine Malik (For Labour and the Conservatives, racism is really all about reputation management, 2 January) or, better still, asked her to be his chief adviser, Labour would reap the reward for being a party of principle, integrity and courage – a party I might once again be proud to be a member of. Alan Wolinski Otley, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Ashley Giles has apologised for England’s failed Ashes campaign but warned that sacking the coach, the captain or even himself as the director of men’s cricket will change little unless the entire game addresses its systemic shortcomings. Recently arrived in Sydney, Giles is compiling a report into a series England trail 3-0 against Australia going into the fourth Test. He held off from addressing the futures of Chris Silverwood, the head coach who is isolating with Covid-19, and Joe Root, the captain, given the final result of the series remains outstanding. Nevertheless, the 48-year-old stressed broader issues than just personnel or tactical missteps were at play for a Test record in 2021 of four wins, two draws and nine losses. Giles cited the pandemic, fixture congestion and the numbing effects of bubble life, plus quality opposition and a struggle to bridge the gap between county cricket and the top level. “I absolutely feel the responsibility of losing this Ashes series,” Giles said. “We all do and we can only apologise. I know there will be a lot of emotion, a lot of anger about how we’ve lost it. But we know it’s not an easy place to come. In the last 34 years we’ve come here and won once [in 2010-11]. “We’ve not done well in terms of results. In the 1990s [a similar record] was accepted as normal for England leaderships and they got away with it. We set our standards much higher than that.” Pressed on this, given English cricket is second only to India in terms of resources, he replied: “That’s what we’re aiming for. But unless we look at more systemic change, a collective responsibility and collective solutions, we can make whatever changes we want – you can change me, the head coach, the captain – but we’re only setting up future leaders for failure. That’s all we’re doing. We’re only pushing it down the road.” Giles said his review will look into why players do not appear to improve in the current Test setup. While this did not sound overly promising for Silverwood, who he appointed in 2019, a strong first 14 months that featured away wins in South Africa and Sri Lanka, and included West Indies and Pakistan being beaten at home, was noted. But in the last year when England – now ranked fourth – faced the top three sides in India, New Zealand and Australia the gulf became evident. A selection whirlpool was amplified by rest periods afforded to players during the 3-1 away defeat in India, and bled into the summer; those handed breaks still played in the Indian Premier League that followed, before going on to miss the 1-0 home defeat by New Zealand. Though 12-month central contracts seem to only mean 10 in practice, Giles had no regrets about trying to manage the draining effects of biosecure bubbles while fulfilling England’s fixtures. Test matches would still have been missed, he insisted, even if given full priority over the T20 World Cup that preceded the Ashes. “The last two years have probably been the most challenging of my career,” Giles said. “Performance has almost been the last thing we’ve had to think about. And that’s a really sad situation. But have we got the game on? Have we tried to keep the players fit and well? Yes, we’ve tried. And the wellbeing issue is a massive one.” England’s 21 Tests since the start of the pandemic is three times that of Australia but, though calling the pile‑up “horrendous”, Giles stressed he had no input into a schedule decided at board level. A three-Test tour of the Caribbean in March will still require restricted environments and Covid-19 testing regimes, with a foreboding “I think the guys are at their very top limit of dealing with that” added here. It was Giles who handed the job of picking squads to Silverwood when removing Ed Smith and dissolving the national selector role last summer but he remains defiant on the principle. There were few obvious omissions who would have made any difference in Australia, he said, even if the selection of XIs is another issue he will explore. Giles also raised the rain-affected warm-up period and, like many, put the failed tour primarily down to the standard of English batting. On the dearth of Test-quality players here, as well as proven spinners or seamers quicker than 87mph (Mark Wood and the injured Jofra Archer aside), he pointed to the domestic system as a whole. “If that’s a failing of this leadership, that’s been a failing of many leaderships before us,” Giles said. “Are we creating [domestic] conditions that will allow us to better prepare our cricketers for playing in the conditions out here? I’m not sure we are at the moment. “What we play, when we play, on what [pitches] we play – that’s a collective responsibility. It’s up to us as ECB but also a conversation to have with the counties.” Giles will submit his final report to the England and Wales Cricket Board, which has grappled with a racism crisis in the past year and appears itself to be suffering from a leadership vacuum given Tom Harrison’s expected departure this year and no chair in place. There is also a lack of cricket experience here too, with Giles’s predecessor, Andrew Strauss, the only former men’s Test player in the room – and he is an adviser with no vote. “In terms of my position, that’s not for me to decide,” Giles said. “You can clearly tell by the way that I’m talking that I’m thinking very much about the future and how we take this team forward.” When Giles enhanced Silverwood’s role last April he said “his head is on the block” and “if we lose in Australia, the pressure is on all of us”. The review has begun and the solutions will apparently follow but that scenario has certainly come to pass.The Napoli and Italy forward, Lorenzo Insigne, has agreed a deal to join the MLS club Toronto FC this summer. The 30-year-old has been given a five-and-a-half year contract with the Canadian club, ending in December 2027, and is set to join them as a free agent when his Napoli contract expires at the end of this season. The deal is said to include a basic wage of €11m a season, with another €5m in potential add-ons, and will be signed and officially announced this week. Capturing Insigne is a huge coup for Toronto, who finished second-bottom of the MLS Eastern Conference last season, with just six wins from 34 matches. Having been on the books at the Italian club since 2006, Insigne made his first-team debut in 2010 and has become a mainstay of Napoli’s attack alongside Dries Mertens, making 264 Serie A appearances and scoring 89 league goals. He was made club captain following Marek Hamsik’s departure in 2019 and his own exit from the club is sure to disappoint many fans of the Partenopei. Insigne was also a key member of Roberto Mancini’s side that triumphed at Euro 2020, scoring two goals, including a spectacular winner against Belgium in the quarter-finals. He is not the first high-profile Italy international to opt for a spell in the MLS, following in the footsteps of players such as Andrea Pirlo and Alessandro Nesta. Elsewhere in Italy, the Ajax and Cameroon international goalkeeper, André Onana, is poised to sign for the Serie A champions Internazionale. The 25-year-old, who was on Barcelona’s books between 2010 and 2015, has passed a medical and will move to Italy in the summer as a free agent. In the Premier League, Watford have completed a move for Ivorian international left-back Hassane Kamara, who joins on a two-and-a-half year deal. The 27-year-old, who has signed from Ligue 1 side Nice, will reportedly cost the Hornets £4m. Claudio Ranieri’s side are also set to seal a move for Udinese centre-back Samir. Congolese midfielder Edo Kayembe and veteran Croatian defender Domagoj Vida will also join imminently, according to local reports. Meanwhile, Watford have allowed Ismaïla Sarr to join up with the Senegal squad for the Africa Cup of Nations after initially ruling that the player was still recovering from a knee ligament injury. Everton have confirmed the signing of the Scotland international defender Nathan Patterson from Rangers. The 20-year-old moves to the Premier League for an initial £12m, with a deal lasting until 2027.A former Olympic showjumping coach raped and sexually abused a teenage girl over a seven-year period, a court has heard. John Sillett, 55, faces three charges of rape, four counts of assault by penetration and two sexual assaults. The alleged assaults against the same girl started when she was aged between 12 and 13, Winchester crown court was told by a prosecutor. Sillett, of Farley Hill, Wokingham, trained riders for the 2016 Rio Olympics and was based at the Wellington Riding Centre on the Duke of Wellington’s estate in Hook, Hampshire. He denies the charges. Kerry Maylin, prosecuting, said the alleged attacks began with Sillett groping the girl, before he raped and sexually assaulted her on several other occasions. She said that after the first alleged assault, the alleged victim confronted Sillett. Maylin added: “His response to that little girl was ‘I am sorry, do not tell anyone’. She didn’t and life moved on.” The alleged victim said in a video interview, which was shown to the court: “I was so scared, I didn’t want to move, I didn’t know what to do.” The prosecutor said that on another occasion: “Mr Sillett started to touch her, he took off her dressing gown, he touched her chest. He told her: ‘You know what you want, you know you want this’. She said: ‘No’ and ‘Why are you doing this to me?’. He took off his own underwear and then he raped her. No protection was used.” The alleged victim said in the video interview: “He just started touching me. I was so confused at what was going on: ‘Why are you doing this to me, what have I done that you think you can do this to me?’ He just took it further.” The trial continues.When Julia Cooper had her first child, she decided to breastfeed so that she could take her out on long walks through nature, one of her favourite hobbies. But that suddenly changed when she spotted a man pointing a long lens camera towards her as she breastfed her baby daughter on a park bench in Greater Manchester. After twisting her baby out of view, feeling unnerved, and noticing he continued to stare, she approached the man to ask him whether he was taking photos of her. He replied that he had the right to do so, since they were in a public park. “I was just so shocked and turned away with my baby so he couldn’t get any more photos, but I couldn’t stop thinking about it – it was really bothering me,” Cooper said. Still rattled that evening, she called Greater Manchester police. Although sympathetic to her distress, they said there was no law against breastfeeding voyeurism, and as a result they were unable to help. But for Cooper the incident transformed her life. She no longer felt able to take her daughter out for long stretches of time, and would hide in her car whenever she needed to breastfeed her daughter. “I was left feeling so disgusted, disturbed and angry that this man had got away with taking photos of me and my daughter,” she said. “I only tried breastfeeding once in public again, and it just ruined the experience for me. I was looking at everybody around thinking: are they going to photograph me.” Distraught by the lack of action, Cooper turned to her MP, Jeff Smith, for help. Together with Stella Creasy, one of the few MPs who is a young mother and who has experienced breastfeeding voyeurism herself, he launched a campaign under the slogan Stop the Breast Pest, which has resulted in the creation of a new offence of breastfeeding voyeurism, which is being put before parliament on Tuesday. Cooper said the proposed new law would provide much-needed reassurance to mothers such as herself that “you can breastfeed in peace”. Creasy’s own experience of breastfeeding voyeurism took place on an overground train in London, when she noticed that a boy seated opposite her was filming her breastfeeding her baby. “You’re sat on the train and you think: what’s that person opposite doing? Then you realise with horror, you suddenly think: Oh my god, can you see anything? I just wanted to get out, I felt embarrassed, I felt humiliated and I wanted to get away,” she said. Creasy said that since the incident she had spoken to many young mothers who had shared similar experiences, and she thinks this may be connected with the UK’s comparatively low rates of breastfeeding. But she is pleased to now be able to tell them that “if you get breast pests in future they will be held to account”. “We need to make sure that mums know they can complain and that police forces should act,” she said. Women who spoke to campaign group Pregnant Then Screwed described their experiences of being stared at, filmed and photographed while breastfeeding. One recalled how a man had asked her: “Is it my turn next?” as she breastfed her three-month-old child. “I can imagine many women are anxious about breastfeeding in public and drawing attention to themselves at the best of times, but something like that could really put them off,” she said. Others described feeling unnerved by sustained eye contact for up to 10 minutes. One said the person “kept shifting to get a better look” and held her gaze when she tried to shame him into looking away, while another said she had felt so uncomfortable she had called her husband to collect her.Ten minutes prior to the announcement of the verdict in the Elizabeth Holmes trial on Monday, reporters in San Jose, California, tweeted a heads up that the jury had returned. The news hit Twitter like oil on a hot frying pan, triggering not only anticipation, but a frisson of spite. Holmes, whose outfits over the course of the 15-week trial – dowdy, pale, and unthreatening – were interpreted as a contrivance equal to the black turtlenecks before them, isn’t a sympathetic figure, and there is always satisfaction to seeing confidence tricksters called out. But the level of enjoyment in her ruin, it seems to me, falls outside the normal range. “Ha,” I thought childishly when the guilty verdict came in. “Serves her right.” This was a particular and not wholly flattering form of schadenfreude. Holmes was found guilty of defrauding her investors on four counts; she was found not guilty on four counts relating to defrauding patients; and the jury couldn’t reach a verdict on three further counts. In all likelihood she will go to jail, and the sheer size of the numbers involved – Holmes defrauded investors to the tune of almost $1bn – will affect the length of her sentence. None of which quite explains the scale of contempt for the woman. I can’t summon a particular face or any real antipathy towards the board members of Enron. I loathe the architects of the 2008 financial crisis in a vague way that has never attached to a single image. Here is Holmes, however, with her too-red lipstick and wispy hair; and up it comes, a violent surge of dislike. Obviously there are sexist biases involved, which knowing them to be such does little to neutralise. The woman thing aside, however, it’s clear that in the popular imagination, Holmes is carrying the can for a lot of unpunished hubris. Jeff Bezos with his ludicrous space hobby; ditto Elon Musk, with his mad tweets and – if we’re going to bring hair into it – ludicrous solution to baldness. If Holmes did something shady to investors, her greater crime was being part of a wealth class that has separated itself from the rest of humanity. It makes you wonder about Leonardo da Vinci – were people sitting around the coffee shops of early 16th-century Florence, bitching about what a big-headed arsehole he was and hoping for his imminent demise? Did we feel this way when Martha Stewart went down? One could write the whole thing all off as class envy were it not linked to some deeper dismay at the world into which we have apparently sleepwalked, one in which the grifters and influencers of Silicon Valley have come to inherit the Earth. Most of them appear to be bomb proof. Liars and plagiarists can lay low for a few years, before popping up to start peddling baloney again. What makes it worse is that, for the space of a few years, many of us willingly drank the Kool-Aid. Facebook allowed us to keep in touch with far-flung friends and family. Social media democratised marginalised voices. Getting a taxi was easier than it had ever been. All these things may be true, but they are not the whole truth, particularly at this time of year when one is encouraged to take stock and remind oneself, sternly, that happiness is sitting on a rock reading a book, or learning to play the harp. Instead, here we go again, passed out on the sofa not merely scrolling, but hate-scrolling. Which brings us to Elizabeth Holmes. What happened at Theranos, the creation of a phoney blood-testing technology, was not a “victimless crime”, but the victims, according to the court, were a plucky group of venture capitalists that it’s safe to say no one will be rustling up a quick crowdfunding campaign for. Regarded in a different light, and overlooking the patients for whom this technology was intended, Holmes almost did us a favour, exposing the credulousness of a system intent only on profit. But that’s not how it landed. The story had nothing to do with me, I thought, not for the first time, but there it was; a thrill of satisfaction when the verdict came through, that was only vaguely related to justice. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistHeart attack patients calling 999 in parts of northern England are being asked to get a lift instead of waiting for an ambulance as hospitals in the region experience more than double the growth rate in numbers of Covid patients compared with London. Four more NHS trusts in England – all outside London – declared “critical incidents” on Tuesday amid soaring staff absences, rising numbers of Covid patients and growing pressure on emergency services. There is cautious optimism that cases and hospitalisations in the capital – which was the centre of the Omicron variant outbreak - are beginning to level off. However, hospitals at the other end of the country are experiencing the fastest growth in Covid occupancy, according to an analysis of official NHS data by the Guardian. The highest rate of growth in England is in the north-east and Yorkshire, where the number of Covid patients in hospitals has more than doubled – up 122% - in one week. There were 1,975 Covid patients in hospitals on Monday, compared with fewer than half that – 889 – the week before. NHS pressures in the north-east have become so intense that ambulance workers in the area have begun asking patients with suspected heart attacks and strokes to get a lift to hospital with family or friends instead of waiting for an ambulance, amid high staff absences and an “unprecedented” surge in demand, it emerged on Tuesday. An internal note at North East ambulance service NHS foundation trust said that where there was likely to be a risk from the delay in an ambulance reaching a patient, call handlers should “consider asking the patient to be transported by friends or family”, the Health Service Journal reported. The second-fastest growth rate in hospital Covid occupancy is in the north-west, which recorded a rise of 94% in the last seven days. It means all parts of northern England have more than double the growth rate experienced in London, which was 46% between 27 December and 3 January. The number of Covid patients in hospitals in the Midlands has risen 74% in the last seven days, with Covid occupancy up 58% in the south-east, 55% in the east and 43% in the south-west. Overall, the daily count of confirmed Covid-19 patients in hospital in England has increased by 68% in the last week, according to the analysis. There were 14,210 patients on Monday, compared with 8,474 a week ago. This remains significantly below the 34,336 peak of 18 January 2021. However, health leaders said in some parts of the NHS, Covid staff absences and the backlog of non-Covid care were having a worse impact this winter than last year, meaning the steep rises in Covid occupancy were still causing major challenges. The deepening crisis in hospitals was highlighted further on Tuesday when it emerged four more NHS trusts had declaredcritical incidents amid staff absences and soaring demand for care. The Guardian revealed on Monday that at least six NHS trusts in England had declared such incidents, which are announced when trusts believe they may no longer be able to provide a range of critical services. Declaring an incident enables local health chiefs to call for help from staff and other organisations, and creates a formal interim emergency governance structure to make prioritisation decisions at speed, for example redeploying staff or reprioritising services. On Tuesday, University hospitals Plymouth NHS trust, Great Western hospitals NHS foundation trust, Blackpool teaching hospitals NHS foundation trust and University hospitals of Morecambe Bay NHS foundation trust all confirmed they had also declared critical incidents. Trish Armstrong-Child, the chief executive of Blackpool teaching hospitals, said an “internal critical incident” was declared due to “operational challenges across the organisation”. These included Blackpool Victoria hospital running at “full capacity”, long waits in A&amp;E, and “high staff sickness absence levels of above 10%”. Outbreaks of Covid in Blackpool had also resulted in more people being admitted to the hospital each day than the number being discharged. Acknowledging that the north of England could experience even more pressure on hospitals in the coming weeks, Dr Sakthi Karunanithi, the director of public health for Lancashire county council, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the county was at “the foothills” of an Omicron wave. He said: “Lancashire is beginning to experience what London did at the beginning of last month and, of course, London is better resourced and the infrastructures are well organised compared to other regions, so we are bracing ourselves for a tsunami of Omicron cases in Lancashire. “But this is all meaning that we are not able to concentrate on the non-Covid issues, that’s really needing to be addressed immediately as well, so it’s a double challenge we face: not only fighting Covid but all the other pent-up demand and need due to non-Covid issues.”My aunt Mary Fraser, who has died aged 91, was head of the Inner London Education Authority’s visionary Unified Language Service (ULS) from the late 1960s until its abolition in 1990, helping to shape the teaching of English as a second language to immigrant and refugee children. During her time at the ULS Mary championed the idea of teaching English to newly arrived pupils by integrating them into mainstream classrooms – a more inclusive approach that helped to change attitudes as well as policy within state education at a time when students were separated according to their different abilities. Under her direction, the ULS also fought to include the traditions, politics and histories of its new students’ home countries within an Anglocentric syllabus. Mary was born in Edgbaston, Birmingham, to Hilda (nee Walker) and her husband, Fred Fraser, a sales rep at a watch and clock making company. She went to Cheltenham Ladies college before going on to Westfield College (now Queen Mary University of London), from which she graduated in 1951 in French and Italian. Her career teaching English as a foreign language began with the British Council in Sweden and Brazil, and in the late 60s she was selected to lead the ULS, which expanded under her leadership from its first office in Islington’s Centre for Urban Education Studies to have bases in 12 London boroughs. Throughout her career and time at the ULS she continued to teach abroad during school holidays in countries such as Syria, Nigeria, and again Brazil. The abolition of the ILEA prompted Mary to take early retirement, but she continued teaching in other ways, including via a long association with a group of Eritrean child refugees whom she had met in south London not long after their arrival in the UK. Initially teaching them English, she also acted as a mentor throughout their school years until their first jobs, developing a form of extended family relationship and lifelong friendships. In later years Mary researched and led history walks around London with the University of the Third Age and its Shape of London architectural group. She also pursued her longstanding love of chamber music, often attending as many as three concerts a week. Mary was a generous, kind and fearless spirit who showed exemplary dedication to the communities that she was part of. She remained sharp and active to the end of her life. She is survived by her sister Jean, me, and a cousin, Anthony.Everton have taken their January spend to about £29m with the signing of Nathan Patterson from Rangers. With it, they have addressed two key areas for Rafael Benítez and finally delivered the money in his second transfer window. With it, the club will rightly demand their manager finally delivers a return of his own. Patterson, a 20-year-old Scotland international, signed a five-and-a-half-year contract on Tuesday after Rangers accepted a deal worth about £11m. The right back was the subject of two failed Everton bids in the summer having been identified as a prime young target to challenge and ultimately succeed the 33-year-old Séamus Coleman, the selfless captain who continues to carry a substantial workload as well as heavy responsibility for a dysfunctional team. “It was an easy choice to sign,” Patterson said. “This is a massive club with huge history and the fanbase is tremendous. Obviously we aren’t in the place where we want to be right now but we can definitely get there with the talent in the changing room and staff here, and I have full belief we can do that. It was also great for me knowing the manager really wanted me here and that made my decision. When a club really wants you, it makes your mind up early on. I wanted to come here from the very start.” Patterson’s arrival follows that of the Ukraine international Vitaliy Mykolenko, the 22-year-old left-back who cost an initial £17.9m from Dynamo Kyiv and was unveiled before the home defeat by Brighton on Sunday. Time to adapt to the first transfers of their professional lives represents a luxury in Everton’s predicament, and one the manager is unable to afford. Benítez wanted to strengthen both full-back positions and midfield this month, having spent £1.7m during his first window as Everton navigated Premier League profit and sustainability rules. He was unaware of just how tight the financial constraints would be when agreeing to become Farhad Moshiri’s fifth, and most controversial, permanent managerial appointment in June. Another necessary rebuild was delayed as big earners remained on the wage bill – until September in the case of £200,000-a-week James Rodríguez – and an extensive injury list that has included the outfield spine of the team has exposed the squad’s well-known limitations. The job, as Benítez has admitted, has been far harder than advertised or anticipated. Yet Goodison Park is not a toxic, disillusioned place (a strange mix, admittedly) that boos Salomón Rondón simply because Benítez once managed Liverpool and dismissed Everton as a small club. Moshiri’s appointment was divisive, disregarded supporters’ emotional connection to their club and guaranteed patience would evaporate at the first sign of trouble. But a crowd that afforded Benítez a rapturous reception before his debut in August has turned for the simple, time-honoured reasons of results and performances. Both have been dire and while there have been legitimate excuses for the downward spiral (that Benítez has seized upon too readily), the manager has presented his detractors with several open goals after an encouraging start. Brighton on Sunday was the worst example so far. Everton had a clear fortnight to prepare because of three consecutive postponements and Dominic Calvert-Lewin back after a four-month absence. Yet Benítez’s switch to a wing-back system sowed confusion and his choice of Coleman over Lucas Digne on the left was a self-defeating act of stubbornness. A fallout over tactics is believed to be behind Digne’s ostracism, with the manager wanting the creative France international to concentrate on his defending, although other, more basic factors may be at play. Digne is a sellable asset at a club that has few. And Benítez likes a tall full-back. At 5ft 10in and 6ft 1in respectively, Mykolenko and Patterson may not be mountainous but they bring more height to a weak backline than 5ft 9in Digne and 5ft 8in Coleman. Everton head to Hull in the FA Cup on Saturday on the back of a dreadful run of eight defeats and one win from their past 11 Premier League games. A return of 19 points from 18 league games is the club’s lowest haul since 2005-06. On previous form Moshiri would have been expected to sack his manager by now. Instead he has backed him, and at considerable cost given Everton’s finances and the impact of the pandemic on the entire industry. Benítez needs to unearth evidence for the strong second half to the season that he has repeatedly promised, and quickly.The striking part about Apple’s $3tn valuation is that it does not look obviously wrong. Or, rather, it does not appear out of line with the racy values the US stock market places on technology companies. There is no need, for example, to engage in heroic horizon-gazing projections, as with $1.2tn Tesla, to support the enormous number. One can roughly get to $3tn at Apple via conventional yardsticks such as revenues, profits and cash generation. The company generated revenues of $366bn in its last financial year that ended in September – $1bn a day – and made profits of $94.7bn. So the shares are being rated at slightly more than 30 times last year’s earnings. That’s punchy, but not wildly so given the rate of revenue growth (one third last year) and the fact that all the profits find their way to investors these days, largely through share buy-backs. Meanwhile, the old scare story about “peak iPhone” has not materialised. Consumers do not seem deterred by increasingly incremental design improvements. The newer worry about regulatory threats also appears less than daunting. Apple is still clinging onto the princely rake-off fees that its app store extracts from developers, and challenges to the regime move at glacial speed. Apple also looks smarter than, say, Facebook in managing the politics. In any case, even if app store fees were slashed, such an outcome would not be game-changing given the frantic pace of growth in other elements of the “services” line – music, TV, cloud storage and so on. Within the tech universe, Apple is diversified. None of which guarantees that, having skipped lightly from a $1tn valuation to $3tn in less than four years, Apple will progress to $4tn just as smoothly. Higher interest rates (one of the big investment uncertainties for 2022) would seriously test the market’s love affair with tech. But $3tn is not currently ridiculous. Flights of fancy There’s nothing like a new year to bring forth optimistic investment thoughts about what might happen in the months ahead, and here come the airlines, reacting to a whiff of optimism about Omicron. On a lively first day of trading, BA owner IAG’s shares rose 11%, easyJet was 9% better and Wizz Air, which reported it carried almost three times as many passengers last month than in December 2020, gained 12%. All those stocks are highly leveraged to the Covid newsflow, so, yes, a bounce in share prices is reasonable if travel restrictions could be eased – if not this week, then soon. Versus a month ago, the Omicron picture for travel, holiday and hotel companies definitely looks less dreadful if infections may be about to peak. The timing could also be ideal: it would allow confidence to return in time for Easter, the first critical period for the short-haul market. That, at least, is one script and the one favoured by bullish analysts. It’s perfectly plausible, but the part of the recovery story that investors might worry about is airlines’ pricing power. As far as one can tell, they’re all planning to return capacity to 2019 levels as quickly as possible. That still feels a little dreamy unless prices are about to be slashed to whip up demand. Even on a gentler Covid outlook (which obviously isn’t guaranteed), one suspects the old profit margins will take a while to return.Even before global energy prices began to soar last spring, too many people in Britain could not afford to keep their homes warm in a cold winter. This year – amid a wider cost-of-living crisis driven by high inflation, a looming rise in national insurance and stagnating wages – spiralling heating bills threaten to tip the household budgets of millions over the edge. According to calculations by the charity National Energy Action, six million families risk becoming fuel poor by the spring, when the energy price cap is expected to be significantly raised. This would be the highest number since such records began to be kept in 1996. The bottom line of this crisis, for those at its sharp end, could not be more stark. Rishi Sunak’s culpably shortsighted decision to remove the universal credit uplift in the autumn stripped £20 a week from the bank accounts of the poor. In the absence of expanded fuel subsidies from the government, more and more of Britain’s less well-off families will be forced into desperate, humiliating choices between food, warmth and other essentials. Parents will go without to make sure their children eat a decent meal. Unheated homes will lead to greater ill health, while higher debt will bring spiralling levels of stress and anxiety. To mitigate this, the secretary of state for business, energy and industrial strategy, Kwasi Kwarteng, who meets the UK’s major energy suppliers this week, needs a plan that is morally fit for purpose. As Labour’s leader, Keir Starmer, has pointed out, the government could by now have cut VAT on energy bills, offering some relief to consumers. A mooted £20bn state loan to the major energy companies may help to flatten the curve of rising prices. But given that the rise in the price cap in April could be as much as 50%, the government urgently needs to show some pre-emptive empathy and solidarity with those who will disproportionately suffer the consequences. Options are available. As National Energy Action has recommended, eligibility for the winter fuel allowance should no longer be restricted to pensioners but include all on low incomes. The warm home discount scheme could be expanded, and Treasury funds used to alleviate the levels of debt accrued by hard-pressed families through no fault of their own. Some of the money for this could come from a windfall tax on North Sea gas producers, who are making record profits as a result of the crisis; the government’s own VAT and booming carbon tax receipts could also be deployed. In the longer term, this crisis should be the final wake-up call when it comes to dealing with the chronic levels of energy inefficiency in so many British homes. A joined-up, properly financed plan to insulate and retrofit social housing to make it zero-carbon would significantly reduce household bills for the poor, reduce emissions and act as a catalyst for wider transformation. Yet in the autumn budget, Mr Sunak chose to halve the money available for a home upgrade grant targeted at improving energy efficiency in fuel-poor homes, while the failed green homes grant scheme has dented industry confidence. Dealing with the coming energy crunch will require imagination, fiscal generosity and a recognition that – in a market that risks becoming unsustainably dysfunctional – state intervention is to be embraced rather than avoided. Sadly, with this government, that may be too much to ask.There are grounds to hope that cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant may already have peaked in some areas, including London, and also that the cumulative damage of the disease it causes will turn out to be less than in the more alarming scenarios described by scientists. But as pupils and teachers return to school, there remains cause for serious concern. It is unsurprising, based on the experience of the past two years, that the education department’s latest measures appear closer to a sticking-plaster than a strategy. But this does not make it acceptable. The publication of an open letter from the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, 48 hours before many schools were due to reopen, and the sudden announcement that 7,000 air purifiers would be available for classrooms, smack of homework left until the end of the holidays. Aspects of the regime that has been imposed until the end of January in England, with mandatory mask-wearing in secondary classrooms and recommended twice-weekly testing, are sensible (the devolved administrations have their own arrangements, with masks already in place in Scottish high schools, for example). Ministers are right to make a priority of keeping schools open. Also welcome is the reframed guidance about the vulnerable children who must be regarded as one of the state’s most urgent responsibilities, in the event of further closures. An increase in child abuse was a predictable consequence of the pandemic, and more should have been done to help social services cope; following devastating evidence in cases including the murder of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, ministers have belatedly acted on some of the risks. The suggestion that classes should double up, or that non-teaching staff might take charge of lessons, however, is more likely to alienate teachers than reassure them. Mr Zahawi’s reference to the “blitz spirit”, and the MP Jonathan Gullis’s cheery approval of a “teach army” of volunteers, were presumably aimed at boosting morale. But two years into a pandemic, with many parts of England still waiting for Omicron cases to spike, and ventilation issues unresolved (with open windows not a straightforward solution in colder periods or areas), the government would do better to focus on meaningful engagement with teachers and their unions than to issue nostalgic calls to arms. Headteachers and schools have stepped up, under Covid, working extremely hard to minimise the disruption not only to children’s education but also to their lives. But with workforce recruitment and retention already known to be a serious problem for schools, as it is in the NHS, there are real worries that the pressures of the pandemic – including the threat to health for those required to spend all day in buildings with large numbers of unvaccinated people – could make a difficult situation worse. GCSE and A-level examinations are only a few months off. Finding a fair way to manage these, despite inevitable interruptions and without exaggerating existing divisions (such as between private and state schools), will be hard. Useful work could also be done via schools in relation to vaccine misinformation and encouraging uptake, particularly in cities where it is low. The Treasury must provide additional resources to meet costs such as emergency cover for absences. Ministers and officials at the Department for Education should be mindful that, as in a foreign language test, listening to teachers is as important as speaking to them.An Eritrean asylum seeker who killed himself shortly after his 18th birthday was worried about his application to remain in the UK and was traumatised by the recent suicide of a close friend, another Eritrean asylum seeker, an inquest has heard. The examination of the circumstances leading to the death of Alexander Tekle is the fourth inquest to be heard into the suicides of four Eritreans within a 16-month period. Collectively, the inquests have put a spotlight on how young, unaccompanied asylum seekers are looked after by local authorities on arrival in the UK. Tekle killed himself on 6 December 2017, a few weeks after his friend Filmon Yemane was found dead. Friends told the inquest that Tekle was profoundly traumatised by experiences he had in Eritrea that had prompted him to flee, and also by the long and dangerous journey he had made to the UK. He was violently attacked in Calais, and arrived in Britain hidden in a refrigerated lorry in December 2016. Tekle told his first social worker in Kent that he was having trouble sleeping and had nightmares, but the social worker did not make detailed inquiries into what was causing this. Over the 12 months he was in the UK, Tekle became homeless and was seriously injured in a stabbing. He started drinking heavily, and friends told the inquest they believed this was a way of dealing with the trauma he had experienced. Tekle gave the wrong date of birth on arrival in the UK, and spent months trying to correct the error. As a consequence of the mistake, he was registered as older than he was. He was quickly transferred to adult refugee services and was no longer eligible for some of the specialist, child-focused support he may otherwise have received. Solicitors asked his social worker in Kent, where he was originally placed before he was deemed to have turned 18, whether there had been a reluctance to fix the mistaken age in order to minimise the period during which the council was responsible for his wellbeing. The social worker denied that this had been a factor in the decision not to exercise discretion and accept the evidence provided by Tekle indicating that he was younger. Benjamin Hunter, a volunteer who had met Tekle in Calais when he was living in the camp there, tried repeatedly to alert officials who were working with him to Tekle’s deteriorating mental health. Addressing the inquest by phone from Sudan, speaking with the assistance of an interpreter, Tekle’s father said his son was loving and caring, had many friends, a good sense of humour and a passion for cycling. “I hoped that he would be safe in the UK, build his life there, go to college, study and one day get married and have his own children,” Tecle Tesfamichel said. “If anything can come from this tragedy, I hope that lessons can be learned to prevent this from happening to another young person. Alex has gone, we can never bring him back, but I don’t want another young person to go through what he did.” Friends paid tribute to Tekle. “He was the nicest person that I have ever met. He had so much charisma,” Sham Aklilu said in a statement read out to the inquest. Tekle was the second of four Eritrean refugees, all friends, to kill themselves. Filmon Yemane had recently turned 18 when he took his life in November 2017. Osman Ahmed Nur, 19, was found dead on 10 May 2018 in a communal area of a young people’s hostel in Camden, north London. Mulubrhane Medhane Kfleyosus, 19, was found dead on 18 February 2019 in Milton Keynes. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.As the highly transmissible Omicron variant wreaks havoc in the US, more than 1.08 million people across the country tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday – a global daily record, data from Johns Hopkins University revealed. The deluge of infections is forcing government officials, employers and citizens to weigh their risk tolerance as Americans enter year three of a devastating pandemic that has upended lives and livelihoods. Although evidence suggests Omicron is generally more mild and less lethal than other strains, the volume of new cases has been followed by an increase in hospitalizations, threatening to once again overwhelm beleaguered hospitals. Medical experts are sounding the alarm that the Omicron wave could be particularly harmful to children, as pediatric admissions of patients with Covid-19 reach record highs. “This narrative that it’s just a mild virus is not accurate,” Peter Hotez, dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine and professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine, told CNN. “We’ve just done a terrible job vaccinating our kids across the country. So even though there’s a lot of happy talk about the Omicron variant, less severe disease, when you add up all the factors … we’ve got a very serious situation facing us in this country, especially for the kids.” Monday’s number of new cases was almost double the previous record of about 590,000, set four days before. While delays in reporting over the holiday period may have played a role, the new record could be a significant underestimate. Many Americans are relying on tests taken at home with results not reported to authorities. Amid the deepening crisis, schools and businesses are facing difficult decisions. Classrooms in cities including Detroit, Los Angeles, Newark, Milwaukee, Cleveland and Atlanta are closing as infections soar, opting for virtual learning or delaying students’ return. But the move toward online education has become one of the greatest dividing issues of the pandemic. Officials as politically polarized as Florida’s Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, and New York’s new Democratic mayor, Eric Adams, have vehemently defended in-person learning, even amid the surge in cases. “We want to be extremely clear: the safest place for our children is a school building,” Adams said. Omicron has also created chaos in the economy. Thousands of flights have been canceled or delayed amid staffing shortages, many Broadway shows have had to cancel performances after positive tests, and hospitals and emergency response departments including police have been left understaffed as workers call out sick. Some companies hoping to return to the office in 2022 watched the first Monday of the year come and go as they instructed employees to work from home for at least another few weeks. Others are keeping their doors open by reducing quarantine periods for workers, according to new and controversial guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. On Monday night, Craig Spencer, director of global health in emergency medicine at New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center in uptown Manhattan, tweeted about how the new wave of hospitalizations was “different” but “scary”. “Today it seemed like everyone had Covid. Like, so many,” he wrote, after leaving an emergency department filled with Covid patients. “And yes, like before, there were some really short of breath and needing oxygen. But for most, Covid seemed to topple a delicate balance of an underlying illness. “It’s making people really sick in a different way.” Diabetics with the virus were, he said, going into diabetic ketoacidosis – “a serious and life-threatening condition” – while many elderly patients feel too weak to walk. Covid patients were being placed in beds beside cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy or others who are immunocompromised, Spencer wrote, causing even more concern. “The next few weeks will be really, really tough for us,” Spencer wrote. “A lot of healthcare workers will get sick. We will have to work short-staffed and take on more patients. “If you haven’t been vaccinated or boosted yet, now is really the time. It makes a difference. I know you’re tired of this. We are too. But we’ll really need everyone’s help to get through it, again.”“I want to put down the best possible race I can,” says Cornelius Kersten, the first British long-track speed skater to make a Winter Olympics in 30 years. “To get the official word a few days ago was like a weight falling off the shoulders. It’s official now, it’s actually going to happen and it feels amazing. My ambition is now to be there in the best shape of my life.” The history of British Olympic speed skating is hardly voluminous, one bronze medal being the extent of it. Of late, Elise Christie has helped to burnish the national reputation in the short‑track form, with the Scot winning world and European titles, but the long track – the icy equivalent of a track cycling time trial – has been out of the reach of these temperate isles for a generation. Kersten qualifies after a number of personal bests in the World Cup series last year and will compete in the 1,000m and 1,500m events. His success comes after years of dedication and development, often without any official funding, and he has grown alongside his partner, the fellow British speed skater Ellia Smeding. They share a passion and a business but also a location, one that in speed skating is worth almost half a second in itself: the Netherlands. It is speed skating’s pre-eminent nation: there is a Wikipedia page dedicated to Dutch records in the sport. Kersten’s father is Dutch and also a passionate skater, one who completed the Elfstedentocht; a 200km, 11-city race that has not been staged since 1997 because it has not been cold enough. Raised in the Netherlands, Kersten has absorbed that Dutch culture – “People are very into it and they’ve been doing it for centuries and most people think they know best” – and is also part of Heerenveen’s Team Worldstream Corendon, known as the NXTGN and marketed like a team of esport professionals. Yet Kersten says he skates like a Briton. “How me and El go at it is [not to say] we know best but: ‘OK, what can we learn.’” And when he came to the last year of his career as a youth skater, he chose to represent the country of his mother. “I had the option to compete for the Netherlands, but I switched,” he says, citing the influence of Stephen Airey, the man who helped to build the British long-track programme and continues to work as its development manager in a voluntary capacity. “He was the one who gave us the room to grow and I’d always wanted to represent Team GB, so it became a really easy decision to make,” Kersten says. Smeding shares a similar biography, and the pair have been living together in Heerenveen, round the corner from the Thialf ice arena, and skating for the past three years. That skating has often been at night, however, as during the day they are busy roasting, packaging and shipping coffee beans. Brew ’22 is the name of the couple’s company and it has been a success, generating funds that have allowed them to continue competing, with Kersten otherwise qualifying for only IOC solidarity funding. Kersten says he would not recommend running a business to any other active athlete. “Coffee is my passion and Brew is our little baby so it’s very easy to put a lot of time and effort into it, but it does sometimes take time and energy when you would rather have a nap in the afternoon.” His preferred drink is a filter coffee and he would like to convert others to the more subtle flavours of a pour-over brew. But before that he would like to give long-track skating a kickstart in the UK. “I think the sport needs to grow and we need more recognition. I’d like to inspire people to get involved and hopefully get a track in the UK. At the moment we’re a small sport, and I hope the Games will help that.” Long-track skating is a sport that has finally come in from the cold and, while Kersten is unlikely to return from Beijing with a medal, he makes for an effective ambassador. What, in the end, does he love the most about his discipline? “For me that’s the speed of it. When you throw yourself into a corner at 40mph you’re in control but you’re also slightly out of control, too. One wrong move and you’re out, you’re flying into the cushions. But if you hit it right, you absolutely blast through … and that’s amazing.” • This article was amended on 5 January 2022. The Elfstedentocht was last held in 1997, not 1994 as an earlier version said.Liverpool have requested the postponement of their Carabao Cup semi‑final at Arsenal on Thursday after more positive tests for Covid-19 at the club. The club submitted the request to the EFL on Tuesday having cancelled a planned training session in response to a rising number of positive tests, other illnesses and injuries. Jürgen Klopp, three members of his staff and three players – Alisson, Roberto Firmino and Joël Matip – missed the draw at Chelsea on Sunday having tested positive. The Liverpool manager has mild symptoms but is fine, according to the club. Nine Liverpool players were missing at Stamford Bridge as a consequence of Covid, injuries and suspension, and Mohamed Salah, Sadio Mané and Naby Keïta have subsequently reported for the Africa Cup of Nations. Further positive tests on Tuesday prompted Liverpool to request the postponement. The club are awaiting a decision from the EFL and face more problems with the fixture schedule should the request be granted. The Carabao Cup final is scheduled to take place on 27 February and there is limited midweek availability for a rearranged game before that time. Klopp has stated he would prefer the semi-final to be decided over one leg. “The Reds have formally requested to the EFL that the fixture is rescheduled after further suspected positive tests were registered among players and staff, allied to other factors impacting selection, including illness and injury,” said Liverpool, referring to positive lateral flow tests, with PCR results awaited. In response, the club halted preparations at the Axa Training Centre, meaning Tuesday’s first‑team training session was cancelled. Among the considerations which led to today’s application to the EFL is the need for travelling supporters to be given as much notice as possible of any potential postponement. “With no prospect of the current situation improving ahead of Thursday’s fixture and the potential for it to worsen, the club considers it both prudent and reasonable to ask for the fixture to be rescheduled.” The EFL said the request would “be considered in accordance with the competition rules as set out at the start of the season alongside information submitted by the club” and a decision would be confirmed as soon as possible. Liverpool would have to prove to the EFL that they do not have 14 fit players (11 starting and three substitutes) who are eligible to feature in the Carabao Cup.In the year since the 6 January insurrection, many US extremist groups haven’t fully recovered from blows landed by increased scrutiny of law enforcement and purges from big tech social media platforms, a new report has found. The research, by the Atlantic Council’s Digital Forensic Research Lab, found that 12 months after the attack on the Capitol by a pro-Trump mob some far-right groups had been gripped by paranoia as authorities traced and arrested participants. But others had reorganized, often with an emphasis on local-level politics and a developing eco-system of far-right social media. The report warned some groups have “made troubling progress by shifting to alternative online platforms, embracing rhetoric to engage more broadly with the mainstream conservative base and engaging in new political activities, particularly public health and education issues at the local level”. The report’s author, Jared Holt, combined investigative reporting along with monitoring and analysis of open source information to produce a report on the characteristics of US extremism movements a year after the Capitol attack. The report details how extremist movements were riddled with paranoia following the capitol riot, with members holding widespread suspicion of each other and law enforcement, leading many members to be discouraged from attending public events. Big tech companies also purged many extremists off their platforms, forcing them to disperse across the internet on to smaller, more obscure sites, without a unifying place to congregate online. The Guardian has reported how the adoption of smaller platforms and less sophisticated alt-tech made extremists vulnerable to data scrapes, breaches and hacks. The report links how some entrepreneurs have responded by creating alternative platforms, independent from current mainstream digital providers. The report quotes the Gab chief executive, Anrew Torba, who says he is trying to build a “parallel Christian economy”. The report warns of the rise of far-right influencers inside these alternative social media platforms and the dangers that they could bring. It said: “These developments offer extremists sufficient conditions to continue metastasizing and recruiting. Though most online tools adopted by extremists enable them to reach smaller audiences than those possible on mainstream social media, they may be more effective in intensifying the radicalization of individuals already engaged with them.” Some extremist movements have tried to re-enter the mainstream by hitching on to suburban conservative causes, even adopting traditional political methods like forming non-profits, phone banking and hosting conferences. “As fruitful opportunity for creating outrage and hate, extremists have embraced emotionally charged social issues as an entry vehicle into mainstream online discourse,” the report said. Far-right figures like the former top Trump aide Steven Bannon have encouraged a “precinct by precinct” strategy, a ground-up approach that focuses on local politics. The Guardian recently reported how far-right groups have shifted their focus to local communities.Boris Johnson has admitted at a No 10 press conference that some hospitals already feel “at least temporally overwhelmed”. (See 6.15pm.) But he also said “I just think we have to get through it as best as we possibly can”, and he said there was a “good chance” no further restrictions would be introduced in England. (See 5.29pm.) This is from Shaun Lintern, the Sunday Times’ health editor, on his comments. About 100,000 workers in key industries in England will be told to take Covid tests on every working day to catch infections early and avoid the virus spreading to colleagues, Johnson has said. Keir Starmer has used a major speech to repeatedly stress Labour’s patriotism, and to put “security, prosperity and respect” at the heart of the party’s offer to voters. (See 1.59pm.) Confirmed daily Covid cases in the UK have hit another record high, with 218,724 reported in the past 24 hours. Heart attack patients calling 999 in parts of northern England are being asked to get a lift instead of waiting for an ambulance as hospitals in the region experience more than double the growth rate in numbers of Covid patients compared with London. Reinfections should be included in Covid figures for the UK as soon as possible, scientists have said, amid warnings that up to 15% of Omicron cases could be people who have had coronavirus before. It is likely that as many as one in 10 people in parts of Northern Ireland had Covid-19 over the festive period, the region’s chief scientific adviser has said. As PA Media reports, Prof Ian Young said one in 20 tested positive in some areas, but with limits on PCR tests, it is likely the true figure was as high as one in 10 last week. Downing Street has expressed concern over moves to end the prosecution of young people caught with cannabis in some London boroughs, under a pilot scheme being developed by Sadiq Khan. That’s all from me for today. But our Covid coverage continues on our global live blog. It’s here. The most striking answer in the press conference came when my colleague Rowena Mason asked Boris Johnson to define what the government meant when it said it would not allow the NHS to be overwhelmed, pointing out that many in the health service think that is already happening. Johnson did not provide a definition. But he said some hospitals were already feeling “at least temporally overwhelmed”. We just have to get through it, he said. He said: The NHS is under huge pressure. I won’t provide a definition of what being overwhelmed would constitute because I think that different trusts and different places, at different moments, will feel at least temporally overwhelmed. And hospitals at the moment are sending out signals saying that they are feeling the pressure hugely. I understand that, and I thank them for the work that they are doing. It is absolutely fantastic. There are not as many Covid patients in the NHS now as there were in the January peak, not be a long way, but sadly the numbers are likely to grow ... I’ve just got to say to people, as I said yesterday, there will be a difficult period for our wonderful NHS for the next few weeks because of Omicron. I just think we have to get through it as best as we possibly can. We will give the NHS all the support that we can. Vallance says Covid cases are still going up in the older age groups in London. So it is wrong to say it has peaked for everyone. We do not know when the peak will occur, he says. UPDATE: Vallence said: So in terms of has it reached a peak in London? The answer is there is no evidence it has clearly reached a peak. And whilst it may be the case that in the younger age groups, this is flattening off or possibly beginning to come down, not least because they had such a big wave of infection, that is not true in the older age groups. It’s still going up in the older age groups. So I think it will be very wrong, and Chris [Whitty] alluded to this, to suggest that there’s a peak which means it’s all over in London. Q: Will you change the rules in the UK so that people have to have had a booster to count as fully vaccinated? Isn’t that unfair on people who were ill over Christmas who have to wait for a booster? Johnson says that is a reasonable point. He says the government will make sure people have enough notice if the rules change. Q: In May 2016 you wrote an article for the Sun saying Brexit would allow VAT on fuel to be cut. Yet that has not happened. Were you misleading people? Johnson denies that. He says he finds it paradoxical that people campaigning for a VAT cut on fuel now (Labour) opposed Brexit. He says the journalist (the Sun political editor, Harry Cole) is right to point out that Brexit allows this option. But cutting VAT on fuel bills would be a “blunt instrument”, he says. It would benefit a lot of people who do not need help. I’m not ruling out further measures and you are quite right to draw attention as I did in that piece to the potential that is contained in the freedom to regulate our own VAT. The argument is that it’s a bit of a blunt instrument. And the difficulty is that you end up also cutting fuel bills for a lot of people who perhaps don’t need the support in quite the direct way that we need to give it. Q: What is your definition of the NHS being overwhelmed. Many people think it is already. Johnson says he will not provide a definition. Some trusts may already feel temporarily overwhelmed, he says. He pays tribute to the work people are doing. But he repeats the point about fewer people now going into ICU. He says “there will be a difficult period for our wonderful NHS in the next few weeks because of Omicron”, he says. He says we just have to get through it. Q: Do you agree with the JCVI chair about four boosters not being justified now? (See 10.48am.) Vallance says some parts of the immune system have a very long-lasting memory. He says Andrew Pollard is right to say it would not be tenable to offer new jabs to everyone every three to six months. But he says this might become like flu, where an annual vaccine is needed. He says frequent vaccines are needed now because we are at the early stages of the disease. That will change over time, he says. UPDATE: Vallance said: I think Andrew Pollard is right - it would be a situation that is untenable to say that everyone is going to need to have another vaccine every three or six months. That is not the long-term view of where this goes to. There may be some people who will require an additional dose, but longer term I would think that as this becomes a disease which is endemic ... it will be something like an annual vaccine like flu or of that order. Whitty says he is saddened by people who have not been vaccinated. Most of them are not “anti-vaxxers with weird views”, he says. He says some people do not know whether it is necessary, some people are unsure whether it is safe, and some people worry about side effects. He says medical professionals should provide assurance on these points. Q: Your winter plan says the government will do whatever it takes to stop the NHS being overwhelmed. But isn’t it already overwhelmed, and you are not doing much to stop that? Johnson says the numbers in hospital are high. There are 15,000 Covid patients in hospital. Some of them may have been admitted for something else. He says he does not want to minimise what is happening. He says it is “absolutely crazy” that there are 2m slots for booster jabs this week, but that most people in intensive care have not had a booster. Q: Why do medical staff not get issued with FFP3 masks? Johnson says he will take this point out. The government is doing all it can to ensure the NHS gets the PPE it needs. Whitty says there is a technical argument about when these masks are needed. They are not fun to wear, he says. You should only wear them when necessary. And he says there is a separate issue about whether they are available. Q: You saw we can ride this out without further restrictions. But isn’t that at the cost of patient care? Johnson says the NHS is under a lot of pressure. But he is confident we can get through it. The government is supporting the NHS in whatever what it can. But further restrictions are not cost-free. They are difficult to do, and have long-term consequences. Omicron is resulting in fewer people in ICU, and fewer deaths, he says. That is why they think the balanced approach is the right one. Vallance says there are two things we don’t know which are key: when the peak will be, and what will happen when it “moves up the age range”. Until now, it is mostly younger people being infected. He says he expects hospitalisation to increase. Q: Are further restrictions now highly unlikely, or impossible? Johnson says he cannot rule anything out. But he is trying to take a balanced approach. He wants people to behave carefully, and they are doing that. “At the moment, it depends,” he says. It will depend on how quickly the virus peaks. There is a “good chance of getting through the Omicron wave without the need for further restrictions, certainly without the need for a lockdown”. Here is a summary of the main points from Johnson’s opening statement. Johnson announced priority testing for critical workers. He said: The government is acting to protect critical national services, keep supply chains open,and fortify our NHS to withstand the pressures ahead. We’ve identified 100,000 critical workers, in areas from food processing to transport to our border force, and from 10 January we’ll be rolling out lateral flow testing for all these workers, available on every working day. We’ll be sending testing kits directly to these organisations and liaising with them on the logistics. He said that “utmost caution” was required and that the next few weeks would be challenging. Anyone who thinks our battle with Covid is over is, I’m afraid, profoundly wrong. This is a moment for the utmost caution ... We can keep our schools and our businesses open, and we can find a way to live with this virus. But the weeks ahead are going to be challenging, both here in the UK and across the world. There is no escaping the fact that some services will be disrupted by staff absences. But he also said two factors made this wave different; Omicron was milder, he said and the boosters were offering protection. Whitty says the latest figures show boosters provide 88% protection against being hospitalised. Whitty says, because of the holiday period, the death figures are artificially low today and will be artificially high tomorrow. But overall deaths are low, he says. Whitty is now presenting hospital figures. And he shows the regional figures. Even in London they are still going up, he says. He says the idea that this is a mild disease is wrong; people are still be hospitalised, he says. Prof Sir Chris Whitty is now showing the slides. He starts with case numbers. Johnson says almost 9 million people have not had a booster. And 90% of people in intensive care have not had a booster, he says. There are 2m booster slots availbale this week, he says. He says some countries already require boosters for people to be considered fully vaccinated. And he says in the coming weeks this will increasingly become the norm. That sounds like a hint the UK government will adopt the policy too. Johnson says tomorrow he will recommend to cabinet that they carry on with plan B. He urges people to get a booster jab. Every eligible adult was offered a jab before the end of Decembr - a whole month early, he says. Johnson says the government will liaise with employers about the details for the priority testing. Former teachers have been asked to help in schools, he says. Johnson confirms that from 10 January 100,000 key workers will be prioritised for testing. They will be asked to do lateral flow tests every day. Boris Johnson opens the press conference saying more than 200,000 new Covid cases been recorded. He says anyone who thinks this is over is “profoundly wrong”. He says we need to proceed with “utmost caution”. Here are three interesting contributions on Keir Starmer’s speech earlier. (See 1.59pm.) From John McDonnell, the former shadow chancellor From the journalist Jamie Maxwell From the blogger David Klemperer Nick Timothy, who was co-chief of staff to Theresa May when she was prime minister, has criticised Sadiq Khan, the London mayor, over his reported plans to decriminalise some drug use. (See 11.57am.) Timothy seems to have forgotten that in a book published in 2020 he himself argued that there was a case for legalising cannabis because it would “free the police to pursue other crimes and take a tougher approach to harder drugs”. This is what a spokesman for the mayor said about Khan’s proposal. This limited trial, which is still in development and has yet to be approved by City Hall, would involve three of London’s 32 boroughs and would only apply to 18 to 24-year-olds found in possession of a small amount of cannabis. It would not apply to any other drug. The idea of the scheme, which is already used by other police forces across the country, would be to divert young people who are found with a small amount of cannabis away from the criminal justice system and instead provide help and support. This has been shown to reduce reoffending. Reducing crime is the mayor’s top priority and he will continue to explore and implement the most effective solutions to help to divert young people away from drug use and crime for good. Boris Johnson will require some key public sector workers to take daily lateral flow tests, ITV’s political editor, Robert Peston, reports. The government’s Covid dashboard shows 347 Covid patients were admitted to hospital in London on Sunday. That was up from the previous day (314), but lower than the total for Boxing Day, the previous Sunday, which was 374, and well below the most recent peak (511, on Wednesday last week). As of today, the total number of Covid patients in London is 3,993. That is more than double the total for two weeks ago today (1,904). Sajid Javid, the health secretary, told Sky News earlier that the government was not planning to cut the isolation period from seven days to five days, as the US has done. It has already come down from 10 days. Asked about this, he said: No, we’re not looking at changing that. Our decisions are based on the very latest evidence and we’re quite clear that where we are with seven days, but you need those two negative lateral protests in the final two days, is the right balanced, proportionate approach. This is from Jo Beer, chief operating officer of the University hospitals Plymouth NHS trust, explaining why it has declared a critical incident. (See 3.21pm.) This morning we communicated to our staff that we are operating in an internal critical incident. This is due to the high pressure on urgent care services and increasing demand for Covid-19 beds. We currently have 99 Covid-19 positive patients across Derriford and our three community hospitals and just under 500 staff absent for Covid-19-related reasons. We don’t want people to be alarmed by this. We took the decision to escalate to the highest level of internal incident because this allows us to be able to take additional steps to maintain safe services for our patients and help us cope with the growing pressures. We are running at extremely high levels of occupancy and like a number of other hospitals across the country, we are seeing huge rises in demands for our services at the moment. Attendances in our emergency department are high; there are ongoing challenges in discharging patients who are well enough to leave hospital, and we are seeing an increase in staff sickness, all of which leads to longer waits than we would like for patients to be seen and admitted. The European Commission has rejected Boris Johnson’s claim that EU law prevented the British crown mark being embossed on pint glasses. In his New Year message the prime minister lauded “restoring the crown stamp on the side of pint glasses” as one Brexit success notched up since the UK left the orbit of EU rules one year ago. Officials at the commission said there was nothing that had prevented the crown stamp being on pint glasses, as long as the CE mark was also visible. A spokesperson said: “EU law does not prevent markings from being placed on products, so long as it does not overlap or be confused with the CE mark.” The letters CE appear on products across the European single market to signify conformity to EU safety and quality standards. EU law on weights and measures became a cause célèbre for Eurosceptics in the early 2000s, when market traders rejected using metric scales to sell fruit. The UK obtained indefinite exemptions to retain miles, yards, feet and inches for traffic signs and distance measurements, and pints for the sale of beer and milk. In his New Year statement the prime minister also suggested the UK’s speedy vaccine rollout was a consequence of Brexit, saying: “We’ve secured the fastest vaccine rollout anywhere in Europe last year by avoiding sluggish EU processes.” EU medical procurement schemes are voluntary and the UK could have run an independent vaccine rollout as a member state. The UK has recorded 218,724 new Covid cases, the government has announced on its coronavirus dashboard. That is a new daily record, and more than 60,000 up on the total recorded yesterday - although yesterday’s figures will have been affected by the holiday weekend. It is less than two weeks since the daily recorded total passed 100,000 for the first time. The dashboard also shows the total number of cases over the past week is up 50.9% on the total for the previous week. And 48 further deaths have been recorded. On a visit to a green energy research centre in Birmingham after delivering his speech, Keir Starmer elaborated on why he favoured Tony Blair getting a knighthood but not Boris Johnson. (See 11.38am.) Starmer said: Tony Blair changed the lives of millions of people for the better. He introduced a minimum wage, he set up Sure Start for young families that changed lives, put money into hospitals and into schools and of course was a key player in the peace agreement in Northern Ireland. So, I think there’s a world of difference between the two [men], in my book. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has told Sky News that around six NHS trusts had declared critical incidents this morning. He gave a figure (unlike his ministerial colleague, Maggie Throup - see 10.10am) when he was asked if he could clear up what the total was. But he also said that this was the figure from this morning and that it might have changed because this was a “very fast-moving situation”. University hospitals Plymouth NHS trust has also declared a critical incident, Shaun Lintern from the Sunday Times reports. The Great Western hospital in Swindon has declared a critical incident. These are from the trust’s chief executive, Kevin McNamara. Two NHS trusts in Lancashire have declared critical incidents in their hospitals owing to staff absences, as the region’s health chief said officials were “bracing ourselves for a tsunami of Omicron cases”, my colleague Maya Wolfe-Robinson reports. Scotland has recorded 17,259 new Covid cases. That is down on the number for yesterday (20,217), but the Scottish government says the holiday weekend has affected processing time. But the positivity rate - the proportion of tests coming back positive - has reached a new high for this wave of Covid, at 35.3%. Yesterday it was 34.9%. There are also 1,147 people in hospital in Scotland with recently-confirmed Covid. Yesterday the figure was 1,031. You can read the full text of Keir Starmer’s “contract with the British people” speech here. It was not one of those landmark speeches that people will be quoting for years to come, but it was relatively substantial in at least two respects: in further reinforcing the Labour remake, and putting even more distance between Starmer and the Corbyn era; and in setting a strategic framework (sound, but extremely woolly), for the election. Here are the main points. Starmer repeatedly stressed Labour’s patriotism, and his love for Britain. In fact, he laid it on with a trowel. This is how he started the speech. Today, I want to do something that leaders of the opposition rarely do. I want to celebrate the country we live in. It’s normally the job of the opposition to criticise and oppose. But it can make us sound pretty miserable. It can sound as if we don’t realise our own historical good fortune to have been born into a peaceful, creative liberal democracy. Think of all that the British have to be proud of. The rule of law. Her Majesty the Queen. Universal public services. A creative heritage that is the envy of the world. And a thriving civil society on which we have relied so heavily during the pandemic. And there was more later. This is a remarkable nation with an extraordinary cultural heritage. British music, British fashion, British advertising, British acting. The diplomatic soft power wielded by the BBC, the world’s greatest broadcaster, which enjoys its centenary this year. I think, too, of the scientists whose wisdom is guiding us through the pandemic. Our world-class industries in pharmaceuticals and financial services. Universities which are a magnet for the best students the world over. There is so much of which we can be proud. I am personally thankful that I grew up in a country which had a national health service to care for my mum when she needed help. That gave me the opportunity to go to university and become a lawyer and fight for what is right. This country has presented me with great opportunities. It’s a great place to live. But I don’t think you cease to be a patriot because you notice your country has flaws. On the contrary, the reason we in this party want to correct those flaws is precisely because we are patriotic. This was an obvious attempt to counter what, particularly under Jeremy Corbyn, became a severe liability for Labour; the impression that it was led by people who were somehow anti-British. In many respects this charge has always been unfair; no one who truly disliked Britain would spend as much time as Corbyn did travelling all over it to speak and campaign. But Corbyn was perceived as unpatriotic, as one particularly memorable comment in a focus group suggested. Asked what they thought Corbyn would do if he had a free night to himself, the person replied: “A nice sit-down dinner with someone who doesn’t like Britain.” Starmer said he setting out a “contract with the British people”. This is a relatively common electoral strategy, last used by the Brexit party at the 2019 election. Starmer did not publish a contract as such, but he implied that such a document would one day materialise, and he gave two specific promises about its contents. He said that the contract would promise voters “security, prosperity and respect”. And he briefly defined all three terms, using the same language Labour used in its overnight press release. (See 9.54am.) The problem with these concepts is that they are all abstract, which means they are not especially memorable, and that the Conservative party would happily adopt them word for word (although Starmer would argue that only Labour policies would really offer “job security”). Of the three, respect is probably the most interesting. One of the reasons why Boris Johnson is popular with some people is that he is seen as non-judgemental; despite being a posh Etonian, people feel that if they met him, he would not patronise or condemn them. Starmer said that his dad felt undervalued because he worked in a factory and that that was why respect matters so much to him. But if Labour does an issue with respect, it is probably not so much about class as about culture (because it is seen as an urban, graduate party that is sometimes harshly judgemental about people who are neither). Starmer said the contract would also include a commitment to standards. In a passage clearly aimed at Johnson, he said: I want to start the new year by making a pledge of straight leadership. Today I want to introduce my Contract with the British people. This will be a solemn agreement about what this country needs and how a good government should conduct itself. I am well aware that just because the Tories lose the public’s trust it doesn’t mean Labour simply inherits it. Trust has to be earned. I am confident but not complacent about the task ahead. So the very first clause in that contract, is a binding commitment about decency and standards in public life. Of course, these standards already exist. They are known as the Nolan principles: selflessness, integrity, objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty, leadership. So my solemn promise to you will always be to run a government that honours these principles. He also attacked Johnson for not abiding by Covid rules. But Starmer also claimed that disregarding rules was a Conservative party problem, and not just a consequence of Johnson’s leadership. He said: And let’s be clear – it’s the party that is the problem. This is not just about the flaws of one individual. It’s about the flaws of a whole style of government, the flaws of an ideology, of a political party that has been in power too long. This sounded like Starmer anticipating Johnson’s replacement as PM before the election, and the attack line that Labour would need in those circumstances. Starmer highlighted a series of policies already announced that would offer “security, prosperity and respect”, including the establishment of crime prevention teams and police hubs in every community. In many respects this will be seen as a Blarite speech. But you could also describe it as solid Kinnock. In an interview for Sebastian Payne’s superb book, Broken Heartlands: A Journey through Labour’s Lost England, Neil Kinnock said Labour should embrace security as a theme. “If Labour can manifest itself as the ‘security party’ in terms of personal security, employment, education, enterprise, national security, all of the many facets of security, then it’s capable of getting over the identity demarcations that produced the referendum result,” the former Labour leader told Payne. Some Conservative MPs want Boris Johnson to ease the cost of living crisis for voters by cutting VAT on fuel and by removing environmental levies from energy bills. Downing Street would not endorse either proposal, and sounded sceptical about both of them. On cutting VAT on fuel, the PM’s spokesman said this would “not guarantee prices fall, given that price rises are driven by a number of factors which we are seeing played out worldwide”. And on environmental levies, the spokesman said: The exposure to volatile global gas prices underscores the importance of our plan to build a strong, homegrown renewable energy sector to further reduce our reliance on fossil fuels. It’s right that we invest in this and ultimately bring down the cost of renewable energy sources while supporting lower-income and vulnerable households with their energy bills. Boris Johnson is going to hold a press conference at 5pm, No 10 has said. He will be joined by Prof Sir Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser, and Sir Patrick Vallance, its chief scientific adviser. At the No 10 lobby briefing the PM’s spokesman also said it was “pleasing” that the number of patients requiring ventilation support has not risen as much as the number of Covid hospital cases has. He said: We keep a very close eye on NHS capacity, that’s something we track very closely. We know that admissions and occupancy are increasing significantly at the moment - we’re not seeing that same jump in beds requiring ventilation, which is pleasing, and almost certainly a function of both the nature of Omicron and our successful booster programme. But we keep an extremely close eye on NHS capacity at all times. The FT’s data specialist John Burn-Murdoch, who has consistently provided some of the best Covid commentary on Twitter, has posted a long thread about the current situation that is worth reading. It starts here. Here is one of his most telling charts. And here is one of his conclusions. Here is the full text of Keir Starmer’s speech this morning. I will post a summary, with some analysis, shortly. At the Downing Street lobby briefing the PM’s spokesman hinted that ministers would be keen to go ahead with further booster doses - despite the chair of the JCVI expressing doubt about whether the evidence now justifies their use for everyone. (See 10.48am.) Asked what the government’s thinking was on administering a fourth jab, the spokesman said: That is clinical advice and the JCVI [Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation] meet regularly to look at things and, in this instance, on waning of the booster dose. There is some early evidence of that and they’ll be considering it, and we’ll await their advice before making a decision. The spokesman also said ministers would also be taking clinical advice and keeping a “very close eye on” the “waning efficacy of second doses and the interplay of Omicron on that as well” as part of a review on whether to make a booster jab a requirement to access a Covid pass. Q: Do you support Sadiq Khan’s proposal to effectively decriminalise class B drugs in London? (The Telegraph today reports that Khan plans to end the prosecution of young people caught with cannabis in the capital, in line with a proposal he made when running for re-election.) Starmer says he is not in favour of changing the law on drugs or decriminalisation. On the drugs legislation, I’ve said a number of times and I will say again: I’m not in favour of us changing the law or decriminalisation. I’m very clear about that. I haven’t seen the detail of the proposals that you’ve reported on. As I understand it they are early measures, they are some sort of pilot. Obviously we’ll look at those, but I’m very clear that we’re not in favour of changing the drugs laws. Q: Wales still has what are effectively level 2 restrictions, where people can be fined for going to work. Do you support the Welsh Labour government in maintaining these? Starmer says every nation in the UK has tried to get the balance right. Mark Drakeford, the Welsh first minister, has led the country very well, Starmer says. He says that is one reason Labour did well in the elections in Wales last year. He says he knows how seriously Drakeford takes these measures. And that’s it. The Q&amp;A is over. Starmer says the government should take stronger action against anti-vaxxers. It is unacceptable that they are allowed to protest outside schools, he says. We need to deal with some of these anti-vaxxers. We have said to the government that they need to take stronger action in relation to anti-vaxxers. It is simply unacceptable to have anti-vaxxers outside schools shouting at school children going into school to have their vaccination, or to see some of the activities we’ve seen. Q: You have mentioned Attlee, Wilson and Blair, but not Labour leaders like Jeremy Corbyn. Why is that? Do you want people to think you are distancing yourself from Corbyn? Starmer says he mentioned those three because they all led Labour governments that made a difference. He wants to lead the fourth such government. The whole purpose of Labour is to win power and change lives, he says. UPDATE: Starmer said: I don’t apologise for mentioning Attlee, Wilson and Blair. The thing that unites those three very different prime ministers is that they all won. They all won. They introduced Labour governments that changed Britain for the better and I want to be the fourth in that list writing the next chapter of our history. So, I have always cited Attlee, Wilson and Blair precisely because they won. And unless the Labour Party is absolutely clear that our whole purpose as a party is to win power to govern to change the lives of millions of people, then we will be talking politics and not doing politics. So, no apology about that at all. Q: Do you agree that giving further booster jabs is unsustainable? (See 10.48am.) Starmer says Labour would listen to the scientists and make a judgment call. On the fourth jab, look, we will study all of the available evidence. We will talk to the scientists. We talk to the government scientists and we talk to our own scientists. We will come to the appropriate judgment call when we have studied all of that evidence, as we have always tried to do. Q: What policies do you have that will appeal to voters? Starmer insists Labour does have strong policies. He cites housing, saying Labour would apply a proper defintion of affordable housing, and stop investors buying homes as assets ahead of first-time buyers. Labour also has a very strong policy on giving workers rights from day one, he says. And it is also proposing to spend £28bn a year on a programme that would deliver green jobs. Starmer says he does not think Boris Johnson has done enough to deserve a knighthood. But Tony Blair did to enough to deserve one, he says. UPDATE: Starmer said: No. I’m sorry, I do not think the prime minister has earned the right to have an honour. I do think Tony Blair has. Q: Martin Lewis has said some people will face a choice between heating and eating this year. What would Labour do on this? Starmer says this will quickly be the major story of this winter and this spring. There are almost too many elements to it. He says the government is putting up tax just when other costs are going up. Labour would not have done that; it voted against the tax rise. And Labour supports cutting VAT on fuel. Q: Do you still support nationalising energy companies? Starmer says he stands by the pledges he made in the Labour leadership contest (when he spoke of putting energy companies back into public ownership, which he claims is not the same as nationalisation). Q: There are shortages in many areas, not just schools. What would Labour do about this? Do you favour reducing the isolation period from seven to five days? Starmer says mass testing must be an important part of the way forward, so the infected can be separated from the uninfected. It is “simply unacceptable” for the government to say there are not enough tests. (The government does not accept there is a shortage of tests per se. It does, though, admit there have been supply issues.) Keir Starmer has finished his speech. I will post a full summary soon. Now he is taking questions from journalists. Q: Is the government right to stick to plan B? Or are new restrictions needed? Starmer says the current restrictions would not be in place if Labour had not voted for them. He says the PM could not pass them on his own. He says he hopes further restrictions won’t be needed. But more children need to be vaccinated. There should be better ventilation in schools, he says. But the ventilators offered only cover one school in four. In other schools people have been told to open windows and put on coats. That is not acceptable, he says. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, told Times Radio this morning that he feared ministers were engaged in a “politicised attempt” to play down the seriousness of the Omicron crisis. He said: We should feel some hope and confidence about the medium term, that we hope we will gradually become more able to live with Covid as the prime minister has said, that when Omicron has gone through us that we make it to that stage and the NHS will recover. On the other hand, we’ve got to recognise where we are now, that, in the next few weeks at least, things are very, very difficult and I think that one thing that people in our service find difficult is that it does seem as though there’s a kind of almost politicised attempt to suggest that things aren’t as difficult as they are ... If you’re working in health service, you see the reality, and what you want politicians to be driven by is the data and what’s happening at the front line, and let’s not be in the business of ... getting away from the reality of this. He also suggested that resisting further restrictions has become “political virility symbolism” for Boris Johnson. Asked if he wanted to see further restrictions in place, he said: The government has to make this balance between public health on the one hand and pressures on the NHS on the other hand [and] people’s desire to socialise. That’s a very difficult judgement. What I’m saying is that judgment needs to be driven by the data and what’s in the best interests of the country. It doesn’t, shouldn’t be driven by a kind of political virility symbolism, where the sooner we can be free, the better it is, regardless of the effect. Let’s carry on being driven by the data and the reality is the data has been all over the place for the last few days. It’s been pretty grim but, because of bank holidays and Christmas, we’re not really, I don’t think, going to know until the end of this week into next week what the patterns are showing us. So let’s wait and see what the data says and act in the public interest. Taylor, of course, used to be head of Tony Blair’s policy unit in No 10. He and Chris Hopson, his opposite number at NHS Providers, another body representing health leaders, have become two of the most powerful voices on Covid policy. Both of them try to avoid sounding partisan, because they know to do so would undermine their credibility. Keir Starmer will be delivering his big speech at 11am. Labour has posted a link on Twitter to a live feed. I’ll write up the speech once I’ve read the full text, but I will be covering the Q&amp;A afterwards as it happens. Judging by the pre-brief (see 9.54am), there will be a strong patriotic flavour to it, and, yes, there are union flags at the venue. This is from Daisy Cooper, the Lib Dem health spokesperson, on Maggie Throup’s failure this morning to say how many NHS trusts have declared critical incidents. (See 10.10am.) If ever proof was needed that the government is asleep at the wheel with this staff shortage crisis, the vaccine minister’s non-answers this morning just about sum it up. Our hospitals are at breaking point and schools are spread thin, yet hapless ministers haven’t got a clue about the true extent of the problems in these settings. It’s high time the government gets a grip on this. Families deserve reassurance that their children’s education won’t be disrupted and that loved ones can get the care they need, when they need it. Prof Sir Andrew Pollard, chairman of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (but not chair of the JCVI’s Covid committee), has told the Daily Telegraph in an interview that further booster jabs should not be offered to everyone until there is more evidence to justify them. “We can’t vaccinate the planet every four to six months. It’s not sustainable or affordable,” he said. Pollard, who is also head of the Oxford Vaccine Group, told Sky News this morning: It’s just not – from a global perspective – affordable, sustainable or deliverable to give fourth doses to everyone on the planet every six months. Remember that, today, less than 10% of people in low-income countries have even had their first dose, so the whole idea of regular fourth doses globally is just not sensible. Asked about Pollard’s comments, Maggie Throup, the vaccines minister, told the Today programme this morning that the government would take advice from the JCVI but also that it would “look at it seriously and decide whether it’s appropriate for our population”. Last summer Pollard was saying he was not convinced of the need for a third-jab booster programme for all adults – at a time when the government was planning just such a programme. Pollard thought vaccinating people in developing countries should take priority. A universal booster programme subsequently became critical to the government’s Covid strategy this winter. Ministers have in the past sometimes been frustrated by the JCVI’s caution in relation to approving vaccine rollouts. In September last year a decision on vaccinating 12- to 15-year-olds was effectively taken out of the JCVI’s hands when it agreed that chief medical officers should have the final say. Keir Starmer – or Sir Keir, as I suppose we should call him in this context – has commented on the row about Tony Blair’s knighthood, saying that the former PM deserves his honour. In an interview with ITV’s Good Morning Britain, Starmer rejected the suggestion that the issue was “thorny”. He told the programme: I don’t think it’s thorny at all, I think he deserves the honour, obviously I respect the fact that people have different views. I understand there are strong views on the Iraq war, there were back at the time and there still are, but that does not detract from the fact that Tony Blair was a very successful prime minister of this country and made a huge difference to the lives of millions of people in this country. As Jessica Elgot reports, more than 500,000 people have signed an online petition saying they take a different view. Morecambe Bay NHS trust, which operates three hospitals across north Lancashire and southern Cumbria, declared a Covid-19 critical incident last night following “relentless and sustained pressure” caused by “unprecedented staff absences”. In an internal memo leaked to the Sunday Times, the trust’s chief executive, Aaron Cummins, said the move would lead to operations and appointments cancelled and staff redeployed which would allow the hospitals to “maintain safe services” for patients. The trust, which operates three sites – Furness general hospital in Barrow, the Royal Lancaster infirmary and Westmorland general hospital in Kendal – joins at least six other trusts which are understood to have issued alerts over “internal critical incidents” in recent days, including United Lincolnshire hospitals NHS trust. The note warned that staff absences had jumped from 7% to 10% in the last week – equating to around 240 NHS employees unable to work, with around 120 patients who were well enough to leave hospital but were unable to. “The impact of this is that seriously sick patients are waiting too long to be admitted and there are many times when we are operating on a ‘one in, one out basis’”, Cummins added. Sakthi Karunanithi, the director of public health for Lancashire, said the region was “bracing ourselves for a tsunami of Omicron cases in Lancashire, including in older age groups”. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that “from a local point of view”, it appears the government were using science as “a side dish that we can pick and choose” and “turning a blind eye to signals of distress from the frontline that doesn’t often get presented in dashboards, like the staff absences”. He went on: Boosters on [their] own should not be the front and centre of the strategy. We need to stop pretending we can boost our way out of this pandemic and start seriously thinking about keeping the infection levels as low as we possibly can by truly engaging with communities and the public, seeing … what we’re seeing and supporting businesses and supporting local services to carry on doing their main jobs during this crisis. As the Guardian reports in our overnight splash, multiple NHS trusts across England have declared “critical incidents” amid soaring staff absences caused by Covid-19. We report that more than half a dozen NHS trusts have issued critical incident alerts, but we do not give a firm figure in the report (because we did not have one). You might have thought that the Department of Health and Social Care would have a number. But Maggie Throup, the vaccines minister who was doing an interview round this morning, refused to say how many trusts had declared critical incidents. She told Sky News: It is fast moving and that’s why it would be wrong of me to actually say a number because quite shortly there could be another one or another trust could actually say ‘no, we’re back on track now and we’re okay’ and it’s a mechanism that’s been put in place in the past ... The critical incidents are announced and then they can be very short-term ones and it’s saying to the other trusts around ‘can we have some extra help, can we have some mutual aid’. Sometimes it’s just a matter of hours that the critical incident is in place for, other times it’s longer, but it’s actually reaching out to the wider NHS to say we have got a problem in this particular area and it’s sometimes quite geographical as well and for different reasons, it can be staff shortages, it could be other reasons. Asked if the government had a handle on the situation, she replied: It definitely does and obviously there’s meetings on a very, very – well, on a daily basis with the key people within NHS England and there’ll be an update later on that situation. Keir Starmer will deliver what is being billed as a major speech later, and in it he will identify “security, prosperity and respect” as the key to Labour’s election offer to Britain. In an overnight press release ahead of the speech, Labour said Starmer would set out “Labour’s ambition for a new Britain in which ‘you and your family get the security, prosperity and respect that they deserve’”. These are abstract concepts, but this is how Labour in its news release explains them. Security Everyone has the basic right to feel safe in their own community. We all need to know that the NHS is there for us when we need it. And if we work hard we should also have a right to job security. Prosperity Everyone should have the opportunity to thrive. To realise our ambitions and make a good life for ourselves. To have the skills they need to prosper. Respect Respect is a less obvious political virtue than security and prosperity. But it is every bit as important. Everyone has the right to live in places we care for and to have our lives and ambitions taken seriously to be valued for who we are and what we do. As Aubrey Allegretti reports in his preview of the speech, Starmer will also stress that Labour has to earn the trust of voters, and emphasise his pride in Britain, while arguing that identifying “flaws” with the country isn’t unpatriotic. Starmer will say: I am personally thankful that I grew up in a country which had a national health service to care for my mum when she needed help, that gave me the opportunity to go to university and become a lawyer and fight for what is right. This country has presented me with great opportunities. It’s a great place to live. But I don’t think you cease to be a patriot because you notice your country has flaws. On the contrary, the reason we in this party want to correct those flaws is precisely because we are patriotic. I came into politics to make things happen not just to talk about them. And here is a full summary of the lines from Prof Neil Ferguson’s interview on the Today programme. Ferguson, a key government adviser on epidemic modelling, said that Omicron infections may have plateaued in London in the under-50s. (See 9.08am.) My colleague Matthew Weaver has more here. But he said hospital admissions may take longer to plateau than case numbers because older people were infected later. He explained: This epidemic has spread so quickly [in the 18-50 age group] it hasn’t had time to really spread into the older age groups which are at much, much greater risk of severe outcomes and hospitalisation. So we may see a different pattern in hospitalisations. Hospitalisations are still generally going up across the country and we may see high levels for for some weeks. He said shortage of tests may have kept Covid case numbers lower than they otherwise would have been. He said: [Case numbers are] not as useful as they used to be because there has been, frankly, demand management of cases by region, which means we’ve been running out of tests. And so in some regions, as we’ve heard over Christmas, numbers of tests have been limited. So almost certainly case numbers, true infection rates, have been much higher than [the published figures]. He said up to 15% of Omicron cases were reinfections. He said the official headline case numbers did not include reinfections. But the scientists did see the reinfection numbers, he said. The data we see includes reinfections. Between 10 and 15% of Omicron cases are reinfections, so you have to just interpret the numbers through that lens. He said school reopening was likely to lead to an increase in Omicron infections in children. He explained: The Delta infections in the last few months have been really driven by school-age children and by the older age groups in the population. Omicron slipped in the middle in 18 to 45-year-olds really but it didn’t have much time to get into schoolchildren before schools shut and we expect to now see quite high infection levels, of mild infection I should emphasise, in school-age children. Good morning. And happy new year to everyone. Or happy new year (medium confidence), as they might put it in a Sage report, using the standard formula scientists apply to show how confident they are about the judgments they make. (It’s not a habit that lobby correspondents have adopted, although perhaps we should.) Medium confidence is probably also good way of summing up Prof Neil Ferguson’s overall mood when he was interviewed on the Today programme this morning. Ferguson, the Imperial College epidemiologist whose modelling is closely followed by government, said he was “cautiously optimistic” that the Omicron pandemic may have plateaued in London (where cases have been highest) amongst the under-50s. He told the programme: I think I’m cautiously optimistic that infection rates in London in that key 18-50 age group, which has been driving the Omicron epidemic, may possibly have plateaued, it’s too early to say whether they’re going down yet. And this is what he said when he was asked whether he thought, overall, the effect of Omicron was as bad as originally feared, or whether it was better. He replied: I think the good news here is it is certainly less severe. We think, if you’ve never been infected before, never had a vaccine, [there is] about a one third drop in the risk of just any hospital admission, probably a two thirds drop in the risk of dying from Omicron. So [it is] substantially less severe. And that has helped us undoubtedly. We would be seeing much higher infection case numbers in hospital otherwise. And vaccines, as we always expected they would, are holding up against severe outcomes well. Well that doesn’t mean it’s not going to be, as the prime minister said, a difficult few weeks for the NHS. This may not sound definitive, but Ferguson sounded noticeably more confident today about Omicron being less severe than Delta than he was two weeks ago, when Imperial College published early research on this topic. I will post more from his interview shortly. Here is the agenda for the day. 11am: Keir Starmer delivers his speech in Birmingham. As Aubrey Allegretti reports, Starmer will use it to launch his plan to maintain the momentum of Labour’s poll lead in the runup to the next election. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. Today I will be focusing mostly on UK Covid developments and on Starmer’s speech. For wider Covid coverage, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comAttempts to press ahead with the forthcoming European fixtures have been dealt a fresh blow after it emerged South African players based in the UK face further red tape to gain entry into France with the Sale director of rugby, Alex Sanderson, saying the Champions Cup could be made into a “mockery”. European Professional Club Rugby, the organiser of the Champions Cup and Challenge Cup, remains in discussions over two rounds of fixtures this month after matches were postponed in December when France limited entry from the UK to “essential only”. EPCR is hopeful of gaining the necessary exemptions to allow fixtures to go ahead. On Tuesday, Sanderson revealed a further complication, however, with Sale’s South African players facing additional visa requirements. It is understood EPCR is aware of the problem, though its priority remains getting the fixtures played in the first place. Sanderson, though, is adamant Sale would not be able to field a competitive side away to Clermont on 16 January if his South African contingent cannot travel and said they were not the only club to raise the issue. In addition, the French government has mandated that all sportspeople be fully vaccinated from 15 January, which would further reduce the number of players available to Sanderson. “There’s a certain type of visa you get if you’re South African, which has to be approved,” he said. “They’d have to fast-track and approve these Schengen visas in record time. Apparently it’s only a stamp but it’s out of our hands. “This is entirely in the lap of European Rugby and their ability to push it through and then the French government to approve it. It doesn’t give us a competitive team. There are nine of our squad who wouldn’t be approved and that’s not even including some of the lads who aren’t double-jabbed, of which there’s one or two. We’re not the only ones, we’re all in a similar boat.” Asked about fielding a second‑string side if his South African players are not granted exemption, Sanderson said: “It’s a mockery of the cup then, isn’t it? We’re in it to play the best teams with our best team. So no, I wouldn’t even consider taking a second team to Clermont to get beaten up.” Even if EPCR receives the green light for this month’s fixtures, when to replay those postponed last month has not been resolved. “I do think [the tournament] is in trouble, not through its own fault,” Sanderson said. “We have all had to deal internally with Covid and all the issues and curveballs that come up because of it. There is no space in the season to reschedule these games. There is none so how do you continue with the tournament in its old structure? I can’t see how you can if we can’t field our best team to come to France or the game isn’t played.”The first time I walked up Mount Owen, I horrified my boyfriend by curling up beneath one of its famous water-riven karst outcrops and insisting I needed to sleep. We’d broken up six months before, and had just gotten back together to give it another go. That morning, we were both questioning our life choices. The previous day had been fine – a decent seven hours of walking, climbing a ridge through mountain beech, sidling along a rocky cliff streaming with water, and clambering up a dry riverbed to Granity Pass Hut, a simple 12-bunk alpine hut just past the treeline. But we’d bickered all morning as the sun rose behind us and we hiked up the massif towards the summit, through the bronzed alpine meadow known as the Hay Paddock, past still mountain tarns reflecting the sky. It was beautiful, but I was getting slower and grumpier, and finally announced I needed a lie-down in the tussock. He looked at me, aghast. He really wanted to get to the top – at 1,875 metres, Mt Owen is the highest point in Kahurangi National Park, which covers the north-western corner of the top of New Zealand’s South Island. The views are majestic. I no longer cared. “Go,” I said, waving weakly from my spot beneath the sun-warmed rock. “It’s sunny. I’ll wait here. I’m fine. I’m just so tired.” He stood over me, considering. “This is not a place to nap,” he said, and hauled me up like a cast ruminant and prodded me towards the top. You do need your wits about you on the glaciated marble karst of Mt Owen. Full of slots and holes, its insides are riven with caves, some of the longest in the world. To get to the top, you have to spend a couple of hours hopping from rock to rock across sharply carved cracks. A fall would require surgery or a body bag, and like all of New Zealand, the weather can change suddenly. Eventually, I made it. I collapsed on the smooth grey rock and watched other trampers bound about taking pictures. I lay on my pack and stared into the layers of bluish mountain ranges, hazy in the January summer heat as my boyfriend grimly prepared himself to spend the rest of the day coaxing me back down to the car, imagining lots of pack-carrying and whining. But on the way back down, I came right – and when we were sorting out our rubbish at the carpark, I realised what had happened. The freeze-dried meal I’d had for breakfast, a product sample from a friend, had actually contained two servings of high-energy scrambled eggs, bacon and hollandaise – about 1,600 calories. No wonder I was comatose; I’d had a Christmas dinner’s worth of rehydrated eggs before trying to stagger to the summit. I showed him the packet, and he just shook his head. Naomi Arnold is a senior longform journalist at RNZ and author of Southern Nights, a story of New Zealand astronomy What’s your favourite wild place? If you would like to contribute to the series tell us about it in 200 words and send it to newzealand@theguardian.comAs the bells chimed one o’clock in the City of London on Tuesday, the typical lunchtime exodus from the offices in the capital’s financial district was barely a trickle. A handful of workers left the Bank of England on Threadneedle Street on their lunch breaks, but most of the scattering of people were dressed for a day shopping or sightseeing rather than sitting behind their desks. In normal times, Tuesday would have marked the first day back in the workplace after the Christmas festivities for millions of the nation’s office-based employees. Despite data suggesting that the Omicron Covid-19 variant is less severe than other versions of the virus, coupled with figures indicating that cases in the capital have stabilised, staff at most large offices appeared to be continuing to work from home. The morning rush hour in London remained well below pre-pandemic levels, according to data from Transport for London. Before 10am on Tuesday morning, TfL reported about 770,000 taps on its buses and about 710,000 entry and exits across the tube network, representing significantly fewer passengers than seen when workers returned in January 2020. Then, about 6m daily trips were made by bus, and 4m by tube. Those commuting to the capital have had to wrestle with severely curtailed services, with all Southern trains to and from London Victoria cancelled until 10 January as a result of pandemic-related staffing shortages, and services reduced across the network. Scotrail has cut about 8% (160) of its services from the 2,000 trains it runs normally. Figures from the satnav maker TomTom showed morning rush hour congestion on roads in city centres including London, Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow and Cardiff remained at half the levels seen at in early January 2020, before the UK pandemic, or even lower. Most of the workers who had nipped out at lunchtime in the City to buy a sandwich or to stretch their legs said they had come to the office to do specific tasks, or because they preferred it to working from home. A financial services worker, Sam Lowres, 23, walking back to the office at the end of his lunch break, had been surprised by how quiet the City was. An employee at the Aquis Exchange, Lowres has only been worked in the district for six months since graduating from university last summer. He said he much preferred working from his desk, where he had a better computer set-up. “I live in a small flat. There is more space to work in the office and a separation from home,” he said. “Lots of places are encouraging working from home until at least the end of January.” Walking past the Royal Exchange, Patrick Tomlinson, the head of business continuity and crisis management at the investment bank Rothschild &amp; Co, said he had to complete some work that could only be done in the office, and was taking advantage of a quiet workplace. “I can come in later to avoid peak travel time. The company has a flexible approach,” he said, adding that the firm was monitoring Covid data to decide how to proceed. The solicitors Gorkem Ozsoy and Caryn Toh said their work required them to be in the office at least some of the time, whether meeting clients or preparing for in-person court hearings. “The nature of the job doesn’t allow working from home all the time,” said Ozsoy. “Initially everyone worked from home for the first six months [of the pandemic]. Now everyone has had enough, or wants to return.” Toh added: “We have to prepare court bundles and I usually prefer to be in the office for that.” When the government once again tightened its coronavirus guidance in early December, urging office-based staff in England to work from home where possible, many large corporates decided to take a more flexible approach than earlier in the pandemic. Large office-based businesses including the insurance firms Legal &amp; General and Aviva are among those who have decided to keep their office buildings open. Aviva, which has a 16,000-strong workforce in the UK, said staff who could not work from home for any reason could attend its offices. L&amp;G said it was keeping its offices and cafes open for any of its 7,000 UK employees “who cannot work effectively from home”, including those who need to work in the office for their mental wellbeing. Inside the City’s historic Leadenhall Market, many of the grab-and-go sandwich shops and coffee bars, which in pre-Covid times would have expected queues out of the door most lunchtimes, remained shuttered. Some had stuck handwritten signs in the window, stating they would reopen the following week, while others gave no indication when they would return. A beauty therapist, Sue Durrant, based at the Chequers hair and beauty salon in the covered market, said she had seen just one customer on Tuesday. “It’s the first day back and I’ve got no one else booked in,” she said. “It’s been really quiet and everyone seems to be working from home. It’s really damaging for the City.”The merits of Virginia Giuffre’s sex assault lawsuit against Prince Andrew are still far from being tested in court. In New York on Tuesday, lawyers for the prince asked a judge, Lewis Kaplan, to stop the case ever getting there. Commenting on the case, other New York lawyers were doubtful that Andrew’s legal team would be successful and questioned why the prince’s representatives had not settled out-of-court. Andrew says he has no memory of meeting Giuffre and vehemently denies alleged assaults in London, New York and the US Virgin Islands when Giuffre was 17. On Tuesday, the lawyer Andrew Brad Brettler argued that the case against the prince should be thrown out, on the basis of a 2009 financial settlement between Giuffre and the financier and sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. Kaplan released the text of the 2009 settlement on Monday. It showed Giuffre agreed to “remise, release, acquit, satisfy and forever discharge the said second parties and any other person or entity who could have been included as a potential defendant”. Brettler also said Giuffre’s claims were not adequately described in her complaint against Andrew, which he said was filed just five days short of the closing of a statute of limitations window in the New York state Child Victims Act. Jeanne Christensen of Wigdor, a law firm with clients including a woman who alleges rape and harassment by the Wall Street financier and Epstein associate Leon Black and claimants in civil suits against the disgraced film producer Harvey Weinstein, said Andrew was almost certainly not covered by the 2009 agreement. Imprecise wording suggests the existence of a second agreement with named parties that has never come to light, Christensen said. “Aside from the fact that it’s horribly worded with over-broad, vague language, it really should not be sustained because it could cover anybody Epstein knows,” she said. “It doesn’t matter who [Andrew’s] lawyers think falls within that definition. It’s not going to be of help.” The lawyer Alan Dershowitz has claimed the agreement releases him from Giuffre’s claims against him. But Christensen said: “I don’t see how any person could fit within that definition without there being a second agreement that specifically names individuals.” Eric Baum, an attorney representing a woman in civil sexual misconduct claims against the American Apparel founder, Dov Charney, and restaurateur Mario Batali, said Prince Andrew and his legal team were “grasping at straws”. “They have concocted a baseless defense to serious allegations of sexual assault,” he said. “Prince Andrew’s lawyers are attempting to rely on a settlement agreement that was entered into between Epstein and Ms Giuffre in a different court. “Prince Andrew was not a party in that case, was not mentioned by name in the release and has not provided anything in return for the release he seeks to use. In essence, Prince Andrew’s legal team’s argument would let any individual who commits a wrongdoing against Ms Giuffre off the hook because of the release she signed with Epstein.” Others were less certain that the Epstein settlement does not cover Andrew, since it was made years after alleged assaults which Giuffre would have had in mind when she and her lawyers agreed to the “potential defendant” language. Julie Rendelman, a New York criminal defence lawyer, said: “The question is, when she’s signing this agreement with Epstein she would have been well aware that Prince Andrew would have been one of the potential respondents in a civil lawsuit, and she chose to go forward with it. “She would have known full well that he could be articulated as being included in that.” At the end of last week, there was a sense that criminal prosecutions arising from Epstein’s behaviour could end with the conviction of Ghislaine Maxwell, his former girlfriend, on sex-trafficking charges. On Tuesday, Judge Kaplan said he would decide “soon” if the civil case against Prince Andrew should be dismissed. But Christensen, of Wigdor, doubted that the affair was close to an end. “I don’t think it’s over, and that’s partly because Epstein is becoming an even bigger issue in my own litigation,” she said. For a New York attorney, Christensen added, it was hard to fathom why the Giuffre-Prince Andrew lawsuit had not been settled. “I can’t believe they haven’t gotten rid of it already. I don’t get it, but then we don’t have a monarchy. It’s a head-scratcher that it’s ongoing to the degree that it is.”Authorities on Hawaii’s Big Island have recovered the body of a 75-year-old man who is believed to have fallen from a closed area of Hawaii Volcanoes national park, where visitors in past months have been trying to get a glimpse of a glowing lava lake from an eruption of the Kilauea volcano. Family members had reported the man missing from the park early on Monday, the National Park Service said. Officials believe the accident occurred late on Sunday evening. Park rangers and firefighters had searched through the night to locate the missing man, and eventually recovered his body 100ft (30.48m) below the crater rim of the Uēkahuna viewing area at the summit of the Kilauea volcano. An investigation is under way, officials said in a statement, and identification of the man is “pending further notification of family”. Thousands of people have visited the park at night to view the glowing lava lake since the volcano began erupting in September. The eruption, Hawaii News Now reported, “[sent] up fiery fountains as high as 100 feet and [flooded] the floor of Halemaumau Crater with lava”. A 32-year-old army soldier was seriously injured in May 2019 after falling from a 300ft cliff into the crater while trying to get a better view of Kīlauea, NPR reported.Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes was found guilty on Monday of fraud, concluding a high-profile trial that captivated Silicon Valley and chronicled the missteps of the now-defunct blood testing startup. After seven days of deliberation, the jury in San Jose, California, convicted Holmes on four charges: one count of conspiracy to defraud investors, and three counts of wire fraud against investors. It acquitted her on three charges, including one conspiracy to defraud patients and two charges related to patients who received inaccurate test results. It remained deadlocked on three remaining charges. The split verdicts are “a mixed bag for the prosecution, but it’s a loss for Elizabeth Holmes because she is going away to prison for at least a few years”, said David Ring, a lawyer who has followed the case closely. A hearing has been set for next week during which the prosecutors will reveal whether they plan to retry Holmes on the three charges the jury could not come to an agreement on. Experts say such a retrial is not very likely, as the existing convictions already carry considerable sentencing time. With no prior convictions, Holmes is unlikely to face the maximum prison time her charges carry, which is 20 years, said Neama Rahmani, a former federal prosecutor and president of West Coast Trial Lawyers. While she will probably face several in prison and more on probation, Holmes is almost certain to appeal, Rahmani added: “She’s not someone who is going to want to do even five months in prison, much less five years,” he said. Holmes walked freely out of the courthouse on Monday after parties agreed she would not be taken into custody until her sentencing hearing. That date will be set at the hearing regarding the retrial next week. It is expected the judge will take into account the timing of the fraud trial of Holmes’ former partner, Sunny Balwani. His trial is scheduled to start next month in the same San Jose courtroom where Holmes’ legal saga unfolded. The former CEO’s loss marks a milestone for Silicon Valley – an industry that has for years evaded accountability in its pervasive culture of “fake it till you make it” that encourages founders to make big promises, often with little proof. “Silicon Valley has thus far been famously been resistant to much prosecutorial activity, because its business model assumes you are going to take an aggressive, optimistic view of your product or service to attract investors,” said Jack Sharman, a white-collar defense lawyer at Lightfoot, a law firm in Alabama. “And if that product or service succeeds, you’re not a fraudster, you’re a visionary,” he added. Theranos sold a promise to improve health with multiple tests on one drop of blood – a claim that despite having little scientific proof raised hundreds of millions of dollars and attracted big-name investors such as the media mogul Rupert Murdoch and the former secretary of state Henry Kissinger. Once a charismatic figure, Holmes was initially hailed as a visionary. Her story represented just how far the cult of personality in Silicon Valley can take someone. That same cult of personality, however, became her downfall: during the trial, prosecutors painted a picture of Holmes as a strict, power-hungry leader willing to go to any lengths to save her company’s image, repressing internal and external dissent and manipulating the press. “She chose fraud over business failure,” prosecutor Jeff Schenk said in his closing arguments. “She chose to be dishonest with investors and patients. That choice was not only callous, it was criminal.” The verdict may embolden prosecutors at large to more aggressively pursue cases of white collar crime and fraud, said Rahmani. In turn, startups may now tread more carefully when making big promises, he added. “In Silicon Valley, this conviction will resonate with the big law firms that advise startup companies,” Rahmani said. “Attorneys are going to be advising their clients to be more careful, especially in what they say to investors.” Investors are already taking heed: Silicon Valley investor Jason Calacanis, who was an early backer of major firms like Uber and Robinhood, said the verdict was a “reminder to founders”. “Never lie, never bend the truth, always be honest about where you are at with your traction, especially when raising money,” he tweeted. The Associated Press contributed reportingCaleb Azumah Nelson was working part-time in the Apple Store in London when he decided to “take a gamble” on himself and try to write his first novel. On Tuesday evening, his debut, Open Water, was named winner of the Costa first novel award, praised by judges as “deeply moving, searingly intimate and just so now”. Open Water follows the lives of two young Black British artists – he a photographer, she a dancer – as they start to fall in love after meeting in a south-east London pub. It beat titles including AK Blakemore’s The Manningtree Witches and Kate Sawyer’s The Stranding to win the £5,000 Costa prize. “We all loved this contemporary portrait of masculinity – it’s like nothing else we’ve ever read,” said judges. Nelson, a British-Ghanaian short story writer and photographer, said it was “so surreal” to be named winner of the award. “I think I am honestly still getting used to the fact that I have not only put a book out, but that it’s been really well received. All writers do this – you kind of commit these acts of bravery by putting words down on the page, and then you close your eyes when you’ve done it and hope someone might read it,” he said. Nelson quit his job at the Apple Store to write Open Water, spending the summer of 2019 in the British Library writing all day. The manuscript sparked a nine-way bidding war before ending up with Viking, an imprint of Penguin. “The main thing I was trying to hone in on was this story of intimacy between people who might feel romantically for each other – these moments that often go unnoticed and undocumented but are really the fabric of our lives,” he said. “I think that my background as a photographer means that I’m just attracted to these really tiny moments in people’s lives that l expand outwards.” Claire Fuller won the £5,000 Costa novel award for her fourth novel, Unsettled Ground, the story of 51-year-old twins Jeanie and Julius, who live in poverty and rural isolation with their mother, Dot, until her death means they are at risk of losing everything. Already shortlisted for the Women’s prize, it is a “masterpiece of storytelling and craft”, said judges. “I’m still lost for words to have won,” said Fuller, who beat authors including Nadifa Mohamed and Elif Shafak to the prize. “It’s an amazing privilege to be recognised in this way.” The novel has its roots in Fuller’s son’s discovery of an abandoned caravan in the woods. “It was derelict and empty, and my son just knows I like weird places. So I went out to see it, and it was just really atmospheric. It made me start thinking: who would have lived here? And how would they have managed?” she said. “And then Jeanie, the main character, was just created in my head without knowing what her story would be or where she came from, or even that she had a twin brother. I had no idea till I started writing it.” John Preston won the Costa biography award for Fall: The Mystery of Robert Maxwell, which judges called an “epic, immersive, cinematic telling” of the life of the late media mogul and MP. The poetry prize went to former London teacher Hannah Lowe for The Kids, which draws on a decade of teaching in an inner-city London sixth form, and the children’s book category was won by Manjeet Mann for The Crossing, a verse novel inspired by the refugee crisis, about two teenagers from very different worlds. The Costas are open solely to authors resident in the UK and Ireland, and go to the “most enjoyable” books of the year. The Crossing, said judges, “will enrich all who read it”, while The Kids made judges “want to punch the air with joy”. A panel of judges chaired by the journalist and broadcaster Reeta Chakrabarti will now select the Costa book of the year from the five category winners, to be announced on 1 February. Last year, Monique Roffey’s novel The Mermaid of Black Conch took the overall £30,000 prize.Prof Chris Whitty has sparked confusion by saying people should stay in self-isolation “until their test goes negative”, despite official guidance allowing a day 10 exit even with a positive lateral flow test. Last month the rules on self-isolation in England changed to reduce the self-isolation period from 10 to seven days for people who have tested positive for Covid, provided they have a negative lateral flow test on both day six and seven and they do not have a high temperature. Wales and Northern Ireland have followed suit, with Scotland facing pressure to do the same. The guidance adds it is not necessary to continue to use lateral flow device (LFD) tests after 10 days. “You should not take any more LFD tests after the 10th day of your isolation period and you may stop self-isolating after this day,” it says. “This is because you are unlikely to be infectious after the 10th day of your isolation period. “Even if you have a positive LFD test result on the 10th day of your self-isolation period you should not take any more LFD tests after this day.” Responding to a question from a member of the public on Tuesday, England’s chief medical officer said a lateral flow test was a helpful tool. “It is a pretty good guide, very good guide, actually, to whether someone is at that moment infectious,” Whitty said, adding that those who tested negative on day six and seven in isolation were much less likely to be infectious to other people than if they had not done those tests. But, he added: “Obviously, if they’re still positive, then they do need to stay in isolation till it goes negative.” According to government guidance lateral flow tests should not be taken before day six of the self-isolation period, but after that self-isolation may be ended after two consecutive negative tests taken at least 24 hours apart. “You should stop testing after you have had two consecutive negative test results,” the guidance states. That means the earliest someone could leave self-isolation would be day seven. Should someone test positive on day six, however, they would not be able to leave self-isolation until day eight at the earliest, after a negative lateral flow test on both day seven and day eight.However, there is a caveat for those isolating without symptoms. “If you are isolating because of a positive test result but did not have any symptoms, and you develop Covid-19 symptoms within your isolation period, start a new isolation period from the day your symptoms start,” the guidance states.* Each down clue contains a superfluous word to be ignored in producing the solution. Each across solution is defined by one of these superfluous words and is a homophone of what results from the wordplay in its related clue. Across 1 cashew (‘nut’) CACHOU [COACH(anag)/U(niversity)] 4 slight (‘insult’) S(pecia)L/EIGHT 10 shoot (‘photograph’) CHUTE triple definition 11 cornflour (‘starch’) CORN  ER 12 annalist (‘chronicler’) (c)ANAL/(c)YST 13 copse (‘wood’) O(fficers) in C(rown)P(rosecution)S(ervice) 15 currant (‘fruit’) CUR + RENT 17 draught (‘drawing’) DR/AFT 19 illicit (‘unlicensed’) (f)ELICIT(y) 21 session (‘meeting’) ION after CESS 22 belle (‘beauty’) BELL double def 24 oversees (‘disregards’) O(bey)/VERSE/AS 27 inveighed (‘reviled’) INVADE [N/V in IDEA (anag)] 28 leech (‘hanger-on’) notabLE ACHievement (hidden) 29 gneiss (‘rock’) N(ature)/ICE 30 tocsin (‘alert’) TOXIN [NIX/OT (rev)] Down 1 case (‘nut’) S(econd) in (p)ECA(n) (anag) 2 scoundrel (‘disregards’) COLD NURSE (anag) 3 extra (‘meeting’) double def 5 life class (‘drawing’) LI  E/CLASS 6 group (‘rock’) GRO(w)/UP 7 tormenting (‘hanger-on’) ROT(rev)/MEN/TIN/G(eneral) 8 script (‘beauty’) (con)SCRIPT 9 orated (‘alert’) A(b)O(u)T RED (anag) 14 scribbling (‘chronicler’) S  LING 16 accredits (‘reviled’) AC(account)/CR(councillor)/EDITS 18 guileless (‘photograph’) GU  ESS 20 trophy (‘unlicensed’) TR  Y 21 speeds (‘fruit’) S  EEDS 23 levee (‘wood’) L  EE 25 salvo (‘insult’) V(ersus) in ALSO (anag) 26 shin (‘starch’) S  IN [front of lower leg]Good morning. Weeks of speculation about Novak Djokovic’s involvement in the Australia Open have come to an end after the world No 1 last night revealed he has a medical exemption to get around Melbourne’s strict quarantine rules. Meanwhile, more hospital staff in NSW speak out about the pressure of staff shortages and record Covid infections. Djokovic is on his way to Melbourne to defend his Australian Open title after he refused to divulge his Covid vaccination status. Australian Open organisers confirmed he had received a medical exemption and said two panels of experts had reviewed the case. The Australian Technical Advisory Group allows exemptions for reasons including acute major medical conditions to any serious adverse effect from previous doses of the Covid-19 vaccine. The reason for Djokovic’s exemption is unclear and has garnered mixed responses from his peers. Hospitals workers in NSW have vented their anger at being left on the frontline with seriously depleted levels of staffing amid a major surge in Covid cases. “The light at the end of a tunnel is a fricking train at the moment,” said Gil Wilson, a senior nurse at the Lismore Base hospital. “We can’t see an end to this.” NSW set another record of new infections, with 23,131 cases reported yesterday and a 28% positivity rate. Scott Morrison continues to face criticism for a decision not to provide free rapid antigen tests, so what are other countries doing? Many have free and widely available tests and price caps for private sales in other countries – very different approaches to Australia’s policy of leaving the tests to the “private market”. Prince Andrew’s lawyers have fought to dismiss Virginia Giuffre’s civil lawsuit against the royal a day after the unsealing of a 2009 settlement between Giuffre and the late financier and sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. The judge, Lewis Kaplan, questioned lawyers for Andrew closely over their claim that the settlement means Giuffre’s lawsuit should be dismissed. He also promised “a decision pretty soon”. Australia Waters off Sydney are undergoing an extreme marine heatwave, with temperatures 3C above normal and likely to be at their highest levels on record for January. Global heating, La Niña and atmospheric conditions are believed to be responsible. The Catholic church’s failed attempt to argue it was not responsible for a priest’s abuse of a five-year-old because it took place during after-hours “social” visits has been slammed as “ruthless” by the survivor and an “affront to common sense” by a judge. A $316.5.m Indigenous cultural precinct will be established in Canberra, which would include a long-awaited national resting place for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander ancestral remains, under a plan announced by the Morrison government. An “unprecedented” number of people have withdrawn from Australia’s overseas diplomatic postings during the pandemic, an internal government document has revealed. The world Emma Watson has been accused of antisemitism after she posted a message of support for the Palestinian cause. Israel’s former ambassador to the UN attacked the actor’s message with a Twitter post saying “10 points from Gryffindor for being an antisemite” and has been accused of “cynical weaponisation” of the term. European gas prices rose by more than 30% yesterday, adding to mounting concerns about the cost of heating a home, as supplies that usually come into Europe from Siberia continued to flow eastwards for the 15th day in a row. A Paraguayan military officer has died after being impaled by a deer while he was serving in a security detail at the presidential residence. Recommended reads Angus and Julia Stone came on to the Australian music scene as a duo in 2006 and, while they still make music together, they have both forged solo music careers. Angus makes blissed-out rock as Dope Lemon and releases his third album this week, titled Rose Pink Cadillac. Essential to every record Angus makes is a particular guitar: a 1960s Telecaster given to him by his father. Stone tells us about that “holy grail” instrument, as well as the story of what he would save from a fire and the item he regrets losing most. Over the past two years something shifted in many Australian families. For some the upheaval meant not just stress but slowing down, getting closer and becoming more adaptable. “The pandemic reset the importance of just being able to spend time with your children,” says Nick Tebbey, national executive officer of Relationships Australia. “People drew real strength from that, and were almost surprised by how much they enjoyed their time together.” On the evening of Sunday 5 January 1975, the bulk carrier Lake Illawarra travelled down the Derwent River in Hobart and missed the main navigation challenge under the Tasman Bridge. It brought down two piers and caused more than 100 metres of road to collapse 45 metres into the river below, along with four cars that drove over the gap. Twelve people died, and casualties would have been much higher had it not been a quiet Sunday evening in the new year holiday period. Listen One of our favourite Full Story episodes from 2021 was about First Nations representation on the reality TV show RuPaul’s Drag Race Down Under. The show was marred by controversies about race and a lack of diversity but it also saw the debut of its first Aboriginal drag queen: Biripi and Worimi queen JoJo Zaho. JoJo talks to Laura Murphy-Oates about the power of First Nations drag and the journey to fame. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Public confusion and distrust over vaccination in Papua New Guinea have been fuelled by what experts say are crippling failures in authorities’ response to the pandemic. For today’s Australia Reads, the Pacific editor, Kate Lyons, introduces an investigation by Jo Chandler into how the country’s Covid strategy went so wrong. Listen to the best of Guardian Australia’s journalism on Australia Reads podcast on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Nick Kyrgios will arrive in Sydney this week with the lowest rank since his breakout performance at Wimbledon back in 2014. His withdrawal from a Melbourne warm-up event due to asthma means he will slide outside the top 100. On a live estimate Kyrgios now sits at 115 but it is possible that will dip further by the next official rankings release on Monday, just a week out from the Australian Open. Media roundup Covid forced the closure of almost 270 early childhood centres in NSW yesterday with more shutdowns expected as the industry deals with staff shortages, reports the Sydney Morning Herald. Businesses are selling rapid antigen tests on Uber Eats for as much as $65, according to the Age but the consumer watchdog has told the ABC that while it is investigating tests being sold at excessive prices it has not seen evidence of widespread price gouging. Coming up National cabinet will meet for the first time in 2022 with rapid antigen tests expected to top the agenda. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Twitter has permanently banned the popular news aggregation service Politics For All, in a sign of how the social media platform has substantial power to deprive news outlets of their audience without warning. A spokesperson said the account was “suspended for violating the Twitter Rules on platform manipulation and spam” and would not be allowed to return. Politics for All, founded by 19-year-old Nick Moar, grew rapidly over the last twelve months by aggressively aggregating news stories published and reported by mainstream outlets. Its understanding of what would go viral on Twitter attracted hundreds of thousands of followers, including MPs and government ministers. However, the account was also accused of distorting stories by focusing on specifics that would go viral. Mainstream journalists also complained that its emoji-laden breaking news posts would often attract more social media shares than the posts by the outlets who actually reported the stories. Despite this, its substantial following enabled the account to rapidly disrupt political news cycles by highlighting stories that might otherwise have been missed. It also built a relatively mainstream fanbase – with the likes of former Manchester United footballer Gary Neville among those calling for the account to be reinstated. Moar, who was last year hired by the Spectator to run its social media accounts, declined to comment on the deletion of Politics For All. Many other related accounts he set up under the For All banner, which were run with the assistance of a team of young staff, have also been permanently suspended. One individual at Politics for All said: “The fact Twitter will allow the Taliban on their platform but not a simple news aggregator is quite something. We will be appealing this decision.” However, it is unclear how the aggregator could appeal against the permanent suspension, which is similar to the treatment handed out to former US President Donald Trump. Twitter has stated the suspension is final and its rules on platform manipulation apply to users who “artificially amplify or suppress information or engage in behaviour that manipulates or disrupts people’s experience”. The specific behaviour that led to Politics for All being banned remains unknown. The deletion of a relatively popular news aggregation service by Twitter could attract political scrutiny. Social media platforms will soon be regulated by Ofcom under the forthcoming online harms legislation, with mainstream journalism outlets lobbying hard to ensure their access to audiences is protected.Call it a trial run. With parliament still on recess (what better way for MPs to endear themselves to the country than to award themselves an extra day off over the new year break?), Tuesday was as good a time as any for Keir Starmer to test-drive his latest pitch to voters. If it went well, so much the better: he would be ahead of the game. But if parts fell flat then there would be plenty of time to put them right in more important speeches ahead. Such as ones where more than a handful of people outside Westminster were listening. Yet even though the stakes couldn’t have been much lower, the Labour leader was leaving nothing to chance. The set was the full Liz “Gloriana” Truss, with two large union jacks for a backdrop. If it took draping himself in flags to prove that he – and the Labour party – were patriotic then so be it. Keir didn’t care if he was laying it on a bit thick. He would bathe in red, white and blue if necessary. Whatever it took. Starmer started as he meant to go on by celebrating the country we live in. Remembering how lucky he – and we – are to be British. We have the Queen. The NHS. The rule of law. The Queen. Musicians. Universities. The Queen. The BBC. Fashion. The Queen. But it wasn’t unpatriotic to suggest there might be one or two areas where there was room for improvement. Over the course of the pandemic, the British people and the opposition had done the decent thing by giving the government the benefit of the doubt. But the government had betrayed that trust by thinking the rules didn’t apply to them. Not just the serial liar and party organiser Boris Johnson. The betrayal went far deeper than that, into a Tory party that had been in power too long and took the country for granted. So replacing the prime minister with Truss or Rishi Sunak would make no difference. What was needed was a new Labour government. So far, so good. But then it all got a little vague. After bigging up the achievements of Atlee – he even dared mention nuclear weapons, Wilson and Blair governments – the best that Starmer could offer was a new social contract. If we worked hard and obeyed the rules, Labour would give us security, prosperity and respect. Which was fine, as far as it went. But it didn’t quite feel as substantial as founding the NHS, Nato, the Open University and the national minimum wage. He also promised to make Brexit work. Which could have been a little rash as no one has, as yet, come close to even the vaguest hint of how they intend to do that. Starmer was more assertive when it came to the media Q&amp;A at the end. After grabbing the moral high ground by pointing out the government’s failure to prepare schools for the new term, and that it had only been down to Labour votes that it had been able to implement plan B, Keir took on both Corbyns. First Piers and the anti-vaxxers, then Jeremy. He made no apology for having pretended to sign up to the Corbyn masterplan only to ditch it once he became leader. He was in the business of winning elections rather than being in opposition. The public had had their chance to vote for Jeremy’s manifesto in 2019 and had given Boris an 80-seat majority. Enough was enough. And no, Johnson was most definitely not the sort of prime minister who should be knighted. The speech hadn’t been quite as polished as Starmer might have ideally liked but it had been more than a decent marker towards the next election. And it was certainly enough to spook the Tories into bringing forward the Downing Street press conference by a day. Boris couldn’t take the risk of Starmer grabbing all the headlines on the evening news bulletins. Or for Keir to be seen as the only leader working. You could tell that Johnson didn’t really have anything new to say at the presser because he took an age saying it. That’s one of Boris’s most telling giveaways. His bullshit and waffle meters work perfectly in sync. Just about the only part of his government that does. So what we got was a lot of hesitation, repetition and deviation. We have a prime minister whose only discernible current talent – other than as a party host – is to talk complete bollocks. His main message was that Omicron was very serious but not so serious for him to need to do much about it. Rather, we should accept that his hands are tied by the libertarian maniacs on the right of the party who couldn’t even accept wearing a mask on public transport. So, as the chances of them approving anything more than that was nil, and imposing further restrictions for a second time with Labour votes was politically unacceptable, we were stuck where we were. Sticking to plan B and keeping our fingers tightly crossed. Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance alluded to problems with this approach but stopped short of spelling them out. So it was left to the media. Johnson talked of hospitals not getting overwhelmed, when at least eight trusts are already operating on an emergency footing without the staff or protective equipment to treat their patients. “Um, er, just get boosted,” he said. He hasn’t even realised that the vaccination programme has stalled. Here we were. With an incompetent prime minister who was making decisions for entirely the wrong reasons. And we would just have to sit tight and hope it somehow turned out for the best. Starmer must have been watching and thinking maybe he had less work to do on his speech than he had imagined.The changing of a year is a time to reflect, to both remember moments that have passed and imagine how they might have happened differently. These considerations are likely to be personal: should I really have let my hair grow long? What if I had not forced the hire car into the narrow parking space next to the concrete pillar? They can also be grander too and one thought that has returned frequently over the course of the past week is of the latter type. It runs as follows: did we miss a trick by not letting the European Super League happen? By we I mean the source of the amorphous people power credited with bringing the 12-club breakaway competition to a halt. I also mean specifically the English contingent of that protest because the dynamics at work in Spain and Italy are different. Finally I mean the part of that group described as the ‘legacy fan’, those who watch their team in a stadium and who support them in a kind of unconditional fashion, as if we were almost part of it ourselves. The legacy fan is probably a term most legacy fans would rather not have used about them but it’s here and it means something, so it’s worth using. It’s certainly distinct from the generic ‘fan’, which is used a lot but means a number of different things to different people. The Super League was apparently stopped by the fans. But it was also stopped for the fans because, in the words of the Premier League, it would damage the concept of “an open pyramid, progression through sporting merit and the highest standards of sporting integrity”. Yet most legacy fans will likely be scratching their heads to locate clear examples of each of these phenomena. An open pyramid? The top of the Premier League is choked off by the Super League clubs, the top of the Championship by those who fell out of the top flight and got to spend parachute payments, while the top of League One features several clubs who did all that and still nearly went bust. Most fans outside that group feels boxed in, increasingly frustrated and likely desperate for a billionaire of dubious means to land their helicopter in the club car park. Sporting merit, sure, if you mean spending power in the transfer market. And sporting integrity, well, not only is it an issue pertinent to the debate over a Covid-disrupted schedule but it is inherent in most of the regular sources of debate – from VAR to simulation to tactical fouling to, once again, the disparity in resources available to clubs in the same division. So let’s say that stopping the breakaway does not mean everything is fine. Could allowing it have made it better? To conduct this thought experiment I must introduce one condition: that when the big six left for the Super League, they left English football altogether. The real plan had it so that there was Super League midweek and Premier League at the weekends (for a bit at least). But in this version, that’s a no. They go. They take their money, their global recruitment networks and their in-house content production teams with them. They pay a one-off exit fee and can concentrate on six-week road trips to China for quadruple headers against Beijing Guoan (oh, yes, one other condition is that the European Super League becomes the Global Super League). Left behind are largely ruins. The Premier League uses the exit money to stave off furious broadcasters, but contemplates a future shorn of global eyeballs. The Championship sees its own exodus, of speculative owners no longer keen on ramming clubs up that open pyramid. Ryan Reynolds cancels his Airbnb in Wrexham. After raging about the betrayal of the big six for a fortnight, radio stations suddenly come to the conclusion that the GSL is, actually, quite an intriguing prospect. Twitter continues to be a squall of egoistic tantrums, but that is what it is there for. Amid the chaos, however, things are suddenly possible that never were before. Sustainability, with limits on owner investment and wage caps at a percentage of clubs’ turnover. With TV interest diminished, public broadcasters can suddenly afford to show games again, but not that many because they have a Stephen Graham drama to squeeze in too. Clubs can no longer afford substantial transfer fees and turn towards developing their own talent. They must also nurture relationships with the one reliable source of income they have: the good old legacy fan. Not that it would all be manna and ambrosia. Some legacy fans, those of the Super six clubs, who have been ignored and traduced as much as any other, would have to follow their teams to the GSL. Those who remained, the virtuous souls who travel through rain and disrupted railway services to support their team, would also have a dirty secret: they’d enjoy watching the GSL too. Like the Premier League before it, the GSL would offer entertainment comparable to anything on earth. It’s simply that to save the sport, and to maximise the entertainment, the two had to be separated. That separation had once seemed illogical, never mind impossible, but once it had happened it made sense. Now it was all right, everything was all right, the struggle had finished. The legacy fan had won the victory over themselves.Back in October Sajid Javid insisted: “We don’t believe that the pressures currently faced by the NHS are unsustainable.” It was a statement that did not age well. It led to snorts of derision from senior doctors and hospital bosses, some of whom wondered what planet the health secretary was living on. Days later Roland Sinker, the chief executive of Cambridge university hospitals NHS trust, gave a vivid insight into how easily NHS hospitals can get overwhelmed. He told a staff Zoom meeting that the loss of 150 out of 900 beds at the trust’s main hospital – Addenbrooke’s, one of the NHS’s finest – meant that “we could barely function before Covid”. With “150 beds out of 900” unavailable, “this is ceasing to function as a hospital”. Days earlier a patient had died in the back of an ambulance outside the hospital. Its inability to cope with demand was so worrying, Sinker said, that it might have to send patients to London or Birmingham. “I’m much more anxious and scared now” than when he took over in 2015, he admitted, adding: “You’d have to be asleep to not realise the profound nature of the crisis we’re in.” Fast forward two months and a growing number of NHS trusts in England, struggling in the face of an Omicron-driven surge in staff sickness, are now having to declare a “critical incident” – an admission that they cannot cope with the extreme pressure they are facing. “Unfortunately this does mean postponing some non-urgent operations and outpatient appointments to accommodate those patients with the most urgent clinical need,” Aaron Cummins, the chief executive of the university hospitals of Morecambe Bay trust in Cumbria, explained in a statement on Monday. It is easy to see such situations as proof that those places are overwhelmed. On Tuesday it emerged that the NHS ambulance service covering the north-east of England has begun asking friends and relatives of people who have dialled 999 to bring them to hospital themselves, even if they are having a suspected stroke or heart attack, because it cannot guarantee that paramedics will reach them in anywhere near the expected response times. Ministers prefer to trumpet the record funding the NHS is now receiving, and that the largest number of people ever now work in it in England, than hear such stories of the inability of the nation’s most important service to do its job. At Tuesday’s Covid press conference Boris Johnson declined to define what an “overwhelmed” NHS looked like. He denied suggestions that it was already in that state, though did concede that “there will be a difficult period for our wonderful NHS in the next few weeks because of Omicron”. The reality is that today’s pileup of problems shows that much of the NHS is already overwhelmed. As the NHS Providers boss, Chris Hopson, points out, while the service’s current difficulties are the result of “an exceptional Covid surge”, years of government decision-making have left it in this weakened state. “Recent winters and NHS performance pre-Covid show that, after [a] decade of longest/deepest financial squeeze in NHS history, NHS has serious capacity/demand mismatch and broken workforce model,” he said. The NHS in England has had close to 100,000 vacancies for years now, including for about 40,000 nurses and 10,000 doctors. The price of persistent understaffing is paid daily by health personnel routinely working extra hours to ensure patients get good care; that goodwill helps keep the NHS from falling over. Patients experience it in the form of delays in getting help or having a diagnostic test. And it is also felt by a service which, in some parts, too often teeters perilously close to falling over, usually under the extra strain winter brings, but sometimes in summer too, and certainly as a result of Omicron. Analysis by Stephen Rocks of the Health Foundation thinktank shows that the UK has only 3.93 hospital doctors per 100,000 people – the lowest in Europe. It also has just 2.42 beds per 1,000 people, the second lowest in Europe after Sweden, which has only 2.07. And it also ranks low down the international league table for its supply of nurses, CT scanners and MRI scanners. The size of the NHS budget is important. But providing high-quality healthcare involves more than that. It also involves giving the service the staff it needs and taking firm action to reduce illness. Today’s immediate, escalating NHS crisis has long roots, which are also political roots. Years of decisions by David Cameron, Theresa May and Boris Johnson, especially their inaction on staffing, left it enfeebled and woefully underprepared for this level of extreme pressure, which the critical incidents and unavailability of ambulances dramatically illustrate. The service’s many supporters can only hope that it does not break altogether in the coming days. • This article was amended on 10 January 2022. The UK has 2.42 hospital beds per 1,000 people, not per 100,000 people.A C$40bn agreement-in-principle has been reached in Canada to reform the child welfare system for First Nations people and compensate more than 200,000 individuals and families who suffered because of it. At the heart of the deal is a legacy of discrimination in child welfare systems that saw many children removed from their homes and placed in state care, and others who were denied adequate medical care and social services because of their Indigenous identity. Half of the C$40bn (US$31bn) is earmarked for reforming a child welfare system deemed discriminatory by the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal (CHRT) and federal court. The other half is reserved for payments to First Nations people harmed by the on-reserve and Yukon child welfare systems between 1 April 1991 and 31 March 2022. First Nations people who experienced delays or denials of medical care and social services between 1991 and 2017 will also receive compensation. “For too long, the Government of Canada did not adequately fund or support the wellness of First Nations families and children,” said Patty Hajdu, minister of Indigenous services, as details of the deal were released on Tuesday. “No compensation amount can make up for the trauma people have experienced, but these agreements-in-principle acknowledge to survivors and their families the harm and pain caused by the discrimination in funding and services,” the minister continued. Cindy Woodhouse of the Assembly of First Nations (AFN), who participated in the negotiations, told reporters that federal policies had led to the overrepresentation of First Nations in every province’s and territory’s child welfare system. “This wasn’t and isn’t about parenting. This is about poverty and First Nations children being removed from their families and communities instead of provided help with food, clothing or shelter,” Woodhouse said, adding that child welfare agencies wouldn’t receive funding unless a child was removed. Another of the First Nations organizations involved in the negotiations warned against premature celebration. Cindy Blackstock, executive director of the First Nations Child and Family Caring Society of Canada, underlined that this was merely a non-binding agreement. “I see it as words on paper,” she said on Tuesday. “Nothing changes in the lives of children today.” First Nations children are more than 17 times more likely to be in foster care than the typical Canadian, and after they turn 18, they are often left without support to find safe housing, employment or education opportunities or even the most basic care services, Blackstock said. She said some of the $20bn earmarked for reform will go toward those needs. The $40bn settlement was reached in the 11th hour of negotiations, on 31 December – the culmination of years of hard-fought litigation, class-action lawsuits and challenges from the federal government, which began with a human rights complaint in 2007. That complaint alleged that federal authorities intentionally underfunded services for First Nations communities and needlessly removed children from their homes. One of its primary arguments was that Canada was not respecting its duty to uphold Jordan’s Principle, which was passed after the 2005 death of five-year-old Jordan River Anderson of the Norway House Cree Nation in Manitoba. Born with medical problems, Anderson spent most of his life in hospital and ultimately died while the provincial and federal governments squabbled over who should pay for his care. Jordan’s Principle dictates that the first government of contact is required to immediately cover the cost of services, and resolve jurisdictional disputes later. In Canada, healthcare is a provincial responsibility for non-Indigenous individuals, but Indigenous people fall under federal jurisdiction. Nine years later, the CHRT found the government acted intentionally. Tuesday’s settlement reflects this judgment, as well as other litigation. The outcomes of discrimination in child welfare have long been seen as an extension of the residential school system, a program that ran from the 1880s until 1996 that saw First Nations, Métis and Inuit children removed from their homes and placed in residential schools where physical, sexual and psychological abuse was often rampant. In 2021, the bodies of thousands of children were discovered on the grounds of former residential schools across Canada, as well as in the United States. Blackstock noted that many of the children included in this compensation program were born to parents who attended residential schools or who were separated from their families in the “Sixties Scoop”. “[The federal government] is a repeat offender against First Nations children,” she said. David Sterns, a lawyer representing one of the classes, pointed out that more First Nations children are in foster care than were living in residential schools at their height. He said some individuals will receive more than $40,000 each for their suffering. He urged First Nations people who may have been affected to register for class inclusion at SotosClassActions.com.Parts of the NHS may be overwhelmed in the coming weeks, Boris Johnson has admitted for the first time as he insisted England can “ride out” its biggest ever Covid wave “without shutting down our country once again”. The prime minister acknowledged the health service is under huge pressure after four more NHS trusts – all outside London – declared critical incidents amid rising staff absences and Covid patients. On Tuesday evening hospitals across Greater Manchester announced some non-urgent surgery and appointments would be suspended. Heart attack patients calling 999 in parts of northern England were also asked to get a lift instead of waiting for an ambulance as hospitals in the region experienced more than double the growth rate in numbers of Covid patients compared with London, which was previously worst hit by the Omicron variant surge. With frontline worker absences fuelled by a record 218,000 new confirmed UK cases of Covid on Tuesday, Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical adviser, said the NHS faced “very substantial pressure over the next couple of weeks” – though there was not yet a “surge in mortality” seen with other waves by this stage. Johnson claimed the vaccine programme and reduced chance of hospitalisation with Omicron meant there was now a chance for the country to get through the wave without imposing new restrictions. To reduce disruption from staff off sick or isolating with Covid, he unveiled a plan for 100,000 critical workers to get tests on every working day to detect cases quickly and prevent them spreading, although some experts raised concerns that was not enough. It was reported last night that health officials were also looking at relaxing rules around PCR tests. People who have asymptomatic infections will no longer need to take a follow-up test after a positive lateral flow test, the Daily Telegraph reported. Previously, Johnson has said he would bring in further restrictions if there was a risk of the NHS becoming overwhelmed. However, the prime minister accepted it may already be happening in some areas when asked for a definition of this, given many medical staff feel that situation has already been reached. “The NHS is under huge pressure,” he told a Downing Street press conference. “I won’t provide a definition of what being overwhelmed would constitute because I think that different trusts and different places, at different moments, will feel at least temporarily overwhelmed. Johnson said the country had a chance to “ride out this Omicron wave without shutting down our country once again”. He said hospitals were “at the moment … sending out signals saying that they are feeling the pressure hugely and there will be a difficult period for our wonderful NHS for the next few weeks because of Omicron … I just think we have to get through it as best as we possibly can.” In a further sign of the intense strain on hospitals, the Greater Manchester Combined Authority said that the region’s 17 hospitals “have made the difficult decision to pause some non-urgent surgery and appointments due to the rising impact of Covid”. However, surgery for cancer, heart conditions, vascular problems and organ transplantation will still go ahead, it pledged. Medics and scientists have been pressing Johnson for weeks to bring in restrictions beyond the advice for people to work from home and requirement for masks in shops and on public transport, with tougher measures already in force in Scotland and Wales. But the prime minister would find it very difficult to get support for further measures in England from Tory backbenchers, scores of whom voted against current plan B restrictions before Christmas. Johnson did not rule out further measures to tackle Covid transmission but said the current plan was to “keep our schools and our businesses open, and we can find a way to live with this virus”. Health leaders reacted with concern, saying Johnson had not acknowledged the depths of the NHS’s problems despite unprecedented pressure in some areas. Pat Cullen, general secretary of the Royal College of Nursing, said nursing staff will have “watched the prime minister’s statement in disbelief”. “One described to me today that the NHS feels more broken than she’s ever known it. This is not hysteria, this is blowing the whistle on falling standards as patient care comes under real threat,” she said. “Vaccinations alone will not reduce infections and hospitalisations – more must be done to prioritise nursing staff for access to testing and high-quality PPE. Meanwhile, the emphasis on virtual and temporary beds shows that the government still fails to recognise the value of highly skilled nursing staff or grasp the extent of the workforce crisis.” Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said the attempt to reassure the public that the NHS is not being overwhelmed “does not chime with the experience of staff up and down the country who are facing fast-rising hospital admissions, intense pressures on all parts of the health and care system and widespread staff absence”. “We urge the government not to allow its optimism to lead to complacency given the rapidly changing situation we are seeing on a daily basis,” added Taylor. He welcomed the plan for daily rapid testing of key workers but said it should have been made available earlier in the pandemic. The British Medical Association, which represents doctors, urged Johnson to impose new restrictions to help relieve the pressure. “The facts, figures and the living reality for thousands of patients and NHS staff daily demonstrate undoubtedly that the NHS is currently already overwhelmed,” said Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the BMA’s chair of council. “Asking the NHS to ‘just get through it’, without doing anything to help, would be to wrongly accept avoidable suffering to thousands of patients in the coming weeks.” Johnson was flanked by Whitty and Prof Sir Patrick Vallance, the UK government’s chief scientific adviser, as he outlined the approach for England. Vallance said there were “extraordinarily high levels of infection at the moment” in the UK. Hospital pressures would depend on how Omicron had an effect on the older generation, he said. Whitty acknowledged that “some hospitals, some areas of the country” will come under “very substantial pressure over the next couple of weeks” with high numbers of staff isolating over infections compounding the typical winter pressures. He also spoke of being left “saddened” by the proportion of unvaccinated patients in intensive care, as he urged people to get their boosters.A suspected member of the group involved in the assassination of Haiti’s president, Jovenel Moïse, has been arrested by US authorities after he was detained while transiting through Panama following his deportation from Jamaica to Colombia. Mario Antonio Palacios, 43, a former member of the Colombian military, is accused by Haitian authorities of being part of a mercenary group that tortured and killed Moïse and wounded his wife, Martine, during an attack on Moïse’s private home in July. Palacios has admitted in a media interview being in Moïse’s bedroom during the assault in which the president died, but has denied being involved in the killing. He entered Jamaica illegally and was detained in prison after his arrest in October while the courts considered an application from Haiti for his extradition. Jamaica instead ordered his deportation to Colombia, but while transiting to his home country via Panama he was intercepted at the airport and put on a flight to the US, which, like Haiti, has issued an Interpol red notice requesting his arrest. Palacios appeared at a federal court in Miami on Tuesday afternoon but did not enter a plea. He is scheduled to appear in court again on 31 January. Panama authorities have issued no public comment on the affair but a person familiar with the matter in Panama confirmed that Palacios had been detained. A video shared with Reuters by the source, who declined to be identified, showed two immigration agents escorting a man, whose face was not shown, through what appeared to be Panama’s airport. An official source quoted by the Colombian news site El Tiempo said: “It seems very certain that Palacios will be sent to the United States because the [legal] process there was pushed forward urgently and they have a plane ready for him.” Palacios’s detention in Panama and arrest by US authorities marks the latest twist in the saga of the investigation into Moise’s assassination, which remains largely mired in mystery. Jamaican authorities ruled that Haiti’s request for Palacios’s extradition did not meet its legal requirements. “This request, as a matter of law, could not proceed, could not be processed and was destined to fail,” said Paula Llewellyn, Jamaica’s director of public prosecutions (DPP), on Friday. According to reports, Palacios had not been named as a suspect in the murder but was instead being sought on a charge of armed robbery. It appeared at the weekend that the Colombian would be allowed to travel home after he was photographed shaking hands with the Colombian ambassador to Jamaica, Jairo Clopatofsky Ghisays. Palacios is believed to be the last of the alleged group of mercenaries to be detained. In an interview given while he was still in hiding, he insisted he had no knowledge of who killed Moïse. “I don’t know who killed him. I say it from the heart for my family, for my children,” he told the Week, though he did admit he had entered Moïse’s house. According to a report prepared by the Haitian police and leaked to various media outlets, Palacios – also known by his nickname of “Floro” – is accused of being one of the instigators of Moïse’s assassination on 7 July. He is accused of being one of 26 Colombians and two Haitian Americans who made up a hit squad that stormed the president’s private residence in the middle of the night claiming to be part of a US Drug Enforcement Administration operation. Moïse was shot a dozen times and also appeared to have had an eye gouged out during the assault. None of the surviving Colombians captured in Haiti have yet been put on trial, and the motivation behind the assassination remains unclear amid contradictory claims. On Saturday, gunmen tried to kill Haiti’s prime minister, Ariel Henry, during an event to mark the anniversary of the country’s independence, officials say. The incident happened at a church in the northern city of Gonaïves. Video posted online showed the prime minister and his entourage scrambling toward their cars amid intense gunfire.• Afghanistan has a population of about 40 million, not 23 million as an article said (West’s sanctions have left Afghan medical system ‘on its knees’, 14 December, p27). • Joan Didion’s book The Year of Magical Thinking was a Pulitzer finalist, but did not win the prize (Joan Didion, US writer who mixed personal and political, dies at 87, 24 December, p13). • Other recently amended articles include: UK delays Brexit checks on goods entering from Ireland Johnson blamed for Covid test shortages as cases hit record 183,000 Dominic Raab photographed at Chelsea game without a mask ‘Patriots’ are undermining American democracy Navy to dismantle sunken cargo ship on Thames holding unstable explosives Pfizer/BioNTech tax windfall brings Mainz an early Christmas present ‘Really abnormal’ storms and tornadoes tear through Great Plains and midwest 83 review – cricket crowdpleaser puts a new spin on the underdog movie Bernard and the Genie: 1991 Richard Curtis sleeper is a Christmas cracker Was 2021 the worst year ever for games? Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com. You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.So many young people in Australia are testing positive to Covid that videos about their experiences are going viral on TikTok. One popular trend involves users posting videos of their positive rapid antigen test, or some other situation showing they have Covid, with the voiceover: “Yep that’s me, you’re probably wondering how I ended up in this situation.” That is then cut with a video of them doing legal but high-risk activities – such as dancing at a music festival – to the sound of Boney M’s Rasputin. Other videos show users struggling to get their hand on a rapid antigen test or waiting in long queues at Covid testing centres. “Gorgeous gorgeous girls Afterpay their rapid antigen test,” writes TikTok user @eilishgilligan, in a statement that attempts to capture the mood of young people living in Australia’s major cities. According to New South Wales department of health statistics, 38,407 people between the ages of 20 and 29 tested positive for Covid-19 in the past seven days – 28% of the total cases. In Victoria, there were 18,467 active cases in the same cohort – 38% of the total. Victoria’s Covid logistics chief, Jeroen Weimar, admitted on Tuesday the state’s actual figures were likely higher but he said about 30-40% of cases being picked up were in people aged 20 to 40. As rapid antigen tests become increasingly hard to come by and PCR testing queues report hours-long waiting times, the Monash University infectious disease modeller Dr Michael Lydeamore said it was unlikely government statistics were capturing the magnitude of the outbreak. “We are just not getting an accurate picture of what’s happening,” he said. Lydeamore said part of the problem was that there was no way to capture the results of rapid antigen tests. “In the UK, for example, there is a barcode on every test, and a QR code,” he said. “You can scan that with your phone and put in your information and record your test result and then the health agency can access that for reporting. “We don’t have that system here and so there are all these people testing positive with RATs, doing the right thing and staying home, but we have no way to know about them.” Although countless TikTok users claim they picked up the virus while celebrating New Year’s Eve, Lydeamore said several factors contributed to the high positive rates among people in their 20s. That cohort were traditionally key transmitters during outbreaks of infectious disease, he said. Not only because of their social contacts but because they also tended to work in high-risk settings such as retail, hospitality and busy offices. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Lydeamore said the timeline of the vaccine rollout also contributed to the high case numbers. “A lot of people in that age category are pretty far from their primary dose and not yet eligible for a booster. And that’s going to put them more at risk potentially of acquiring the virus.” ‘You have to laugh or you’ll cry’ Some young people on social media have said – most likely in jest – they were lucky to have tested positive before the recent outbreak so they could move on with their lives. “Smashing out c0v1d early so I can have an uninterrupted hot v@x summer,” says one user, 28-year-old Georgia Milhe (@brokebutmakeitboujee), who tested positive for Covid in November. She said joking about the situation was a cathartic release and, despite her comment, she remained concerned she would be impacted by the current Omicron outbreak. She was doing her best to avoid exposure, reporting a similar attitude among her circle of friends. “You have to laugh or you’ll cry,” Milhe said. “I don’t think people are taking it lightly, I just think they’re trying to cope. This situation – to think that it’s going to still be going on and getting worse than it was after all the lockdowns – it’s pretty crap.” ‘You just have to try and protect yourself’ Other users have joked about trying to get the virus now so they can isolate with their housemates and partners. But Lydeamore warned against this strategy. “Even though younger people have a much lower chance of getting a severe disease, it’s certainly not zero,” he said. “There’s plenty of people under 30 in hospital and in intensive care. And every time you get Covid, that is something that could happen to you.” He also pointed to reports from South Africa of people suffering “distinct infections as little as a month apart”. While he acknowledged the challenges of young people – especially those who live in shared housing – he said it was important everyone tried to avoid exposure. “It’s not inevitable that everyone will get Covid,” he said. “It’s inevitable that a lot of people will get Covid, but we don’t know who those people are. You just have to try and protect yourself as best as you can, the closer quarters [make it] harder, but you just have to do your best.”PEN15 (Sky Comedy) started out as a show that leaned on the grotesqueness of the teenage experience, and was constructed on the foundations of a largely visual joke – that the 13-year-old versions of the two protagonists, Maya and Anna, were played by actors in their 30s, while the other 13-year-olds around them were played by actors of that age. Yet its early fondness for a gross-out gag has evolved and it has matured into a remarkably sensitive and beautiful series about life, friendship and growing up. This run of final episodes, which conclude a second season delayed by the pandemic, mark the end of the show. It is bowing out at the peak of its powers. It returns with Bat Mitzvah, in which Becca, one of the Mean Girls-esque characters who is far more popular than Maya or Anna, has her batmitzvah, having been reminded to chase her classmates’ RSVPs during a lesson about the Holocaust. Becca’s disdain for Maya, a running theme of the series, turns a party into a finely tuned study of peer pressure and economic status, as Maya starts to realise that her family cannot buy Swarovski jewellery with the same ease as some of her classmates. When Maya hands Becca the gift she has forced her father to buy, it is a terrible, awkward snapshot of teen power dynamics and porcelain-thin self-esteem. Often awkward and usually excruciating, PEN15 conjures all the most painful parts of growing up and forces its characters to act them out, slowly, as if tiptoeing over a cliff edge. While Maya is learning about her social class, Anna is having an existential crisis, brought on by the discovery that there is evil in the world. Her parents’ divorce is exacerbating her anxiety, and the pressure of the newfound suspicion that life is pointless leads to alcohol, a kiss and a potential new boyfriend. All the great levelling drama of being a teen is here, from trying to be popular to wondering how God could allow great suffering to happen. It all exists in the same heightened emotional state. By this stage of PEN15, it is largely easy to forget that Maya Erskine and Anna Konkle, who created the show as well as starring in it, are not 13, which is a credit to its keen eye for detail. It takes place in an American middle school, but you don’t need to be familiar with American schools to relate. It is set in 2000, but its retro appeal is also confined to the background now, and mostly to quick jokes about Discmans, waiting for a phone call that might never come, or endless conversations on the landline. (You know, the thing you couldn’t use when the dial-up was on.) Instead, it has blossomed into an intelligent and creative comedy. It has style and flair, tipping into the surreal when it feels appropriate, never afraid to be inventive. One episode unfolds from the perspective of Maya’s mother, Yuki (played by Erkine’s real mother). There is a scene involving amphetamines at a funeral, a clever use of glow sticks and light to convey a panic attack, and, in one especially tense moment, a use of perspective that is wordlessly devastating. If some of its early, cruder humour has been lost, that seems like a fair exchange. What remains is still funny and sometimes hilarious, though it is all tempered with fragility, and the sense that the characters are not quite grown-up enough to deal with what the world is throwing at them, until they do deal with it, usually together. This is sweet without being sickly, and that is a rare and hard-won balancing act. Its tone is perfectly judged. The show is so pitifully accurate about how cringeworthy teenage life can be that, at times, it is tough to watch. I put my hands over my eyes more frequently while viewing this than I would during a horror film. Towards its end, with the arrival of a sinister stoner named Derek, the series takes on a darker hue. Death intrudes on Anna’s life, and sex begins to nudge its way into Anna and Maya’s immediate world. I found the very last episode surprisingly upsetting, and wondered if this was really how it would end. And then it pulled out its PEN15 superpower, turned its lights up, and became something touching and brilliant again.Hello, happy brunch-time and a big welcome back to everyone except La Niña, who I resent even when she’s watering my garden. This is Five Great Reads, a weekday summertime wrap of interest, service and sweet, sweet juice picked out by me, Alyx Gorman, lifestyle editor of Guardian Australia. You may notice today’s reads are arriving a little later in the morning. That’s because my esteemed colleagues over at the Morning Mail are back on tools and summarising the news first thing, just for you. And if you’d like to read through the day’s events as they unfold, you can do so at our live blog. Finally, a paragraph later than expected, comes a reminder that if you’re reading this as an article, you can also receive it as an email by putting your address in the box below. To the people who are already receiving this as an email, I am sorry I keep saying this, and even more sorry you can’t see the box. It’s a very nice box. Now we’re done with the box chat, onto the reads. 1. How does it feel to fight off a predator in the wild? Five people who survived terrifying wild animal attacks share their stories and the way these incidents shaped their lives. Which terrifying animals? A mountain lion, a shark, a bear, a hippo and an otter. An otter? An otter. Otters aren’t terrifying. “The otter kept torpedoing underwater to bite my legs,” says Leah Hiller. “It would come up, track where I was, and attack again. I knew I couldn’t outswim it, so I just had to brace for the bites and try to protect my neck because, if it hit me there, I would have drowned.” “These sharp, searing bites were coming from every angle,” she continues. “It bit me 25 times. Some of them were two inches deep and one pierced my ankle bone.” How long will it take me to read? Like many of the animals mentioned, this is a big one. It’ll take about nine minutes to read. But if you can’t be tempted into reading 4,000 words of personal experience on animal attacks (with a gently eco bent) then honestly, you just can’t be pleased. Bonus read: Okay, one last attempt to please you with a very good boy instead: a dog that saved a hiker’s life in the Croatian mountains. 2. The slow, overlooked art of recovery As millions around the world grapple with long-Covid, “we need to respect the process of healing” writes GP Gavin Francis. Notable quote: “Convalescence is anything but a passive process,” Francis writes. This realisation came to him while he worked on a brain injury rehabilitation ward as a junior doctor. “Though its rhythms and its tempo are often slow and gentle, it’s an act, and actions need us to be present, to engage, to give of ourselves.” How long will it take me to read? Eight minutes. But it’s a must for anyone who has ever fallen and taken a while to get up. 3. The year in underrated actors Film critic Guy Loge on the best performances this award season has overlooked. What’s in it for me? You’ll end up with a long list of movies to watch, from Norwegian dramadies to spiky road trip flicks to a horror movie so scary-sounding I can’t watch the trailer. How many movies? 16 4. Is civil war fomenting in the US? Stephen Marche certainly seems to think so. In an extract from his new book the Next Civil War, he makes his case. Notable quote: “The right has recognised what the left has not: that the system is in collapse,” Marche writes. “The right has a plan: it involves violence and solidarity. They have not abjured even the Oath Keepers. The left, meanwhile, has chosen infighting as their sport.” How long will it take to read? About four minutes. Bonus read: After finishing Marche’s piece, you might just forgive the Americans for trying to be rid of the phrase “no worries”. They do seem to have worries. 5. An easy win: drink a little less Finally, here’s Celina Ribeiro on how a couple of dry nights a week have helped change her relationship with alcohol.