Here’s a round-up of today’s top news on Covid from around the world: India’s daily Covid cases jumped fivefold in a week, to 117,100 on Friday, with the Omicron wave on course to overtake the country’s previous peak from Delta. UK experts advised no fourth doses yet, as third shots continue to provide high protection against severe disease from the Omicron variant among older adults. The UK recorded 178,250 new cases and 229 further deaths. Germany toughened restrictions for bars and restaurants and cut isolation times for boosted people. Authorities in Henan province, China, imposed more Covid restrictions after a sharp rise in infections, limiting travel and activities in some cities or launching mass testing drives in others. Bulgaria tightened travel restrictions, as ministers sought to limit the rise of new infections from Omicron. Friday’s 5,525 new cases were almost double the 2,810 cases from a week ago. Austrian chancellor Karl Nehammer tested positive for Covid, but is continuing to work remotely. Japan will impose introduce limits on bar and restaurant opening times in three areas in an attempt to stem a surge in Covid infections that has been linked to US military bases. Meanwhile, new cases hit their highest level in nearly four months as 4,475 cases were detected. Senior officials in Hong Kong entered a 21-day quarantine after they attended a birthday party, despite the government’s own pandemic warning. In Romania, isolation and quarantine times will be cut for Covid-positive people, depending on their vaccination status. French president Emmanuel Macron doubled down on his comments saying he wanted to “piss off” the 5 million French people who are still not vaccinated. Spain’s Covid prevalence rate jumped to 2,722.72 cases per 100,000 people — 147 cases higher than the 2,574.46 per 100,000 on Wednesday. Russia continues to see a steady decline in cases, with 16,735 new Covid infections, a 32% decline from the 24,522 new cases detected two weeks ago. Likewise, Poland’s gradual decline kept its pace, despite Omicron fears on the horizon. The country reported 11,902 new infections, a 22.5% decrease on two weeks ago. In the US, public school systems including in Newark, New Jersey, Milwaukee and Cleveland went back to remote learning as infections soared and sidelined staff members. Mexico is likely to surpass 300,000 deaths from Covid this week - the fifth highest death toll worldwide - as infections rise after the holiday season, fuelled by the Omicron variant and largely unrestricted tourism. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew in London, and for the blog today. Thanks for following along. Bye for now. Brazil detected 63,292 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, a more than tenfold increase on the 4,362 reported on Friday three weeks ago. (Reporting lags over the holiday period may have contributed to irregularities.) A further 181 people died from Covid-related causes on Friday. Brazil, which has the third-highest Covid deaths globally behind the US and Russia, according to Reuters’ tally, has experienced one the world’s most acrimonious pandemics. In October Brazil’s Senate accused right-wing president Jair Bolsonaro of “crimes against humanity” for his handling of the pandemic, during which more than 620,000 people died from Covid-related causes. Bolsonaro’s popularity dropped last year. Bolsonaro has repeatedly sowed doubts about the dangers of the virus and the value of getting vaccinated, saying he is not vaccinated himself. The president has also put pressure on Anvisa, the country’s health regulator responsible for approving vaccines, over its decision to recommend vaccination for children in line with dozens of other countries worldwide. Bolsonaro trails leftist leader Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva in polls for October’s elections. Malaysia reported 3,381 new Covid infections on Friday, the New Straits Times reports, a 4% decline on the 3,528 detected two weeks ago. The country’s last peak came in August, with daily cases often vaulting 20,000, but new infections have largely been below 10,000 a day since October. Yet the Omicron variant led to ministers banning mass celebrations on New Year’s Eve in efforts to a void another surge. A further 19 people died from the virus in the past 24 hours, health authorities said, taking the country’s total death toll to 31,628 people. Ukraine reported 7,177 new Covid cases on Friday, a 5% jump on the 6,828 new infections on Friday two weeks ago. Ukraine’s most recent epidemic peaked in early November, with daily cases sometimes rising above 25,000. Recent infections have receded but authorities fear Omicron will provoke a new wave. A further 192 people died from the virus, local media Ukrinform reports, a 29% decline on 241 a week ago. Ukraine has recorded a total of 97,088 Covid-related deaths since the pandemic began, the world’s 16th highest. Spain’s Covid prevalence rate has jumped to 2,722.72 cases per 100,000 people — 147 cases higher than the 2,574.46 per 100,000 on Wednesday. To try and suppress cases, Spain brought back its strategy from earlier in the pandemic of mandating mask-wearing outdoors, joining Italy and Greece who took similar measures in December. Prime minister Pedro Sánchez said masking was “as an effective tool” amid the surge caused by the “highly contagious” Omicron strain. It applies to all people over 6. Spain’s reported figures were disrupted over the festive period, but the percentage of hospital beds occupied by patients with Covid was 11.79% on Friday, compared to 24% amid the previous peak on 28 January 2021. New Covid cases in Japan were at their highest level in nearly four months on Friday, as 4,475 cases were detected nationally. That is an almost tenfold increase since the 418 cases on 31 December 2021, and represents the highest daily case number since 18 September. The dramatic increase follows Japan’s plans to introduce limits on bar and restaurant opening times in three areas in an attempt to stem a surge in Covid cases that has been linked to US military bases. Russia reported 16,735 new Covid infections on Friday, a 32% decline from the 24,522 new cases detected on Friday two weeks ago. Russia experienced spiking cases in late-October and early-December, with a gradual decline in recent months. But Omicron has sparked fears of a new wave after the Sputnik V vaccine was found to offer little protection from infection against the highly-mutated strain. Covid deaths in Russia are falling but remain at high levels. A further 787 people died from the virus in the past 24 hours, the Moscow Times reports, a 19% fall on the 972 deaths reported two weeks ago today. Russia’s death toll is now the second-highest in the world, behind the US, with over 650,000 people dying from Covid-related reasons. Travel restrictions tightened in Bulgaria on Friday, as ministers seek to limit the rise of new infections. Public broadcaster BNT has details on the new rules: As of 7 January, new rules come into force for those arriving from countries in the Covid “red zone”. They will be required to present both a valid EU digital Covid certificate and a negative PCR test done up to 72 hours before arrival in Bulgaria. Bulgarian citizens who do not have any of these documents will be placed under a mandatory 10-day quarantine. The quarantine may not be cancelled. Those who present only one of the two required documents will also be required to go into a 10 day quarantine, but it can be revoked if they present a negative PCR test. The updated list of countries by colour zones can be found on the website of the Ministry of Health. Bulgaria detected 5,525 new cases in the past 24 hours, almost double the 2,810 cases a week ago today. (Some countries reported lower figures over the holiday period.) A further 72 people died from Covid-related causes on Friday, the Sofia Globe reports, taking the total death toll to 31,375 people. Bulgaria now has a Covid prevalence rate of 547.89 cases out of 100,000 people over the past two weeks. Poland reported 11,902 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said, a 22.5% decrease on the 15,376 new cases recorded two weeks ago today. On Thursday, 646 people died from Covid-related causes, a 5% climb on the 616 two weeks beforehand. Poland experienced spiking cases in late-November and early-December, with new infections receding in recent weeks. But Omicron has led to fears of a resurgent wave. Health minister Adam Niedzielski said reporters the country is bracing for a peak in late-January, Polskie Radio reported, when up to 60,000 hospital beds could be needed. It comes as people in the Polish capital of Warsaw celebrated Epiphany on Friday with a procession. Let’s take a look at those UK daily Covid figures in context, starting with surging cases: Ministers will still be keeping a keen eye on how that translates into hospitalisations – which are climbing – after weeks of high cases driven by Omicron: When it comes to deaths, we are yet to see a steep jump but numbers have been rising recently: UK experts have advised that booster doses continue to provide high protection against severe disease from the Omicron variant among older adults, meaning a fourth jab is not yet needed. Around three months after boosting, protection against hospitalisation among those aged 65 and over remained at about 90%, the latest figures from the UK Health Security Agency show. Protection against mild symptomatic infection is more short-lived, dropping to around 30% by about three months. In comparison, with just two vaccine doses, protection against severe disease drops to around 70% after three months and to 50% after six months. The priority therefore remains to get first, second and third doses to those who have not already had them, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation said. This is despite some countries including Israel rolling out fourth Covid shots in response to the highly infectious Omicron, which is driving up infections around the world. Prof Wei Shen Lim, the JCVI’s chair of Covid-19 immunisation, said: The current data show the booster dose is continuing to provide high levels of protection against severe disease, even for the most vulnerable older age groups. For this reason, the committee has concluded there is no immediate need to introduce a second booster dose, though this will continue to be reviewed. The data is highly encouraging and emphasises the value of a booster jab. With Omicron continuing to spread widely, I encourage everyone to come forwards for their booster dose, or if unvaccinated, for their first two doses, to increase their protection against serious illness. Extremely vulnerable patients with impaired immune systems are advised to have four shots overall, rather than the usual three, to be fully vaccinated. But the JCVI said there is no immediate need to introduce a second booster dose, or fourth jab, to the most vulnerable care home residents and those aged over 80. The timing and need for further booster doses will continue to be reviewed as the data evolves, it added. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: The UK recorded 178,250 new coronavirus cases, and 229 more deaths, according to the daily update to the government’s Covid dashboard. Large school systems in the US, including those in Newark, New Jersey, Milwaukee and Cleveland, have gone back to remote learning as infections soar and sideline staff members. Dozens of smaller districts have followed, including many around Detroit, Chicago and Washington. The disruptions also raise alarms about risks to students. Long stretches of remote learning over the last two years have taken a toll, leaving many kids with academic and mental health setbacks that experts are still trying to understand. Joe Biden, who campaigned on a promise to reopen classrooms, is pressing schools to remain open. With vaccines and regular virus testing, his administration has said there’s no reason to keep schools closed. But the reality for some districts is not so simple: Testing supplies have been scarce, and many districts face low vaccine uptake in their communities. Story here. Japan is to introduce limits on bar and restaurant opening times in three areas in an attempt to stem a surge in coronavirus cases that has been linked to US military bases. The measures – officially described as a quasi-state of emergency – will go into effect from Sunday until the end of the month in Okinawa, home to more than half of the US service personnel based in Japan, and parts of the western prefectures of Hiroshima and Yamaguchi, which also host American troops. Story here. Dozens of senior officials and legislators in Hong Kong that have been sent into a 21-day quarantine after they attended a birthday party despite the government’s own pandemic warning. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said it was a “deep disappointment” that her bureaucrats ignored the government’s own advice on avoiding large gatherings in the middle of an Omicron outbreak. Story here. Germany’s leaders agreed to introduce stricter requirements for entry to restaurants and bars, and decided to shorten quarantine and self-isolation periods for people who have been boosted. Customers will have to show either that they have received a booster shot or provide a negative test result on top of proof that they have been vaccinated or recovered. Scholz and the governors also agreed to shorten quarantine or self-isolation periods that are currently as long as 14 days, something that many other countries already have done. People who have received boosters will no longer have to go into quarantine after having contact with coronavirus cases, Scholz said. All others can end their quarantine or self-isolation period after 10 days if they don’t have – or no longer have – symptoms; that can be cut to seven days with a negative test. [see 4.31pm.]. The Austrian chancellor, Karl Nehammer, tested positive for Covid-19 following contact with an infected member of his security team. The chancellery said in a statement that Nehammer was in self-isolation and was not showing symptoms. The chancellor, who is boosted, is conducting official business from home via video and telephone conferences and will not attend any public appointments in the next few days, the statement added. [see 3.57pm.]. Romania will cut the isolation and quarantine periods for Covid-positive people, their direct contacts and untested travellers from high-risk countries to varying lengths depending on whether they are vaccinated, health officials said. For direct contacts of Covid-positive people and travellers arriving from high-risk countries, quarantine will last five days from 14 currently for people who are vaccinated or have already been infected, and 10 days for the unvaccinated, according to a decision approved on Friday. The health ministry will approve a separate decree mandating that Covid-positive people will isolate for seven days if they are vaccinated and for 10 days if they are not, Pistol said. The shorter isolation period is appropriate because of faster incubation of the new variant, officials said. As of Saturday, wearing face masks becomes mandatory in both outdoor and indoor public spaces, and officials have banned the use of cloth face coverings, saying surgical or FFP grade respirator masks offered better protection. [see 3.44pm.]. French president Emmanuel Macron said he stood by his earlier comments saying he wanted to “piss off” the 5 million French people who are still not vaccinated against Covid-19, adding it was his responsibility to sound the alarm given the Omicron threat. [see 11.58am.]. The UK has recorded 178,250 new coronavirus cases, and 229 more deaths, according to the daily update to the government’s Covid dashboard. My colleague Andrew Sparrow reports that the total number of new cases over the past week is still up on the total for the previous week, by 19.8%. But yesterday the equivalent figure was up 29.3%, and for the third day in a row now the figure for reported cases has gone down. That explains the tiny kink downwards in the graph, which could be early evidence of cases starting to plateau. You can read more of Andy’s UK Covid coverage here: The vast majority of US districts appear to be returning to in-person learning, but other large school systems including those in Newark, New Jersey, Milwaukee and Cleveland have gone back to remote learning as infections soar and sideline staff members. Dozens of smaller districts have followed, including many around Detroit, Chicago and Washington. The disruptions also raise alarms about risks to students. Long stretches of remote learning over the last two years have taken a toll, leaving many kids with academic and mental health setbacks that experts are still trying to understand. Joe Biden, who campaigned on a promise to reopen classrooms, is pressing schools to remain open. With vaccines and regular virus testing, his administration has said there’s no reason to keep schools closed. “We have no reason to think at this point that Omicron is worse for children than previous variants,” Biden told reporters earlier this week. “We know that our kids can be safe when in school.” But the reality for some districts is not so simple: Testing supplies have been scarce, and many districts face low vaccine uptake in their communities. In Detroit, just 44% of residents five and older have received a vaccine dose, compared with a statewide rate of 63%. Read more here: Return to remote schooling brings despair in US as Omicron surges Japan is to introduce limits on bar and restaurant opening times in three areas in an attempt to stem a surge in coronavirus cases that has been linked to US military bases. The measures – officially described as a quasi-state of emergency – will go into effect from Sunday until the end of the month in Okinawa, home to more than half of the US service personnel based in Japan, and parts of the western prefectures of Hiroshima and Yamaguchi, which also host American troops. The prime minister, Fumio Kishida, has come under increasing pressure this week to address outbreaks that began at US military facilities last month and have since spread to the local civilian population. US military authorities on Thursday announced stricter Covid-19 measures, including mandatory mask wearing off base and stronger testing regimes. More on this story here: Japan attempts to stem surge in Covid cases linked to US military bases Once obscure diagnostic devices, lateral flow tests have had a rocky path to mainstream use, but some experts now view their rise to ubiquity as a “heroic” step in the fight against Covid-19 and say they could be here to stay. Read the full story here: The rise of lateral flow tests: are these ‘heroes’ of the pandemic here to stay? Here is my colleague Vincent Ni’s story on the dozens of senior officials and legislators in Hong Kong that have been sent into a 21-day quarantine after they attended a birthday party despite the government’s own pandemic warning. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said it was a “deep disappointment” that her bureaucrats ignored the government’s own advice on avoiding large gatherings in the middle of an Omicron outbreak. The party, held at a Spanish tapas restaurant earlier in the week, was to celebrate the 53rd birthday of Witman Hung Wai-man, a local delegate to China’s top national legislature. The well-connected politician invited a long list of the city’s political establishment, ranging from the home affairs secretary to the security chief. Read more here: Dozens of Hong Kong officials in Covid quarantine after birthday party Germany’s leaders have agreed to introduce stricter requirements for entry to restaurants and bars, and decided to shorten quarantine and self-isolation periods for people who have been boosted, AP reports. With the Omicron variant spreading fast throughout hte country, the chancellor, Olaf Scholz, and the 16 state governors built on restrictions introduced just after Christmas that limited private gatherings to 10 people and effectively shut nightclubs. People have already been required for some time to show proof of full vaccination or recovery to enter restaurants and bars – as well as many nonessential shops, theatres and cinemas. Friday’s decision calls for the requirements to be ratcheted up for restaurants and bars across the country. Customers will have to show either that they have received a booster shot or provide a negative test result on top of proof that they have been vaccinated or recovered. “This is a strict rule … but it is a necessary one,” Scholz said. Scholz and the governors also agreed to shorten quarantine or self-isolation periods that are currently as long as 14 days, something that many other countries already have done. People who have received boosters will no longer have to go into quarantine after having contact with coronavirus cases, Scholz said. All others can end their quarantine or self-isolation period after 10 days if they don’t have – or no longer have – symptoms; that can be cut to seven days with a negative test. “These are strict rules, but they are pragmatic and mean an easing of the current rules,” Scholz said. The Covid situation in Germany has been foggy for the past two weeks because of very patchy testing and slow reporting over the holiday period. Official figures, which authorities have acknowledged don’t yet show the full picture, have shown a steady increase in the infection rate over the past week. On Friday, the national disease control centre, the Robert Koch Institute, reported an official rate of 303.4 new cases per 100,000 residents over the past seven days. Over the past 24 hours, 56,335 new cases were reported. In its weekly report on Thursday, the institute said Omicron accounted for 44.3% of cases tested for variants in Germany last week, up from 15.8% the previous week. Germany’s vaccination campaign is regaining speed after the holidays. As of Friday, 71.6% of the population had received a full first vaccine course and 41.6% had had a booster shot. The Austrian chancellor, Karl Nehammer, has tested positive for Covid-19 following contact with an infected member of his security team, he wrote on Twitter. The chancellor said he went home immediately to quarantine following his positive result and will continue to work remotely. His contacts had been notified, he said. Nehammer added: Of course I am threefold vaccinated and thus protected as best as possible from a severe course. The chancellery said in a statement on Friday that a member of his security team tested positive on Thursday, and Nehammer was in self-isolation and was not showing symptoms. “There is no need to worry, I am fine and doing well,” the chancellery quoted him as saying. Nehammer, a conservative, is conducting official business from home via video and telephone conferences and will not attend any public appointments in the next few days. His wife and children tested negative, the chancellery said. The news came after Nehammer, 49, announced new measures on Thursday designed to curb the spread of the pandemic and pressed on with plans to make vaccinations mandatory from next month. Austria managed to slash daily Covid cases with another lockdown between November and December last year, but the Omicron variant is pushing the numbers up again. Romania will cut the isolation and quarantine periods for Covid-positive people, their direct contacts and untested travellers from high-risk countries to varying lengths depending on whether they are vaccinated, health officials said on Friday. Romania is the European Union’s second-least vaccinated state, with roughly 40% of the population fully inoculated amid distrust in state institutions and poor vaccine education. Omicron is expected to become the dominant variant in the country around mid-January, with a peak of over 25,000 daily infections and a hospitalisation rate of up to 20%, the head of the National Center for the Monitoring and Control of Communicable Diseases, Adriana Pistol, told reporters. The number of daily infections has tripled over the last week, with 5,922 cases confirmed on Friday. For direct contacts of Covid-positive people and travellers arriving from high-risk countries, quarantine will last five days from 14 currently for people who are vaccinated or have already been infected, and 10 days for the unvaccinated, according to a decision approved on Friday. The health ministry will approve a separate decree mandating that Covid-positive people will isolate for seven days if they are vaccinated and for 10 days if they are not, Pistol said. The shorter isolation period is appropriate because of faster incubation of the new variant, officials said. As of Saturday, wearing face masks becomes mandatory in both outdoor and indoor public spaces, and officials have banned the use of cloth face coverings, saying surgical or FFP grade respirator masks offered better protection. At the height of the fourth wave in late October and November, Romania topped global lists of new coronavirus deaths per million. The country of 20 million has an official death toll of 58,971. The ruling coalition government is still negotiating whether to send a new bill mandating a Covid health pass. The UK Health Security Agency has published its latest Covid transmission statistics. Police in India are tracking down Covid-positive air passengers who escaped on their way to quarantine, reports CNN. At least ten passengers have escaped from an airport in the northern city of Amritsar after testing positive for Covid-19, Ruhee Dugg, a senior district official, told CNN. The travellers had arrived aboard an international chartered plane from Italy on Thursday and 125 people tested positive. The passengers were tested for coronavirus after they landed, in accordance with India’s entry rules. While those who tested positive were taken to a local hospital, at least ten of them separated from the main group and managed to evade authorities. “They were supposed to go to the hospital but they went home … The police are now working on tracking these people down and will take the required action,” Dugg told CNN. VK Seth, the director of Amritsar airport, added that 160 passengers were tested, and 19 were exempted because they were under five years of age. India’s medical resources are coming under great strain as the fast-spreading Omicron variant rampages through the cities. The country’s daily Covid-19 cases have jumped to 117,100 on Friday, Reuters reports, a five-fold increase in a week. Hello. I’m Georgina Quach, bringing you more global coronavirus coverage while Lucy Campbell takes a lunch break. Please feel free to contact me if you have a story tips, news or gossip. You can reach me on: Email: georgina.quach@theguardian.com Twitter: @georginaquach Austria was the first western country to moot making vaccinations mandatory for all, but the Alpine nation’s timetable is starting to slip. On Friday, Austria’s electronic health records provider ELGA informed the parliament that its national vaccine database will not be ready for use until 1 April. Until then, ELGA said in a statement, the government could merely “incentivise” unvaccinated people to get the jab, but not accurately identify and issue fines against those who didn’t comply with a mandate. Austria’s government says it is still in favour of introducing a vaccine mandate law, a draft of which is being debated by experts and will need to be approved in the health committees of the upper and lower houses of the Austrian parliament before the end of the month. But the political consensus around the plan has started to fray in recent weeks as some scientists and politicians argue the nature of the Omicron variant has changed the situation. The Omicron-driven surge in US Covid cases has likely not peaked yet, the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Friday, as schools, hospitals and businesses struggle with rising caseloads. “I don’t believe we’ve seen the peak yet here in the United States,” CDC director Rochelle Walensky told NBC News’ Today programme. Health officials have urged Americans not to get complacent in the face of the highly transmissible variant, noting that even if it turns out to induce milder disease the fact that it is more contagious means a higher volume of cases, including more severe ones. The US reported 662,000 new Covid cases on Thursday, its fourth highest daily total ever recorded and just three days after a record of nearly 1 million cases was reported, according to a Reuters tally. The seven-day average for new cases set a record for a 10th day in a row at 597,000 new infections, while Covid hospitalisations reached nearly 123,000 and are approaching the record of over 132,000 set last year, the data showed. Deaths, an indicator that lags behind hospitalisations, remain fairly steady at 1,400 a day, according to the tally. “We are still seeing those numbers rising,” Walensky said, noting that while cases outpaced hospitalisations and deaths, rising hospitalisations were primarily among the unvaccinated. Rising cases have forced hospital systems in nearly half of US states to postpone elective surgeries. While many school systems have vowed to continue in-person instruction, some have faced ad hoc closures as cases rise. Chicago Public Schools, the third-largest US education district, were closed for a third day on Friday amid a teacher walkout over Covid protections. US and other officials have said schools can be safely opened, especially amid widely available vaccines and boosters, and the CDC on Thursday issued new guidelines for schools on isolation policies. While the US is fighting a surge right now, the country will have to face the long-term impacts, Walensky said. “We are definitely looking at a time ahead of us where Covid … will be an endemic virus,” she told NBC. Officials continue to press vaccinations as the best protection against Covid, although federal mandates requiring them have become politically contentious. Later on Friday, the US Supreme Court will weigh requests to block president Joe Biden’s vaccine mandate for larger employers and a separate similar requirement for healthcare facilities. Novak Djokovic has broken his silence after being held in an immigration detention centre in Australia to thank his fans for their support. Writing on Instagram, the men’s world No 1 tennis player said: Thank you to people around the world for your continuous support. I can feel it and it is greatly appreciated. It is believed – although not confirmed – that Djokovic, who has never disclosed his vaccination status, was granted an exemption to play at the Australian Open based on him having previously contracted Covid. But when he landed in Australia he was detained by border officials who said his exemption was not valid. He is waiting to challenge in court the federal government’s decision on Thursday to cancel his visa. Australia’s home affairs minister has dismissed any suggestion that Djokovic is being held “captive” in a Melbourne hotel, declaring he is free to leave the country whenever he chooses. There is more on this story here: Novak Djokovic not being held ‘captive’ and free to leave whenever he chooses, Australia says Pakistan’s largest city Karachi is launching a door-to-door campaign to vaccinate women, who are lagging behind men in rates of Covid inoculation as the country enters a fifth wave of the pandemic, a senior official said on Friday. Pakistan on Friday reported nearly 1,300 cases in a single day, its highest tally in two months, with a positivity rate of 2.5%. Karachi’s positivity rate rose to 10%, from 4.74% on 31 December. “We have found that a sizeable population of housewives are unvaccinated, and they socialise and attend weddings without face masks,” Qasim Siraj Soomro, parliamentary secretary health of the Sindh provincial government, told Reuters. In contrast, the rate of vaccination among male family members who go out to work is higher than the rate among women, he added. The provincial government’s campaign will use female health workers, who have long played an instrumental role in country-wide polio vaccination campaigns in Pakistan. “We plan to target clusters in urban areas and at later stage in rural areas,” said the parliamentary secretary. About 70 million people, or 32% of the population, have had two vaccine doses. The first case of the Omicron variant was reported on 13 December in Karachi, and the federal government has acknowledged that a fifth pandemic has started in the country, with most of the cases in Karachi, Lahore and the capital, Islamabad. The government has not yet announced new restrictions but has urged people to follow precautionary measures. It has authorised booster doses for citizens over the age of 30 from Monday. Children over the age of 12 are being offered vaccinations at their schools. Norwegian conscripts are to return their underwear after completing military service for the next recruits, as the army struggles with dwindling supplies due to Covid, AFP reports. Norway, which guards Nato’s northern borders and shares a border with Russia, calls up about 8,000 young men and women for military service every year and until recently allowed newly discharged conscripts to leave barracks with the underwear they were issued. But the pandemic has seriously strained the flow of supplies with factory shutdowns and transport problems, leading the Norwegian military to ask conscripts to hand over underwear, including bras and socks. Though originally voluntary, it has now been made mandatory, public broadcaster NRK reported on Friday. “Now that we have chosen to reuse this part of the kit, it helps us … We don’t have enough in stock,” the defence logistics spokesman Hans Meisingset told NRK. “The textiles are washed, cleaned and checked. What we distribute is in good condition,” he said. A conscripts’ representative, however, criticised recurrent shortcomings, saying they could end up affecting operations. “Severe shortages of equipment and clothing can potentially affect operational readiness and, in the worst case, the safety of the soldier,” Eirik Sjohelle Eiksund told trade publication Forsvarets Forum. The full story is here: Norwegian conscripts told to return underwear as Covid hits supplies Hong Kong authorities have ordered about 170 people, including several officials, to be quarantined at a government facility on Friday after they attended a birthday party where two guests later tested positive for Covid, AP reports. Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam expressed disappointment on Thursday that government officials had attended the large party during the Omicron outbreak, saying it did not set a good example for the public. Fears of a new cluster were sparked when the two guests tested positive. On Friday, health authorities said all guests at the 3 January party would be classified as close contacts and be sent to mandatory quarantine. The city has been racing to control the Omicron variant, with authorities locking down multiple residential buildings for mass testing and sending hundreds of people into quarantine. About 170 guests attended the birthday party, including about nine government officials and nearly 20 lawmakers. “We now think that every person who had gone to the party is now a close contact. Therefore, our quarantine work is specifically aimed at the people who have attended the party,” said Chuang Shuk-kwan, head of the communicable disease branch at the Centre for Health Protection. Local media including the South China Morning Post reported that the party was held for Witman Hung, the principal liaison officer for Hong Kong at the Shenzhen Qianhai Authority, which oversees economic development between Hong Kong and the Greater Bay Area. The government officials at the party included Hong Kong police chief Raymond Siu, home affairs minister Caspar Tsui and director of immigration Au Ka-wang. Au apologised in a statement on Friday, saying he would be more vigilant in the future. “Regarding the additional burden to the epidemic prevention work and the disturbance to the public as a result of my personal behaviour, I offer my sincere apology to all people of Hong Kong,” he said. Hong Kong tightened epidemic restrictions this week, banning dining-in at restaurants and eateries after 6pm and ordering businesses such as museums, beauty salons and gyms to close for two weeks. The city has also banned passenger flights from eight countries, including the US and UK, from landing until at least 21 January. Authorities reported 33 new confirmed infections on Friday, 26 of which were imported. They also reported over 30 preliminary-positive cases. The city has officially reported a total of 12,749 infections and 213 deaths. Good afternoon from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next five hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ French president Emmanuel Macron said he stood by his earlier comments saying he wanted to “piss off” the 5 million French people who are still not vaccinated against Covid-19, adding it was his responsibility to sound the alarm given the Omicron threat. “I stand by my earlier comments,” said Macron, as he hosted the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, during her trip to Paris. The verb he used earlier this week, emmerder, is derived from the word merde, or shit, and was slammed by Macron’s political opponents as vulgar and beneath a president’s standing. It can be translated in several ways and carries a sense of creating hassle for someone. Reuters report he added today that it was the authorities’ obligation to place restrictions against those who are not vaccinated, to protect the more than 90% of French citizens who are vaccinated. France is reporting more than 200,000 daily new Covid-19 cases on average, an all-time record, due to the high contagiousness of the new Omicron coronavirus variant. More tennis intrigue, this time with news coming out of Prague, where the Czech foreign ministry has confirmed media reports that player Renata Voráčová was detained in the same immigration hotel as Novak Djokovic ahead of the Australian Open. ABC News reported on Friday the Australian Border Force (ABF) had cancelled Voráčová’s visa, and the Czech ministry, in response to questions from Reuters, has said that it had sought an explanation to the situation but also that Voráčová had decided to leave the country. There’s a great report on the BBC News website today from their disinformation reporter, Marianna Spring, looking at the case of one man who was interviewed while in hospital suffering from Covid, and then found himself on the receiving end of social media abuse from anti-vaccine activists. There’s a fantastic segment here: After the initial wave of abuse tailed off he tried to joke about it on his Instagram bio, sarcastically describing himself as a “1x Academy Award Winning Crisis Actor”. “Humour is my way of coping, all you can do is laugh,” he explains. A BBC News Special broadcast on 27 December, called Review 2021: The Coronavirus Pandemic … included [a] clip of Dyne’s original interview. Someone posted a video of themselves watching the special, googling Henry Dyne’s name, finding his Instagram bio and reading the phrase “crisis actor”. One of the main drivers of the Twitter storm was an aspiring Welsh politician, Richard Taylor. He posted the video on Facebook and racked up thousands of reactions with a tweet. Taylor received 20% of the vote in Blaenau Gwent standing for the Brexit Party in the 2019 General Election. Taylor’s posts read “We see you” along with the video, but when contacted said via email: “In my original post, I was not implying anything. It is unfortunate that Mr Dyne decided to reference himself sarcastically in his social media accounts. I have lived believing that when someone tells you who or what they are, believe them, so I would have taken Mr Dyne at face value when he referenced himself as a crisis actor.” It’s a good read: BBC News – ‘Crisis actor’ conspiracy theory: How anti-vax activists targeted a Covid patient Pedro Fonseca and Ricardo Brito have a bleak assessment of the situation in Brazil for Reuters. They write that health experts are warning that insufficient testing and a data blackout caused by hackers have left Brazil in the dark as it grapples with a wave of infections from the Omicron coronavirus variant. Brazilians with Covid symptoms are facing long lines to get tested due to the lack of kits in a country without a comprehensive testing strategy since the start of the pandemic. To make matters worse, some health ministry databases have been offline since an apparent ransomware attack on 10 December seriously hampered the government’s ability to gather data from state health authorities. “We are seeing an expressive increase in the number of cases, dealing with patients and people in everyday life. And this increase is happening in the places where Omicron has been detected,” said Esper Kallas, a doctor who specialises in infectious diseases and a professor at the University of Sao Paulo. “In general, the registration system was bad from the start, and it got worse with the hacker attack, so we’re really under water,” said Gonzalo Vecina, former head of Brazilian health regulator Anvisa and professor at the University of Sao Paulo. “We’re in the dark,” he said. Despite having the world’s third-deadliest outbreak after the US and Russia, according to Reuters calculations, Brazil tests for Covid-19 far less than its South American peers. France’s sports minister Roxana Mărăcineanu has stuck her oar into the Novak Djokovic drama by confirming that the Serbian world No 1 tennis player would be allowed to enter France and compete in the French Open at Roland Garros, which begins in May. Reuters reports her saying: “He would not follow the same organisational arrangements as those who are vaccinated. But he will nonetheless be able to compete because the protocols, the health bubble, allows it.” France does not bar unvaccinated people from entering its territory, but it does imposes tougher restrictions on them than on those who have had the shot. Djokovic, 34, has consistently refused to disclose his vaccination status, while publicly criticising mandatory vaccines. The Covid-19 wave engulfing France could reach its peak in about 10 days’ time, said Prof Alain Fischer, an official responsible for France’s Covid vaccine strategy. France reported 261,481 new coronavirus infections on Thursday, and the seven-day moving average of new cases rose above 200,000 for the first time since the start of the crisis. Chancellor Olaf Scholz and Germany’s 16 state premiers are likely to build on restrictions introduced just after Christmas when they meet later today. Health minister Karl Lauterbach said the hospitality industry was a “problem area, as people often sit there for hours without a mask”. One measure under consideration is toughening the requirement for people to provide proof of full vaccination or recovery to enter restaurants or bars. Scholz and the premiers also are expected to consider shortening required quarantine or self-isolation periods The northern German city of Bremen has become the hardest-hit by the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. The seven-day infection rate there stood at 800 cases per 100,000 residents, more than double the national rate of 303. India’s daily Covid-19 cases have jumped to 117,100, a five-fold increase in a week and on course to overtake its previous infection peak as the fast-spreading Omicron variant replaces Delta in cities. Ten Hong Kong government officials were among more than 100 people sent into quarantine after attending a banquet where two guests tested positive for Covid-19. From today, 15 types of venues, including bars, clubs, gyms and beauty parlours have to close in the city for at least two weeks. Restaurants can stay open until 6pm, but are only allowed to offer takeaway service after that. Thailand will extend the suspension of its quarantine waiver programme and bring in new restrictions after a jump in new coronavirus cases linked to the Omicron variant. To curb local virus transmissions, alcohol consumption in restaurants will be stopped after 9pm from Sunday in eight provinces including the capital Bangkok, and banned in the country’s other 69 provinces. Australia’s treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has tested positive for Covid-19. Australia’s home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, meanwhile, has dismissed any suggestion Novak Djokovic is being held “captive” in a Melbourne hotel, declaring the world No 1 is free to leave the country whenever he chooses. Brazil’s president Jair Bolsonaro has criticised the country’s health regulator Anvisa for authorising the vaccination of children aged five to 11 years against Covid. Argentina reported a record number of Covid-19 cases for a third day in a row at nearly 110,000. The true number of deaths from the Covid pandemic in the US are likely being undercounted, due to the long-lasting and little-understood effects of Covid infection and other deadly complications that surged during the past two years. After the debacle of the Ruby Princess’ arrival in Sydney in March 2020 led to over 900 cases of Covid-19 and 28 deaths, the cruise ship appears to be in another Covid-19 outbreak situation in San Francisco. Thanks for sticking with our coverage. Andrew Sparrow has a combined UK politics and Covid live blog today. I’m Martin Belam, and I’ll be here with you for a little while yet bringing you the latest coronavirus news from around the world. The northern German maritime state of Bremen has the country’s highest Covid vaccination rate by far, but it has become the hardest-hit by the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, reporting the highest infection rate of any region in Germany. Experts say that the rise in Bremen could herald where Germany as a whole is heading in the coming days. Riham Alkousaa reports for Reuters that the seven-day infection rate in Bremen stood at 800 cases per 100,000 residents on Thursday, the highest in Germany and more than double the national rate of 303, according to the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases. “I assume that Bremen is just a little further ahead than other federal states,” said Hajo Zeeb of the Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research and Epidemiology in Bremen. He said he expected many of Germany’s federal states to report infection rates similar to Bremen in the coming days. Bremen’s location near the Netherlands and Denmark, where Omicron has already become the dominant variant, could be one reason for the higher infection rate in the state, Zeeb said. Omicron now accounts for more than 85% of coronavirus infections in Bremen, well above the national figure of around 44%, according to data from the RKI on Thursday. Ten Hong Kong government officials, including the heads of home affairs and immigration, were among more than 100 people sent into quarantine after attending a banquet where two guests tested positive for Covid-19, health authorities have said. The banquet was on Monday, before the new restrictions came into force but after the first Omicron community transmission was confirmed in Hong Kong on 31 December. None of the officials has tested positive but they were sent into quarantine as a precaution, in line with the city’s zero Covid policy. City leader Carrie Lam said she was “highly disappointed” that so many officials attended a big gathering and they should not be “engaging in activities that carry risks and create more work for the city’s health bureau.” Reuters reports that senior officials who attended included home affairs secretary Casper Tsui, director of immigration Au Ka-wang, police commissioner Raymond Siu and the head of the city’s independent commission against corruption, Simon Peh. The true number of deaths from the Covid pandemic in the US are likely being undercounted, due to the long-lasting and little-understood effects of Covid infection and other deadly complications that surged during the past two years. There have been an estimated 942,431 excess deaths in the US since February 2020, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hispanic, Black and Native American and Alaska Native populations have been disproportionately affected with high death rates, research shows. In addition to deaths from Covid-19, drug overdoses – already one of the leading causes of death for working-age adults – and homicides have also risen during the pandemic. Insurers are also seeing a rise in disability claims – at first for short-term disability and now for long-term disability, because of both long Covid and delayed care for other illnesses. Deaths from long Covid have been particularly difficult to track, because the virus may no longer be present at the time of death, but it weakened organs or created fatal new ailments. “We’re seeing the statistics get written as we go, almost,” Micah Pollak, associate professor of economics at Indiana University Northwest, said. “We really don’t know what the tail of this thing looks like,” Pollak said of long Covid. “The further you get out [from infection], the longer time you have to potentially develop some kind of complications.” Read more of Melody Schreiber’s report here: True number of Covid deaths in the US likely undercounted, experts say Australia’s treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has tested positive to Covid-19, he has announced. As the country deals with a massive rise in case numbers due to the spread of the Omicron variant, with more than 78,000 Covid cases reported in a single day on Friday, Frydenberg tweeted the news that he had joined the statistics. “Like thousands of Australians, I tested positive today to Covid-19. I have the common symptoms and am isolating with my family,” he said. Miranda Murray at Reuters has a small update on Germany. She reports that health minister Karl Lauterbach said the hospitality industry was a “problem area, as people often sit there for hours without a mask”, in an interview with broadcaster RTL Direkt. Additionally, Hendrik Wuest, the premier of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany’s most populous state, told the news outlet Welt that tighter dining rules were reasonable, since being around maskless people required maximum protection and the booster shot was available to everyone. There is an expectation, however, that rules on quarantine are set to be relaxed, to avoid having too many people in isolation at the same time, especially in critical sectors. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK Covid live blog for the day. He is leading with the news that the military are on standby to extend hospital support beyond London. You can find that here: I’ll be continuing here with the latest coronavirus developments from around the world. Australia’s home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, has dismissed any suggestion Novak Djokovic is being held “captive” in a Melbourne hotel, declaring the world No 1 is free to leave the country whenever he chooses. Here’s the clip: The Covid-19 wave engulfing France could reach its peak in about 10 days’ time, said Prof Alain Fischer, an official responsible for France’s Covid vaccine strategy. “I think we are coming to the peak of this new wave,” Reuters report Fischer told LCI TV, adding that this peak could come “primarily towards the beginning of the second fortnight of January, so if we work it out this would be in around 10 days’ time”. France reported 261,481 new coronavirus infections on Thursday, less than the record of more than 332,000 set on Wednesday, but the seven-day moving average of new cases rose above 200,000 for the first time since the start of the health crisis. French president Emmanuel Macron is banking that enough people will take up Covid vaccine booster shots to mitigate the effects of the virus, and thereby allow Macron to avoid enforcing major new restrictions to tackle the pandemic. There are more quotes here from Dr Chaand Nagpaul, council chair of the British Medical Association (BMA), about the status of the NHS in the UK. PA Media reports him telling Sky News “we have never known this level of staff absence before”, adding: “Every winter of course, the NHS has additional pressures, but I don’t think anyone who’s worked in the NHS has experienced this level of absence of their colleagues and we’re feeling it in very real time because doctors and nurses and healthcare workers are having to cover for their absent colleagues – that’s adding additional, exceptional strain.” Asked how close the NHS was to being overwhelmed, he said: “I think that the words like overwhelmed, I mean, I think we should just look at the reality. The reality of the army having been drafted in to London, the reality of 24 hospitals having declared critical incidents, the reality of having some hospitals having to cancel all their routine surgery, the reality of general practices having to cancel clinics on the day. I’m a GP, I’ve never known it this bad.” Associated Press is carrying this update on the situation in Germany. It reports that chancellor Olaf Scholz and the country’s 16 state premiers are likely to build on restrictions introduced just after Christmas that limited private gatherings to 10 people, among other steps, when they meet later today. One measure under consideration is toughening the requirement for people to provide proof of full vaccination or recovery to enter restaurants or bars. They could now be required to provide proof of either a booster shot or a fresh negative test. Scholz and the premiers also are expected to consider shortening required quarantine or self-isolation periods that are currently as long as 14 days, a step that other countries have already taken. The government is hindered because testing and reporting over the holiday period has been patchy. Official figures, which authorities have acknowledged don’t yet show the full picture, have shown a steady increase in the infection rate over the past week. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, has said people should not feel concerned by the presence of the military in hospitals, as this was how the service was dealing with staff shortages. “It is unfortunately the case for example that in some parts of the country we are going to have to cancel non-urgent operations and I know that’s really frustrating for people who’ve been waiting for a long time but it’s important to understand that these are very special circumstances we’re in,” PA Media quotes him saying. “The NHS is not going to disintegrate – it’s been dealing with this crisis for two years and it will deal with it again and NHS managers will … burn the midnight oil thinking about how they deploy their resources to deal with things that are most urgent.” Air Commodore John Lyle meanwhile has said that the army had handled over 400 requests for individual support from the military since March 2020, while more than 1,000 personnel were deployed supporting the booster programme, so the support in hospitals was part of a “wide range” of help provided by the armed services, he said. He said patients could expect to see a “primarily NHS workforce” supported by personnel wearing Army uniform and protective equipment. PA Media reports he added that the army remained in discussions and that there were areas where they were aware of the need for more assistance outside London where support will be deployed first. Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the council chair of the British Medical Association (BMA), has told Sky News in the UK that it was important that “the government doesn’t just wait to ride this out, because every day people are suffering”. He said there are two or three things that must be done, adding: “One is we do need to bring down levels of Omicron infections in the community because healthcare staff and frontline key staff, just members of the general population, if you have such high levels of Omicron, over 200,000 on many days last week on a daily basis, you will have NHS staff and other staff isolating and off ill, it’s as simple as that. “So the infection rates do need to be brought down. The second thing is we need to ensure that those of us who are working on the frontline who are mixing with patients who are infectious, need to be properly protected. “And one of the things we’ve been calling for is higher grade masks that can filtrate the airborne spread of Covid-19 and Omicron as opposed to the normal paper surgical masks.” PA Media reports he said some NHS staff still could not access the lateral flow tests needed to allow them to return to work after seven days of isolation instead of 10 days. Edmond Ng reports from Hong Kong for Reuters that bars, restaurants and caterers say tighter restrictions aimed at averting a new wave of Covid-19 infections may cause hundreds of millions of dollars in losses, threaten jobs and even, for some, their survival. Hong Kong has stuck to a zero Covid policy, but three months without community cases in Hong Kong ended with the confirmation on 31 December of the first local transmission of the Omicron variant – and numbers have been rising since then – prompting authorities to reinstate a raft of restrictions on daily life. On Friday, 15 types of venues, including bars, clubs, gyms and beauty parlours had to close for at least two weeks. Restaurants can stay open until 6pm, but are only allowed to offer takeaway service after that. If restrictions are extended into the lunar new year holiday period, which begins on 1 February, when restaurants and caterers are usually most busy, there will be substantial losses. “If they can’t see light at the end of the tunnel, restaurants will close,” said Tommy Cheung, a legislator representing the restaurant and catering industry. He estimates businesses will lose up to HK$6bn ($770m) in the next two weeks alone. Jason Hui, who owns the Yuet Nam Mak Min noodle restaurant, expects to lose up to 40% of his business. He expressed some scepticism to Reuters about the measures. “It’s no use,” Hui said. “Is the virus only out at night?” In the UK, Labour’s shadow justice secretary Steve Reed has been on Sky News calling for the UK government to “get a grip” on testing immediately in order to avoid the possibility of more restrictions. He said: The key to avoiding [restrictions], and we all want to avoid them if it’s possible, is to make sure that testing gets out and works properly. Now. we’ve got a problem at the moment, because the government was relying on testing to keep us safe during this period, but they haven’t ensured that there is a sufficient supply of tests available for people to make sure before they go out that they haven’t got Covid. And one of the reasons we’re seeing this big increase in infections is, if people can’t check before they go out, they may be infected and go on to infect other people. That is what leads to the risk of a higher level of lockdown. We don’t want to see that. The government needs to get a grip on testing immediately. The government lost control by failing to make sure the tests were available, and we do need to now be prioritising what tests are available for those key workers, essential services, the National Health Services, and making sure we keep the schools open because kids school kids in particular lost too much education already. Later in the interview, he described the government’s “sheer and utter incompetence”, saying: “They put us in this position. We must protect the NHS and education.” Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said military personnel in London hospitals would be “helping out in different ways depending on whether or not they are clinically qualified, so obviously if people have medical skills, then they can be used in clinical settings”. Others would be used helping “in relation to transport or potentially setting up facilities … we’re building a surge capacity in some of our hospitals to deal with the numbers of patients coming in”. PA Media quotes Taylor saying there were several thousand NHS staff absent primarily due to Covid, and that “having 200 extra people is going to help but it’s only a very small part of what will continue to be a very difficult situation”. He added Omicron was a fast-moving situation “moving up the country” and that NHS staff must have access to tests so that they could return to work. “We’ve suggested that as a very short-term expedient we should think about clinical students working at the front line – we don’t want that to happen for long but that’s something again we’ve done in the past,” he added. “We are in a very, very difficult set of circumstances – we all hope this will last a few weeks, but in those circumstances we have to do everything we can, and we as the public have to understand the pressure the health service is in.” Thailand will extend the suspension of its quarantine waiver programme and bring in new restrictions after a jump in new coronavirus cases linked to the Omicron variant, the government’s Covid taskforce said on Friday. Reuters report that new applications for Thailand’s “Test &amp; Go” quarantine waiver scheme will not be approved until further notice to stem the increase of coronavirus infections, but existing applicants can still enter Thailand without quarantine until 15 January. “We can still make changes if the situation improves, but for now we have to learn more about Omicron,” said Taweesin Visanuyothin, the spokesman of the Covid taskforce Due to concerns over Omicron, Thailand had halted the waiver programme since 22 December. To curb local virus transmissions, alcohol consumption in restaurants will be stopped after 9pm from Sunday in eight provinces including the capital Bangkok, and banned in the country’s other 69 provinces, Taweesin said. “Social drinking is the cause of the virus spread. Measures to restrict this will help curb the spread,” he said. However, from 11 January, Thailand will lift an entry ban on people travelling from eight African countries it had designated as high-risk. Having kept numbers low for so long, the growing Covid outbreak in Australia is generating headlines that other parts of the world were seeing 18 months ago. This morning there are dire predictions about hospital capacity. Elias Visontay reports for us: Almost all of the 12,500 beds across public and private hospitals in New South Wales will be occupied – by both Covid cases and regular patients – when pressure from the state’s Omicron outbreak peaks in late January, if worst-case scenario modelling is realised. On Friday, after NSW’s chief health officer, Kerry Chant, acknowledged that the 38,625 new cases recorded were an “underestimate” of the actual total, health authorities released fresh hospitalisation modelling, alongside the announcement of a pause on elective surgeries and new restrictions to slow the speed of Omicron. Pressure on the state’s health system will peak in the third or fourth week of January, the modelling based on vaccination coverage, general health and outbreak data from NSW and abroad predicts, with beds in intensive care and other wards likely to be stretched. NSW’s public hospital bed capacity is about 9,500, and on Thursday, 8,000 of these beds were occupied by 1,600 patients with Covid and 6,400 people receiving treatment for other illnesses. Read more of Elias Visontay’s report here: Almost all 12,500 hospital beds in NSW could be full during Omicron peak in worst-case scenario One slightly odd bit of UK small business minister Paul Scully’s Sky News interview this morning was when he tried to reassure viewers that members of the armed forces deployed in London’s hospitals wouldn’t be wearing combat uniforms. He told the programme: When you talk about armed forces around hospitals, they are not sitting there in combats or anything like that. It is more people helping out with the undoubted pressures on the NHS and that’s why we want people to get out and get vaccinated and get boosted, because that remains our best weapon against the pressures on the NHS and against Covid, as we learn to live with Covid. Australians may be unable to buy fresh produce at supermarkets while fruit and vegetables are left to rot on farms unless staff shortages caused by the coronavirus pandemic are fixed, the industry’s peak body has warned. Michael Rogers, the chief executive of the Australian Fresh Produce Alliance, said there was a “significant risk” of such a situation. The industry is calling for seven-day isolation times for close contacts who test negative to be done away with so that workers who are cleared of the disease can immediately return to work. He said the pandemic had halved the workforce available to some companies, with transport and distribution hubs worst hit so far. However, he said he expected that if nothing was done to address the staff shortage it would soon follow the spread of Covid-19 across Australia and hit farms and packing businesses in rural Australia. “Through all of Covid, the food supply chain was continuing to operate,” he said. “So we’re very realistic and pragmatic about the way forward. But what we’re trying to say is we’re in the worst position that we have been through Covid.” Read more of Ben Butler’s report here: Australians face worse fresh food shortages unless Covid isolation rules ease, industry warns India’s daily Covid-19 cases have jumped to 117,100 on Friday, Reuters reports, a five-fold increase in a week and on course to overtake its previous infection peak as the fast-spreading Omicron variant replaces Delta in cities. Government officials have privately said they are working under the assumption that daily infections will surpass the record of more than 414,000 set in May. “We will clearly surpass our record shortly and reach a new peak by early February,” MD Gupte, a former director of the state-run National Institute of Epidemiology and an immunisation adviser to the government, told Reuters. “Given the size of our population, we will report more daily cases than the US. But what we have seen is that these cases are much more mild, so the need for hospitalisation and oxygen and all that is not picking up.” He said India’s high rate of infection during a previous major wave in April and May, as well as vaccinations, would mean a reduction in the severity of the illness for those infected by the Omicron variant. Health officials have said hospitals and testing infrastructure have yet to come under pressure as many people are recovering quickly at home. In Mumbai, about quarter of all tests are positive but fewer than a fifth of those who have contracted the virus have needed hospitalisation, Maharashtra Health Minister Rajesh Tope told reporters. The city recorded 20,181 new infections on Thursday, well above its previous high of just over 11,000 set last year. “Around 80% of the hospital beds are still empty,” he said. “Oxygen demand is not rising in proportion to the rising cases. Right now, there is no plan to impose a lockdown. If required, we may increase restrictions.” Delhi, where daily cases have risen by more than five times in a week, goes into a 55-hour lockdown from Friday night to Monday morning. Authorities have also imposed a night curfew on weekdays, closed schools, and ordered most shops to open only on alternate days when there is no curfew. Polly Toynbee writes for us this morning that in the UK, the NHS was already collapsing long before the arrival of Covid: The admirable NHS “copes”. It triages and triages again, treating people according to available beds and who is nearest to death. That’s rationing, a word politicians shun. Waiting used to be the traditional rationing mechanism in a financially capped system. There’s no mystery as to why this is happening: waiting lists rise and fall according to the level of funding. Seasoned observers used to assume queueing was a permanent function, until New Labour all but abolished waiting times, ensuring everyone was treated within 18 weeks from GP to hospital. During the post-2010 austerity years, funding increases fell behind the country’s growing, ageing population. By 2017, waiting lists had risen to just over 4 million. Let’s hope that despite the record infection rates we’ve seen in recent days, hospitalisations stay low enough so that the NHS still “copes”. If so, Johnson will get away with his high-risk plan B, with its new year pubbing and clubbing in the face of scientists’ concerns. But you wouldn’t praise someone for surviving a dash across the M1 with their eyes shut, especially if we all had to run across with him. Read more here: Polly Toynbee – The NHS was already collapsing long before the arrival of Covid Paul Scully, the Conservative minister for small businesses and for London, is doing the media round this morning in the UK. He has appeared first on Sky News. Despite the use of the armed forces to support hospitals in the capital, he appeared to rule out further restrictions being brought in soon. At the moment we are looking at the data, but we’ve seen what’s happening in London, which was leading the way on the case numbers. And we don’t see the need to [put in more restrictions] at this moment in time. We would clearly be reviewing our plan B scenario before 26 January and then we’ll come to parliament with the decisions that have been taken at that time. But what you find is that any plans and any restrictions that come in, take weeks to get through the progress of being infected with the virus and then hospitalisations and unfortunately, deaths. So what we’re doing now is something that effect will affect the numbers in the NHS in a few weeks time. That’s why we’re looking at the curve and the data on a day-to-day basis. Scully is promoting government plans to make payments to support businesses. He said: We’ve got to make sure that we can balance the needs of everybody within what is an incredibly difficult situation, the pressures on the NHS, but also the pressures on the economy. The pressures on households jobs, livelihoods, and indeed the money that’s coming in to pay for the public services in the first place. Hello from London. It’s Martin Belam here, taking over from my colleague Helen Livingstone. Here is a rundown of the latest Covid figures in the UK, according to the government. Over the last seven days there have been 1.27 million new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 29% week-on-week. There have been 1,094 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have increased by 56% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have increased by 64% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 17,988 people in hospital in total, of whom 875 are in ventilation beds. The peak of hospitalisations during the pandemic was in January 2021, with 39,254 patients in hospital. That’s it from me, Helen Livingstone, for today. I’m handing over to my UK colleague Martin Belam. Here’s a quick roundup of what’s been happening in Covid news over the past 24 hours: Schools in England are “teetering on the edge” with more than a third (36%) struggling with staff absence rates in excess of 10%, according to a snap poll by a headteachers’ union. Almost one in 10 heads (9%) who took part in the survey said more than 20% of their teaching staff were absent on the first day of term for Covid-related reasons. Brazil’s president Jair Bolsonaro has criticised the country’s health regulator Anvisa for authorising the vaccination of children aged five to 11 years against Covid. His comments came as the country reported reported 35,826 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, the highest daily number of infections since September. Australia’s home affairs minister has dismissed any suggestion Novak Djokovic is being held “captive” in Melbourne, declaring the world No 1 is free to leave the country whenever he chooses. The more infectious Omicron variant appears to produce less severe disease than the globally dominant Delta, but should not be categorised as “mild”, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said on Thursday. Authorities in Henan province, China, have imposed more Covid restrictions after a sharp rise in infections, limiting travel and activities in some cities or launching mass testing drives in others. Argentina reported a record number of Covid-19 cases on Thursday for a third day in a row at nearly 110,000, as Omicron drives a third pandemic wave in the South American nation. The efficacy of boosters against Covid-19 is likely to decline over the next few months and people may need another shot in the fall of 2022, Moderna Inc chief executive officer Stephane Bancel has said. A Japanese government panel has put forward a request to declare quasi-emergency measures in three regions to stem a Covid-19 surge that some officials have linked to US military bases in the country. If approved, it would mark the first such measures since September. After the debacle of the Ruby Princess’ arrival in Sydney in March 2020 led to over 900 cases of Covid-19 and 28 deaths, the cruise ship appears to be in another Covid-19 outbreak situation in San Francisco. Local media reports around 25% of passengers on board were tested and 12 people came back positive. Johnson &amp; Johnson has confirmed a real-world study shows that its single shot Covid vaccine produced long-lasting protection for up to six months against breakthrough infections and hospitalisations. Mexico is likely to surpass 300,000 deaths from Covid this week - the fifth highest death toll worldwide - as infections rise after the holiday season, fuelled by the Omicron variant and largely unrestricted tourism. The Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte, has ordered the arrest of unvaccinated people who violate stay-at-home orders aimed at curbing “galloping” infections driven by the Omicron variant. It feels like a lifetime or two ago, but the Melbourne hotel Novak Djokovic is now being held at was previously used as a hotel quarantine hotel for returning travellers. It became the focus of attention in mid-2020 because it was the source of a number of transmissions of Covid-19 that ultimately led to the second wave of cases in Victoria, and the marathon lockdown Melbourne endured in 2020. The inquiry into hotel quarantine concluded around 90% of cases of Covid-19 in Victoria between late May and the end of the year could be attributed to the outbreak at the then-Rydges Hotel, which was being run by the state government as a “hot hotel” where people who were Covid positive were being held. A number of the returning travellers who stayed there told the inquiry of how the hotel lacked open windows, and in some instances that the rooms themselves were not clean. There have been a lot of changes since that report was handed down, and also two new variants, and our understanding of how Covid-19 is transmitted has changed, and our daily case numbers are now more than the total of that second wave ... but it’s an interesting bit of history. I regret to inform you the Ruby Princess is at it again. After the debacle of the cruise ship’s arrival in Sydney in March 2020 led to over 900 cases of Covid-19 and 28 deaths, the ship appears to be in another Covid-19 outbreak situation in San Francisco. The cruise ended its 10-day trip in San Francisco, but according to reports there is an outbreak on board. SFist reports around 25% of passengers on board were tested and 12 came back positive, amid suggestions the outbreak may be much larger than just among those tested, with entertainment cancelled as performers had reportedly tested positive for Covid-19. According to NBC, one passenger said they were not going to get tested and “the Bay Area is getting us as is”. In a statement to NBC, Princess Cruises said a small number of Covid-19 cases were detected among vaccinated guests who are all asymptomatic, and will either return home in their own cars, or be taken to hotels to be quarantined. Schools in England are “teetering on the edge” with more than a third (36%) struggling with staff absence rates in excess of 10%, according to a snap poll by a headteachers’ union. Almost one in 10 heads (9%) who took part in the survey said more than 20% of their teaching staff were absent on the first day of term for Covid-related reasons. The staffing situation is already so critical in some schools that 4% of heads have had to send classes or year groups home for online learning, while almost 7% have combined classes or year groups in response to teacher absence. Half of school leaders said they were already dependent on supply teachers to cover classes, and more than a third (37%) were unable to source the supply staff they need, even via agencies – almost certainly because of high demand. The Guardian’s education correspondent, Sally Weale, has more: Australia’s home affairs minister has dismissed any suggestion Novak Djokovic is being held “captive” in Melbourne, declaring the world No 1 is free to leave the country whenever he chooses. Djokovic is being held in an immigration hotel until Monday when he will challenge in court the federal government’s Thursday decision to cancel his visa. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, said on Friday that other international players and officials who had already been allowed into the country on a similar vaccine exemption to Djokovic were being investigated by border force officials. She rejected accusations from the Serb star’s family that the Australian government was “keeping him in captivity”. “Djokovic is not being held captive in Australia,” Andrews told the national broadcaster ABC. “He is free to leave [the country] at any time that he chooses to do so and border force will actually facilitate that.” The Victorian state government on Friday said it had not seen correspondence between the federal government and Tennis Australia in late November that stipulated unvaccinated players could not enter the country on the basis they had previously been infected with Covid. “I can confirm people who contracted Covid-19 within the past six months and seek to enter Australia from overseas, and have not received two doses of a TGA-approved vaccine or TGA-recognised vaccine, are not considered fully vaccinated,” the federal health minister wrote to the Tennis Australia boss, Craig Tiley. Tiley and the sports governing body in Australia declined multiple requests for comment on Friday. Andrews, however, confirmed the Australian Border Force, which she oversees, was looking at other individuals who have travelled in similar circumstances to Djokovic for the Open. “We do have the intelligence to indicate there are some individuals here now that have not met the entry requirements and we have to investigate that,” she told the Nine Network. Cait Kelly has more: As Australia battles a huge surge in Covid cases, one exhausted ICU nurse has described how it has felt to work in intensive care for the past two years. Here’s a taster: My non-medical friends get angry on my behalf at protesters and anti-vaxxers, because I don’t have the energy. I obtained my critical care registered nurse qualification in 2020 after nursing in ICU for a few years, and almost all of the colleagues I graduated with have attempted to leave intensive care since. Leaders of the US’s third-largest school district have cancelled classes for a third consecutive day, AP reports, as heated negotiations continue with the Chicago Teachers Union over remote learning and other Covid-19 safety measures. The union, which voted this week to revert to online instruction, told teachers not to show up to schools starting Wednesday during the latest Covid-19 surge while both sides negotiate. The move just two days after students returned from winter break prompted district officials to cancel classes each day for students in the roughly 350,000-student district during negotiations, saying there’s no plan to return to districtwide remote instruction. School districts nationwide have confronted the same pandemic issues, with most opting to stay open while ramping up virus testing, tweaking protocols and other adjustments in response to the shifting pandemic. In a Thursday message to parents, Chicago leaders said classes would be cancelled Friday but “in-person learning and activities may be available at a small number of schools” based on how many employees report to work. A small percentage of teachers, along with substitutes, have continued to come to schools during what the district has labeled an “illegal work stoppage.” Some schools preemptively alerted parents earlier Thursday that they didn’t have enough staff and wouldn’t accept students aside from offering meal pickup in the largely low-income and Black and Latino district. The district said roughly 10% of about 21,620 teachers came to work Wednesday and by Thursday it was nearly 13%. “Our schools are the best, safest place for students to be during this pandemic, and we are working tirelessly to get everyone back in class every day,” Schools CEO Pedro Martinez said in a statement Thursday evening. “We will continue working with CTU to resolve this situation and will provide you with ongoing updates as the week continues.” Chicago’s school leaders have rejected a return to remote learning, saying it worsens racial inequities and is detrimental to academic performance, mental health and attendance. District officials have spent about $100 million on a safety plan, including air purifiers in classrooms. There was little sign Thursday that either side was softening — the district and union both filed labor complaints with the state this week as negotiations continued. Mayor Lori Lightfoot, who has said the city is considering legal options to get teachers back in classrooms, issued a statement late Thursday saying negotiations went on most of the day and were “productive from our perspective.” The city has said that teachers who don’t come to schools won’t get paid. Issues on the table include more testing and metrics to trigger school closures. The union has blasted the district for not doing enough, like botching a testing program and maintaining unreliable data on infections in schools. They’ve sought demands similar to a safety agreement put in place last year after a fierce debate. However, the district says the pandemic is different now than a year ago and requires a different response, particularly since 91% of school staff is vaccinated. A deputy district attorney from California who regularly spoke out against vaccine mandates has died of complications from Covid-19. Kelly Ernby, 46, a prosecutor from Orange county, southern California, who recently ran for the state assembly, died after contracting the virus, her family and friends have said. According to Ernby’s husband, Axel Mattias Ernby, Kelly Ernby was unvaccinated at the time of her death. “She was NOT vaccinated. That’s the problem,” Axel Ernby said on social media posts. Here’s more from our correspondent Gloria Oladipo: Here’s Serbia’s response to the whole Novak Djokovic kerfuffle from AAP’s Andrew Brown: Serbia’s foreign affairs ministry has hit out at Australia’s decision to cancel the visa of tennis star Novak Djokovic, saying the world No.1 was a victim of a political game. Australia’s ambassador to Belgrade, Daniel Emery, was summoned to the ministry and urged to make personal efforts to assist Djokovic. The federal government on Thursday cancelled Djokovic’s visa to enter the country for the Australian Open due to him not meeting vaccination requirements needed for entry. The Serbian ministry said Australia had acted in bad faith towards the tennis star. “Starovic emphasised that the Serbian public has a strong impression that Djokovic is a victim of a political game against his will, and that he was lured to travel to Australia in order to be humiliated,” the ministry statement said. “Novak Djokovic is not a criminal, terrorist or illegal migrant, but he was treated that way by the Australian authorities, which causes understandable indignation of his fans and citizens of Serbia.” A protest note was also sent by the Serbian government to its embassy in Canberra, following the visa decision. Djokovic is being held in an inner north Melbourne hotel while he awaits a court challenge to his visa cancellation on Monday The hotel is also used to house asylum seekers, and Serbia’s foreign ministry has called on the federal government to give Djokovic better accommodation. “Serbia does not want to influence the upcoming decision of the Australian judiciary in any way,” the statement. “(Serbia) expects that the authorities of the country, in the spirit of good bilateral relations between Australia and Serbia ... allow Djokovic to spend (time) in better accommodation.” A third vaccination shot will soon be mandatory for frontline workers in the Australian state of New South Wales, home to Sydney, as it bans singing and dancing in pubs and clubs, and pauses non-urgent elective surgery, to try and slow the state’s Omicron outbreak. High-risk major events could also be postponed, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, said on Friday. NSW will additionally start requiring positive rapid Covid test results to be reported to health authorities – as already occurs in Victoria – and has asked residents to “minimise mingling” whenever possible. Teachers, health workers and those in frontline disability roles will be among the groups required to get a booster shot to be considered “fully vaccinated” against Covid-19, Perrotet told reporters. The state reported 38,625 Covid cases on Friday – taking the three-day total above 100,000. Perrottet was warned by health experts not to ease restrictions as Omicron cases spiked ahead of the Christmas holiday period, but nevertheless scrapped most measures on 15 December. Here’s more on the premier’s backflip: India reported 117,100 new Covid-19 cases on Friday, the most since early June, as the Omicron variant overtakes Delta in the cities, Reuters reports. The health ministry also reported 302 new deaths, taking the total to 483,178. Total infections stand at 35.23 million. China reported 174 confirmed coronavirus cases for 6 January, versus 189 a day earlier, its health authority said on Friday. Of the new infections, 116 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, from 132 a day earlier, Reuters reported. Most of the new local cases were in Henan and Shaanxi provinces. Zhejiang province also reported new cases. China reported 45 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, compared with 45 a day earlier. There were no new fatalities, leaving the death toll unchanged at 4,636. Mainland China had 103,295 confirmed cases as of 6 January. Despite the pouring rain Novak Djokovic supporters are still singing loudly and dancing across the road from the Park Hotel in Melbourne, where the tennis star is being kept. The crowd is a lot smaller today, with Djokovic protestors now mixed in with refugee activists and a comparatively strong anti-vaxx contingent. While some anti-vaxx protestors are yelling out at passing pedestrians they are largely drowned out by Djokovic’s supporters. They have brought a large banner with the tennis star’s face on it and are chanting “Novak” in-between songs. Many are draped in Serbian flags or colours. The rain has meant the crowd is disbursed under shelter, huddling together. Inside the hotel, some of the 33 men who are detained there have put banners on the windows. “I’m looking for my freedom” reads one, while another says “Nine years too long”. A Japanese government panel has put forward a request to declare quasi-emergency measures in three regions to stem a Covid-19 surge that some officials have linked to US military bases in the country, Reuters reports. If approved, it would mark the first such measures since September, when Japan lifted emergency controls that had prevailed over the country for most of last year. Official approval is expected later on Friday after a meeting of health experts. The infectious Omicron variant has been found in about 80% of Japanese prefectures, and coronavirus cases are surging. New infections exceeded 4,000 nationwide on Wednesday, compared with an average of about 200 per day last month. “There are cases where there is no history of overseas travel and the route of infection is unknown, while the Delta strain also continues to spread,” Health Minister Shigeyuki Goto told reporters. “We must be prepared for the rapid spread of infection in the future,” he added. The new measures, affecting the southern prefecture of Okinawa and the western prefectures of Hiroshima and Yamaguchi, would last from Jan. 9 until the end of the month. All three regions host bases for the US military, which on Thursday announced stricter infection controls at Japan’s urging after on-base outbreaks appeared to have spilled into surrounding communities. Governors of the prefectures had requested the quasi-emergency steps, which include limited opening hours for bars and restaurants, after seeing a surge in cases, driven by the infectious Omicron variant. The southern island chain of Okinawa, host to 70% of U.S. military facilities in Japan, has been the hardest hit so far, in what appears to be the nation’s sixth wave of the pandemic. The prefecture is expected to report more than 1,400 new cases on Friday, Okinawa TV reported, a new record and up from 981 on Thursday. The efficacy of boosters against Covid-19 is likely to decline over the next few months and people may need another shot in the fall of 2022, Moderna Inc chief executive officer Stephane Bancel has said at a Goldman Sachs-organised healthcare conference. Bancel said the company was working on a vaccine candidate tailored to the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, but is unlikely to be available in the next two months, Reuters reported. “I still believe we’re going to need boosters in the fall of ‘22 and forward,” Bancel said. His comments on needing a fourth shot come on the back of Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett citing a study on Tuesday that a fourth dose of Covid-19 vaccine boosts antibodies five-fold a week after the shot is administered. Moderna, which benefits by repeat inoculations, during its third quarter earnings results said commercial booster market sales could be up to $2 billion in the United States in 2022. Argentina reported a record number of Covid-19 cases on Thursday for a third day in a row at nearly 110,000, Reuters reports, as the highly infectious Omicron variant drives a third pandemic wave in the South American nation. The record tally of 109,608 in the middle of the southern hemisphere summer holiday season with tourist centres full of travellers, has not translated into a similar exponential rise in Covid-related deaths, which totalled 40, the government said. “We do not have a strong impact on intensive therapy units and less in terms of deaths,” the chief of staff of the Ministry of Health, Sonia Tarragona, told local radio station Urbana Play. “The cases are mild or moderate and they are not putting stress on the health system.” Argentina accelerated its vaccination campaign in recent months, which started with the Sputnik V vaccine, then added AstraZeneca and Sinopharm and, later, CanSino, Pfizer and Moderna. Tarragona said she does not know “what the ceiling for infections is going to be,” but some experts believe the true number among the country’s 45 million population is already significant. “Today in Argentina we could be quietly at around 150,000 or 200,000 cases of new infections per day,” biochemist Jorge Geffner told Reuters. He estimated that the infection peak could come in mid-January. And if you want to read more on the refugees being held in the same Melbourne hotel as Novak Djokovic, check out Ben Doherty’s interview with Mehdi, an Iranian who sought asylum in Australia when he was 15 and has been locked up by authorities there for the past nine years. Here’s a short extract: Mehdi has watched boatmates he arrived alongside leave detention to begin lives, careers and families in Australia; he has watched others in detention burn themselves to death in despair. He has been beaten, abused, incarcerated without reason. Mehdi has never been charged with a crime, nor has any wrongdoing been alleged against him, yet still he has not known a day of freedom in Australia. Friday is his ninth birthday in detention. “I’m getting older; it’s really sad that my youth, my teenage time – that’s been wasted. I don’t want to leave here as a middle-aged man, all those years lost.” Novak Djokovic’s wrangling with authorities over entering Australia has inadvertently highlighted a different plight: those of the refugees and asylum seekers stuck for months, and years, at the Park Hotel. The infamous detention hotel in Carlton, Melbourne, where the tennis star is likely to spend the weekend as he awaits a court hearing over his visa cancellation has been described by detainees as a “torture cell”. “There is no fresh air, there was recently a fire, the food is not great, we do not have access to a gym, the hotel is totally locked up,” 38-year-old Jamal Mohamed told Guardian Australia. Read the full report from Guardian Australia correspondents Mostafa Rachwani and Ben Doherty here: Authorities in Henan province, China, have imposed more Covid restrictions after a sharp rise in infections, limiting travel and activities in some cities or launching mass testing drives in others. On Thursday health authorities reported 64 community cases in Henan for the preceding 24 hours, a jump from four the day earlier. None have been reported as Omicron, the fast-spreading new variant which has raced through numerous other countries, but China has remained committed to a Zero-Covid policy of stamping out all infections, which officials are under pressure to maintain especially ahead of next month’s Beijing Winter Olympics. The one million residents of Gushi have been stopped from leaving the county, and visitors have been discouraged after two cases – one symptomatic and one asymptomatic – were reported on Wednesday. Another four million people in Xuchang are set to be tested. New rules have also been added for people travelling to China from the US. They are now required to complete a nucleic acid test seven days before departure, and report their body temperature daily. The city of Yuzhou, home to almost 1.2 million people, has been locked down since earlier this week, after three asymptomatic cases were detected. It joined Xi’an in Shaanxi province, which has held 13 million residents under lockdown for more than two weeks so far, with troubling reports of limits on access to medical care. On Thursday officials apologised after a woman miscarried at eight months pregnant after she was denied entry to a hospital because her negative Covid test was four hours past the dictated validity. The Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte, has ordered the arrest of unvaccinated people who violate stay-at-home orders aimed at curbing “galloping” coronavirus infections driven by the Omicron variant, AFP reports. The government tightened restrictions in Manila and several provinces and cities this week. Unvaccinated people among the capital’s 13 million people were ordered to stay home, after infection numbers tripled in the last two days. Health officials said infections were projected to increase further in the coming days and would peak by the end of the month. “Because it’s a national emergency, it is my position that we can restrain” people who have not got their shots, Duterte said in a pre-recorded message on Thursday. “I am now giving orders to the [village chiefs] to look for those persons who are not vaccinated and just request them or order them, if you may, to stay put. “And if he refuses and goes out of the house and goes around in the community or maybe everywhere, he can be restrained. If he refuses then the [official] is empowered to arrest the recalcitrant persons,” he added. James Corden, host of the Late Late Show, has tested positive for Covid. In a post on his Instagram account the British comedian said he was “fully vaccinated, boosted and because of this am fortunate enough to say I feel completely fine.” He also said the show would be “off the air for the next few days”. His diagnosis comes a day after fellow TV host Seth Meyers was forced to cancel his Late Night show after also catching the virus. The scene at the Park Hotel in Melbourne where tennis star Novak Djokovic is staying is very quiet this morning. There are a small number of refugee activists setting up for today’s protest, including representatives from Amnesty International and Tamil Refugee Council. The two groups crossed over yesterday, with some Djokovic supporters calling on more help for the refugees, and refugee advocates calling on the tennis star to help them raise awareness of the 33 men detained indefinitely inside. “We are here to stand vigil, to make sure the men detained know that we are here,” national campaign manager for Amnesty International Australia Shankar Kasynathan told Guardian Australia: We’re hoping that Novak, who is inside there today as well, knows the world is watching him, that he has the opportunity today to bring an end to this madness. To shine a light on the cruelty in this country. The game that is being played with lives must end. It’s game over. Serbian Australians came out in force yesterday, mixing their protest of Djokovic’s detainment with celebrations of their Christmas Eve. They lit candles, sung and danced into the evening, yelling “Free Novak” up at the hotel. There was a small skirmish between police and refugee activists as they arrested two women who had been protesting on the awning above the old hotel entrance. Today’s protests are expected to be bigger for the refugee activists, but many of Australia’s Serbian community will be enjoying Christmas Day. Djokovic is expected to stay inside the hotel until the court hearing on Monday, when he will fight the deportation. President Jair Bolsonaro has criticised Brazil’s health regulator Anvisa for authorising the vaccination of children aged 5 to 11 years against Covid-19, Reuters reports, one day after his health minister unveiled plans to inoculate that age group. Vaccine skeptic Bolsonaro said in a radio interview on Thursday that he had not heard of children dying of Covid-19 and repeated that his daughter Laura, 11, would not be vaccinated. Bolsonaro said vaccines could have side effects on children, but gave no evidence. Anvisa and health regulators around the world have found that Covid-19 vaccines are safe from age 5 and up. “Are you going to vaccinate your child when the possibility of dying is almost zero? What is behind this? What are the interests of vaccine maniacs?” Bolsonaro stated. The Ministry of Health announced on Wednesday that it had bought 20 million pediatric vaccines developed by Pfizer Inc and voluntary vaccination of children 5 to 11 years old will begin by the end of the month. Bolsonaro’s comments came as the Health Ministry reported 35,826 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, the highest daily number of infections since September, and 128 deaths from Covid. In a social media broadcast later on Thursday, Bolsonaro stressed that the vaccination was not obligatory. “No town mayor or state governor can prevent a child from going to school for not being vaccinated,” he said. Bolsonaro warned that Pfizer has not assumed responsibility for any side effects the vaccine could have in children, and said parents should immediately seek a doctor if their child developed chest pains or shortage of breath. Anvisa approved the Pfizer vaccine for children on 16 December, drawing heated criticism from people opposed to vaccines and the president, who suggested that children only be vaccinated with a doctor’s prescription. The ministry dropped the idea as impractical. Requiring a written prescription would discourage vaccination at a time when the more transmissible coronavirus variant Omicron is starting to spread in Brazil, health experts said at a public hearing. According to the national council of state health secretaries at least 300 children aged 5 to 11 had died in Brazil from Covid-19 by the start of December. Brazil’s army differed from the president this week on how to deal with Covid-19. It ordered soldiers to get vaccinated, wear masks and maintain social distance, and warned them against spreading false news about the pandemic. Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s rolling coverage of the Covid pandemic with me, Helen Livingstone. Brazil’s president Jair Bolsonaro has criticised the country’s health regulator Anvisa for authorising the vaccination of children aged five to 11 years against Covid. His comments came as the country reported reported 35,826 new cases of coronavirus in the past 24 hours, the highest daily number of infections since September. Novak Djokovic’s family have said he is the victim of “a political agenda” aimed at “stomping on Serbia” as protesters in Belgrade called for his release and Serbia’s president insisted “the whole country” was behind him. The more infectious Omicron variant appears to produce less severe disease than the globally dominant Delta, but should not be categorised as “mild”, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said on Thursday. Britain’s first wave of coronavirus raised the risk of death by more than 40% for most adults regardless of their underlying health and other factors, research suggests. Johnson &amp; Johnson has confirmed a real-world study shows that its single shot Covid vaccine produced long-lasting protection for up to six months against breakthrough infections and hospitalisations. Mexico is likely to surpass 300,000 deaths from Covid this week - the fifth highest death toll worldwide - as infections rise after the holiday season, fuelled by the Omicron variant and largely unrestricted tourism. Peru raised its pandemic alert level in numerous cities and tightened some restrictions amid a third wave of infections caused by the spread of the Omicron variant. Nigeria is working to develop a Covid vaccine, President Muhammadu Buhari said in a televised interview on Thursday, as the country battles growing cases of the virus. Chile will begin offering a fourth shot of the Covid vaccine next week to immunocompromised people, making it the first country in Latin America and one of the first in the world to offer the extra dose. The Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte, has ordered the arrest of unvaccinated people who violate stay-at-home orders aimed at curbing “galloping” infections driven by the Omicron variant.Erin Jackson slipped in the 500 meters and stunningly finished third, failing to make the Beijing Olympics in her signature event Friday at the US speed skating trials. She had hoped to be given a re-skate, but officials ruled that because she didn’t fall that wasn’t a possibility. Her only chance of getting into the event would be if one of the top two qualifiers would give up their spot to Jackson. The 29-year-old Jackson, who earlier this season became the first Black American woman to win a World Cup speed skating race, bobbled in the second straightaway of the sprint, with one skate appearing to clip her other foot before she recovered. Her time of 38.25 seconds put her second going into the final pairing. But it wasn’t fast enough to hold on. Kimi Goetz, already on the US team after finishing second in the 1,000, knocked Jackson out by taking second in 37.86. “I just hit a bad edge,” Jackson said afterward to NBC. “Not good.” Brittany Bowe won in 37.81. She already qualified for her third Olympics with a win in the 1,000 on Thursday. Bowe and Jackson are friends who are both from Ocala, Florida. Jackson is ranked No 1 in the world in the 500, having won four of eight World Cup races this season. She also had a second and a third. The Americans have qualified two spots for the women’s 500 in next month’s Olympics. Four years ago, Jackson became the first Black woman to qualify for a US Olympic long-track speedskating team, just four months after taking up the sport. She switched to the ice from inline skating and roller derby, going on to finish 24th in the 500 at the Pyeongchang Games. Jordan Stolz won the men’s 500 in 34.55 to qualify for his second Olympic event. The 17-year-old phenom won the 1,000 on Thursday. Austin Kleba finished second in 35.17, although he will have to wait to see if he’ll go to Beijing since the US men only have one quota spot in the event. Final quota reallocations for the Olympics will be done later this month.The sister of a security officer who was murdered in Oakland in 2020 is suing Facebook, alleging that the tech company played a part in radicalizing the two men accused of killing him. David Patrick Underwood was fatally shot and his partner was wounded while guarding a federal building on 29 May 2020, when a large demonstration over the police killing of George Floyd was underway nearby. Federal prosecutors said two men now awaiting trial in the drive-by shooting met through a Facebook group page dedicated to the extremist anti-government “boogaloo” movement and used the protest as cover for the crime. The wrongful death lawsuit against Meta, Facebook’s parent company, was filed Thursday in Alameda county superior court. It seeks at least $25,000 in damages. “Facebook bears responsibility for the murder of my brother. As the lawsuit alleges, Facebook knowingly promoted inflammatory and violent content and connected extremists who plotted and carried out the killing of my brother,” Angela Underwood Jacobs said in a statement. The lawsuit alleges that Facebook used algorithms to steer users to extremist groups as a way to keep them active on the platform, which in turn drives advertising sales and revenue. “We believe and intend to show that Facebook’s conduct has led to a rise in extremism throughout the world and acts of real-world violence, including the murder of officer Underwood,” the sister’s attorney, Ted Leopold, said. “It is time that Facebook is finally held accountable for its actions.” Federal prosecutors have said Steven Carrillo, an Air Force sergeant, met his accomplice Robert Alvin Justus Jr through a Facebook boogaloo group, where they agreed to take advantage of the racial justice protests to attack law enforcement officers. Messages obtained by investigators show the men agreed to meet in person and drive to the Oakland protest, where prosecutors said Carrillo fired at Underwood and his partner with a homemade assault rifle before fleeing. The Guardian reported in 2021 that researchers monitoring online extremism had feared an attack like the one that killed Underwood, after they identified boogaloo groups on Facebook with thousands of members. These groups were used to recruit new members, sharing advice for making weapons and post memes about killing police and federal officials. Facebook said at the time that it took action against hundreds of individual posts that violated its policies against inciting violence but did not ban the boogaloo movement from its platform. Carrillo was arrested eight days later, after he shot and killed a Santa Cruz sheriff’s sergeant and wounded four other officers who tracked down his vehicle. Carrillo has pleaded not guilty to both killings. Court documents reveal Carrillo also had ties to a rightwing militia known as the Grizzly Scouts that held firearms trainings, scouted protests and laid out terms of “war” against police. After Underwood’s killing, Facebook pledged to remove groups, accounts and pages affiliated with the far-right group from its services. But the lawsuit alleges groups tied to the boogaloo movement persist on the platform. “We’ve banned more than 1,000 militarized social movements from our platform and work closely with experts to address the broader issue of internet radicalization. These claims are without legal basis,” said Kevin McAlister, a spokesperson for Meta.Staff at the hospital serving tourist mecca Byron Bay in northern New South Wales say the facility is under “extreme strain”, with Covid-positive patients left in bays behind curtains and one patient waiting 45 hours to be transported to the region’s designated Covid hospital. As many as 100 people a day are arriving at the Byron Central hospital, stretching staff already depleted by Covid-forced absences. The Byron area had a double-vaccination rate of about 85% as of 20 December, one of the lowest in NSW. The hospital’s single isolation room was taken up by one Covid patient for almost two days earlier this week before being transported. “We are constantly being crippled by a lack of transfer options” with ambulances often unavailable because of their own shortages, a senior staffer who requested anonymity said. “We have a positive pressure room also that is being used as an isolation room and another room which we can close an actual door on,” the hospital worker said. “These are often all taken up, so we have Covid-positive patients in bays behind curtains because we can’t get people to where they need to be in a timely manner.” As reported this week by Guardian Australia, northern NSW hospitals are under increasing strain at the designated Covid hospital at Lismore and at the bigger Tweed hospital near the border with Queensland. Byron’s challenges are made worse by the loss of medical staff who have refused the government’s Covid vaccination mandate, and its proximity to communities with relatively large anti-vaccination support. The region also has a relatively high number of cases per 1,000 people, with another 1,154 Covid cases in northern NSW in the latest 24-hour reporting period. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Three of the people that have required oxygen with Covid this week have all been unvaccinated,” the senior staffer said. “We’re all tired and under pressure and facing abuse.” The NSW health department says its workforce across northern NSW had been “increased and upskilled, with more than 265 staff attending surge training in intensive care, emergency care and immunisation specialties to provide additional capacity if needed.” “Between mid-2012 and mid-2020, the district increased its workforce by an additional 1,008 full-time staff. This is a 26.7% increase and includes 171 more doctors, 367 more nurses and midwives, and 121 more allied health staff.” Liz McCall, assistant secretary of the NSW Nurses and Midwives Association and a senior nurse at Byron Central hospital, that while hospital services in Byron had long operated with “skeleton staff”, conditions have got increasingly worse. While vaccination rates were improving, “we still have a lot of anti-vaxxers out in the community”. They typically require more medical care when they get ill and were more likely to pass the virus on to others. Governments’ refusal to set minimum nurse and midwife to patient ratios as they exist in Victoria and Queensland has left NSW more exposed to Covid pressures. “It’s just horrendous what they’re going through into the fever clinic because the queues are so long,” McCall said. “Because you’re in [personal protective equipment] all day, you get dehydrated, you can’t stop for a drink of water because you can’t take it off.” “If you’re going to remove your mask, you know, take everything off and then start again and you just don’t have time for it,” she said. “They are really working themselves ragged in every department.” “Because they’ve always kept us with such threadbare staffing for our hospitals, now they’re paying the price and every step of the way that’s been on the back foot,” McCall said. Other regional hospitals aren’t faring much better. A nurse at the Coffs Harbour Base hospital said staff were doing as much as 40 hours overtime in just one week, with managers pleading for staff to work longer hours. “Staff are burning out and the standards of care are dropping,” the nurse said.That’s all for today, thanks for following along. Some key links and developments: A judge in Georgia sentenced Travis McMichael, Gregory McMichael and William “Roddie” Bryan to life in prison on Friday for the murder of Ahmaud Arbery. Biden spoke of the worsening pandemic, saying, “The new normal is not going to be what it is now, it’s going to be better.” The president traveled to Colorado to view the destruction caused by the abnormal winter wildfires that devastated two towns outside of Denver last week. A return to remote learning has brought despair across US schools as Omicron surges. The effort to disrupt and undermine American democracy has sped up since 6 January. The US government’s expanded online surveillance since 6 January has raised privacy and civil liberties concerns. The chair of the 6 January House committee said the panel is expected to ask former vice-president Mike Pence to voluntarily appear this month. Citigroup is set to begin enforcing its “no jab, no job” policy next week, making it the first Wall Street bank to implement a vaccine mandate. The US supreme court’s conservative majority appeared skeptical of the Biden administration’s authority to impose a vaccine-or-testing requirement on the nation’s large employers. FedEx has warned that the Omicron Covid surge has caused staff shortage and delay in shipments transported on aircraft, Reuters reports. “The explosive surge of the Covid-19 Omicron variant has caused a temporary shortage of available crew members and operational staff,” the company said in a statement. At the same time, winter storms across the US are further exacerbating FedEx’s challenges, leading to additional disruptions, including at its main air hub in Memphis, Tennessee, Reuters said. The recent sharp rise in infections has forced multiple US airlines to cancel flights. Some images from the president’s trip to Colorado where he and the first lady are meeting with officials and speaking with wildfire victims who “lost everything”: The chair of the 6 January House committee said the panel is expected to ask former vice-president Mike Pence to voluntarily appear this month, NPR reports. Congressman Bennie Thompson, who chairs the committee investigating the insurrection, told NPR in an interview today that Pence’s appearance was critical since he had written a letter to Congress before 6 January saying he did not have the power to reject Electoral College votes and would not refuse his ceremonial role. Thompson said, according to NPR: “The vice president was put in a tough spot. The president was putting a lot of pressure on him to break the law, and he stood fast. And because of his respect for law, there were people who came to the Capitol a year ago wanting to hang him. And so, if for no other reason, our committee really needs to hear what are his opinions about what happened on January 6.” More details here: Price gouging for at-home Covid tests is increasing during the Omicron surge, my colleague Carly Olson reports: With at-home Covid tests running scarce during the Omicron surge, the price gouging has begun, and everyone from restaurants to pet food stores appear to be trying to cash in. Recent reporting by Vice found a Manhattan deli advertised an Abbott BinaxNOW rapid test (retail: $24) on the Seamless delivery app for $80. Meanwhile, an online-only pet store, Pet Foods by Village Farm, offered to deliver the same type of test for $50, and a liquor store was selling a “Covid fighter pack”, including rapid tests and hand sanitizer, for more than $100. There have been reports across the country of vendors charging double or triple the normal costs of at-home Covid tests. One New York restaurant worker paid $180 for four test kits, the Los Angeles Times reported. And a Covid testing site in San Francisco’s Mission district is reportedly charging between $99 and $250 for rapid tests. Authorities have warned that this is a growing problem. In a December statement, New York attorney general Letitia James encouraged people to report price hikes, noting that her office had already seen reports of test kits “being unlawfully sold for more than $40 and up to $70 per package”. A pack of two at-home rapid Covid tests should cost around $25. This week, Walmart and Kroger are raising prices for BinaxNOW rapid tests to the market price after a temporary government-mandated $14. Los Angeles county is reporting over 43,000 new Covid cases, setting a daily record: Los Angeles faced one of the worst coronavirus surges in the nation this time last year and is now faced with a major uptick in cases and widespread community transmission. The county’s health system is experiencing “significant healthcare workforce shortages” due to high Covid rates, officials said this afternoon. As of 6 January, there were 973 newly reported cases since the last report on 30 December, marking an increase of more than 47%. In total, there have been more than 50,000 healthcare workers and first responders confirmed to have Covid in LA county. Citigroup is set to begin enforcing its “no jab, no job” policy next week, making it the first Wall Street bank to implement a vaccine mandate, my colleague Edward Helmore reports: The New York-headquartered bank said in October that it would require all US employees to be vaccinated against Covid as a condition of their employment in line with a Biden administration policy requiring workers supporting government contracts to be fully vaccinated. The Biden policy has been widely challenged in the courts, and is currently before the US supreme court following requests by Republican state officials and business groups to block it. Citigroup also said it would examine requests for exemptions on religious or medical grounds, or any other accommodation by state or local law, on a case-by-case basis. More than 90% of Citigroup staff have so far complied with the mandate and that figure is rising rapidly, Bloomberg reported, citing a Citigroup spokeswoman. Joe Biden is in Colorado to view the destruction caused by the abnormal winter wildfires that devastated two towns outside of Denver last week and left thousands displaced. The Marshall fire on the last two days of 2021 is considered the most destructive blaze on record in Colorado, based on property losses. More from Reuters on Biden’s trip today: Biden’s trip to Boulder County, where he will tour a Louisville neighborhood and meet with families displaced by the blaze, marks his second as president to Colorado and his second focused on wildfires. Biden has declared the scene of the latest blaze on the eastern fringe of the Rocky Mountains a national disaster, freeing up federal funds to assist residents and businesses in recovery efforts. The normal wildfire season in Colorado does not typically extend into the winter thanks to snow cover and bracing cold. But climate change and rising global temperatures are leaving vegetation in parts of the western United States drier and more incendiary. The president’s primary legislative initiative, the Build Back Better Act, would funnel billions of dollars to increased forest management, firefighting and efforts to reduce carbon emissions. Hi all, Sam Levin in Los Angeles here, taking over our live coverage for the rest of the day. The family of Ahmaud Arbery thanked their supporters after the three men were sentenced today to life in prison for murder of Arbery in February 2020: Wanda Cooper-Jones, Arbery’s mother, told supporters after the sentencing: I sat in that courtroom for five weeks straight. I knew that we would come out with a victory. I never doubted it. I knew that today would come. When it would come, I didn’t know. But I knew today would finally come. Thank you all ... who stood with me through a very long fight. Back when Ahmaud was killed on the 23rd of February ... the city of Brunswick thought I would have to fight this fight alone so they chose to ignore me, because they thought they would have to face me alone. But they didn’t know I had you guys to stand with me. Supporters of the family are now celebrating at a mural honoring Arbery: The supreme court began hearing arguments from Republican state officials and business groups seeking to block the federal vaccine-or-testing mandate for employers with more than 100 workers and a similar requirement for healthcare facilities. The panel’s conservative majority appeared skeptical of the Biden administration’s authority to impose such a requirement. Joe Biden spoke about the new job numbers – the country’s unemployment rate dropping to 3.9% – and told reporters that he does not think Covid-19 is here to stay. The three white men convicted of killing Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old Black man, were sentenced to life in prison. An Albany judge has dropped the forcible touching charge against former New York governor Andrew Cuomo. One year ago, Ted Cruz, the Republican senator from Texas, called the 6 January attack on the US Capitol “a despicable act of terrorism and a shocking assault on our democratic system”. The conservative fanbase of Donald Trump supporters were not pleased when he reiterated that description at a Senate hearing on Wednesday. On an appearance on Tucker Carlson Tonight, Cruz tried to walk his words back. “It was a mistake to say that yesterday and the reason is what you just said, which is we’ve now had a year of Democrats in the media twisting words and trying to say that all of us are terrorists, trying to say you’re a terrorist, I’m a terrorist,” Cruz told Carlson. While none of the mob that stormed the Capitol one year ago have been charged with terrorism, the justice department has filed charges against 725 defendants, 325 with felonies. Earlier this week, the attending physician at the US Capitol announced that an unprecedented uptick in positive Covid-19 cases on Capitol Hill. It appears there’s been another one: Former New York governor Andrew Cuomo has issued a statement regarding the charge dropped against him today: The three white men who chased down and killed Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old Black man, were sentenced today to life in prison. In November, Travis McMichael, who shot Arbery as he was running through a Georgia neighborhood, was found guilty of malice murder and several charges of felony murder. Greg McMichael and William Bryan, who took part in the pursuit in two separate vehicles, were found guilty on multiple charges of felony murder. Watch what Ahmaud Arbery’s family had to say at his killers’ sentencing today: An Albany city judge has dismissed the forcible touching charge against former New York governor Andrew Cuomo after the district attorney dropped the charge against the former governor earlier this week. Cuomo was forced to resign from his position as governor in August amid findings that he sexually harassed 11 women. The woman who accused Cuomo of forcible touching has identified herself as Brittany Commisso, one of Cuomo’s executive assistants. She said Cuomo assaulted her when they were alone in an office at the governor’s mansion in Albany in late 2020. Commisso “had no control over the filing or prosecution of criminal charges. She had no authority or voice in those decisions,” her lawyer, Brian Premo, said in a statement. “The only thing she has any power over is her resolution to continue to speak the truth and seek justice in an appropriate civil action, which she will do in due course,” he added. Cuomo has denied groping Commisso. Earlier today, Joe Biden spoke about the new job numbers: The US supreme court’s conservative majority appeared skeptical today of the Biden administration’s authority to impose a vaccine-or-testing requirement on the nation’s large employers. The court also was hearing arguments on a separate vaccine mandate for most health care workers. After oral arguments this morning, with both cases coming before the bench on an emergency basis, a decision is expected within a few weeks or even just days. The Associated Press writes: The arguments in the two cases come at a time of surging coronavirus cases because of the Omicron variant, and the decision Friday by seven justices to wear masks for the first time while hearing arguments reflected the new phase of the pandemic. Justice Sonia Sotomayor, a diabetic since childhood, didn’t even appear in the courtroom, choosing to remain in her office at the court and take part remotely. Two lawyers, representing Ohio and Louisiana, argued by telephone after recent positive Covid-19 tests, state officials said. But the Covid circumstances did not appear to outweigh the views of the court’s six conservatives that the administration overstepped its authority in its vaccine-or-testing requirement for businesses with at least 100 employees. “This is something the federal government has never done before,” the chief justice, John Roberts, said, casting doubt on the administration’s argument that a half-century established law, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, confers such broad authority. Roberts and the two newest justices, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett, who were selected by Donald Trump, probably hold the key to the outcome in both cases, as they have been more receptive to state-level vaccine requirements than the other three conservative justices. Barrett and Kavanaugh also had tough questions for solicitor general Elizabeth Prelogar, the administration’s top supreme court lawyer. The court’s three liberal justices suggested support for the employer rule. Justice Elena Kagan, who was previously solicitor general, said officials have shown “quite clearly that no other policy will prevent sickness and death to anywhere like the degree that this one will.” And justice Stephen Breyer said he found it “unbelievable” that it could be in the “public interest” to put that rule on hold. He said that on Thursday there were some 750,000 new cases in the country and that hospitals are full. Beginning Monday, unvaccinated employees in big companies are supposed to wear masks at work, unless the court blocks enforcement. Testing requirements and potential fines for employers don’t kick in until February. Legal challenges to the policies from Republican-led states and business groups are in their early stages, but the outcome at the high court probably will determine the fate of vaccine requirements affecting more than 80 million people. Joe Biden’s addressing reporters’ questions earlier at the White House on coronavirus, specifically, whether Covid is “here to stay”, was almost certainly prompted by developments earlier this week where former health advisers to the US president life with the virus present in society being the new normal. The Washington Post reported yesterday: Six former health advisers to President Biden’s transition team released a series of journal articles on Thursday calling for a “new normal” in the nation’s approach to fighting the coronavirus and other viral threats. In the articles, the advisers lay out dozens of recommendations, sometimes explicitly and often implicitly criticizing the federal response. For instance, they urge the administration to create a “modern data infrastructure” that would offer real-time information on the spread of the coronavirus and other potential threats, saying inadequate surveillance continues to put American lives and society at risk. They also suggest investments in tests, vaccines and prevention beyond what the White House has done, such as mailing vouchers to Americans that could be used to obtain free, high-quality face masks. “We’re trying to take the next steps, to anticipate where we need to be in the next three to 12 months,” said Ezekiel Emanuel, the University of Pennsylvania bioethicist who coordinated the effort. In an interview, Emanuel characterized the advisers’ articles, which were published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, as an “outline of a national strategy … to find a new normal.” Rather than continuing in “a perpetual state of emergency,” he and the others argue, the United States must shift to a strategy of seeking to live with the virus by suppressing its peaks, rather than attempting to eliminate it. Asked on Thursday whether Biden believed the virus was here to stay, and whether health officials had read the JAMA articles, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said, “the president’s ultimate goal continues to be to defeat the virus.” The rest of the WaPo article is here. This morning, Biden said he did not think Covid is here to stay - then emphasized that he meant it was not here to stay in the current, out of control, pandemic situation we’ve all been dealing with for two years now. He indicated that surging infections should not be the new normal and that the US could get control of the pandemic. But that the virus itself appears here to stay. The supreme court began hearing arguments from Republican state officials and business groups seeking to block the federal vaccine-or-testing mandate for employers with more than 100 workers and a similar requirement for healthcare facilities. After speaking about the new job numbers, Joe Biden told reporters that he does not think Covid-19 is here to stay. Per protocol, Nancy Pelosi has extended an invitation to Biden to present the State of the Union address before the two houses of Congress - this year, the date is set for 1 March. Joe Biden, speaking just earlier at the White House about the coronavirus pandemic, also added to his remarks about the norm of periodic surges in infections. “We’re going to be able to control this,” he said of the pandemic. The US president added: “The new normal is not going to be what it is now, it’s going to be better.” Although the pandemic has ebbed and flowed in the two years it has been dogging the US, through the last year of the Trump administration and the first year of the Biden White House, at no point have the federal public health authorities been able to declare that the situation is nationally under control. Just before July 4 last year, Biden spoke of the US being on the verge of declaring “independence from the virus”, but that was before the Delta variant took hold, despite the nationwide availability of safe and effective vaccines. Through the summer and into the fall, almost 100% of deaths from coronavirus were among those who had not been vaccinated. The Omicron variant burst onto the scene in December and is now the dominant strain in new infections, which are raging across many states, even though experts tentatively believe that on an individual basis, Omicron appears less severe. Per protocol, House speaker Nancy Pelosi has extended an invitation to Joe Biden, inviting him to deliver the State of the Union before the two houses of Congress - this year scheduled for 1 March. The letter reads: Dear Mr. President: Thank you for your bold vision and patriotic leadership which have guided America out of crisis and into an era of great progress, as we not only recover from the pandemic but Build Back Better! Indeed, this past year has been historic: with the life-saving American Rescue Plan, once-in-a-century Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and, soon, the truly transformational Build Back Better Act! In that spirit, I am writing to invite you to address a Joint Session of Congress on Tuesday, March 1, to share your vision of the State of the Union. Thank you for considering this invitation to speak to the Congress and Country. Sincerely, NANCY PELOSI Speaker of the House There’s a lot less fire in this round of arguments about the vaccine-or-testing mandate before the supreme court. Meanwhile, in New York state: Brian Fletcher, US principal deputy solicitor general, is before the supreme court now, arguing for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and the policy of vaccine-or-testing. Applications are submitted. Now begins arguments before the supreme court for Biden v Missouri, which focuses on the vaccine-or-test mandate specifically for healthcare facilities. Joe Biden addressed the issue of the persistent coronavirus pandemic, taking questions from reporters after an economic speech at the White House moments ago. The US president was asked if he thinks Covid-19 is “here to stay”, responding to the fact that former advisers to Biden have said the White House needs to change its messaging about the virus from one of communicating and making policy on the basis of “a perpetual state of emergency” and instead switch to a strategy of adapting to co-exist with the coronavirus. “I do not think Covid is here to stay,” Biden said. However, he did not talk about trying to eliminate the virus. “But having Covid in the environment here and in the world is probably here to stay. But Covid as we are dealing with it now is not here to stay. The new normal doesn’t have to be,” he said. The US reported 662,000 new cases on Thursday, the fourth highest daily figure in the pandemic, according to Reuters figures, almost two years after coronavirus began killing Americans. And the government warned that the surge of the Omicron variant has not yet peaked in the US. Biden continued: “We have so many more tools we’re developing and will continue to develop that can contain Covid and strains of Covid, so I don’t believe this is [pause] things are very different today than they were a year ago, even though we still have problems. But 90% of the schools are open now, was 98 it’s now down to 90, but..we spent the time and the money in the recovery act to provide for the schools to remain open.” “The flu kills people every year,” Justice Neil Gorsuch said. “Traditionally OSHA does not regulate in this area.” “Covid-19 is unprecedented,” said US solicitor general Elizabeth Prelogar. Gorsuch immediately snapped back, bringing up polio and how OSHA has never required a polio vaccine. Then he returned to the flu. “We have flu vaccines. The flu kills hundreds of thousands of people every year. How do we regulate that?” Gorsuch asked. (The flu results in about 12,000 to 52,000 deaths annually, according to the CDC. The CDC tallied about 385,343 deaths from Covid-19 in 2020, and 385,348 in 2021). Prelogar responded that the difference between Covid-19 and polio was that virtually all workers at one time or another had been inoculated against polio (92.6% children by the age of 24 months). She also pointed out that the flu was a seasonal virus. “Are you suggesting it does not pose the same risk?” Gorsuch asked. “Certainly if there was a similar 1918 influenza outbreak like there was before” then OSHA would consider a similar measure, Prelogar responded. Quick note that polio is also an odd disease for Gorsuch to bring up as a point against the vaccine-or-test mandate - it was pretty much eliminated from the US because of a robust vaccination effort. Justice Clarence Thomas asked if a vaccine was the only way to treat Covid-19. US solicitor general Elizabeth Prelogar turned the question back to the issue at hand: “It’s certainly the single most effective way to combat all the issues that Osha has identified.” Because the main question at hand here is whether the federal government and Osha (the Occupational Safety and Health Administration) has the power and scope to issue this federal vaccine-or-test mandate for all employers with more than 100 workers and healthcare facilities, and Prelogar answered that at the moment, a vaccine is the best protection that Osha knows of to combat the dangers of Covid-19. US solicitor general Elizabeth Prelogar is before the supreme court now, arguing in defense of the federal vaccine-or-test mandate. Justice Samuel Alito asked if Prelogar would argue against them issuing a stay to decide the case. He got a little prickly in his questioning, asking her if she did not think there was grave danger in the time this case was filed until now. “We think there are lives being lost every day,” she said, but noted that the administration allowed for the 10 January deadline to allow workplaces to meet compliance. There’s been a lot of back-and-forth about the efficacy of the Covid-19 vaccine – which, reminder, while everybody here is highly educated in law, nobody is an epidemiologist – and Justice Elena Kagan went hard at Ohio solicitor general Ben Flowers. “You said we understand that 18- to 29-year-olds, even though they’re not going to die or end up with very serious injuries, they can spread. You don’t doubt that, that they can spread to other people who are more vulnerable?” Kagan asked Flowers. “That’s right,” Flower said. “All right,” Kagan said, cutting him off. “Then you say the danger is to other unvaccinated people, older people, immunocompromised people. And you seem to say that the causes to other unvaccinated people, they assume the risk and the agency’s power runs out.” There appears to be some hedging now in the arguments against the federal vaccine-or-test mandate that not every workplace is at high-risk for Covid-19 spread as others, and therefore shouldn’t be subject to a mandate that requires regular testing or vaccinations. “I would have thought every workplace was affected by Covid,” Justice Elena Kagan said. “I’m trying to figure out why this is a blunderbuss approach when everybody knows every workplace has been affected by Covid.” Ohio solicitor general Ben Flowers, who is arguing against the mandate before the supreme court today remotely because he tested positive, responded that even if every workplace has been affected by Covid, it doesn’t make it a workplace risk, it makes a societal risk - he compared it to terrorism. Scott Keller, the solicitor general of Texas and the attorney arguing against the federal vaccine-or-test mandate, has said Osha (the Occupational Safety and Health Administration) estimates that 1 to 3% of employees will quit if they are either required to test regularly or be vaccinated. He pointed out that such a loss in the workforce would have a terrible effect on the economy. “Catching Covid keeps people out of the workplace for extraordinary periods of time,” Justice Sonia Sotomayor said. She also made a note about the unprecedented number of deaths the country is experiencing at the moment as well. Scott Keller, the solicitor general of Texas and the attorney arguing against the federal vaccine-or-test mandate, is asking for the supreme court to issue a stay for when the requirement goes into effect Monday. The argument so far is that the federal government is abusing its power in issuing this mandate and that it shouldn’t be up to the federal government to require this. Keller said the effect such a mandate would have on the economy would be detrimental. “We understand the gravity of the situation, but in balancing the shear size and scope of this emergency power that is supposed to be exercised delicately...we are entitled to a stay,” Keller said. Justice Stephen Breyer asked, “How could it not be in the public’s interest?” Wow. One of the attorneys arguing against the federal vaccine-or-test mandate is presenting his case to the supreme court remotely today because he tested positive for Covid-19. Justice Elena Kagan asks why this current situation - the coronavirus pandemic that has killed more than 832,000 people in the US - doesn’t count as “necessary and grave”. “What else should be done?” Kagan asked. “It’s obvious the policy that’s geared to preventing the most sickness and death and the agency has done everything but stand on its head to show that no other policy will prevent sickness and death like this one will.” The supreme court is now in session. Our business live blog is reporting that the US added 199,000 new jobs in December, a weaker showing than expected. However, the US unemployment rate has dropped to 3.9%. Follow here for more: Greetings, live blog readers. Congrats on making it through the first week of the new year. We kick off today with the supreme court set to begin hearing arguments from Republican state officials and business groups seeking to block the federal vaccine mandate for employers with more than 100 workers and a similar requirement for healthcare facilities. The at least two hours of arguments for the two cases are scheduled to start at 10am local time. Because of pandemic protocols, the building is closed to the public, but we will be streaming the oral arguments here. To recap: last year the Biden administration put in place a mandate requiring that all employers with more than 100 workers and all healthcare facilities must ensure that all their workers are either fully vaccinated or tested on at least a weekly basis. Joe Biden has argued that these policies will strengthen the economy and save lives. Conservatives in particular balked at the mandate, calling it an overreach of authority, especially as these requirements were not authorized by Congress. But the lower courts have been divided on the issue, reports the Washington Post. The US court of appeals for the fifth circuit blocked enforcement of the mandate soon after the administration announced the policy for private companies in November. Then the US court of appeals for the sixth circuit dissolved the fifth circuit’s stay, and allowed the rules to go into effect. The cases involving the mandate for employers with more than 100 workers are National Federation of Independent Business v. Department of Labor and Ohio v Department of Labor, and have been consolidated, as have the the cases involving the mandate for healthcare facilities – Biden v Missouri and Becerra v Louisiana.Parts of Queensland are experiencing major flooding, with the aftermath of ex-tropical Cyclone Seth causing “unexpected” prolonged heavy rain and storms. The Bureau of Meteorology said there was major flooding in the Wide Bay and Burnett regions, north of Brisbane, causing highways to close and cutting off some towns. Marodian near Gympie received more than 670mm in the 24 hours to 9am with many other areas receiving at least 300mm. The Bruce Highway reopened late Saturday morning after the downpour forced it to close earlier. There were warnings for more heavy rain on Saturday and authorities issued an emergency alert for Maryborough, urging people to reconsider travel. Queensland Police confirmed one person had drowned after his vehicle became submerged in flood waters at Kanigan, Wide Bay on Friday night. Police and emergency services responded to reports of a ute being swept off the road on Cherry Tree Road near the Bruce Highway about 7.30pm. The driver, a 22-year-old Sunshine Coast man, was found inside the vehicle on Saturday morning. No one else was in the car at the time. Police had been called to rescue 23 people in 11 vehicles. Eight of those were now safe, but the remaining 15 people were unaccounted for with rescue crews unable to access many areas. The RACQ Lifeflight helicopter released vision of it winching a family of three to safety from the second storey of their flooded home in Wide Bay, after they were trapped by the rising flood waters. Elsewhere, Channel Seven reported that a woman and her dog were rescued from the flood waters outside Bundaberg, on Bingera Siding Road. An elderly couple were the first to be winched to safety, followed by their son aged in his 20s. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said the flood event was unexpected. “As the bureau said with this severe weather event, no one was expecting it to sit and stay and produce thunderstorms that were not moving. “This was an unexpected event from the bureau’s point of view and they were sending out information as it came to hand. And also, alerting the mayors in the local council as well.” A spokesperson for the Bureau of Meteorology said the weather was extremely rare. Storms rarely sit in the same region for such a long period of time, the bureau said. “This was incredibly rare,” the spokesperson said. “The magnitude of what we saw really escalated during the night. It was a really evolving situation.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning State Emergency Service officials received more than 700 calls for help, while 31 swift water rescues were launched. Assistant Emergency Services Commissioner Stephen Smith said his crews remain in high demand. “Incidents are still being responded to,” he said. “Out of those 31 Swift water incidents, 18 remain open. We are having difficulty with access both on land and in air so we do urge community support in minimising to essential travel only.” Wild storms have also lashed Victoria, bringing large hail stones and flash floods. The Victorian State Emergency Service received 848 calls in the 24 hours to Saturday, mostly due to flooding and building damage overnight. The SES duty officer, Geb Abbott, told ABC Radio about a dozen cases were people calling to be rescued. “There were some events where rescues had to be enacted just with people that had been stuck in flood water,” she said. The storms had left hundreds of properties without power across the state’s west. On Friday, the storms caused flash flooding in parts of Melbourne’s western suburbs and the roof of a shopping centre in Point Cook caved in, collapsing under a heavy downpour. The wild weather had already hit Portland on Thursday night, bringing down trees, damaging buildings and causing flash floods. Additional reporting by Australian Associated Press.Australia ended 2021 in an unusual climatic state, with no region in this famously wide, mostly brown land officially in drought for the first time since 2017. The Bureau of Meteorology’s latest drought report, released on Friday, said the country’s record rainfall in November helped clear up remaining areas of short- to medium-term rainfall deficiencies. A slightly drier than average December – including the driest December in Tasmania since 1994 – did not derail the generally wetter trajectory of late for the country. “It’s the first time in five years, since the start of 2017, that we haven’t any part of Australia in what we call a meteorological drought,” said Simon Grainger, a senior climatologist with the Bureau of Meteorology. Such a measure assesses the extent and severity of drought conditions by comparing rain tallies to typical levels for a region, and is keenly watched by farmers and firefighters, among others. Climate change is altering the chances of rain, with southern Australia tending to dry out, particularly in winter, while northern Australia is getting wetter. Last year was marked by storms and floods and ended up as Australia’s coolest since 2012 but still unusually warm for a La Niña year. It was also the wettest year since 2016. Among the state capitals, Perth was a standout with rainfall 22% above 1990s averages. The 892mm recorded in the Western Australian capital made it the wettest year since 1994, Grainger said. WA was notable for its searing December heat, with the state posting its third-hottest December on record for maximum and mean temperatures, the bureau said. Marble Bar – the Pilbara town more akin to a frying pan – sweltered with 29 consecutive days of at least 42C, beating a previous record run of 25 such blistering days in 1986. Mardie, also in north-west WA, recorded Australia’s hottest temperature in 2021, with the mercury reaching a toasty 47.9C on 20 December. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The experience for most Australians, though, was a moderately cool year. “It’s been relatively cool across the south-eastern capitals, Melbourne, Adelaide, Canberra,” Grainger said. Melbourne’s days averaged 19.8C in 2021, the coolest since 1996. Nights in the Victorian capital averaged 11.2C, the coolest since 2006. The city’s rainfall of 682.6mm was 5% above the long-run average. Sydney, which is typically wetter than Melbourne, recorded 1,290.2mm rain in 2021 – 6% above the norm. Sydney’s average maximum of 23.1C was 1.3C above the average for all years in records going back to 1858. Minimums were 0.3% above the norm at 14.1C. Canberra’s 19.6C average maximum gave the national capital its coolest year since 1996, or 0.3C below the long-term norm. Minimums of 6.2C were the briskest since 2012, similarly 0.3C below average. Rainfall of 912.6mm was the most since 2010, or 46% above average. Adelaide was another capital on the cool side, with an average maximum of 22.0C – the coolest since 1997 - and 0.6C below the norm. Minimums were 10C cooler, averaging 12C, the chilliest year since 2002. Rain was close to average at 506.4mm. Brisbane, too, with average days reaching 26.4C, was 0.3C cooler than the 1990s, though nights were slightly above average at 16.6C. Annual rainfall was 39% above average, at 1,407mm, even if the city’s main Wivenhoe dam missed out on it, ending the year at under half full. Hobart maintained its record as Australia’s second driest capital, with its 664.2mm of rain about 9% higher than the long-run average. Maximums of 17.7C across the year were close the average since 1991, as were minimums of 9.2C. In the Top End, Darwin’s days averaged 33C in 2021, making it the city’s equal fourth hottest year on record. Minimums in Darwin averaged 23.9C, or 0.6C above the average over the past 30 years, making it the eighth-warmest for overnight temperatures. Rainfall was just above average at 1,787.8mm. Rounding out the extremes, Australia’s coldest place in 2021 was Perisher Valley in New South Wales, where the mercury sank to 10.0C below zero on 7 July. And in a year of big floods that looks likely to extend into 2022 along with the La Niña set-up in the Pacific, the wettest daily recording was Byfield in north Queensland. There the rain gauge collected 550mm on 17 March.Joe Biden ended his tour of neighborhoods devastated by Colorado’s most destructive blaze by emphasizing the link between America’s escalating wildfires and the global climate crisis, saying that the US can “no longer ignore the reality” of weather conditions that have “supercharged” blazes. Biden’s trip to Boulder county on Friday marked his sixth climate disaster tour since taking office a year ago, underscoring the growing threat of global heating in the US and the need for radical action to cut greenhouse gas emissions. Last week’s prairie grass fire destroyed almost 1,100 homes and some businesses after hurricane-force winds drove flames through two densely populated Denver suburbs, forcing 35,000 people to flee. The cumulative effect of unusually wet conditions last spring followed by extremely dry and warm conditions through December – weather patterns linked to global heating – enabled the rare winter fire to scorch over 6,000 acres, engulfing residential neighborhoods and commercial districts alike. After meeting some of the affected families, Biden praised the courage of survivors and said: “We can’t ignore the reality that these fires are being supercharged. They’re being supercharged by changing weather.” Biden pledged not to abandon families as they try to rebuild, saying “we’re here with you and we’re not going away”. The Colorado disaster capped a catastrophic year for the US in which at least 650 people died from climate disasters including heatwaves, hurricanes, fires and floods. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the estimated economic cost of the destruction had topped $100bn even before the Colorado blaze. A 69-year-old construction worker, Robert Sharpe, has been confirmed dead, while another person remains unaccounted for. The cause of the fire remains under investigation. Biden’s latest disaster tour underlines the stakes of his teetering Build Back Better (BBB) legislation, which earmarks $550bn to tackle the largest sources of global heating gases – energy and transportation. The bill’s passage has been impeded by the fossil-fuel friendly senator Joe Manchin, who angered his Democratic colleagues by opposing the historic social spending package that includes major investments in forest restoration, wildfire resiliency, and mitigation as part of what would be the country’s largest ever climate crisis investment. Experts say that without the bill it will be impossible to meet the administration’s target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions to at least 50% below 2005 levels by 2030. Globally, the US is the second-largest emitter of greenhouse gases, after China, and scientists warn that even halving emissions by 2030 may not be enough to avoid a catastrophic rise in atmospheric and oceanic temperatures, which elevate the risk of wildfires, intensify drought and rainstorms, and exacerbate flooding. “In the last few months we’ve seen vivid examples of the extraordinary costs the country is shouldering because of climate change, and the problem is worsening day by day,” said Vijay Limaye, a climate and health scientist at the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) Science Center. “The tremendous benefits of the adaptation and mitigation measures in BBB would far outweigh the costs.” As the Biden administration battles to rescue the legislation and get it through the Senate, there are growing calls to accelerate reforms needed to modernize government agencies so that they are equipped for climate disasters and extreme weather events. Manchin’s vote is crucial as the bill is opposed by Republicans. On Friday, the Colorado Democratic congressman Joe Neguse, co-chair of the bipartisan Wildfire Caucus, unveiled a new bill to help prevent future wildfires, fund state-of-the-art firefighting equipment and programs, and support recovery efforts for communities and forests affected by fires across the west. “As we endure increasingly worse wildfire seasons, it is critical for the federal government to lend a hand in stopping fires before they start, fighting them if they spread, and helping our communities fully recover after they’ve been contained … We cannot expect our communities to bear the burden of these disasters on their own,” said Neguse. The Western Wildfire Support Act, co-sponsored by Senator Catherine Cortez Masto of Nevada, would direct the Departments of the Interior and Agriculture to create fire prevention, management and recovery plans for federal land across the western US. It would also provide $100m in funding to help communities affected by wildfires conduct long-term rehabilitation projects. Neguse, whose district includes Boulder county, launched the Wildfire Caucus after the unprecedented 2020 season, when more than a thousand fires destroyed 665,454 acres of land in Colorado. Last year, more than 8,600 fires were recorded in California – a historic high that caused over 2.5m acres to burn. Exposure to wildfire smoke can cause serious health problems such as asthma attacks and pneumonia, can worsen chronic heart and lung diseases and can increase the risk of lower birth weights if pregnant women are exposed. Yet while damage to property is well tracked, there are no national statistics on hospital admissions or other health impacts of wildfires – or any climate disasters. “Climate-related health tracking is in very poor shape nationally. We barely have a handle on the physical health implications, never mind the impact on mental health,” said Limaye. Yet the scale of the health and social costs are likely to be substantial given that in 2021 alone, more than four in 10 Americans lived in a county struck by climate disaster, according to an analysis by the Washington Post. The Post’s analysis found that about 15% of Americans live in counties where fire disasters were declared in 2021, and the conditions necessary for fire – high temperatures, low rainfall and high winds – last on average more than a month longer than they did four decades ago. If the planet continues to heat up, research suggests that by mid-century the fire season could lengthen by another 23 days. As BBB stalls and the drilling of fossil fuel continues apace, it’s a race against time to ensure government agencies, regulations and standards are fit for purpose as drought, flooding and other extreme weather events will almost certainly continue to escalate. Biden has reinstated some climate-smart standards rescinded by Trump, such as requiring all federally funded projects to take into account the long-term risk of flooding and sea level rise, but most building and land use standards remain woefully outdated, according to the NRDC analyst Rob Moore. Learning from past mistakes is also key. A group of lawmakers from states bearing the brunt of extreme weather events (Hawaii, Louisiana and California) support creating a National Disaster Safety Board (NDSB), modelled on the body that investigates aviation accidents, to help identify and correct the factors that contributed to a hazard, such as a storm or wildfire, becoming a full-blown climate disaster. Moore said: “The board would be a tremendous addition to coping with climate disasters nationally and accelerate climate adaptation efforts. Extreme weather events are no longer an act of God, they are systemic and endemic problems which we need to plan for.”The boss of Tennis Australia has privately told his staff the organisation has done “an unbelievable job” in handling the Novak Djokovic affair despite refusing to explain to the public why players were told a prior Covid-19 infection would exempt them from vaccine travel requirements. The scandal surrounding Djokovic deepened on Saturday, following revelations that Tennis Australia informed players that a prior infection would be a reason to exempt them from Australia’s tough border restrictions. That advice was given despite the health department telling Tennis Australia on two occasions that exemptions did not exist for those recently infected with Covid. The organisation has largely gone to ground, not answering media queries or responding to calls or emails. But a leaked video of Tennis Australia boss Craig Tiley addressing his staff has been obtained and published by News Corp, in which he tells staff the organisation has performed well. “We’ve chosen at this point not to be very public with it and simply because there is a pending lawsuit related to entry into Australia. Once that has run its course, we’ll be able to share more with you,” he said. “There’s a lot of finger-pointing going on and a lot of blaming going on, but I can assure you our team has done an unbelievable job and have done everything they possibly could according to all the instructions that they have been provided.” Tennis Australia has maintained a deliberate silence on the affair, save for a statement issued on Friday night denying that it “misled” anyone by providing such advice. “We reject completely that the playing group was knowingly misled,” Tennis Australia said. “Informing players they could get into the country on a medical exemption was taken from the Smart Traveller website that Greg Hunt directly referred us to.” Further details have also emerged about Tiley’s interactions with the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) about exemptions for players either recently infected with Covid or who had only received one dose. The Age reported that Tiley had told Atagi the treatment of such players “goes to the heart of the viability of the Australian Open”. Djokovic, meanwhile, remains in the Park Hotel, while he waits for Monday’s federal circuit court hearing on his challenge to the visa cancellation. His request to move to a private residence was rejected. In his pre-tournament press conference, Australian tennis star Nick Kyrgios described the treatment of Djokovic as “not really humane” and criticised the media’s reporting. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Kyrgios has previously been outspoken about the world champion’s approach to Covid-19, but has struck a more conciliatory tone during the current scandal. “For the sport we need him here, it’s that simple,” he said. “He’s one of the most influential sports people probably of all time. For the sport, I think, as I said, if he’s ready to play and he’s allowed to play, I think it’s in a way good for our sport with all this attention because probably the Australian Open won’t have as many views as it’s ever probably had if he’s able to play. “I don’t know. I’m feeling for him now. Like it’s not really humane, is it, what’s going on? I think like it’s just, if this was a normal person they wouldn’t have to deal with all this sort of media side of bullshit.” Kyrgios also suggested the scandal would fire up Djokovic, saying he does not want to face the world No.1 if he plays in the tournament. “If he’s allowed to play the Australian Open, I don’t want any bar of him. I reckon he’s going to be pissed off. He’s going to be very determined to play well, and stick it to everyone of what’s going on. And I don’t want any bar of that Novak.” The Australian government is now facing diplomatic spats on two fronts due to its handling of the affair. Czech doubles specialist Renata Voracova has left the country voluntarily after having her visa cancelled by the Australian Border Force (ABF) on Thursday. She was also detained in the Park Hotel, despite having been waved through the border and already having played a pre-tournament match. In an interview with Czech media, she accused Tennis Australia of misleading players. “Apparently the Australian Tennis Association has misled us, which is annoying. I wanted to focus on tennis, not visas, quarantine. It’s really weird that I spent a week here, played a match ... And then they came for me.” Her treatment prompted a tersely-worded statement from the Czech embassy overnight, saying it would demand answers from the Australian government. “She held a valid medical exemption from Covid vaccination and until yesterday the Australian authorities had no problem with her stay in the country,” the embassy said. “The Embassy of the Czech Republic in Canberra sent a note to the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade asking for a thorough explanation of the situation, an explanation of the circumstances of her detention and an explanation of why our player was taken to a detention hotel.” Victorian health minister Martin Foley refused to be drawn on the revelations about Tennis Australia on Saturday, saying only that its advice to players was its own matter. “Tennis Australia deliver an outstanding Australian Open and in very difficult circumstances I look forward to them delivering another great Australian Open,” he said.North of Tywyn, a 19th-century land reclamation dyke heads from the Wales coastal path to the Ynysymaengwyn estate. At wintry dawn through a glass, I watched passing squadrons of dark, goose-sized birds, necks outstretched, wings beating powerfully before they glided down into Morlyn – a square kilometre of coastal lagoon formerly known as Broadwater. The birds were cormorants (Phalacrocorax carbo). Their rookery – the only inland breeding colony in Wales – is four miles upriver on a former sea cliff, Craig yr Aderyn, where their presence was first recorded in 1695 by the Welsh naturalist Edward Lhuyd. (An early Welsh poem suggests that they were already long established at that date.) These prehistoric-seeming birds splashed down, sat low in the water with heads upraised, then dived with the serpentine spasm that earns them their Welsh name of Bilidowcar (Billy the ducker) to seek out flatfish and eels. After they’d caught and swallowed their awkward prey, they emerged from a channel through Morlyn to waddle on to sandbanks in the twisting course of the river. There they stood in habitual pose, wings outstretched. (Their wings lack weatherproofing, to decrease buoyancy in diving – a marvellous evolutionary touch – so must be dried before flight.) Until recent times, Welsh angling associations offered bounties for the heads of cormorants. Now even the wildfowling fraternity around Broadwater SSSI has its activities constrained, mainly thanks to diligent work by Marged Tudor-Turner in pressing the Ordnance Survey to resurvey tidal limits along the Afon Dysynni. Her work with oceanographers from Bangor University has established that the lagoon “predominantly fluctuates in response to river inputs, rather than tidal exchange”. This has been of crucial importance here, for crown estate leases of shooting rights are dependent on foreshore classification: if the banks are riparian, they’re not crown estate and can’t be leased by that body to the shooters. The Unesco Dyfi biosphere (of which Morlyn should be a part) is a haven for lapwings and curlews – both declining species, here being one of their last strongholds. Marged and her fellow conservationists have won a famous victory for wildlife. Let’s hope the threat of species loss prevails against this bloody “sport”. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe US has been battered by extreme weather in recent weeks. Heavy snowfall swept the west coast, with Seattle recording an unseasonable 9in of snow. On 2 January, Washington was struck by “thundersnow” storms that left five dead and 850,000 homes without power. And, conversely, extreme heat was recorded in southern states, with temperatures soaring to the mid-30s Celsius. The former tropical cyclone Seth made landfall on the north-east coast of Australia this week, bringing gale-force winds of about 65mph and waves rising to 9 metres. The gusts, which coincided with high tides, caused hazardous conditions on 3 and 4 January in south-east Queensland, putting a strain on coastguards on the Gold Coast. In Malaysia, 50 people were killed and 125,000 evacuated from their homes in the past two weeks after extreme flooding. While floods are not unusual during the monsoon season, the region was hit by one month’s average rainfall in one day, leading to one of the worst incidents of flash flooding on record. The government has promised to provide $300m in aid, and requested an additional $3m from the UN’s Green Climate Fund to help adapt to an uncertain future.Boris Johnson’s ethics adviser has been accused of failing to investigate a potential “funds for favours” scandal after the prime minister was cleared of rule-breaking over his Downing Street flat refurbishment. Christopher Geidt shut his investigation without commenting on Johnson seeking funds for the works from a Conservative donor while promising to consider plans for a “great exhibition”. Expectations also faded that another inquiry, led by parliament’s standards commissioner Kathryn Stone, would go ahead. However, it emerged that the UK’s data watchdog has launched an investigation into the Cabinet Office after a complaint that it failed to release WhatsApp messages exchanged between Boris Johnson and the Tory peer who financed his flat renovation, David Brownlow. Pressure on Lord Geidt to reopen his investigation mounted on Friday night when Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said his decision to close the case “raises a number of serious concerns and questions”. She claimed the original finding that Lord Brownlow had “altruistic and philanthropic motives” for paying for the flat refurbishment, and that there was “no reasonably perceived conflict”, appeared undermined by the WhatsApp messages. The existence of the messages emerged as part of a probe by the Electoral Commission that concluded in December but their contents were only published on Thursday. They showed Johnson told Brownlow parts of his No 11 flat were a “tip” and he was keen for his decor designer to “get on with it”, asking if he could put her in touch “for approvals”. The prime minister added: “PS am on the great exhibition plan Will revert.” In his reply, Brownlow said he would “get it sorted” and “approval is a doddle as it’s only me and I know where the £ will come from”, adding: “Thanks for thinking about GE2.” The great exhibition plan was backed by Brownlow, who several weeks later met to discuss it with the then culture secretary, Oliver Dowden. On Friday, Johnson’s spokesperson confirmed that No 10 passed on an inquiry about the suggested event to Dowden’s department. Johnson was forced to offer a “humble and sincere apology” for not recalling the messages, and blamed “security issues” – thought to relate to when his personal phone number was posted online – for not having access to the phone they were on. Rayner said it was “irrelevant” whether Brownlow’s motives were altruistic, and added: “The issue is that a reasonable person could surely perceive that his financial relationship with the prime minister has provided him with privileged access to government, and that relationship was undeclared at the time.” Rayner accused Geidt of holding Johnson to a “far weaker” standard for potential conflict of interests than that set out in the MPs’ code of conduct, adding: “This suggests that you will hold ministers to a lower standard of transparency than backbench MPs.” She called on Geidt to publish a new or amended report, but senior Whitehall sources downplayed such a possibility. “It’s probably not going to get anywhere,” said one. “I’m sure Lord Geidt will issue a polite reply.” While Stone was waiting for the Electoral Commission and Geidt’s inquiry to conclude before proceeding, the standards commissioner was said to be unlikely to launch an investigation of her own. This is because Johnson’s flat was used by him in a ministerial capacity, meaning any potential wrongdoing would need to be judged against the ministerial code. Rayner called on 9 December for Stone to launch an investigation into whether Johnson broke the rule that MPs have to be honest, given the non-disclosure of the texts with Brownlow. However, even if Stone dismisses it, Labour could make a separate complaint based on the new evidence that emerged this week. The MPs’ code of conduct makes clear that ministers are bound by the ministerial code, which is not enforced by the standards commissioner. But it adds allegations about “failure to abide by the rules on lobbying for reward or consideration” are within Stone’s scope. In further criticism of Geidt’s inquiry, Labour’s lawyers wrote to him on 4 January after stories appeared in the press suggesting Johnson would be cleared of breaching the ministerial code. The solicitors’ firm Edwards Duthie Shamash said the “apparent failure” of Geidt’s investigation to obtain the WhatsApp messages was “more than unfortunate”. Geidt was accused in the letter of “failure to ask the searching questions necessary to get to the truth of this matter and that such failures should not allow the prime minister to escape the consequences of apparent breaches of the ministerial code”. The lawyers added: “The recent briefings have done little to restore my client’s faith in the processes over which you preside.” Geidt did not respond, but his office said in reply to another letter sent several weeks previously that it “is not generally appropriate” for him to “engage in legal correspondence in respect of the discharge of his functions”. Separately, the Cabinet Office is being investigated after it was asked in a Freedom of Information request for all correspondence between Johnson and Brownlow but claimed there was nothing to hand over. The data watchdog, the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO), received a letter from Rayner in December raising “concerns” because the Electoral Commission report had unearthed texts exchanged between Johnson and Brownlow. “We are now conducting inquiries about the handling of this request,” a senior official at the ICO confirmed in response, saying it was a “live case”. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, defended Geidt, saying he was “very well respected and has a very fiercely independent role”. Downing Street said Brownlow was given no special treatment. “Ministers have a range of ideas and proposals put to them by various people – through MPs, through other parties,” Johnson’s spokesperson said.Hunter Lewis left his father’s home on California’s far northern coast last week with a plan. The adventurous college student, 21, had spent years creating an elaborate treasure hunt for his friends and family. Now it was time to hide the final prize. On 30 December, Lewis is believed to have launched a 15ft green canoe into the frigid Pacific waters to hide the treasure that would complete the journey. He never returned home. Lewis’s adventure had been years in the making. An experienced outdoorsman who was scuba certified and had a second-degree black belt in Taekwondo, Lewis had always been fearless, his father, Corey Lewis, said. The boy grew up outdoors, strapped to his father’s back as a one-year-old while the elder Lewis went snowshoeing in the Sierra Nevada. The Lewises loved movies involving lost treasure, such as National Treasure and the Goonies. And, over the course of the pandemic, while studying aerospace engineering and earning his pilot’s license, Lewis designed his own epic treasure hunt: the search for the “lost Lewis treasure”. Whenever he was back home visiting from California State University, Long Beach, he sketched maps and created riddles. The days before his disappearance had been joyful. Lewis spent the holidays with family, and then the treasure hunt commenced. The searches took participants all over Humboldt county, rappelling down a cliff, climbing a railroad trestle and hiking secret trails. Dozens of people participated in the adventure, which had elaborate clues, involving code and, in one case, Braille. “I’ve seen more secret beaches and coastlines and trails in the last few days than in the last decade,” Corey Lewis said of the hunt. “He was just wanting to give us all an adventure and an experience. He wanted everyone to experience those adventures.” Lewis wanted everyone to join. He spent three hours teaching a friend who was afraid of heights how to rappel, so that he could search for the treasure, Corey Lewis said. “We would stay up late at night poring over maps and riddles trying to solve ciphers. We’d get up early in the morning. We’d celebrate when we saw pictures and videos of someone finding a clue. It was wonderful,” Corey Lewis said. “He would show up and hang out with you for an hour or two as you kept searching and then celebrate with you when you found it.” On the last Thursday of December, Lewis set off to prepare the final part of the quest. He launched his canoe at Trinidad state beach. When he didn’t come home, the US Coast Guard began an overnight search. In past days, pieces of the canoe and other items Lewis had with him that day have begun washing ashore. Lewis’s family and friends refocused their search, no longer looking for a hidden treasure, but their loved one’s body. Joined by hundreds of others, they have scoured local beaches and caves by foot and on horseback and with boats, ATVs and planes. Lewis’s family believes he never made it out of the water. “We know it is not a rescue operation. It is a recovery of the lost Lewis treasure: my son Hunter’s body,” his father, Corey Lewis said. The coast guard suspended its search last week after canvassing 1,000 sq nautical miles, citing difficult conditions and exhaustive efforts. “It’s always difficult to suspend a search when you don’t have any answers as to what happened. In this case, with no further information to go on and given the conditions, we’ve exhausted our reasonable search options. We can only hope that additional information is found in the future that helps reveal what happened to this young man,” said Captain Mark Hiigel, the sector Humboldt Bay commander, in a statement. Using the treasure hunt he designed for them, Lewis’s loved ones believe they know what happened. Corey Lewis and his son’s fiancee, Kinsley Rolph, solved the last clue in the treasure hunt on Saturday with a heart-shaped key Lewis had created on his 3D printer. The grooves of the key match the pattern of sea stacks off the beach where Lewis was last seen, and the heart points to Flatiron Rock, a small island just offshore. Corey Lewis suspects his son, unaware of a hidden dangerous reef along one side of the island, capsized while approaching Flatiron Rock. Volunteers have recovered pieces of a large bucket, which Lewis was using to hide the treasure, from the shore, along with a small wooden cigar box. Lewis had the box since he was a kid when his father set up a treasure hunt for him and his younger brother. “It’s both just epically heroic and tragic,” Corey Lewis said. “Here we are involved in this epic treasure hunt, which started out with a letter which says ‘you are inheritors of the lost Lewis treasure. Part of the Lewis family years ago went down at sea and that treasure is hidden but you can find it’. Tragically that’s what happened. We’re searching for the lost Lewis treasure, and that’s him.”It all started with a hooded tracksuit worth less than £30. The unwanted item, processed online at one second past midnight on Christmas Day because it was too large, was the first in a torrent of festive returns for ZigZag Global, a company that specialises in handling online returns. Within an hour, 709 products had been returned online via ZigZag; at 3.51am a £99 off-the-shoulder dress was the first item to be deposited at an InPost locker, and when newsagents began opening at 10am, queues began forming at counters to post back unwanted items. Shoppers have sent back more goods than ever this Christmas as the cancellation of parties, the return to working from home and a shift to online shopping led to an enormous pile of unwanted goods. Since Christmas, returns have surged by 24% on the year before, according to ZigZag, which works with the likes of Boohoo, Selfridges and Gap. Fellow returns specialist ReBound has recorded even higher demand, with returns in December 40% greater than a year earlier. With up to half of clothing bought online returned to some retailers, the whole process is estimated to cost businesses about £7bn a year, according to a 2020 study by consultancy KPMG. It is tricky to measure the environmental costs, but the transport, storage and disposal of items that cannot be resold because they are damaged or dirty is likely to weigh heavily on brands’ carbon footprints, and poses troubling questions about the dark side of the online sales boom. Anita Balchandani at consultancy McKinsey says managing the flow of returned goods is a “sustainability imperative for the industry”, not just looking at the impact of the “last mile” delivery to, and from, homes – but also what happens to an item that is no longer wanted. While the percentage of items sent back by online shoppers dipped in the early days of the pandemic, it has since risen as trends have changed: easy-fitting tracksuits, popular during the start of working-from-home, have been ditched in favour of more structured items such as suits and dresses, thanks to the return of weddings and office working. Last month, online fast fashion specialist Boohoo was forced to slash sales and profit expectations, partly as a result of the change in habits. About 15% of electrical goods sent back after being bought online are disposed of, according to one major reprocessor, because either they are unfixable or not worth fixing or cleaning. Every brand or retailer has a different benchmark, but as it costs up to £20 to reprocess each individual item many returns lose retailers money. Many small products, unless still untouched in their original packaging, will never be reused. A considerable effort is involved in processing returns. Checking goods are in safe working condition, clean and that any software has been wiped of personal images or data, must be done manually and is a time consuming, sometimes tricky process. While some brands supply reprocessors with free parts to mend faulty items and avoid them being landfilled, others do not. A large expensive item, such a washing machine or even a food processor, is likely to be checked, fixed and resold – probably via an auction site such as eBay – for 15% or 20% less than its retail price. But the best that can be expected for most broken or used hair clippers or electric toothbrushes is that they are dismantled for recycling. Cosmetics are another tricky area. Unless they are completely untouched and in their original package, resale is not possible because of the hygiene risk. About 80% of returned clothing is likely to be resold without significant work – perhaps requiring new packaging or a steam. Of the rest, most can be reprocessed but about 5% is likely to be deemed unfit for resale, either because it is too damaged or potentially unhygienic – such as worn underwear or swimwear. Items that have clearly been on a night out, had tags removed or are marked with cosmetics may not easily be revamped for sale by the original retailer and, again, the value of that item will influence the decision over whether it is to be to put through a cleaning or mending process or ditched. Al Gerrie, the chief executive of ZigZag Global, says: “Fast fashion has about a six-week life cycle. If it spends three or four weeks off the shelf it is losing value in that time and, if it can’t make it back [in time], it will be less attractive or unsaleable. If it’s a Christmas-themed item, it may have to wait until next year.” Many unwanted items may be sold in bulk to charities or to resellers who then mend or repurpose them for sale on eBay or Depop. For the rest, the vast majority of major retailers now send those unwanted items to charities or for recycling, but a proportion is still thought to be either burned or sent to landfill despite a furore over such practice in recent years. However, pressure to behave more sustainably and to cut down costs is driving retailers to reduce the amount of unwanted goods. Laura Gee at another returns specialist ReBound, says: “Brands are on a learning curve. They are getting better at [reprocessing] as shoppers are becoming more sustainably minded.” Technology firms such as ZigZag and ReBound help retailers track returned items more closely, monitoring why a sale has not been successful and taking decisions on where and how to reprocess goods without necessarily bringing them all back to the UK, if sold overseas. Last year, eBay said it had seen a surge in retailers setting up their own online stores to clear unwanted products and seconds. Other techniques to reduce returns rates include posting customer reviews which flag how a garment fits, using avatars to enable virtual trying on of a dress or encouraging customers to bring an item back to a store where they can pick up, and try on, the alternative. Geerie at ZigZag says: “Even fast-fashion retailers are becoming more conscious about corporate social responsibility and being more sustainable and trying to recover product whenever possible. It is a shift in the market for the good but not at a low cost, they are definitely losing money on some products.” Change is partly being driven by the threat of legislation. In France, companies must monitor what happens to unsold goods and from this month are banned from destroying them. Other European countries are expected to follow suit. In the UK, charities called for an anti-waste law, to be introduced after Amazon was forced to deny it sent household goods such as laptops and TVs to landfill after employees were filmed by ITV last year placing such products into boxes labelled “destroy”. The company said the items were donated or recycled. Balchandani says better consumer education about the effects of buying more selectively will be key to reducing the wasteful merry-go-round of returned goods. “In a world where consumers are increasingly conscious of their carbon footprint I don’t think brands are doing enough talking about how do you consume more thoughtfully,” she says.Ellie on Tom What were you hoping for? Flowing conversation, free food and to meet my future husband. First impressions? He was smartly dressed and relaxed. What did you talk about? Travelling adventures and the awkwardness of the photoshoot. Any awkward moments? He said he’s been likened to Jack Grealish and I couldn’t quite hold in my laughter. Good table manners? Faultless. We shared tapas, and when I mentioned I was vegetarian he agreed to go meat-free with me. He didn’t even criticise me when I ended up ordering the chorizo. Best thing about Thomas? He was super easy to talk to and has a genuine, warm laugh. Would you introduce him to your friends? Why not. I’m sure they’d get on well. Describe Tom in three words? Not Jack Grealish. What do you think he made of you? Hopefully easy to talk to, probably a bit loud, definitely not vegetarian. Did you go on somewhere? After a few cocktails we went elsewhere for tapas and stayed there till midnight. And … did you kiss? Nope. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? He missed the last train and my tube broke down – so the transport home. Marks out of 10? 8. Would you meet again? Our paths could definitely cross, but just as friends. Tom on Ellie What were you hoping for? To meet someone I get on with and have a fun evening. First impressions? Really pretty and less nervous than me. What did you talk about? Travel stories, Covid, machete-wielding cycle thieves, music festivals, the merits of ballroom dancing vs twerking. Any awkward moments? I should have gone to the bar with her when we were trying to negotiate free cocktails rather than watching the barman’s look of confusion from afar. Good table manners? Impeccable. Best thing about Ellie? She’s a 10/10 storyteller. Would you introduce her to your friends? They were trying to convince me to bring her to a roller disco afterwards. I would have, but not on a first date. Describe Ellie in three words? Funny, smart, engaging. What do you think she made of you? Hopefully that I was good company. Did you go on somewhere? We headed to a little Spanish place up the road for tapas and wine until we noticed the place had emptied around us. And … did you kiss? No. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? Not a lot. Maybe a slightly less windy photoshoot? Marks out of 10? 8.5. Would you meet again? I’d definitely like to. • Ellie and Tom ate at Bubba’s Oasis, Islington N1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comFrostbitten faggots, a tub of mystery white sauce and a big lump of blue cheese sit on my counter defrosting: is this food still even edible, I ask myself, and if so, how should I cook it? I haven’t had time to check my freezer for a while, but when used properly, it’s an excellent food-waste-prevention tool, prolonging shelf life by months. You can freeze pretty much anything, to preserve nutrients as much as to prevent waste. Freeze food before its use-by date, and make sure it’s packed in airtight bags or freezer-proof containers to avoid freezer burn. In case of any spillage and therefore cross-contamination, ideally keep meat and dairy in the bottom drawer, cooked food in the middle and fruit and fresh foods at the top. Inspect your freezer’s contents before going to the shops, not least because building them into your meals will both prevent them getting freezer burn and keep your weekly shopping bill down. Label items clearly, with a description and use-by date, to avoid freezer confusion. Most foods will freeze well for two to six months, after which their texture will probably deteriorate, though it’s often still usable for up to a year. Blend defrosted food into soups to avoid any unpleasant textures, while even freezer-burnt meat can be marinated, minced or stewed to help improve its mouthfeel. Defrost food in the fridge overnight, to avoid the so-called danger zone, because bacteria can form above 8C. Once defrosted, it’s a good general rule to eat it within 24 hours, and don’t refreeze unless it’s been cooked since thawing. The Food Standards Agency says: “It doesn’t matter if you cook your meat from frozen or fresh, you can use your leftovers to make a new meal. This new meal can then be frozen, but make sure you only reheat it once.” How to freeze Fruit Love Food Hate Waste estimates that 81.25% of the fruit we waste is because we just haven’t used it in time. Raw or cooked fruit can be frozen whole or sliced for ease of use in smoothies or porridge, say (we even freeze brown bananas and our daughter’s half-eaten ones, peeled and sliced, in a tub). Foods that have a high water content, such as fruit, may turn mushy as they defrost, but they are still fine to blend or cook. Vegetables The National Center for Home Food Preservation in the US recommends blanching vegetables before freezing to prevent flavour, colour and texture loss; if you have time, prep and cut them, too, for ease of use (if need be, though, you can always freeze something whole to prevent it from going to waste). At home, we keep a freezer container for vegetable scraps to make stock, and if we have an excess of vegetables at the end of the week, we blanch and freeze them for later. Herbs These perish quickly, so catch them before they turn to mulch. Chop up, spread on a tray, freeze, then pack into a container so they don’t freeze in one solid block. Or pack into ice-cube trays, top up with water and freeze. Meat and fish The cost and resources that go into producing meat make it a product with a big foodprint. Even a small amount of frozen leftovers is a win-win, and can form the basis of a future thrifty meal, be it ragu, curry or pie. And remember, meat stores better in liquid, such as in a stew or curry, or double wrapped in a sealed bag to reduce the risk of freezer burn. Dairy The equivalent of 3.1m glasses of milk are wasted in the UK every day, yet only a quarter of the population freezes the stuff, compared with half who freeze meat, fish and bread. The government waste scheme Wrap estimates that just matching those levels for milk would cut more than 10,000 tonnes of waste, saving £5m. Freeze in a suitable container with space for the liquid to expand. (Milk can sometimes turn lumpy when it’s been frozen, in which case it’s best used in cooking.) Freeze cheese in portions or grated for ease of use. Other Freeze leftover wine for sauces. Freeze batches of pastry or bread dough (it defrosts really quickly and is much better than shop-bought). Batch-cook meals and freeze, ready to reheat and fake-away a takeaway. According to the food systems charity Feedback, UK households throw away 24m slices of bread a day, so freeze and pop straight into the toaster as required. Incidentally, in the end, I made a blue cheese fondue with my freezer scraps, while the faggots fed the compost monster. What will you make from your freezer this week?I am sitting at the kitchen table. My wife is standing at the sink with her back to me, washing something up while telling me about all the upcoming social obligations she has managed to extract us from. “Is it a good idea,” I ask, “us never going anywhere again?” “I don’t care,” she says. “I’ve forgotten how to socialise, and I don’t want to learn again.” “No, I mean, me neither,” I say. “It’s just, I don’t know.” “If you would like to be in charge of our social lives from now on, feel free,” she says. I remain silent for a minute, keeping open the possibility that I didn’t hear this bit. “What do you want to do for our 30th wedding anniversary?” I say. “Oh God,” my wife says, turning round. “How close is it?” “It’s the next one,” I say. “But still months,” she says. “Many months.” ‘’ “There’s probably still time to get divorced first, if that’s what you’re worried about.” I say this with the confidence of someone who thinks: there is nowhere near enough time to get divorced first. “I don’t want to do anything,” she says. “I know, but it’s 30 years,” I say. “It feels like the sort of thing where we should invite everyone we know to a remote island.” “And kill them?” she says. A brief silence follows. “Well, maybe,” I say. “But don’t put anything about that in the save-the-date email.” I didn’t intend to give my wife the opportunity to reconsider three decades of marriage; I only raised the subject in a bid to distract her from the idea of passing sole responsibility for our social calendar to me. She did the same thing with cooking about two years ago, and I have not coped well. The afternoon brings on an urge to take a long and solitary walk, but the sky turns black and rain comes down in billowing sheets. I lie on the sofa with a book on my chest. Thirty years is more than half my life, I think. I have been married for most of the time I’ve been alive. And in that time countless opportunities to be a better husband have been squandered. My eyes are just beginning to roll to the back of my head when my wife comes in and speaks some words. “What?” I say, the book sliding off my chest. “It’s garden waste,” she says. This is shorthand for a particular phase in the rotating collection cycle: the night of the three bins – black rubbish, food scraps, green garden waste wheelie. “Ugh,” I say. Half of our front garden is given over to a small paved drive (it was like that when we moved in), so it’s impossible to get the rubbish to the kerb without somebody – my wife – backing the car up a bit while somebody else – me – drags the bins from their normal resting place. I’ve had hundreds of chances to perform this office with something like grace over the years, and I’ve seized none of them. Rain runs into my collar as I pull the garden waste across the bricks in the glare of the car’s headlights. The wheels of the bin catch in some gravel, nearly turning it over. “Shitting hell,” I say. Behind the windscreen my wife’s face glows as she looks down at her phone. That night my family draw amusement from the shrivelled carrots I produce for supper. “They look like raisins,” says the middle one. “They were small to begin with,” I say, “but then I forgot about them in the oven.” I thought adding an unrehearsed vegetable dish to a standard Tuesday meal was within my capabilities, but it turned out to be akin to adding a fourth chainsaw to a juggling routine right before showtime. “The rice isn’t done,” the oldest one says. “I forgot about the rice,” I say. “Because of the carrots.” “Is this meat safe to eat?” the youngest one says. “I don’t recommend you eat any of it,” I say. Lying in bed later with the rain still hitting the roof, my mood lightens. It’s wrong to dwell on past opportunities for improvement missed, when there are still opportunities ahead: islands to be hired, guests to be invited, quicksand traps dug and covered with leaves. Save the date.Ant &amp; Dec’s Limitless Win 8.30pm, ITV Here’s something that might just inject a bit of excitement back into Saturday night telly: the Geordie duo host a quizshow (their first new one in a decade) with a limitless cash prize. Yes, contestants can keep adding to the prize pot as they continue to answer questions correctly – but with more money available to win comes the increasing risk of losing it all. How far will they go? Expect jaws to drop (mostly Ant and Dec’s). Hollie Richardson Celebrity Catchphrase 6pm, ITV The gameshow that asks you to “say what you see” continues its celebrity run, no doubt causing just as much frustration as ever. Contestants hoping to win £50,000 for their chosen charity tonight: Alexander Armstrong, Natasha Hamilton and Jamie Laing. HR The Masked Singer 7pm, ITV The berserk extravaganza continues. So far this season, we’ve been getting familiar with the cheerfully ridiculous new characters (Traffic Cone, Robo Bunny). But expect the guessing game to become a January national obsession as Davina McCall, Rita Ora, Mo Gilligan and Jonathan Ross take their places. Phil Harrison Pointless Celebrities 7.40pm, BBC One More celebrity pairings scour their brainpans for obscure knowledge nuggets. Hoping to triumph tonight are sportscasters Clare Balding and Mark Chapman, dance experts Oti Mabuse and Giovanni Pernice, Sunday Morning Live hosts the Rev Kate Bottley and Sean Fletcher, plus likely lads Joe Swash and JB Gill. Graeme Virtue Michael McIntyre’s The Wheel 8.30pm, BBC One Joining the comedian and his wheel of potential fortune to help out hopeful contestants are Richard E Grant, Saffron Barker, David Haye, Anneka Rice, Danny Jones, Jo Brand and Melvin Odoom. HR The John Bishop Show 9.30pm, ITV The comedian and Doctor Who actor delivers a brand new, aptly named show designed to make us laugh on these wintry, Omicron nights. The series sees Bishop doing a bit of standup and shooting the breeze with guests. HR Live sport FA Cup Football: Millwall v Crystal Palace 12noon, ITV. Third-round London derby from the Den. Followed by Hull City v Everton on BBC One at 5.20pm. Premiership Rugby Union: Harlequins v Exeter Chiefs 2.30pm, BT Sport 2. A repeat of last season’s final lineup from Twickenham Stoop.The ankle boot is a classic of winter footwear – reliable whatever the weather and occasion. The high street has designs that fit into trends – see the cowboy ankle boot with a twist. If you want to invest, a durable hiking style or a chunky-soled Chelsea boot will last several seasons. Or you may be in the market for something a bit more glitzy. Heeled boots that have a one-night-only feel are plentiful at rental sites. Go rock’n’roll with snakeskin or choose midnight blue velvet for a luxe edge. Pair them with a rented party dress for a “wow” effect. And if you don’t mind walking in someone else’s shoes, you can pick up secondhand designer boots for a steal. Leather ones wear particularly well; or if you’re lucky you might find a never-worn pair. Lauren Cochrane * * * Buy Cream chunky, £240, essentiel-antwerp.com These work with wide-leg jeans and midi dresses. Cowboy ankle, £119, zara.com A twist on a classic, these boots will look fun with a party dress. Black lace-ups, £118, nae-vegan.com Made from vegan leather, with a flexible sole that prevents blisters. * * * Rent Crocodile-look, from £43, by Paris Texas, hurrcollective.com Style these with a long-line knitted dress. Black lace-ups, £14 for three days’ rental, by Karen Millen wearmywardrobeout.com Lace-up boots are the perfect addition to a tailored suit. Blue velvet, from £7 a day, by 3.1 Phillip Lim, mywardrobehq.com Ease back into high heels with this statement style. * * * Thrift Burgundy leopard print, £75, us.vestiairecollective.com Snap up a bargain: these never-worn Calvin Kleins are a real find. Black suede, £35, cosresell.com Suede is always versatile – just be sure to protect it against the elements. Tan lace-up, £44, marketplace.asos.com These lace-ups will be the focal point of your look – style with a floral dress.Going Out: Cinema Licorice Pizza Out now Set in the San Fernando valley in the 1970s, Licorice Pizza (above) finds American director Paul Thomas Anderson (Phantom Thread, There Will Be Blood) in a playful mood, with a coming-of-age story of a teenage crush, as precocious high-schooler Gary Valentine develops feelings for a much older woman (she’s 25). Boiling Point Out now National treasure Stephen Graham is first among equals playing the head chef in a superbly-acted exercise in tension and claustrophobia set in a busy hotel restaurant kitchen. Filmed in one long take, this arresting debut firmly marks director Philip Barantini as a name to watch. The 355 Out now International intrigue ahoy, in a spy thriller employing the old “recover the world-destroying MacGuffin from the mercenaries” premise. Never mind that we all know how that one goes, The 355 appeals mainly because of its top-tier cast: who wouldn’t want to see Jessica Chastain, Lupita Nyong’o and Penélope Cruz team up to save the world? A Hero Out now Iranian film-maker Asghar Farhadi (A Separation, The Salesman) always relishes a zesty moral parable, and his latest is no different: in A Hero, a man imprisoned for debt must try to convince his creditor to withdraw his complaint, but as ever in Farhadi’s films, nothing is ever simple. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs Poppy 11 to 15 January; starts Glasgow American artist Moriah Pereira created Poppy (above) as a living avatar who satirised internet culture via a hugely popular YouTube channel. Over the course of four albums, however, the person beneath the android surface has started to emerge, with last year’s Flux utilising pop punk’s gonzo energy to winning effect. Michael Cragg Lise Davidsen &amp; Leif Ove Andsnes Barbican, London, 13 January Opera’s current favourite soprano teams up with pianist Andsnes for a recital centred on music by their fellow Norwegian, Edvard Grieg. Davidsen sings Grieg’s Six Songs Op 48 and his cycle The Mountain Maid, as well as Wagner’s Wesendonck Lieder and a group of songs by Richard Strauss. Andrew Clements Sam Ryder 11 to 20 January; starts Manchester At the start of lockdown the silky-haired, big-voiced Ryder started covering his favourite songs on TikTok, a move that found him some famous fans (Justin Bieber, Sia) and more than 11 million followers. He’s now signed to Parlophone and is taking his windswept originals on a UK tour. MC Calum Gourlay Big Band Vortex Jazz Club, London, 12 January The inspirational first mentor of Calum Gourlay, the Glasgow-raised bassist-bandleader, was Scottish jazz star Tommy Smith – an education in everything from driving bass-playing to directing a cutting-edge orchestra. Gourlay’s talent-packed big band continues its regular Vortex residency, and these gigs can be enjoyed both in person or as livestreams. Fordham * * * Going Out: Art Hockney to Himid Pallant House Gallery, Chichester, to 24 April PPrint-making, as old as the printing press, had a revival in the 1960s and has never looked back. This survey of 60 years of British art starts with Hockney’s pop prints and Eduardo Paolozzi (above), and comes right up to date with Tracey Emin’s passionate lines, Lubaina Himid’s bold colour, Grayson Perry’s carnivals on paper, and many more. Fragmented Illuminations V&amp;A, London, to 8 May Gorgeous and enigmatic images from medieval manuscripts, glowing with pink flower-like forms, bright blue classical columns and monks being dragged away by green devils. All these fantastic sheets were cut out of the books they originally decorated to be sold on the 19th-century art market. A cornucopia of clippings. Allison Katz Camden Art Centre, London, 14 January to 13 March This London-based Canadian artist has turned the gallery into a pink and red system of organic passages in which her paintings and posters hang. It is entitled Artery, to stress this theme of inner bloody space. She explores her personal history in a show conceived in lockdown. Turner in January Scottish National Gallery, Edinburgh, to 31 January The swirling storms and icy Alpine abysses painted by JMW Turner suit winter days. This display of some of his greatest watercolours is a century-old tradition, suspended last year but now roaring back. Don’t let the term “watercolour” fool you: there’s nothing insipid about Turner’s mighty seas and skies. Jonathan Jones * * * Going Out: Stage Alan Carr Ipswich Regent theatre, 8 January; G Live, Guildford, 12 &amp; 13 January; York Barbican, 14 &amp; 15 January; touring to 8 October On a standup tour mixing showbiz stories and salt-of-the-earth observations – as per the best camp comedy tradition – Carr is an expert at balancing glamour with relatable grottiness. Rachel Aroesti Life of Pi Wyndham’s theatre, London, to 29 May Stunning puppets, clever magic tricks and crystal-clear storytelling bring this stage adaptation of Yann Martel’s philosophical tale – about a boy and Bengal tiger stranded at sea – roaring into life. Fantastically Great Women Who Changed the World Chichester Festival theatre, 12 to 16 January Chris Bush and Miranda Cooper’s musical version of Kate Pankhurst’s book about pioneering female figures, including Frida Kahlo, Rosa Parks and Emmeline Pankhurst, stars some of the original queens from the smash musical Six. Miriam Gillinson Raymonda London Coliseum, WC2, 13 to 23 January Ballerina turned company director Tamara Rojo is on a mission to reinvent classical ballet in innovative ways. In her new production masterminded for English National Ballet, she turns a staid 1898 work set during the Crusades into a Crimean war drama with a strong female lead inspired by Florence Nightingale. Lyndsey Winship * * * Staying In: Streaming Rules of the Game BBC One, 12 January Work is a total nightmare in this unsettling four-part drama (above), which follows a new HR boss at a Cheshire-based sportswear brand with a familial mindset and an incredibly problematic office culture. Maxine Peake plays the company’s hard-nosed COO – but yet another unexplained death threatens to unravel her, too. Archive 81 Netflix, 18 January The podcast adaptation goldrush continues apace with this time- and mind-bending horror, which follows an archivist reconstructing an unfinished documentary about a sinister cult. He’s soon convinced he can rescue the film’s director – despite the fact she’s been dead for 25 years. Euphoria Sky Atlantic, 10 January Starting a moral panic isn’t easy nowadays, but the first season of this US high-school drama – featuring an Emmy-winning performance from Zendaya – came pretty close. Expect more drugs, sex, violence and unremitting bleakness as the show returns for another dose of bracingly grim teen despair. The House Netflix, 14 January This three-part stop-motion animation has a stellar cast - Helena Bonham Carter, Miranda Richardson, Will Sharpe, Mark Heap - yet the most important character is the building at its core. Occupants past, present and future try to reshape their new home, but the house has other ideas. Rachel Aroesti * * * Staying In: Games God of War Out 14 January, PC One of the greatest PlayStation games (above) is coming to PC this week. The tale of an exhausted single dad who also happens to be a Greek god in hiding in the mythological realms of Scandinavia, it mixes superb combat with a story that hits surprisingly hard. Weird West Out 11 January, PC, PS4, Xbox A western role-playing game with werewolves, witches and other supernatural strangeness that adds an interesting twist to the ol’ frontier storytellin’ and shootin’. If you miss 90s computer RPGs such as Planescape Torment, this is one to check out. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Yard Act – The Overload Out now With famous fans including Elton John and Tony Visconti, the Leeds post-punkers (above) head into a new year riding a wave of hype. This spit-flecked debut album, which pairs frontman James Smith’s barked lyrics skewering modern Britain with shards of angular guitar, just about lives up to it. RuPaul – Mamaru Out now The Drag Race titan returns to music with his 14th album. In fact, Mamaru’s first two singles both take place within his increasingly ubiquitous show’s DayGlo world; Just What They Want offers advice for new Queens, while the catty trap anthem Blame It on the Edit calls out contestants criticising the show. Twin Atlantic – Transparency Out now Now a duo following the departure of drummer Craig Kneale last September, the Scottish alt-rock exponents return with their sixth album. While recent single Dirty channels 80s-era Depeche Mode, the pulsating Get Famous is bang up to date with its on-the-nose lyrics raising an arched eyebrow at influencer culture. The Wombats – Fix Yourself, Not the World Out now Recorded remotely between London, LA and Oslo, before being finished alongside producers Mike Crossey (the 1975) and Jacknife Lee (REM), indie pop stalwarts the Wombats’s fifth album continues their passion for big-chorused, off-kilter anthems. Ready for the High, for example, hints at an arms aloft singalong before sagging into 2021 malaise. MC * * * Staying In: Brain food The Unfiltered History Tour Online This fascinating alternative tour of the British Museum aims to better illustrate the origins of 10 looted objects in the museum’s collection, via expert testimony. Available as an augmented reality experience for museum visitors, as well as online. Call Your Girlfriend Podcast Long-distance relationships are often tricky but best friends Aminatou Sow and Ann Friedman have been making an artform out of cross-country catch-ups since launching their podcast in 2014. This month sees its final episodes, covering current affairs with inimitable chat. The Lady and the Dale Sky Documentaries, 10 January Amid the 1970s energy crisis, entrepreneur Elizabeth Carmichael rose to fame with “The Dale”, her fuel-efficient three-wheeled car invention. This three-part series explores the scam that ensued and how it intersected with her chaotic, criminal past. Ammar KaliaThat’s where we’ll leave our live blog for the day. Thanks for sticking with us during what has been a busy Saturday. Until next time, take care. Western Australia has recorded one new Covid-19 case. From WA Health: Seven cases related to interstate and overseas arrivals have also been reported. All cases are in home isolation or hotel quarantine. The eight cases reported brings the State’s total number of Covid-19 cases now to 1,229. The total number of cases related to the Delta backpacker cluster remains at 21, which includes the index case. In relation to the case of the hotel quarantine security guard at the Hyatt Hotel and his household contact who tested positive – together there are 26 contacts in total so far, with a majority testing negative, including all their work colleagues. Four people are still being tested. There are now 86 active confirmed cases in WA and 1,134 people have recovered from the virus. This image gives you an idea of the extent of the flooding around Gympie, Queensland. It shows flood waters caused by ex-Cyclone Seth impacting the Woolooga Trader in Gympie. Meanwhile, emergency services have issued an alert for the areas of Goomeri, Kilkivan, and Woolooga. Thanks Josh. Just sticking with the Djokovic story, his former Australian strategist Craig O’Shannessy has spoken to AAP and predicted that the world champion will be back to his peak within days, if he wins his court case and is released from the Park Hotel. Novak is one of the most supreme athletes on the planet. It’s only a few days. If he wins the court case, it will only take him two days or so to hit top speed. He could be back to his peak by, say, next Wednesday or Thursday. He continued: But we’ve seen over and over during his career how strong mentally Novak is. If there’s an athlete on the planet who could overcome all this and compete at a grand slam, it’s Novak Djokovic. It could even steel him. With that, I will hand you back over to Christopher Knaus for the rest of the day. As a side note, Novak Djokovic’s court hearing over his visa cancellation on Monday is via a publicly-available Microsoft Teams link. In case you are not familiar, in these ones, everyone who joins has their microphone and video switched on if they so choose (at least that’s how courts here have done it so far). This promises to be a mess given the amount of global interest in the case, as well as the usual crowds who flock to anything involving protesting against vaccination. Here’s a previous story on one such hearing for example: The Herald Sun has published a leaked video of Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley speaking to staff about the ongoing Novak Djokovic visa medical exemption saga. In the three-minute video, he said Tennis Australia would like to share more information but cannot while Djokovic challenges in court the federal government’s cancellation of his visa: We’ve chosen at this point not to be very public with it, and simply because there is a pending lawsuit related to entry into Australia for a few and once that run its course, we’ll be able to share more with you as well. There’s a lot of finger-pointing going on. And a lot of blaming going on that I can assure you our team has done an unbelievable job and have done everything they possibly could according to all the instructions that they have been provided. Here’s the Covid-19 case numbers nationally as we have them for everywhere bar Western Australia (but they will be low or zero most likely). New South Wales: 45,098 Victoria: 51,356 Northern Territory: 594 Tasmania: 2,223 South Australian: 4,274 Australian Capital Territory: 1,305 Queensland: 11,174 The total cases reported today, therefore, sits at 116,024. This is obviously the highest Australia has reported nationally ever, and the first time we have reported over 100,000 in a single day but the caveat here is that over half of Victoria’s reported cases are rapid test results, with around 20,000 of those tests from Saturday to Thursday last week. The more accurate figure for test results received on Friday would be closer to 96,000. Number crunching doesn’t just belong to Covid or the cricket, as weather geeks everywhere know. Last year, as you may know, was marked by storms and floods and ended up as Australia’s coolest since 2012 but still unusually warm for a La Niña year. It was also the wettest year since 2016. Well, how about the cities in which most Australians live? Here’s a summary of how the state capitals, ah, weathered 2021. And a reminder that extremes seem never to be far away, it looks like we have an early contender for wettest day of the year in Queensland. Those of us with an eye on the cricket along with the torrent of Covid news, meanwhile, might want to keep a watch on the heavens, particularly if you happen to be in the eastern parts of NSW including Sydney. The ACT has reported 1,305 new Covid-19 cases. There are 24 people in hospital, with five in ICU. From Monday, people will be able to present evidence they have registered a positive rapid antigen test result with their state health authority in order to qualify for pandemic leave disaster payments. Queensland has yet to decide whether to delay face-to-face learning when school returns in a couple of weeks. Yvette D’Ath says a national plan is being developed, but the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, has been clear she does not want kids returning to class at the peak of cases. It might just mean a delay for primary school, where children have not yet had the chance to be fully vaccinated. The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, says non-urgent elective surgery (category three and some category two) will be suspended until 1 March. She says it will be reviewed at the end of January depending on what the load on the hospital system is. D’Ath also says for outpatients, there will be a postponement of appointments, or telehealth appointments put in place instead. She says it’s not just about hospital space, but healthcare worker availability: It’s not just about bed capacity, it’s about health workers and their availability. So we have 3,505 health workers now, frontline health workers, who are either positive or who themselves are quarantining. So this puts pressure on the health system and that’s why we have to put these plans into place. We will also be talking with the private hospitals to activate the contractual arrangements that we have put in place with the private sector to secure staffed beds over the coming days and weeks so that we have those beds ready that we can move public patients into the private hospital system to free up capacity so that we can deal with those emergencies and deal with more Covid patients. The two deaths reported today are both men in their 30s. One of whom was unvaccinated. They both died from myocarditis, that is viral infection of the heart. One had been flagged ten days ago but the cause of death is now confirmed. Queensland has 17 people in the ICU being treated for Covid-19, and 349 Covid-positive patients in hospital. The Queensland portal for people to register their positive rapid antigen tests (RATs) has gone live. The health minister, Yvette D’Ath, says people can find it on the Queensland government website. She says anyone who has had a positive RAT in Queensland should register it on the website. She says people should brace for higher case numbers when the RAT numbers are added, following the RAT numbers reported in Victoria today. The Queensland health minister, Yvette D’Ath, announces two deaths from Covid-19 since last reporting, as well as 11,174 new cases of Covid-19. Of the five deaths reported in South Australia today, premier Steven Marshall says they are one person in their 50s, one in their 60s, one in their 70s, and two in their 90s. With that, I’ll hand back over to my colleague Josh Taylor. Thanks for sticking with us. Thankfully, Steven Marshall says Covid has not yet been detected in remote Indigenous communities on the state’s border with the Northern Territory. The news isn’t so rosy for other remote communities, though: We have been reporting some outbreaks in Aboriginal communities in SA. We were very concerned about two positive cases close to the NT border. What I can report to you today is that there were about 300 people that have been tested. We have 270 results back already. All of them are negative. We are pleased and hopeful at this point in time. But I can also report that we have another two cases on the west coast, the far west coast of SA, and we also have one further positive case where somebody from Adelaide moved back to a town recently and have returned a positive swab and we have brought them back to Adelaide and we are testing them in the community. These are vulnerable communities due to their remote location and so we are working with the local health providers as well as putting our rapid response team in place to support them. South Australia has recorded five deaths and 4,274 new cases. The premier, Steven Marshall, is speaking about the Covid situation now. The state’s vaccination figures are not yet available, but the premier says a significant proportion of those in hospital are unvaccinated. He also provides advance warning that the state will make the booster shot mandatory in some sectors: It is now going to be mandatory for all healthcare workers or aged care workers and all of those in the disability sector to not just have the two doses to be fully vaccinated, but to have the booster as well. And we’re giving people to 29 January to make sure that they can comply with this and I do need to give advance warning that we are very strongly considering making it mandatory for the booster in other sectors as well, including childcare and the education sector. Some sad news out of Canberra. The Canberra Times reports that the founder of Questacon, Prof Mike Gore, has died. Tributes have flowed for Gore, praising his contribution to science. Australian tennis star Nick Kyrgios was just asked about the ongoing detention of Novak Djokovic. He says the ordeal will have fired up the world No 1, and says he wouldn’t want to encounter him in the Australian Open: I reckon he’s going to be pissed off. He’s going to be very determined to play well, and stick it to everyone of what’s going on. And I don’t want any bar of that Novak. He says the sport needs Djokovic to play and says the way he has been treated is “not really humane”: For the sport we need him here, it’s that simple. He’s one of the most influential sportspeople probably of all time. For the sport, I think, as I said, if he’s ready to play and he’s allowed to play, I think it’s in a way good for our sport with all this attention because probably the Australian Open would have as many views as it’s ever probably had if he’s able to play. But I just want it to end, and I want like – I don’t know. I’m feeling for him now. Like it’s not really humane, is it, what’s going on? I think it’s just, if this was a normal person they wouldn’t have to deal with all this sort of media side of bullshit. His life’s probably hard enough as it is, and I know what that’s like. I just hope it all gets sorted soon. Annastacia Palaszczuk says the current flood event was unexpected. It appears to have caught the bureau off guard, delaying warnings to local councils: As the bureau said with this severe weather event, no one was expecting it to sit and stay and produce thunderstorms that were not moving. This was an unexpected event from the bureau’s point of view and they were sending out information as it came to hand. And also, alerting the mayors in the local council as well. Police have just clarified that the Bruce Highway is now open. It was closed earlier. Police have had requests to rescue 23 people and 11 vehicles so far. The safety of eight of those people has been verified, police say. The remaining 15 appear to be unaccounted for. Annastacia Palaszczuk says: They’re working to access these people. We will update you during the day. Police have been unable to retrieve the body of the man who died at Kanigan, after being swept away by flood waters. The flood waters are causing police immense difficulties in accessing affected areas. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, is speaking about the flood emergency now. She says: I can say that we do have a severe weather event at the moment. I think everyone would know that we had ex-tropical cyclone Seth off our coast. It crossed over and has been sitting around this Wide Bay region and has not moved, is producing storms, and excessive rainfall, like what we saw during tropical cyclone Oswald. So we do have locally intense rainfall, which may lead to flash flooding. We have the areas between Bundaberg and Kilroy, including Gympie, where we expect this rainfall to be there over the next few hours as well. But we also have a major flood warning that has been issued for Maryborough. Queensland is currently grappling with a major flood emergency across the Wide Bay and Burnett regions, which has washed away highways and cut off towns. Tragically, police have just confirmed that one person has died after his vehicle was submerged in flood waters at Kanigan, Wide Bay. Police said in a statement: Police are investigating the death of a man after his vehicle became submerged in flood waters at Kanigan, Wide Bay last night (Friday, January 8). Around 7.30pm, police and emergency services received a report of a utility being swept off the road on Cherry Tree Road near the Bruce Highway, and into floodwaters. Following an extensive response involving police and fire and rescue swift water crews, the driver and sole occupant of the vehicle, a 22-year-old Sunshine Coast man, was located deceased inside the vehicle this morning. The areas around Gympie recorded huge rainfalls since early Friday. Marodian recorded 673mm while Mount Kanigan saw 650mm. The Bruce Highway is shut north of Gympie and Granville, a rural suburb of Maryborough, is about to be cut off by flood waters. More storms are expected today across eastern Queensland. Thanks very much Josh. The Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, is warning of a significant uplift in cases, after the state recorded 2,223 new cases this morning. There are 10 people in hospital. The state now has 6,509 active cases. The state government says the virus is now spreading across younger, more mobile segments of the population. Gutwein said: Make certain that you wear your mask, make certain that you have good hand hygiene, do the right thing. We are going to see a significant uplift in cases as we move forward, and people should ensure that they are ready for that. I will now hand over to my expert colleague Christopher Knaus for the next little while. The Northern Territory has reported another daily Covid-19 case record with 594 infections diagnosed overnight, AAP reports. The figure – until 8pm on Friday – is up from 412 reported the previous day. The health minister, Natasha Fyles, says the virus has spread to every region in the territory as the number of active cases grows to 1200. “It is concerning that we have had significant escalation in the numbers but we expected this,” she told reporters on Friday. “We can still manage these numbers that we’re seeing and I expect these numbers to grow over the coming days.” Meanwhile, an investigation is under way into cases in Nhulunbuy in east Arnhem Land, about 700km east of Darwin. More than 20 infections were also detected in Alice Springs and one was detected in Tennant Creek, 510km to the north. A territory-wide lockout of unvaccinated people aged 16 and over started on Thursday and will continue until midday on Monday when a proof of vaccination pass system will be rolled out. It will run on the territory’s check-in app and apply to most hospitality and entertainment venues. Under the lockout, unvaccinated people can only leave their homes for medical treatment and testing, essential goods and services, and to care for a vulnerable person. They are not permitted to go to workplaces or travel more than 30km. At that press conference, the Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, was asked about the ongoing Novak Djokovic saga. He largely avoided the questions, saying responsibility for travel restrictions lay with the commonwealth and advice to players was a matter for Tennis Australia. He made no criticism of Tennis Australia, despite revelations it told players that a previous Covid infection was enough for a travel exemption. He said: The entire Australian Open team deliver a fantastic event, which makes Melbourne the sport destination of the world. This particular set of incidents, the Victorian government is not briefed on the matter, in terms of how people got into the country, that’s a matter for the federal government. But Tennis Australia deliver an outstanding Australian Open and in very difficult circumstances I look forward to them delivering another great Australian Open. He said the Victorian government had no regrets about partnering with Tennis Australia to facilitate the Australian Open this year. The Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, says the rapid test numbers in today’s figures are a vindication of the government establishing the system to record rapid tests this week: The system will give us better oversight of people out there who previously we suspected were out there but we didn’t have the formal link to them. Now we do ... we would encourage particularly the RATs as they become more available, and we distribute them freely and widely as we possibly can, that we will bring more people into the system, particularly as we see case numbers spike. So this is a good start. The numbers will wash out over the coming days, but there may well be more people out there who continue to be undiagnosed and therefore potentially unsupported in their Covid journey. Victoria is now issuing rapid antigen tests at 40 of its testing sites across the state. People will get two tests each, and 13,000 tests were issued to 6,500 people, to alleviate the pressure on the queues for PCR tests in the state. We know the Covid case numbers are increasingly meaningless, given the shift towards rapid antigen testing, if you can get your hands on one. We might also wonder about the hospitalisation rates too. As noted in my article this morning, hospitals are being asked to accelerate the discharge of patients. That might explain why the hospitalisation rate in NSW barely budged in the latest daily figures, up 3.3%. Positive case numbers rose one-sixth, or almost 17%, but that 8.2% rise in ICU beds being occupied will be a better guide because it is less likely these very sick patients will be nudged out of hospital early. Meanwhile, it’s clear staff are stretched at all aspects of the health system, from cleaners to pathology and so on. One nurse at Sydney’s Liverpool hospital – where one senior Covid coordinator yesterday told colleagues they were facing a crisis “of epic proportions” – has provided additional detail this morning. “Medical and nursing staff care for any inpatients can be out of their usual scope of practice; running local anaesthetic infusions into the spine or managing lung drains with no previous experience or consumables for this on the ward,” this nurse tells us. “Covid-positive patients are treated in single rooms with ventilation that recirculates to non-Covid patient areas,” the nurse says. Staff don’t have access to anterooms, donning and doffing their PPE in the “clean” hallway. “Gowns hang off walls and reused masks mix with clean equipment,” the nurse adds. “Not enough closed bins for contaminated dogged PPE so goes into an open bin in the hallway.” There’s also a lot more detail, which we will write about later. In the meanwhile, if you know more you can also contact me on peter.hannam@theguardian.com The Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, is holding a press conference. He has broken down the 26,000-odd rapid test results included in today’s case numbers. They are: 5,923 are from Friday. 6,700-plus were from Thursday. 5,000 approximately turned positive on Wednesday. About 3,800 turned positive on Tuesday. About 2,500 on Monday. About 1,700 on Sunday. And about 620 on New Year’s Day. Novak Djokovic is not the only competitor to have his visa cancelled as the Czech foreign ministry joined the growing list demanding answers over the Australian Open’s medical exemption bungle, AAP reports. Doubles specialist Renata Voracova has been confirmed to be at the same Melbourne hotel as the world No 1 after having her visa cancelled by the Australian Border Force (ABF) on Thursday. And the ABF has also confirmed that action has been taken against a third person. “One individual has voluntarily departed Australia ... and the visa of a third individual has been cancelled,” the ABF said. The ABF added that one person had been taken into immigration detention pending deportation, but declined to to give details. The Czech embassy overnight confirmed Voracova was detained in Melbourne and is now in the Park Hotel after her visa was revoked. The embassy said she had played one preparatory match in Melbourne, and held a valid medical exemption from Covid vaccination, and until yesterday Australian authorities “had no problem” with her stay. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has been issued with a please explain by the embassy: The Embassy of the Czech Republic in Canberra and the Consulate General of the Czech Republic in Sydney are in contact with R. Voráčová. Renata has decided to leave Australia at the earliest possible date and will not be attending the tennis tournament in Melbourne. The Embassy of the Czech Republic in Canberra has also contacted the Australian Department of Home Affairs (responsible for issuing certain types of visas and external border protection) with a request for an explanation of the situation. We are currently awaiting a statement from the Australian side. We have been trying to get a statement from Tennis Australia about all this, but have not yet received a response. The Herald Sun has documents suggesting the federal government warned Tennis Australia that players who had Covid-19 in the past six months would not be considered “fully vaccinated”. This has led to the paper reporting that Tennis Australia has misled players who sought a medical exemption from vaccination on the grounds they have had Covid-19 in the past six months. Tennis Australia told the Herald Sun, however, that they “reject completely” that players were misled. Informing players they could get into the country on a medical exemption was taken from the Smart Traveller website that Greg Hunt directly referred us to. The purpose of this document was to explain eligibility to participate in the AO under Victorian laws which required that an exemption be in line with the Atagi guidance. The summary of the Atagi guidance in particular the information related to recent infection was new information taken from the expanded guidance issued by Atagi. The Atagi advice has said people who have had Covid-19 in the previous six months are eligible for a medical exemption. NSW Health has said of the nine people who died with Covid overnight there were four women and five men aged in their 50s, 70s, and 90s. Five people were from south-western Sydney, two were from south-eastern Sydney, one person was from western Sydney and one person was from Newcastle. There are 1,795 people in hospital in NSW with Covid-19, including 145 people in intensive care, 40 of whom require ventilation. Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull has also tested positive for Covid-19, as he urges people to not take out their frustrations on frontline workers. While we are focused on case numbers, too, my colleague Elias Visontay has written this on what the change in not requiring people to get PCR tests when they have a positive rapid test means for how we are tracking the pandemic. Labor MP Andrew Giles has announced he has tested positive for Covid-19. We have collected stories from readers on what it is like trying to get tested this week. My own personal experience this week was lining up at St Vincent’s in Fitzroy in Melbourne at 4.30am for a 7am opening. There were six people ahead of me in the queue when I got there – and the line was completely full by 5.30am, wrapping around the whole testing site and down to Alexandra Parade. They’d closed the line for the day before I’d even got in to get tested at around 7.30am. I am thankful, however, the result came back in less than 18 hours. The Victorian State Emergency Service has dealt with hundreds of calls for help as wild storms crossed the state bringing large hail and flash floods, AAP reports: The SES received 848 calls in the 24 hours to Saturday, mostly due to flooding and building damage overnight. SES duty officer Geb Abbott told ABC Radio about a dozen cases were people calling to be rescued. There were some events where rescues had to be enacted just with people that had been stuck in floodwater. The storms have left hundreds of properties without power across the state’s west. On Friday, the storms caused flash flooding in parts of Melbourne’s western suburbs and the roof of a shopping centre in Point Cook caved in, collapsing under a heavy downpour. The wild weather had already hit Portland on Thursday night, bringing down trees, damaging buildings and causing flash floods. I feel like it’s important to be clear about it. The reason Victoria’s case numbers went past NSW today is only because around half of the 51,000 cases recorded were rapid test results from the previous week because of the new system going live yesterday. The NSW figure is just PCR test results alone because NSW isn’t recording that yet – they plan to roll something out in the Service NSW app next week. It’s not a competition, but I think just important to contextualise. Victoria has probably a better picture of just how much Covid is circulating in the community because it includes the rapid tests. New rules have come into effect from today banning retailers from gouging people on the price of rapid antigen tests, AAP reports. Retailers caught marking up test kits by more than 20% of the supply price now face a penalty of $66,000 and up to five years in jail. At the beginning of the pandemic personal protective equipment such as masks and hospital gowns as well as hand sanitiser were added to the biosecurity list to prevent prices being hiked. The determination also controls the export of items on the list to prevent overseas buyers taking Australian stocks. Health minister Greg Hunt told 2GB on Thursday the federal government was taking “the strongest possible actions” to prevent profiteering in a time of need. Victoria has overtaken New South Wales for daily Covid-19 cases, recording 51,356 new cases overnight and nine deaths. There are 644 people in hospital, and 106 in intensive care. The health department says this figure included the people who tested positive via a rapid test and registered it yesterday when the new system went up. There were nearly 6,000 of those yesterday and around 20,000 for the whole week. My colleague Peter Hannam points out that in NSW, the positive test rate is now 38.6%. There was just a 3.3% rise in hospitalisations, but an 8.2% increase in ICU patients. Svetlana Kovacevic, the Australian Serbian Chamber of Commerce Public Relations director, is on ABC News Breakfast to discuss Novak Djokovic’s detention in Australia over his visa cancellation. Kovacevic says the visa approval is a “political hot potato” between the federal and Victorian governments and is a bad look: This is a bad look for the Australian immigration system and you would think that somewhere along the way, proper inquiries would have been made earlier regarding Novak’s suitability to come to Australia and to try to avoid this embarrassing situation for everyone. It appears that this debacle is as a result of a lack of coordination between the federal and Victorian state governments and Tennis Australia regarding the organising of tennis players’ visas. It may have been that the left hand wasn’t talking to the right, or that Tennis Australia, in the middle, might not have communicated properly the requirements for entry. But the point is moot now – that the courts will decide. She says the issue could escalate tensions between Australia and Serbia, pointing out Djokovic’s requests to be moved into different accomodation have been denied: It is hard to believe that Novak is treated like a high-risk individual considering that his intention is only to play in a tennis tournament and then leave the country. The punishment that Novak is receiving does not appear proportionate to the circumstances he has found himself in. NSW numbers have come in. The state has recorded 45,098 new Covid-19 cases and nine deaths. There are 1,795 in hospital and 145 people in the ICU. Worth noting these numbers do not account for people who are testing positive on rapid antigen tests and are now not getting a PCR to confirm – NSW hasn’t put a system in place to record that yet. Good morning and welcome to the live blog for Saturday, 8 January. I’m Josh Taylor and I’ll be bringing you the news this morning. Here’s what we know so far. Australia reported a record number of new Covid-19 cases on Friday, with over 78,000 reported across the country. The Australian treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, was among them, announcing on Friday night he is isolating with his family after testing positive. New South Wales brought back restrictions on dancing and singing at hospitality venues in response to the massive number of Omicron cases in the state. Male tennis No 1 Novak Djokovic remains in the Park Hotel in Melbourne ahead of an injunction hearing against his removal from Australia as Tennis Australia denies it misled players over potential vaccination exemptions to be allowed to play at the Australian Open. Leaked documents to the Herald Sun suggested Tennis Australia had told players that a recent Covid-19 infection would be a reason for medical exemption from needing to be vaccinated, despite the federal government telling Tennis Australia that was not the case. Czech doubles player Renata Voracova who was given similar advice on exemptions to vaccination was also moved into the same detention as Djokovic. Djokovic, meanwhile, broke his silence for the first time since arriving in Australia, posting on social media overnight: “Thank you to people around the world for your continuous support. I can feel it and it is greatly appreciated,” in a post on his Instagram stories posted in both Serbian and English. Let’s get into it.Conservative factions are nothing new, as Theresa May learned to her cost with Brexit and Boris Johnson saw in a mass rebellion on Covid rules. But Johnson is facing significant pressure from well over 100 of his MPs to change course on a number of fronts including green policies. Conservative backbenchers say an ever-growing number of factions – most with their own acronym, and with significant crossover when it comes to their members – hold sway within the party, a process helped by WhatsApp-based organising and a perception the prime minister’s authority has eroded. “I’m on so many WhatsApp groups it’s like Ben-Hur – there’s a cast of thousands,” one MP said. “I can’t keep track of them all. It doesn’t mean I believe in everything, but I like to keep track of people’s views.” MPs feel empowered by the groups. “It’s often said that with first past the post, coalitions exist within parties rather than between parties,” another MP said. “Under Thatcher we used to have the wets and the drys. It can be a good counterbalance to the executive.” John Major struggled endlessly with Eurosceptics he termed “bastards”, while May’s nemesis was the European Research Group, or ERG, the longstanding alliance of Brexit ultras. What is different now is that – unlike Major and May – Johnson has a significant Commons majority. Nonetheless, before Christmas he still had to rely on Labour votes to pass new coronavirus restrictions amid a 101-MP rebellion instigated by the Covid Recovery Group (CRG), which is sceptical about new pandemic rules. Unlike the ERG, which has membership levies and a formal structure, CRG backers say it is little more than a WhatsApp forum with occasional in-person meetings. There is significant crossover, not least with Steve Baker, a former ERG chair who is vice-chair of the CRG. The ERG receded into the background after Johnson delivered the Brexit its members wanted, and the CRG could likewise call off hostilities if the Omicron wave subsides and rules are eased. Even then Johnson will not be in the clear. His parliamentary party’s internal groupings, while varied in core aims, often share certain views and some of the same members. These tend disproportionately to be former Brexiters, and common aims centre around a desire to push Johnson away from what they see as overly statist, high-tax policies – ones they believe the UK should abandon outside the EU. “It feels particularly important now, as we’ve had two years of a Conservative government and for some of us it hasn’t especially felt like a Conservative government,” one backbencher said. “We’re all facing re-election in a year or two, and we just want to gently nudge the government back to a virtuous path.” Some blocs, such as the Northern Research Group (NRG), are more geographic than ideological. But others, such as Blue Collar Conservatism and the culture war-focused Common Sense Group, have beliefs that include opposition to current elements of tax-and-spend. The Net Zero Scrutiny Group (NZSG), which claims many more supporters than the 18 Tory MPs who signed a letter this week seeking an end to VAT and green levies on fuel bills, looks set to become increasingly influential in coming months as Johnson faces pressure over the cost of living. Some critics have argued the NZSG flirts with denial, citing its pledge to consider research from Nigel Lawson’s controversial Global Warming Policy Foundation thinktank. Craig Mackinlay, the South Thanet MP who chairs the group, rejects the characterisation. He says: “This isn’t an argument about climate change or any of that. This is about: is this affordable and technologically achievable, what will it do particularly for the lower paid, and is there a better way?” There are repeated echoes of Brexit, and not just because many of the MPs involved cut their factional teeth inside the ERG. One backbencher, a member of several groups, says: “We know one reason people voted for Brexit was they felt elites were telling them how to live their lives. And I think there’s some similarities when they’re told: don’t have an old-fashioned boiler, don’t drive a 15-year-old car or van even though you can’t afford another one. It’s the same with Covid – officials in London telling them what to do.” Some MPs crop up time and again. The Lincoln MP, Karl McCartney, for example, is in the CRG, NZRG and Common Sense Group, as well being on the executive of the 1922 Committee of backbench Tories. The Wealden MP, Nusrat Ghani, is vice-chair of the 1922 Committee and involved with the CRG, while the former minister Esther McVey is linked to the CRG and NZSG and founded Blue Collar Conservatism. Much as Johnson succeeded May by positioning himself to Tory MPs and the party membership as the man to deliver a muscular, immediate Brexit, those now hoping to follow him, such as Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak, will look to the groups for ideological pointers. In the meantime, Johnson must try to keep them on side, mindful they have the ability to cause significant trouble. “You don’t throw yourself on the barbed wire every time there’s a vote,” noted one Tory MP, a member of several groups. “But you have a greater opportunity to get in front of ministers and argue the case – because they know you’ve got some cards in your pocket.”The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack is examining whether Donald Trump oversaw a criminal conspiracy on 6 January that connected the White House’s scheme to stop Joe Biden’s certification with the insurrection, say two senior sources familiar with the matter. The committee’s new focus on the potential for a conspiracy marks an aggressive escalation in its inquiry as it confronts evidence that suggests the former president potentially engaged in criminal conduct egregious enough to warrant a referral to the justice department. House investigators are interested in whether Trump oversaw a criminal conspiracy after communications turned over by Trump’s former chief of staff Mark Meadows and others suggested the White House coordinated efforts to stop Biden’s certification, the sources said. The select committee has several thousand messages, among which include some that suggest the Trump White House briefed a number of House Republicans on its plan for then-vice president Mike Pence to abuse his ceremonial role and not certify Biden’s win, the sources said. The fact that the select committee has messages suggesting the Trump White House directed Republican members of Congress to execute a scheme to stop Biden’s certification is significant as it could give rise to the panel considering referrals for potential crimes, the sources said. Members and counsel on the select committee are examining in the first instance whether in seeking to stop the certification, Trump and his aides violated the federal law that prohibits obstruction of a congressional proceeding – the joint session on 6 January – the sources said. The select committee believes, the sources said, that Trump may be culpable for an obstruction charge given he failed for hours to intervene to stop the violence at the Capitol perpetrated by his supporters in his name. But the select committee is also looking at whether Trump oversaw an unlawful conspiracy that involved coordination between the “political elements” of the White House plan communicated to Republican lawmakers and extremist groups that stormed the Capitol, the sources said. That would probably be the most serious charge for which the select committee might consider a referral, as it considers a range of other criminal conduct that has emerged in recent weeks from obstruction to potential wire fraud by the GOP. The vice-chair of the select committee, the Republican congresswoman Liz Cheney, referenced the obstruction charge when she read from the criminal code before members voted unanimously last November to recommend Meadows in contempt of Congress for refusing to testify. The Guardian previously reported that Trump personally directed lawyers and political operatives working from the Willard hotel in Washington DC to find ways to stop Biden’s certification from happening at all on 6 January just hours before the Capitol attack. But House investigators are yet to find evidence tying Trump personally to the Capitol attack, the sources said, and may ultimately only recommend referrals for the straight obstruction charge, which has already been brought against around 275 rioters, rather than for conspiracy. The justice department could yet charge Trump and aides separate to the select committee investigation, but one of sources said the panel – as of mid-December – had no idea whether the agency is actively examining potential criminality by the former president. A spokesperson for the select committee declined to comment on details about the investigation. A spokesperson for the justice department declined to comment whether the agency had opened a criminal inquiry for Trump or his closest allies over 6 January. Still, the select committee appears to be moving towards making at least some referrals – or alternatively recommendations in its final report – that an aggressive prosecutor at the justice department could use to pursue a criminal inquiry, the sources said. The select committee is examining the evidence principally to identify legislative reforms to prevent a repeat of Trump’s plan to subvert the election, but members say if they find Trump violated federal law, they have an obligation to refer that to the justice department. Sending a criminal referral to the justice department – essentially a recommendation for prosecution – carries no formal legal weight since Congress lacks the authority to force it to open a case, and House investigators have no authority to charge witnesses with a crime. But a credible criminal referral from the select committee could have a substantial political effect given the importance of the 6 January inquiry, and place pressure on the attorney general, Merrick Garland, to initiate an investigation, or explain why he might not do so. Internal discussions about criminal referrals intensified after communications turned over by Meadows revealed alarming lines of communication between the Trump White House and Republican lawmakers over 6 January, the sources said. In one exchange released by the select committee, one Republican lawmaker texted Meadows an apology for not pulling off what might have amounted to a coup, saying 6 January was a “terrible day” not because of the attack, but because they were unable to stop Biden’s certification. The select committee believes messages such as that text – as well as remarks from a Republican on the House floor as the Capitol came under attack – might represent one part of a conspiracy by the White House to obstruct the joint session, the sources said. In referencing objections to six states, the text also appears to comport with a memo authored by the Trump lawyer John Eastman that suggested lodging objections to six states – raising the specter the White House distributed the plan more widely than previously known. Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, added on ABC last week that the investigation had found evidence to suggest the events of 6 January “appeared to be a coordinated effort on the part of a number of people to undermine the election”. Counsel for the select committee indicated in their contempt of Congress report for Meadows that they intended to ask Trump’s former chief of staff about those communications he turned over voluntarily, before he broke off a cooperation deal and refused to testify. Thompson has also suggested to reporters that he believes Meadows stopped cooperating with the inquiry in part because of pressure from Trump, but the select committee has not opened a separate witness intimidation investigation into the former president, one of the sources said.Ilkley Moor, West Yorkshire Start/finish Cow and Calf Rocks car park, Ilkley Distance/time 10.8 miles, 5½ hours Refuel The Swan, Addingham There is a tradition around new year to take to the moor. For me, it’s when this landscape is most intriguing: stripped back to its winter bones, all black rock, snowy heather and pinkish dusks, the lights of the Wharfe valley raked out along the river like embers. It calls to me as surely as the hillside ewes throating: moor, moor. I know this place better than any, yet it always surprises with its geologies, wildlife and layers of lived history. Climb the track from the car park, pausing for views at the top of the Cow and Calf Rocks, and search among the Victorian graffiti for: “E M Lancaster 1st XXIV Foot, 1882”. Strange to think that three years before his mark was chiselled here, his regiment was fighting at Rorke’s Drift. Follow the path up to Ilkley Crags, then head west along the high ground. You’ll startle grouse and, if lucky, see a merlin – the UK’s smallest bird of prey – hunting. Below is White Wells, a bath house from Ilkley’s spa town days where Darwin took the waters the day On the Origin of Species was released. Drop down towards Hebers Ghyll Woods and look for the Swastika Stone curtained with iron railings. Depending on whom you believe, this is either one of the moor’s many cup-and-ring carvings, dating from the bronze age, or the chisel work of a homesick Roman soldier copying the Camunian rose patterns found in the hills of Italy. The lower moorside track to Addingham is easy walking through farms and wintry fields. Though I’ve walked it a thousand times, I discovered only recently that the path briefly picks up the bump of the old Roman road that ran between forts at Ilkley and Elslack. Thaw out with a feast at The Swan. The best seat is by the old range, where there’ll be a fire, and pints of local beer (Saltaire Blonde, Timothy Taylor’s Landlord) will be well-earned. Return to Ilkley along the wooded banks of the River Wharfe as dusk falls. There’ll be the smell of wood smoke in the air and, as you rise through town to the moor and your starting point, tawny owls will be calling time on the last of the light. Rob Cowen, author of Common Ground and The Heeding Llyn y Fan Fach, Brecon Beacons Start/finish Llanddeusant Distance/time 4 miles, 2 hours Refuel The Red Lion, Llangadog There was every reason not to walk to Llyn y Fan Fach, a glacial lake cupped in the oblique flanks and eroded hilltops of the Black Mountain in Brecon Beacons national park. It was late in the season and already mid-afternoon. But the lake tugged me to it, and soon I was walking steadily uphill on a cold, crystalline day, wind pushing and shoving, winnowing into my ears and making them throb. After about an hour the lake came into view, its surface blue-grey, the sandstone shore vividly red. And those emphatic hills, bookending the lake on two sides, gleamed a deep, velvet green. This primacy of colour in a place so devoid of incidentals seemed to speak more of the selectiveness of art than the randomness of nature. And art was what I’d come to visit. Llyn y Fan Fach is the site of one of the oldest stories inscribed in Wales’ dog-eared landscape: the tale of the lady of the lake. You know the story: young farmer meets beautiful woman who emerges from beneath the waters. They marry, but there’s a catch: if he touches her three times with iron, she must return to her watery homeland. The couple enjoy a happy marriage, but iron is everywhere, and accidents happen. By the time he tosses her a bridle and its iron bit touches her hand, they’ve run out of luck, and she’s duty-bound to return to the lake. Why iron, you may wonder. Perhaps the tale remembers the first encounter of technological difference in Britain. The lady belongs to the stone age people who left us the megaliths; the farmer is one of the technologically superior invaders, the iron age Celts. Iron, the story could be saying, is the way of the future, indestructible and deadly. Like the advancements that come along later – steel, bullets, nuclear warheads – it can make people disappear. I shivered on the lakeshore, and not just from the cold and wind. Red kites circled overhead, drawn by the nearby feeding station. It was time to turn my back on ancient encounters and the lake itself, eel-black now with wriggling shadows, and dive down into the hills’ embrace. I fetched up at the Red Lion in nearby Llangadog, a Grade II-listed coaching inn whose historic warmth could thaw even the hearts of lake dwellers. Pamela Petro, author of The Long Field Warden Hill, Northumberland Start/finish Just past the Boatside Inn and under railway bridge on road to Chollerford in a lay-by Distance/time 2 hours/3¼ miles Refuel The Boatside Inn, Warden From high on Warden Hill I can look down on to two great river valleys. There, below me, the North and the South Tyne join, while away to the west is the tilted whinstone ridge of Hadrian’s Wall. It’s no wonder that this commanding spot was chosen for an iron age hillfort. I stand at its centre, encircled by the three concentric rings and ditches of prehistoric earthworks. The name Warden comes from the Old English for a lookout hill, and the views from here are extensive and uplifting. It’s a winter walk to clear the mind and refresh the spirit. I’ve been up here in the snow, on windy, buffeting days and on warm, blue-sky dawdling days with friends, on New Year’s Day, on birthdays … It’s that kind of place. This was the first walk I did in my first spring in Northumberland. A discovery then, but each time the seasons and the weather make it new. In late winter, hellebores flower by the narrow path, squeezed between railway line and steep woods, that leads to the intriguingly named Quality Cottages. Then, it’s up through fields where worked flints have been found, skirting stone walls and hawthorn hedges, and across the flank of the hill to a wood of Scots pine that hugs the top. The wind quietens in the shelter of the regularly spaced trunks. Out into the light again and the summit views: Cold Fell in the west, the hills of Northumberland national park to the north, towns and villages, fields and woods, on top of the world. Dropping down from the fort, the way winds through the hamlet of High Warden and on to a lane whose banks are bright in spring with wild garlic and red campion. The village of Warden hunkers down below the hill. To one side of the road the tree-covered Norman motte, to the other Saint Michael’s church, its Saxon tower partly built of reused Roman stone. To end at the 18th-century Boatside Inn adds yet another strand to this walk through layers of history. Susie White, Guardian Country Diarist Quiraing circuit, Isle of Skye Start/finish Quiraing car park Distance/time 4 miles/3 hours Refuel Isle of Skye Brewery, Uig Of all the creatures that have made their home in Scotland, perhaps the most fantastic are not the kelpies, mythical loch monster or unicorns, but the dinosaurs that once roamed what is now the Isle of Skye. The palaeocene-era Quiraing landslip is renowned for its distinctive geological theatre, but the Trotternish peninsula on which it lies contains as many mid-Jurassic -era stories. Here be no dragons, but the remains of dinosaurs waiting to be discovered. To begin, park in the saddle below the much-photographed, 466-metre-high Bioda Buidhe, on the Trotternish Ridge, then walk north into a narrow gully at the brink of the landslip that eventually tumbles into the Minch. In the middle of this boulder-strewn gorge, the path scrambles beneath rocky overhangs into a labyrinth of thin columns and shadowy towers, all revealing different characteristics of the complex geology. Look out for the knuckle-shaped Prison, serrated Needle and, after a steep ascent, the grass-topped Table. Together, the skirmish of rock formations gives off a Mordor vibe, particularly when a murky haar underlines their dark personality. Skye’s name has several variations, but my favourite is Eilean a’ Cheo, “Island of Mist”. While it’s tempting to see the pathway as a journey back in time, this is a well-trodden route, even if few make it past the first stile. Beyond here, take the left branch of the trail up and onto the Trotternish Ridge, there is a spectacular chance to savour the tussocky shoulder of Sròn Vourlin. It looks uncannily like the spine of a stegosaur. From here, return by climbing the broad, sloped ridge, being wary of the sheer drop. Every pause – to take in the Torridon mountains across the sea, or to plan a fossil hunt on the nearby Rubha nam Brathairean foreshore – offers a moment for prehistoric discovery. Soon after, the path seesaws from a summit down across a boggy expanse of moorland and back to your starting point. For more Jurassic encounters, and to put the Quiraing in context, pay a visit to Dugald Ross and his daughter Caroline’s Staffin Dinosaur Museum in Ellishadder. The Megalosaurus, Hadrosaurus and Ceolophysis fossils are terrific. Mike MacEacheran, travel writer and guidebook author living in Edinburgh Pyecombe circular, South Downs Start/finish Pyecombe village, park on road by crossroads next to church Distance/time 6 miles/3 hours Refuel The Plough Inn On the outskirts of Brighton, the ancient village of Pyecombe made the perfect starting point for a solitary stroll through Sussex downland, a gentle, unassuming landscape that nevertheless holds some secrets for curious walkers. I was searching for a memorial to Indian soldiers and a folly that inspired a ghost story. With Pyecombe church gates on the right, I went over the crossroads, descended to – and crossed – the A273, followed a bridleway through a gate parallel with the road and, after 100 metres, veered left through a gate climbing to open land. In summer this chalk downland would be ringing with the sound of skylarks; today it is the throaty squawks of corvids. I continued into a wooded area via a gate, crossed golf fairways and two fields to a treeline and wire fence. Through a gate I turned right, and after 100 metres the track turned left through another gate up the right side of a field. Waymarkers took me through another gate, and I descended a broad, chalky track with Brighton and the Channel in the distance. Soon, a surprising sight came into view in this empty landscape – the smooth dome of the Chattri. An eerie, isolated and unique memorial, the Chattri was built a century ago for Sikh and Hindu soldiers who died while hospitalised in Brighton during the first world war. They were cremated here and their ashes scattered at sea. Granite slabs mark the site of the three original pyres. These soldiers had originally been hospitalised in Brighton Pavilion on the assumption they’d feel more at home with its “Indian”-style exterior. What they made of its kitsch, over-the-top interior is anyone’s guess. I returned to the wide, chalky path and headed north for a 1½ miles, turning left on a path that became Mill Lane, passing the black and white Jack and Jill windmills. Reaching the main road, I turned left for 300 metres to a railway bridge. Peering over the wall I saw the startling entrance to the Clayton Tunnel – a 19th-century gothic folly-cum-castle. Why this almost Disneyesque feature was built over the tunnel remains a mystery. It was, however, the scene of a disastrous collision between two trains in 1861, inspiring Dickens to write his second-most famous Christmas ghost story – The Signal-Man. Retracing my steps up the road, I turned left down a lane, then, after 200 metres veered left down a bridleway before rising through the woods in a long, gradual climb. At the top I traversed the crossroads and continued until the path becomes a drive, leading me back to Pyecombe and a well-earned pint at the Plough. David Bramwell, musician, broadcaster and co-author of Cheeky Walks in Brighton and Sussex Ansty to Bingham’s Melcombe, Dorset Start/finish Ansty Distance/time 3 miles/1 to 1½ hours Refuel The Fox Inn, Ansty In winter, when arable fields are bare, sparkling with flint and stalked only by pheasants, the middle of Dorset seems empty. But buried in its landforms, this well-signposted walk has both history and variety. The footpath led me from Ansty under massive oaks by Marsh Water, taking me west across a cattle-churned field which made me grateful for my walking boots, and through bare beech woodland to a wide avenue of trees leading to the grand, isolated house at Bingham’s Melcombe. Neither house nor garden is open to the public, but I marvelled at the huge evergreen hedge that overhung the bowling green on the other side of the precariously leaning wall, a scene reminiscent of David Inshaw’s painting The Badminton Game. Coming round to the front of the house, I found the small, square-towered church of Saint Andrew’s. The shady burial area in the churchyard set aside for beloved pets (one headstone reads “Hugo 1948-1960, and in memory of his friend Treasure”) might lead you to believe this was a private chapel for the big house; actually, it’s the orphan of an earlier settlement. Clambering on to the churchyard’s compost heap, I peeked over the hedge. Beneath the lumpy field beyond, lit with low winter sun, lies the medieval village of Bingham’s Melcombe, abandoned some time before the end of the 15th century. Leaving the lost village behind and crossing a small bridge by the fishpond, I climbed a track that led into a holloway, where hart’s-tongue ferns licked at the chalky path. My day was dry, but in wet weather this would soon run with slippery rivulets. Briefly taking the high road, where long views unfolded across the valley to the south, I came down to the watery village of Aller, which has brooks and ponds everywhere, before returning to Ansty. The energetic and curious can extend their walk another mile or two through modern Melcombe Bingham to another abandoned village – Melcombe Horsey, lonely in an open valley with only farm buildings and a house for company, not far from the Dorsetshire Gap, where five ancient trackways meet. Jon Woolcott of the Little Toller independent publisher and bookshop; he is currently writing Real Dorset Bradwell-on-Sea, Essex Start/finish King’s Head pub, Bradwell-on-Sea Distance/time 6½ miles/3 hours Refuel King’s Head The remote, seventh-century chapel of St Peter-on-the-Wall stands on the Essex coast near the wide, wild Blackwater estuary. It is one of England’s oldest churches and still regularly used for services. A hike there along the sea wall above saltmarshes and shell-carpeted beaches has a bracing, cobweb-clearing feel, especially in blustery January, when the tidal mudflats are busy with overwintering waders: several kinds of lapwings, curve-billed curlews, redshanks and black-and-white oystercatchers. In 653, St Cedd, a Northumbrian monk and bishop, sailed down England’s east coast from Lindisfarne and landed near a ruined Roman fort called Othona. The following year, he used stone from the abandoned fort to build the chapel. St Peter’s is towards the end of this coastal loop from Bradwell-on-Sea. The walk starts near the newer St Thomas’s church, heads over the fields to Bradwell Waterside, with its 350-berth marina, and past the looming towers of a decommissioned power station. There are views across the water to beach-hut-ringed Mersea. As you round the tip of the peninsula heading south, the scenery gets steadily wilder. The wide, waterlogged area on the left is the largest continuous saltmarsh in Essex. Winter brings thousands of birds to roost and gather in murmurations: godwits, divers and dark-bellied Brent geese. When the tide is low, look out for submerged Thames barges. Some wooden posts far out on the sandflats are the remains of a Saxon fish trap that probably supplied the monastery. Centuries of tides have left this coast with a long bank of cockle and oyster shells, where silvery sea holly and samphire flourish; yellow horned-poppies and purple sea lavender flower in summer. Eventually, hidden in trees on the right beyond the Othona Community, you reach the simple stone-walled chapel, which has long been visible on the horizon. The doors are almost always open and, inside, rows of benches face a cross on the east wall. A 45-mile waymarked walk called St Peter’s Way arrives here from the other direction, meandering up the marshy coast after its pilgrimage across Essex from Chipping Ongar. The stony track that leads away from the sea becomes a lane through houses. Follow it past the Cricketers pub and St Cedd’s school, back to Bradwell and the welcoming King’s Head along the course of an old Roman Road. Phoebe Taplin, author of Scenic Walks in Hertfordshire and Essex County Down coast Start/finish Ballyhornan Bay/Ardglass Distance/time 5 miles/3 hours Refuel Ardglass Golf Club restaurant Mist swirled in a dazzle of moisture as the sound of incoming waves crashed against the shingle beach on which I trod. The sky had turned a thick shade of pewter and, for a good few minutes, I was walking in a state of partial sensory deprivation. Then, almost as suddenly, it dissipated and I could see all along Ballyhornan Bay, the rise and fall of its dramatic rocky clifftops stretching into the retreating clouds. It was a fittingly biblical introduction to Northern Ireland’s County Down coast (which pokes out into the Irish Sea, between the major centres of Belfast to the north and Newcastle to the south), because I was on an ecclesiastical mission myself – or at least I had been. Fresh from walking the St Patrick’s Way – a fairly “new” pilgrim path (circa 2015) that runs between Armagh and Downpatrick – I had a hankering to stretch out my legs on something shorter. I found this coastal stroll almost by mistake when visiting the Downpatrick Centre to collect my certificate, AKA Irish Compostela, and discovered that two nuns had researched another pilgrimage that followed part of this coastline. It starts at Ballyhornan, said to be the area where Patrick arrived in the country by boat with the sole aim of bringing Christianity to Ireland, and heads south to the town of Ardglass, mainly on a signless rough track following the route of the much longer 47-mile Lecale Way. I strolled the rocky beach, watching gannets dive into the water near the green mound of Guns Island just offshore. The faint trail soon plunged into grassland festooned with wild flowers, then climbed to high clifftop, where the roar of the ocean reverberated as it bounced against the rock. In the distance I could make out the shape of the Mourne Mountains. Finally, a walled enclosure appeared alongside. Inside was a fabled natural water source – a small, circular holy well in the ground, overlooked by a freshly painted crucifix, once said to be the place where the patron saint christened the first Irish people, and which could cure any ailment. From its edge I could look inland, where the final section of this walk would see me wander past the remains of the 15th century Ardtole church, one of the oldest in the country, which Patrick also founded. On the spot I stood, I later found I later found sepia photographs online showing huge crowds gathered back in 1911 on a pilgrimage to the healing waters, standing where I had stood. And while I didn’t plunge into the sacred water source, through this walk an immersion had still taken place, one that saw me, like the gannets, dive into the wilds of the east coast and emerge with my eyes wide open. I can only thank Saint Patrick for that. Saint Patrick’s Centre runs guided walks on this route from May to September. Ulsterbus 16a runs twice daily back to the start, for one-way trips. Phoebe Smith, author and host of the Wander Woman podcast Watlington Hill, Chilterns Start/finish National Trust car park, Watlington Hill Distance/time 7 miles/4 hours Refuel Fox and Hounds, Christmas Common There’s something particularly magical about ancient routes in winter. Curls of wood smoke, the chatter of a startled blackbird, dew-draped webs – in this weather, I feel like I’m walking in the past. Everywhere you look on this walk are signs of earlier generations who built their lives in this land. Watlington Hill may look untamed but it’s the result of centuries of sheep farming that transformed it from woodland into rare chalk grassland, now home to numerous endangered insects and plants. Commanding views across the Thames Valley reveal a patchwork field system – a result of 18th- and 19th-century land enclosures, whereby larger fields were divided up and hedged, and common land was privatised. The result? The poorest country dwellers, reliant on the common’s free resources, were forced into towns to look for work. Hedgerows themselves are now in need of protection – they’re important wildlife corridors in intensively farmed landscapes, and a key tool in our race to decarbonise. Head downhill along the edge of the White Mark – a chalk triangle cut in 1674 to give the illusion of a spire on the parish church when seen from a distance. At the bottom of the hill, turn left on to the ancient Icknield Way. Running from Norfolk to the Dorset coast, this route is one of the oldest in the country – many archaeologists believe its origins are prehistoric. After a mile, turn left to head south towards Dame Alice Farm – look for the unusual chalk stone cottage, then meander along the trackways to Dumble Dore (perhaps an inspiration for JK Rowling?) and on to Greenfield Copse. Here you’ll spot 2,000-year-old iron age earthworks – probably the remains of a homestead or livestock enclosure. There’s even history in the trees – look for coppiced beech trees, which have been cut down and allowed to regrow more than one trunk from the same base (known as a “stool”). It enabled people to get more usable timber from one tree, and it’s an indicator that a woodland is very old. From here, loop round via Hollandridge Farm and along the unsurfaced Hollandridge Lane. It’s a Saxon route – more than 1,000 years old – which acted as the spine road for the 12-mile-long “strip parish” of Pyrton. The “strip” takes in land on the valley floor (best suited for settlements, offering shelter and reliable water sources), but also rougher land on the hillside and tops of the chalk escarpment, which was valuable for seasonal grazing, woodland and quarrying. The footsteps of ancestors will then lead you to the Fox and Hounds at Christmas Common. Mead optional. Mary-Ann Ochota, TV presenter and author of Hidden Histories: a Spotter’s Guide to the British Landscape Thompson Common, Norfolk Start/finish Thompson Common car park Distance/time 8 miles/3 hours Refuel The Chequers Inn, Thompson The first time I went to Thompson Common, I managed to miss its unique, historic, stupendous feature. It is that kind of place – a tranquil and unassuming landscape of woods, bushes and little grassy glades. In summer these meadows are filled with orchids and dragonflies. In autumn, there are fungi and spiders’ webs, and in winter there’s a hush to the place and a glimpse of a roe deer on the far side of the clearing. But the discovery here is easier to spot on the Ordnance Survey 1:25,000 map than in the place itself: this calm, green landscape is pitted with mysterious little ponds. Thompson Common is the “pingo” capital of Britain. A pingo is an ice age pond, derived from an Inuit word for hill. These ponds were formerly hillocks of ice beneath frozen tundra. When the ice age drew to a close, they melted into little round ponds. There are at least 400 on the common, but most are hidden beneath centuries of reeds and other marsh plants, or shaded by birch and ash. Each is a miniature world and time capsule, packed with rare plants and animals. There are 57 rare species living in this pondscape, from the scarce emerald damselfly to the northern pool frog, Britain’s rarest frog. There is also the minuscule pond mud snail. None is likely to be visible in winter – you’ll see the damselfly on the wing in midsummer, when the air is alive with the croaking of frogs – but the landscape feels richer if you know they are there. This walk can just be a potter around Thompson Common, which is protected by Norfolk Wildlife Trust (so no dogs), or a hike on the Great Eastern Pingo Trail, following the old railway line south-west into some classic Breckland heath and woods. Then it’s a turn to the north-west, up the arrow-straight Peddars Way, an old Roman road that follows the chalk into west Norfolk. After a mile, turn east again around the north side of Thompson water (a humanmade lake) and back to where you began. There are more pingos to find, and more now being resurrected in two new nature reserves. Norfolk Wildlife Trust is excavating “ghost” pingos ploughed up or filled in by farmers a century ago. The uniqueness of this overlooked landscape is, belatedly, being recognised and revived. Patrick Barkham, Guardian natural history writerWell over 100 of the Conservatives’ 361 MPs are aligned with one or more of a string of internal pressure groups. Here are the main ones: Covid Recovery Group Led by the former chief whip Mark Harper and the former Brexit minister Steve Baker, the CRG’s size and opposition to new Covid rules is essentially the reason why England has notably fewer restrictions than other UK nations. While informal in structure, the CRG has organised and disciplined messaging, employing an external PR consultant. Support estimated at 80 to 100 MPs. Net Zero Scrutiny Group Set up in the lead-up to the Cop26 climate summit, its members insist they are not climate emergency sceptics but believe policies such as emissions targets and the phasing out of conventional cars have not been fully thought out and will adversely affect poorer Britons. The NZSG has 18 MPs as public supporters and claims “many” more. Common Sense Group Partly based around culture war issues, and what its chair, the Tory backbencher John Hayes, terms a struggle against “subversives” such as Black Lives Matter and Extinction Rebellion, its 136-page policy booklet sets out ideas on everything from immigration to the legal system and family life. Sixteen MPs contributed to the booklet. Blue Collar Conservatism Originally launched by Esther McVey in parallel with her brief leadership bid to succeed Theresa May, with policies including redirecting foreign aid to domestic priorities, it boasts 159 MPs as official supporters including several cabinet ministers. However, it is less active in terms of openly agitating for policy change. Northern Research Group Led by the former Northern Powerhouse minister Jake Berry, this is a geographical faction aimed at boosting spending and investment in the north of England, north Wales and Scottish borders. More than 50 members. All-party group on fair fuel Very low key, and not officially a party faction, as it has two Labour members and one from the DUP. But it is Tory-dominated, and is arguably the most financially significant pressure group anywhere in the UK. It has been central to parliamentary and media efforts to keep fuel duty frozen for 11 years and counting, a policy that has cost the Treasury somewhere north of £100bn. European Research Group The model for the other factions. Set up in 1993, gradually moving from being the voice of Euroscepticism to that of hardline Brexiters. Hugely influential in the Commons revolts that saw off May’s limited Brexit compromises, and then ejected her from Downing Street. Largely quiet now, in part as many members have moved on to other pressure groups.Government lawyers have said any legal challenge against making low-paid people take confirmatory PCR tests to get financial support during isolation would stand a high chance of success, the Guardian has learned. Legal advice circulated within the UK Health and Security Agency (UKHSA) is understood to warn that there is a risk of a challenge under equalities law. The advice puts the chance of any challenge being successful at 50% to 70%. It says it could be argued that lower socioeconomic groups would be disadvantaged by the move to scrap confirmatory PCR Covid tests for everyone, if low-paid people were still required to get them in order to access £500 payments for support during isolation. “There is at least a medium-high 50-70% risk of successful challenge in the basis of equality and rationality grounds if we require individuals to have a confirmatory PCR to access TTSP [test-and-trace support] payments,” the advice says. “This is because it disproportionately impacts individuals from low-income backgrounds and if [lateral flow tests] are deemed to be sufficient from a public health and fraud perspective then to require all individuals to legally self-isolate then it is difficult to argue they should then [need a PCR test to] get access to the TTSP.” The move to scrap confirmatory PCR tests for asymptomatic people who test positive by self-reported lateral flow was announced this week. The exception is people on low pay who want to apply for Covid support payments, who are required to get confirmation because of the risk of fraudulent applications. It was also announced this week that PCR requirements would be scrapped for travellers arriving in the UK – a move that was opposed by the health secretary, Sajid Javid, on the grounds that it could set back detection of new variants coming in to the country. The Guardian revealed this week that Jenny Harries, the head of the UKHSA, had raised concerns about low-paid workers being disadvantaged by changes to the Covid testing regime in England. In a memo before Christmas, she highlighted a greater risk of false negatives for those on lower incomes forced to go to a testing centre to ensure they received the £500 Covid test-and-trace support payments. Harries wrote: “In higher prevalence periods, the abandonment of confirmatory PCR would mean that the people most likely to receive a false negative and therefore potentially become ill and then seek hospital care later and therefore more likely to die would be more likely to be those from lower socioeconomic groups who also have higher risk of underlying health conditions as additional risk factors.” The government made the changes partly to ease pressure on the PCR testing system while Covid case numbers are at an unprecedented level, and partly to allow people to start the clock on isolation periods earlier. However, there were also concerns among public health officials that a confirmatory PCR was counterproductive because of the risk of false negatives. Some experts have previously highlighted that there is still a reasonable chance of a person having Covid if they have a positive lateral flow followed by a negative PCR, with the PCR missing a positive result about one in 20 times. It is understood that data prepared for Javid this month contained estimates that about 9,000 out of 195,000 confirmatory PCR tests taken in November in England were false negatives. Out of 20,000 negatives overall, this suggested that 45% of all negative PCR results after a positive lateral flow result were false. In Wales, support payments are given out for self-reported tests without the need for a confirmatory PCR. It is difficult to quantify the number of people affected, but the House of Commons library found that about 370,000 support payments had been made by November. That means about 1 million applications are likely to have been made, because, based on previous data, the success rate is estimated to be about a third. The number of payments is likely to have risen again substantially during the latest wave of Covid. The UKHSA declined to comment on the leaked advice.This could be the year of the jumbo-sized mortgage – for some UK homebuyers at least – as lenders loosen their purse strings and increase the maximum sums they are willing to offer. The mortgage lender Habito recently announced that it will let some buyers borrow up to seven times their salary – well above the traditional maximum – in order to help them “secure their dream home sooner”. In the coming months a new lender called Perenna plans to launch mortgages of up to six times salary, and some experts believe other similar deals will emerge this year. Those who meet the criteria for these mortgages could be able to buy a property they might have assumed was well out of their price range – perhaps a home costing £200,000 more than they thought they could afford. Some might argue that letting people borrow more is the only realistic answer to the fact that years of soaring property values have left large numbers priced out of the market. The average price of a home is now 8.6 times average earnings, according to official data. However, these new deals are only open to certain borrowers and come with plenty of downsides – probably the biggest of which is that you may be able to get a much cheaper interest rate if you go for a standard deal. Just because a bank is prepared to “go large” on its lending doesn’t necessarily mean it is a good idea to sign up for a supersized mortgage. The basics Banks and building societies look at various aspects of people’s finances when deciding how big a mortgage they think someone can afford to take out. Traditionally the typical maximum for how much someone can borrow is between four and five times their salary. This is known as the income multiple. In the years after the financial crisis of 2007-08, rules were tightened up to prevent a repeat of the reckless lending that some say was rife prior to the crash. The Bank of England imposed limits on mortgages of more than 4.5 times earnings: banks can offer higher income multiples but only on a set proportion of their lending. Last year a number of big lenders lifted their caps to 5.5 times salary for certain borrowers. The new deals Habito, which started as a mortgage broker in 2016 before launching into lending in 2019, is offering borrowing of up to an income multiple of seven times basic salary but not to everyone. The deals are only available to people who take out one of the company’s fixed-for-life mortgages. Launched last year under the Habito One brand, these let borrowers lock their monthly repayments at the same level for up to 40 years. Habito One is open to first-time buyers, home movers and remortgagers in England and Wales. You will need a 10% deposit (it says it hopes to launch a deal for those who can only manage 5% soon) and there is a chunky £1,995 product fee to pay. To qualify for the biggest loans available, applicants need to have one of the following jobs: teacher, firefighter, nurse, paramedic, doctor, police officer, accountant, barrister, engineer, lawyer, dentist, architect, surveyor or vet. They must also earn a minimum basic salary of £25,000 a year. Higher earners – those on a minimum £75,000 basic salary – who don’t have one of those jobs are also eligible. Single and joint applications will be considered, although if it is a couple, only one will be accepted for up to seven times salary, with the other at up to five times. At the time of writing, the Habito One rates without early repayment charges start at 2.99% (for a 15-year term where someone is borrowing 60% of the property’s value), rising to 5.6% (for a 40-year term where the applicant is borrowing 90%). The rates with early repayment charges – the tie-in period is 10 years – are slightly lower: from 2.79% to 5.4%. Perenna, meanwhile, plans to launch its fixed-for-life mortgages in the second half of this year, and says it will be letting homebuyers borrow up to six times their income. It intends to start with a 30-year fixed-rate, then launch 40- and 50-year fixes later. One of the big downsides of this new breed of mortgage offering fixed monthly payments for decades is that most people will be able to get a much lower interest rate if they go for a standard shorter-term deal such as a two- or five-year fix. With these, when the offer period ends, you simply move to another competitive deal. Elsewhere, rates for first-time buyers looking for a standard two-year fix up to 90% loan-to-value currently start at only 1.23%, according to the data provider Moneyfacts. But the lenders behind these fixed-for-life deals say that as your interest rate is guaranteed for the lifetime of your loan you are protected against any threat of fluctuating interest rates, and you won’t have to keep paying expensive product fees, perhaps every two or three years. The maths Take a couple where both earn £25,000: if they went for a deal where borrowing was capped at 4.5 times their combined salary, they might be able to buy a home worth £250,000. If they went with, and qualified for, the Habito One deal, they could borrow seven times one salary and five times the other – allowing them to buy a home costing £333,000. For a solo applicant earning £75,000 whose borrowing was capped at 4.5 times income, they might be able to buy a home for £375,000. With this new deal, they could potentially purchase a property worth £560,000 (in this last example, it’s not quite the full seven times salary because of Habito’s rule that customers must have a minimum 10% cash left over in their accounts after all expenditure). (All of the examples assume a 10% deposit). What about other lenders? Several big names – including Halifax, HSBC, Santander and Barclays – will now go up to 5.5 times income for high-earning borrowers, and will typically let those who are accepted access their entire range of standard mortgage deals. At Halifax, a maximum of 5.5 times salary will apply to those earning more than £75,000 who are borrowing up to £1m at less than 75% LTV. HSBC requires a salary of £100,000-plus, and the maximum loan is 90%. At Santander, it is a combined income for all applicants of £100,000 or more, with a maximum loan of 75%. With Barclays, at least one borrower must be on £75,000-plus, or the two highest-earning applicants must have a combined income of £100,000 or more, and the maximum loan is 85%. The return of big loans After the 2007-08 financial crisis, mortgages to first-time buyers in particular were immediately slashed but in recent years many lenders have eased lending restrictions. A further relaxation is on the cards: the Bank of England has announced it will consult on scrapping a rule that forces many borrowers to prove they could afford a big rise in interest rates before they can be approved for a mortgage. At the moment, with a typical two- or five-year deal, lenders must stress-test an applicant’s ability to repay their home loan at 3% above the standard variable rate that the borrower might go on to at the end of the initial period. This limits the amounts many people are able to borrow. The new breed of long-term fixed-rate mortgages avoid these restrictions because their interest rates are guaranteed for the lifetime of the loan. Perenna says: “There are no interest rate stress tests with long-term fixed-rate products, as borrowers are protected from any interest rate rises over the long term and won’t revert on to a lender’s higher SVR.”The questions 1 Which singer songwriter is known as the “mother of the MP3”? 2 What is the largest arboreal mammal? 3 Sandra Mason is the first president of which country? 4 Which UK charity is named after a New York bar? 5 In global investment, what is a SWF? 6 Which monarch had a 325-volume stamp collection? 7 Which Lloyd Webber musical borrowed a title from Elgar? 8 The sports paper L’Auto founded which race? What links: 9 Abertawe; Caerdydd; Casnewydd; Llanelwy; Tyddewi? 10 Hudson; Crichton; Pennyworth; Carson? 11 Betelgeuse; Peter the Great; plague rodents; music, dance etc? 12 Aspartame; isomalt; lactitol; steviol glycoside? 13 Thyssen-Bornemisza; Reina Sofia; Prado? 14 Canton; charge; field; fimbriation; fly, hoist? 15 Little Albert; Asch Conformity; Stanford Prison; Milgram? The answers 1 Suzanne Vega (Tom’s Diner was used in testing). 2 Orangutan. 3 Barbados. 4 Stonewall. 5 Sovereign wealth fund. 6 George V. 7 Starlight Express. 8 Tour de France. 9 Welsh names for Welsh cities: Swansea; Cardiff; Newport; St Asaph; St Davids. 10 Fictional butlers: Upstairs, Downstairs; Admirable Crichton; Batman; Downton Abbey. 11 Anagrams: star; tsar; rats; arts. 12 Artificial sweeteners. 13 Galleries in Madrid’s “art triangle”. 14 Parts of a flag. 15 Famous (or infamous) psychological experiments.• Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereThe former head of Kazakhstan’s domestic intelligence agency has been detained on suspicion of high treason, the agency said, after he was fired amid violent protests. The National Security Committee, or KNB, said in a statement on Saturday that its former chief Karim Masimov had been detained on Thursday after it launched an investigation into charges of high treason. “On suspicion of committing this crime, former chairman of the KNB, K.K. Masimov was detained and placed in a temporary detention centre, along with others,” the statement said. Dozens have died and public buildings across Kazakhstan have been ransacked and torched in the worst violence experienced by the former Soviet republic in 30 years of independence. Security forces appeared to have reclaimed the streets of Kazakhstan’s main city on Friday after days of violence, and the Russian-backed president Kassym-Jomart Tokayev said he had ordered his troops to shoot to kill to put down a countrywide uprising. At Tokayev’s invitation, a Russia-led military alliance has been deployed at a time of high tension in East-West relations. Russia and the United States are gearing up for talks next week on the Ukraine crisis. US secretary of state Antony Blinken warned on Friday that Kazakhstan will find it difficult to lower Russian influence after inviting in troops to quell unrest. “One lesson in recent history is that once Russians are in your house, it’s sometimes very difficult to get them to leave,” Blinken said. On Friday the US State Department also authorised non-emergency consulate employees and the family members of all staff to leave Kazakhstan, warning its citizens that “violent protests may severely impact the US Embassy’s ability to provide consular services”. Massimov is widely viewed as a close ally of former president Nursultan Nazarbayev. He has twice been prime minister and has also served as head of the presidential administration under Nazarbayev. Nazarbayev, 81, was the longest-serving ruler of an ex-Soviet state until he turned over the presidency to Tokayev in 2019. His family is widely believed to have retained influence in Nur-Sultan, the purpose-built capital that bears his name. The interior ministry has said 26 protesters were killed in the clashes over the past week, as well as 18 people from police and security forces. Witness reports of shootouts and casualties suggest that the real figures may be considerably higher. More than 3,800 people had been detained, the ministry said. In a televised address on Friday, Tokayev said he had personally given the order to use lethal force in recent days, and also blamed “so-called free media outlets” for helping to fan unrest. “Abroad there are calls for the two sides to hold negotiations for a peaceful resolution,” he said. “What idiocy. What kind of negotiations can you have with criminals? We were dealing with armed and well-prepared bandits, both local and foreign. Bandits and terrorists, who should be destroyed. This will happen in the nearest time.” The protests were sparked this week by a sudden rise in fuel prices combined with long-simmering frustrations over the political and economic situation in the country. The peaceful demonstrations turned violent on Wednesday, with crowds seizing government buildings and widespread looting. With Agence France-Presse and ReutersTwo strange things happen in a Northern Irish village in the summer holidays of 1993. First, Hannah’s classmates start dying. Then, one by one, they return to haunt her. There’s a pattern to the deaths. Strange lumps cluster on the victim’s skin, they become feverish, then their organs fail. Within hours of their passing – and even before the village’s well-oiled gossip machine has begun spreading the news – they come to Hannah. Each appears just once, flicking through magazines in the doctor’s surgery, or scrunched up in the darkness of the bathroom as Hannah gropes her way in for a wee. They are subtly changed: older, with a coat of nail polish here, a drop of extra confidence there. After a few words, they vanish. Two questions propel Carson’s compassionate and meticulously observed third novel. Why has this plague hit Ballylack? And why, of all her class, is Hannah the one blessed with apparent health, and cursed with strange visions? Carson was born in Ballymena, the Antrim town whose famously pious council banned Electric Light Orchestra and Brokeback Mountain. Now living in Belfast, she has spoken of her desire to give a voice to the Protestant experience in the province. Her previous novel, The Fire Starters, which won the European Union prize for literature, set a magical siren among sectarian violence in a carefully drawn Belfast. The Raptures brings a similar mix of granular detail and uncanny happenings to Ballylack, a village whose name and religious conservatism carry more than an echo of her birthplace. Here, homes bear “wonky paintings of the Queen, Princess Di and King Billy”, local pastors boom at the pulpit and schoolboy drummers soundtrack Orange marches. One mum is banned from demonstrating yoga at the school fair; Hannah’s evangelical household don’t let her study dinosaurs or sing Beatles songs. The orthodoxy can be crushing, but Ballylack is no monolith. Some residents come from the Philippines or China, and not everyone is a church regular. There’s a “fairy tree” on the edge of town and a folk healer in the neighbouring village, while the era of alcopops, 2 Unlimited and bomber jackets is dawning for Hannah’s pre-teen class. Ballylack’s miniature pandemic tears holes in this community. Bereaved parents turn on each other, or reach out towards vigilante justice. Those with faith wonder if it is strong enough. News reporters swarm around the houses of ailing children. Seán, a crisis management officer brought in to investigate, scrabbles to find the outbreak’s cause, until one of Hannah’s ghostly visitors drops a clue. Shy but resolute Hannah is Carson’s main focus, but The Raptures slips through Ballylack like a sympathetic spirit, checking in on parents and children and spending time with fixer Seán, taciturn farmer Alan and his wife, Maganda. The narrative voice takes on the tics, rhythms and thoughts of the characters, occasionally stumbling but never falling. Instead it rolls out in a great, chatty cascade, drawing the reader into the community’s fraying confidence and driving the story onward. The result is an intriguingly mixed-up book. The Raptures is a study of village life that brings the easy familiarity of a sitcom to its cast, but it’s also an Agatha Christie-esque whodunnit, a dark supernatural mystery and an account of mass trauma. Carson forges these parts into a tragicomedy in which fantastic elements slot almost seamlessly alongside kitchen-sink realism. Given Hannah is the novel’s centrepiece, this makes a fair bit of sense: why wouldn’t a child who’s spent many Sundays “drinking in the Apocalypse like a wee sponge” view ghostly classmates as just another of life’s mysteries? Hannah takes a singular path through the grim plague and Ballylack’s religious groupthink, and Carson ends The Raptures on a note of measured optimism. The village may be battered and grieving, but there’s patience and kindness here too, and green shoots that stubbornly poke through the scorched earth. • The Raptures is published by Doubleday (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Stand-in coach Graham Thorpe is talking but the house is waking up and I can’t catch much but he’s optimistic and kind of bullish I think, like a man putting out a job CV should be “I want the guys to enjoy the contest tomorrow because sure the Australians will come hard but the guys showed good temperament tonight.” “The two at the top they’ve experienced some tough moments and they’re having to dig deep, so you’ve got to manage yourself against some good quick bowlers and Nathan Lyon. I’m looking forward to coming out of the game with a draw.” Bold! We’d like to see it too Graham - especially with Buttler and Bairstow and Stokes injured. They’ll be batting tomorrow too though, it is confirmed. Anyway, that’s about it from me on the red-eye: thanks for all the messages and sorry I didn’t get to all the correspondence. Join us here tomorrow for the denouement - have a lovely day. A cracking day at the SCG that will always be remembered for Usman Khawaja’s second century: dreams are not usually written so sweetly A joy in itself, but at the age of 35, he’s also played himself into the next Test at Hobart as well as the forthcoming tour. Runs too for Cameron Green, who has belted himself into form. For England, it was another long, weary, day at the office. Their innings subsided in a stretch and a sneeze; then a promising start with the ball - Wood grabbing Warner and Labuschagne and Leach, Harris and Smith (and later Green and Carey) - subsided once Labuschagne got started and strode on... and on. Fantastic to see Leach bowling with confidence again though - even if Cummins denied him a possible hat-trick and fiver-fer by declaring. And should we be celebrating an England opening partnership that survived eleven overs and made it to 30? A throaty 7am roar of yes, as the dog turns in her sleep and shows her belly to the morning. 11th over: England 30-0 (Crawley 22; Hameed 8) Cummins to bowl the last. Hameed lets one fly - I don’t like it when he does that. The umpires come together, but no, they’re not going to let England off the hook for the last three balls. Hameed, short-sleeved jumper baggy over his slender frame, squeezes the ball to square leg and comes back for the second. Brave/foolish. He picks off a single and Crawley defends the last and that’s it! A small but pleasing pat on the back on what has been another long, dominantly Australian, day. The ground-staff sprint onto the pitch to protect it against the encroaching rain and the players wander away into the shadows. 10th over: England 27-0 (Crawley 22; Hameed 5) Crawley is surprised by one that fires up from Boland, jumping like a fire-cracker, hits the shoulder of the bat and hollers over the slips and down to the boundary. Crawley then slowly examines his boots for debris but Boland is his match, running back to his mark.A nervy over and Australia sprint into position to catch one more. This is now the highest England opening partnership of the series. One over to come. 9th over: England 23-0 (Crawley 18; Hameed 5) Cummins switches to the Paddington end, and they pocket a single each. Five minutes left. 8th over: England 21-0 (Crawley 17; Hameed 4) The first real scare as bustling Boland takes Hameed’s edge as he pulls the bottom hand away, but the ball falls short of Smith at slip. Then a most unusual slight as Cummins misfields awkwardly as Hameed calls for a quick single. And on they truck. “As far as I am concerned Australia [could have kept] on batting because I want to put off hearing what a great opportunity English batsmen have/ have wasted. “Given the good pitch, good weather and good length of time English batsmen will have to bat, how often will we hear: “This is a really good opportunity for Hameed/Crawley/Bairstow/Buttler/. Followed by: “That was a really good opportunity for Hameed/Crawley/Bairstow/Buttler.” Spare me such agony someone.” Maybe, maybe, Alisdair Gould, tonight they will. 7th over: England 20-0 (Crawley 17; Hameed 3) Starc throws himself to the crease. Hameed is content to defend, even a full toss. He dabs the fifth into the off-side and they take a quick single - nicely done. And that’s stylish from Crawley, as Starc sprays onto his legs and he eases the ball on its way past square leg for four. A quarter of a damned hour left. And a surprise email pings in from Fiona Staples, my husband’s lovely cousin over in Australia! “G’day Tanya from steamy Sydney. Very much enjoying your blog. Can say from experience that it takes stamina to do the nightshift. Hope your boys can hang in there for a while and not make it too easy for the Aussies.” So great to hear from you - hope the cats are doing well and a big shout out to your dad too. 6th over: England 15-0 (Crawley 13; Hameed 2) Boland gets the nod with Cummins and Starc getting through five overs without the customary results. Crawley though, is his equal. It’s raining in Sydney, if not yet at the SCG. 5th over: England 15-0 (Crawley 13; Hameed 2) The shadow of the floodlights stretches onto the field like a huge traffic light. Starc sprints through another and Hameed gets off the mark at last with a reach at a wide one and square drive for two. 4th over: England 12-0 (Crawley 12; Hameed 0) Oh, and that is sweet by Crawley, an off-drive, nothing more than a push, but it glides away, speeding to the boundary. Eau de elegance. He picks up five more off Cummins and, dare I say it, looks untroubled. Nine from the over “Just woken up and I see that Australia managed to get 151 of the last ball of their innings - must have been running for a very long time!” OMG, thank you for that Steve Ditchburn - I will go back and correct but just to be clear Australia scored 265-6 in their second innings NOT 416! 3rd over: England 3-0 (Crawley 3; Hameed 0) Ah yes, we get a panorama of the sky and the clouds definitely are banking in the inky-blue sky. Crawley flicks a single off Starc, and that, glory be, is a third over stoutly survived. “Here I am a Brit in Los Angeles - listening to England being roasted again via the geo-restriction-defying website of Melbourne radio station “1116 SEN” “Noticing the very peculiar Oz radio announcer habit of giving the score as if the batting side’s position should be determined by how many wickets it has lost rather than by how many runs it has scored. “So when the score is 253 runs scored with 4 wickets down we expect that that should be described as “253 for 4”. But for reasons unknown Oz radio folks always announce it as the batting team being “4 for 253”. Surely that is a description of the bowling side’s position - not the batting side’s score?” Hi Martin Lewis! Yes, that’s the Australian way for reasons that escape me right now. 2nd over: England 2-0 (Crawley 2; Hameed 0) Crawley plays the same trick again, escaping the strike first ball by turning Cummins off his pads. Hameed survives with a series of leaves and defence, and Cummins stifles an lbw appeal off the last ball. A storm, apparently, is brewing behind the back of the stand. “Bloody hell,” taps Robert Wilson. “That’s truly crushing. I hope Khawaja’s mum is a good enough mother to take him aside afterward and gently remind him that having fun is all very fine and good but it’s never an excuse for being unkind to the other boys.” 1st over: England 1-0 (Crawley 1; Hameed 0) Starc’s moustache bristles at the top of his mark at the Paddington end. The first is outside the off stump and, is it my imagination, keeps a bit low. They spring a single off the second ball which leaves HH to bat out the over. Starc sprays mercifully wide. England’s openers have scores 158 runs for 14 wickets this series. And only Root has scored more runs than Khawaja this series. “Tanya my dear old thing.” Morning Kim Thonger! “In these inflationary times might it be an idea to add, in Boycottian method, when England are batting, not two wickets to the score, but four, or even five, to get a true understanding of the state of the game?” Hide thine eyes. What a day for Usman Khawaja, what a Test match. The applause as he walks off raises the emerald tiles from the pavilion roof. If his first innings was graceful and restrained; this was more brutal, at times freestyle. Bravo! And already, the Australian fielders are standing in the shade on the boundary, waiting for Hameed and Crawley to enter the lion’s den. Australia declare with Leach on a hat-trick! Carey sweeps and edges to give Pope his fourth catch of the day. Green attempts to slog-sweep, perhaps to persuade Cummins not to declare, but the ball just goes up, up and into Root’s paws. 68th over: Australia 259-4 (Khawaja 101, Green 68) Wood again - surely he’s earned a rest, unless Root is hoping he gets a well-earned wicket. My telly has switched off for reasons of inexplicable modern technology but I can tell you Australia haven’t declared. 67th over: Australia 258-4 (Khawaja 101, Green 67) Khawaja’s wife, holding their daughter, smiles from the stands and Khawaja gets a huge hug from Green, who towers over him. What a joyous performance. Nice to see Root and England applauding too. Khawaja’s the third man to make double hundred in a Test at Sydney after Walters and Ponting; and the sixth to make two hundreds in Ashes Tests. Gorgeous, gracious, godly stuff! He nudges into the leg side and they sprint two. He raises his bat and skips a jig of delight, takes off his helmet and looks to the sky as the SCG stand to a comeback to beat all comebacks. 66th over: Australia 250-4 (Khawaja 98, Green 62) Back leg raised, Green hollers Wood through covers for four. Wood sprays two balls wide and Khawaja can’t reach them. The crowd boo a leg-bye off the last ball, then England go for REVIEW...not out. On the baggy-green balcony, Australia are waiting. 65th over: Australia 244-4 (Khawaja 98, Green 57) Much applause as Green gets off strike from Malan’s second ball; but Khawaja just picks up a single to give it back and they continue to play ping-pong - finishing with a gently booed single to give Green back the strike at the end of the over. “Remember that tiny smidgen of hope that filled English hearts at the close of yesterday’s play, as Bairstow and Leach walked off ?” I do Sankaran Krishna. “The Khawaja-Green partnership today is a reminder that entertaining such hopes and thoughts will be mercilessly punished -immediately and wholesomely. Sorry guys, the worst is yet to come - I cannot imagine Eng getting to close of play today without losing about 3 wickets at minimum.” It will be time to duck down behind the sofa. 64th over: Australia 239-4 (Khawaja 96, Green 54) Someone lay out a cooled towel in readiness for Mark Wood, just a couple off his over, as he hurtles in, touching 90mph still, even pulling out a bouncer. 63rd over: Australia 236-4 (Khawaja 95, Green 53) And into the 90s with the most laid-back slog sweep for six you’ll ever see. Root hides his feeling behind his sunglasses. “On getting up at 5.30 in the morning,” writes Robert Wilson, “ I’m reading the OBO chronologically from the bottom up as I and others always (a unique way of following the day’s chronology and a matchless delight) until it gets to Khawaja and starts bugging. He comes in to bat. But then he’s got thirty odd. Fifty slips by and now he’s in the eighties. I keep having to go back and check I haven’t skipped half an hour’s play. But it seems to be real. How big is he actually seeing it?” Like a full moon on a cloudless night. 62nd over: Australia 227-4 (Khawaja 87, Green 51) Wood sprints in - impressive mind over muscle - but Green sees a short one and ham-shanks it for four to bring up an increasingly confident fifty, his first big score of the series. Everything slotting into place for Australia. Root walks back with Wood as they make their weary way to the top of his mark. Well played. “What some may not know is that Khawaga / Khawaja (spelling varies across Iran, the Middle East, Pakistan, Baluchistan, etc.) means “Master.” Thank you Darryl Accone! And how true that has been at the SCG. 61st over: Australia 222-4 (Khawaja 87, Green 46) Root, bowling in sunglasses, doing the donkey work. Khawaja eyes up a fat wide one and reverse sweeps him for four. A half-hearted lbw appeal sticks in Root’s throat, but there’s an inside edge. 60th over: Australia 216-4 (Khawaja 82, Green 45) Mark Wood gets the short straw in an attempt to slow the over-rate if not the run-rate. His first ball is pancaked to the square leg boundary by Green. and he knocks four more through the covers and mid-on. The lead streches to 338 and the sun bakes down on England’s morale. 59th over: Australia 208-4 (Khawaja 82, Green 37) Oh my, Khawaja is playing beach cricket here, through the covers for four, then swept for three more. Root twirls on, in necessity rather than hope. 58th over: Australia 200-4 (Khawaja 75, Green 36) No boundaries but still six glide off Leach’s over. 57th over: Australia 194-4 (Khawaja 71, Green 35) Runs, runs, as Khawaja pulls a short one from Root with a dismissive crack. And then a chance - a demi-chance - as the ball skims the outside edge in-and out of Pope’s gloves and past the diving Crawley at slip. “Hello Tanya! “Good morning Abhi Saxena! “For entirely selfish reasons, I am hoping Khawaja plays next week. He is so good to watch, surely they will not drop him now? He has made the last few rainy winter nights in the American northwest a lot more bearable for this one.” I don’t think they can drop him. Can they? Especially as this second hundred looks nailed on... 56th over: Australia 178-4 (Khawaja 66, Green 34) Khawaja slog-sweeps Leach for six, just because he can. And the cameras pan to a pensive Pat Cummins on the balcony, what a ridiculously Hollywood-handsome man he is. 55th over: Australia 178-4 (Khawaja 59, Green 31) A couple from Root’s arm-over exercise. I’ve thought this too, just from the TV pictures. Not as many as in New Zealand where they can just play on the grass all day, but definitely more than at home. I would love to see a space carved out for kids to play at a Test but the concourses are always so crowded. 54th over: Australia 176-4 (Khawaja 58, Green 30) Leach again, from the other end,, the sky just a beautiful cornflower blue that I wish I could bottle up and throw into the January gloom. A nifty reverse-sweep by Khawaja is stopped at the rope by Overton. Apparently, England have bowled on 12 of the 16 days of this series - one for the bowlers’ union. 53rd over: Australia 173-4 (Khawaja 55, Green 30) Root takes off Leach, and brings on himself. The last ball is a “mystery” dumped on the leg side that neither Root or anyone else can read. 52nd over: Australia 171-4 (Khawaja 54, Green 29) Khawaja, batting like a dream, drives Broad through the covers to reach his fifty, then late-cuts a half volley down to third man and over the rope. Dan Norcross wonders just how ruthless Cummins will be in his declaration... if Khawaja is approaching a second century, and Green fifty. 51st over: Australia 163-4 (Khawaja 46, Green 29) Khawaja, dainty and dancing, lofts Leach over midwicket for four. “Good morning Tanya.” Hello Brian! “I’m finally at breaking point, having watched most of the preceding Tests including every ball yesterday, and then stayed up until 4am today in the ludicrous hope of a proper Australian collapse (or just a spectacular thunderstorm). “Not even the lure of waiting up to see if this email gets used can keep me going any longer. Forgive me and good night.” You’ve earned your sleep. See you for the denouement. 50th over: Australia 157-4 (Khawaja 41, Green 28) Khawaja, in perfect touch, nips Broad off his pads for four. But what is this? England score a direct hit! The first I’ve seen of the entire series. A nifty pick up and throw from Malan atcover but Cameron Green’s loping legs eat up the ground too quickly and he’s home. 49th over: Australia 151-4 (Khawaja 36, Green 27) Leach creaks into action for the first over after tea and the Aussies pick up a couple. “Just emailing in while we do get another night feed with our 3 week old twins,” writes Rob Harper. “Their insatiable appetites, and their ability to make you think all is well for brief periods before coming back with a bang, remind me of something... the Aussies?!” I’m in awe! You and your partner deserve a huge medal. I remember those nights, and I only ever had one at a time. Hope this feed sates them like a Jonny Bairstow century and you get to sleep at least until England bat again. Green leads Khawaja back out and we go again. In case you haven’t heard, Sam Billings is currently driving from Queensland to Sydney after being called up by England after the injuries to Jos Buttler, Jonny Bairstow and Ben Stokes. Billings, Kent’s captain who has been playing in the Big Bash, was supposed to fly home on Friday, ahead of England’s T20 tour of the Caribbean. He’ll need to rock up with a negative PCR and then isolate before being allowed in the bubble and presumably playing at Hobart. 48th over: Australia 148-4 (Khawaja 35, Green 25) Joe Root bowls the last over before tea - finishing with a bouncer! Khawaja ducks, Pope takes it with a surprised right glove, Khawaja grins and so does Root. They all saunter off for tea - advantage Australia, but England have been plucky. Time to put the coffee on, back shortly. 47th over: Australia 148-4 (Khawaja 35, Green 25) Green and Khawaja pick up three from Leach, Green looking increasingly at ease. 46th over: Australia 145-4 (Khawaja 36, Green 23) We’ve reached the empire building stage of the innings now -as Khawaja picks up a couple through point. The Barmy Army are singing to themselves, and the rest of the ground - not packed - are waiting for the final act. The lead 268. 45th over: Australia 143-4 (Khawaja 32, Green 23) “With Leach bowling so nicely,” says Gower... and he is. Everything just has more of a spring to it, from the rhythm of his run-up, to the way he twirls the ball in his hands. Australia pick up three. 44th over: Australia 140-4 (Khawaja 29, Green 23) Anderson replaces Wood, who busted 90mph throughout that quick burst. And, most uncharacteristically, Anderson leaks runs as Green dispatches him for two successive boundaries, one straight back ticking his toes, and another lofted over midwicket. 43rd over: Australia 132-4 (Khawaja 29, Green 15) Overton sprints round the boundary and stops a Green boundary with a launch and a dive. Good 12th man action as Leach wheels through another over. 42nd over: Australia 128-4 (Khawaja 28, Green 12)Wood pounds one into the pitch and it rises up, up, and the diminutive Pope, deputising for Buttler, has no chance of reaching it.The next fizzes past Green’s outside edge, and the next, but still no reward. Even the effervescent Wood looks a little doleful. Australia’s lead reaches 250 which, realistically, is already too much for this England to chase, especially carrying injuries to Buttler and Bairstow. But might they see a day and a bit of batting out? If it rains a bit? I wonder how much longer Cummins will bat for. 41st over: Australia 122-4 (Khawaja 26, Green 12) More Leach control. 40th over: Australia 121-4 (Khawaja 26, Green 12) Khawaja swivels and pulls handsomely as Wood takes over from Broad, away to the rope. Then the ball flies off Green’s glove (?) to and then past Stokes at third slip who either can’t reach the ball because of his injury, or clutches his side afterwards because the attempt has hurt him. England starting to resemble a field hospital. 39th over: Australia 112-4 (Khawaja 21, Green 8) Leach again, mojo bubbling, floats the ball and Green defends. 38th over: Australia 110-4 (Khawaja 21, Green 6)From the balcony, Bairstow in bearded glory, arms folded, watches. Earlier pictures showed him with a huge splint on his thumb. Khawaja picks up a couple with a punchy push. An email from yesterday that the guys didn’t have time to put up, from Kathy Phillips. “I had the joy of spending yesterday at the SCG with my English friend. We had plenty of time during the rain delays to discuss the current state of English cricket and he had some interesting observations...since he moved to Sydney he’s noticed that many of the local parks have cricket nets that are in constant use all year by the local school kids. He seemed to think access to cricket was easier here and played by more people. He also noted that everywhere he goes, the cricket is either on the TV or radio and most people follow it, whereas back home it’s not on free to air TV and less visible. He felt there needed to be more done to build back from the grassroots. Food for thought. “Then Broad started taking wickets and Usman got his century so we just went back to watching the cricket. It was a good day.” 37th over: Australia 108-4 (Khawaja 19, Green 6) Leach turns the screw, a maiden, Green has a dart but only edges onto his own leg. 36th over: Australia 108-4 (Khawaja 19, Green 6) The sun bounces off the lovely green pavilion roof as Broad, wearing the air of a man whose been toiling in the pasture, bounds in. Dab, dab. This is so true: 35th over: Australia 105-4 (Khawaja 19, Green 3) Thanks Sam, great stuff! Well well, and I’m going to say this while I can, but things have looked worse for England. Ben Stokes is breathing down Green’s throat at silly point as Leach wheels in. Khawaja reverse-sweeps the last ball down for four. 34th over: Australia 99-4 (Khawaja 15, Green 1) We think this is the last one before drinks, and Anderson gets the first one to jump markedly, as Green now takes one on the glove. Some “up and down” as the commentators would say now - Green is uncertain in coming forward to Anderson here. Green then digs a yorker out to midwicket, leaving Khawaja to negotiate the remainder. He makes the most of it, driving one past mid off that really should have been fielded. Wood again. Usman picks up another single behind square. That’s drinks and that’s me done, Tanya Aldred will take over now. Cheers for your company! 33rd over: Australia 95-4 (Khawaja 12, Green 1) Khawaja reverses Leach for two to begin the over, and is happy to hang out defending on the front foot thereafter. He’s getting well outside off stump to do so. 32nd over: Australia 93-4 (Khawaja 10, Green 1) Anderson continues, he strikes Khawaja on the ribs with one that collects his glove on the way through. So he’s short again and Khawaja pulls him for one into the onside, albeit mistimed. Green’s on strike and immediately there’s a funky short mid-on next to the non-striker. Everything else is defended on the front foot. 31st over: Australia 92-4 (Khawaja 9, Green 1) Leach is bowling to Green and Green is ever-tentative in his forward defence. Every movement exaggerated, the hands seem hard. There’s two men in close, and a slip. Green comes down the wicket and pushes for one to mid-off, he makes it. They needed him on strike there. Khawaja finds one with a thick outside edge through gully, which is vacant. 30th over: Australia 90-4 (Khawaja 8, Green 0) It’s Anderson, and after some defence Khawaja then plays one of those classic pull shots through mid-wicket for four. Could watch that all day. The rest are let go. 29th over: Australia 86-4 (Khawaja 4, Green 0) Leach replaces Broad, and Smith flicks the first to deep mid-wicket. Khawaja does the same. Leach is employing the attacking angle of coming around the wicket. Feels like he is finally in the series. He then bowls Smith! Well! England creeping into the game here, Australia will not feel as though their lead is adequate enough to throw caution to the wind. England are only a wicket or two from being right back in it. Leach is around the wicket, Smith went back, it went straight on and took his stumps! Smith looks at the wicket, but he’s been beaten there. Leach roars with delight. 28th over: Australia 84-3 (Smith 22, Khawaja 3) Wood is in rapidly and wide of the crease and bounces Khawaja straight away, but it flies well over his head. Don’t get me wrong, it’d still be very scary. Wood is then full and Khawaja is caught on the crease, defending, perhaps anticipating more short stuff. The next is full and Khawaja leans on it, doing enough to gain two down the ground. Wood cranks it up, and Khawaja is back just in time to defend. Khawaja looks uncomfortable there. 27th over: Australia 82-3 (Smith 22, Khawaja 1) Broad hits Smith on the pad in the same manner he did in the first innings (where he offered no shot). The appeal is not serious but it looked close! There’s another half shout for caught behind with one that flicked Smith’s pad on the way through. Safe to say Broad is bowling very straight to Smith. He tries something wider and Smith cracks him through extra cover for four. As textbook as Smith can look. That finishes the over. 26th over: Australia 78-3 (Smith 18, Khawaja 1) Smith is back and across to Wood and pushing him past mid wicket for an easy two. Wood falls over in the process. He hooks the next thunderously behind square for six! It pierced square leg and deep backward. Wow. A punter with liquor in hand offered his left hand to catch it, instead it slammed into his wrist. Not a drop spilled. Smith then finds another single behind square. Khawaja is happy to defend the rest. Australia now lead by 200. 25th over: Australia 69-3 (Smith 9, Khawaja 1) Khawaja is watchful here, leaving Broad outside off before tentatively ducking a bouncer. Broad returns to the dry line, Khawaja leaves. Little bit of a new complexion here - Cameron Green is next ... can England make inroads? Australia won’t want to make another mistake. Khawaja’s approach reflects it. It’s a maiden. 24th over: Australia 69-3 (Smith 9, Khawaja 1) Wood screams one past Khawaja’s bat first up. Pope goes up, more out of happiness than real appeal. Wood could be “on” here. He’s 2/17 from 5, every batter looks rushed. Khawaja is late on a pull shot that beats him underneath his bat. He eventually squeezes one past leg gully to long leg. 23rd over: Australia 68-3 (Smith 8, Khawaja 0) It’s Broad to accompany Wood from the Randwick End - Smith drives to drive him past mid on straight away, but it’s well stopped. There’s a leg gully and one slip, and plenty of space otherwise. Broad pulls his length back and Smith defends accordingly. 22nd over: Australia 68-3 (Smith 8, Khawaja 0) Wood starts, and Marnus tucks him around the corner for one. Can England strike? Can England hold Australia? Smith nudges a single of his own to the onside. Wood then removes Labuschagne, bringing Khawaja to the wicket. The first one leaps at him and Khawaja does well to ride it into the ground. Welcome. The next carries high to Pope - a great start to the session for England. Here’s the BOM weather description for tomorrow: Cloudy. High (70%) chance of showers, most likely in the morning and early afternoon. The chance of a thunderstorm. Winds southerly 15 to 25 km/h becoming light in the late evening. And again! Labuschagne tries to cut Wood, it’s perhaps a bit close for it, and he edges him again! Marnus hangs around for a little bit, but it’s out of disappointment. He has to go. Similar to previous dismissals. Both teams are about to resume Sydney’s apparently bathed in sunshine, but there are storms on the way. Australia will have an hour or two here where they’ll be looking for a hundred or so runs. If they’re expecting to be rained off this afternoon, how many will they want before it comes? Has Marcus Harris found his ceiling, and is it high enough? Moeen doing Moeen things over on BT Sport apparently... England started brightly as Jonny Bairstow picked up where left off, immediately looking for runs in a bid to grab as many as possible before the second new ball. Jack Leach briefly shone before top edging a slog sweep, as did Stuart Broad as England made their way to 294, highlighted by Bairstow’s outstanding 113. Scott Boland finished with 4 for the innings and a damaged average. Somewhat disappointingly, Joe Root assumed a defensive posture just a few overs into Australia’s second innings, which has rendered much of the innings an exercise in easy singles and doubles, punctuated by the odd boundary and wicket. Warner succumbed to Wood early, Harris and Labuschagne partnered for 40 comfortable runs, and Smith has taken up the role in the spirit of quick runs. Australia leads by 188 with 8 wickets in hand, and it’s now a question of scoring pace, targets, and weather. I’ll bring you any odds and ends that pop up during lunch, and will then see you upon the resumption. 21st over: Australia 66-2 (Labuschagne 28, Smith 8) Marnus gets a single, then Smith demonstrates minimal interest in waiting this one out, he’s down the pitch, lofting Leach expansively over his head, one bounce four. Leach is obviously flatter thereafter. Marnus then plays an uppish, flat-batted swipe through cover - it was loose. He gets three in the end. That’s lunch. 20th over: Australia 57-2 (Labuschagne 24, Smith 3) We’re probably two overs from lunch, 12.30pm local time, and Anderson continues. Again, he hangs it outside off-stump, no doubt aiming to stem any potential tide of runs. One before lunch would be extremely handy for the visitors. Last ball of the over sees Anderson attack the stumps, and Marnus clips it confidently out to square leg for one. There’s one left before the break. From Max: “Have we left out one of our best batsmen out, only to the realise he’s one of our best keeper-gloveman?” 19th over: Australia 56-2 (Labuschagne 23, Smith 3) So Smith picks up where Harris departed. He’s busy early, whipping Leach through mid wicket for two, punching one to deep cover for one. Marnus returns the favour with one, and Smith defends the rest. Leach gets Harris! Leach goes wide on the crease, changing the angle, and Harris chases an expansive drive through cover. He nicks it and Pope takes a good catch behind the stumps. Harris fails to convert again. 18th over: Australia 52-1 (Harris 27, Labuschagne 22) Anderson is dry, and so is Australia. Harris gets one to fine leg. 17th over: Australia 51-1 (Harris 26, Labuschagne 22) Root is at slip, Hameed is at short leg, and there are few others nearby for Leach’s bowling. It’s an in-out configuration in the extreme. They are mitigating a risk that Harris has never posed. Why not see if he’s prepared to hit over the top? And now Harris is away with one. That’s the over. 16th over: Australia 50-1 (Harris 25, Labuschagne 22) Anderson is hanging it outside off, Marnus is initially happy to leave it. Eventually he strokes him from the back foot through point for two. Labuschagne content to play from the back foot here, and late. These will be 20 of the easiest Test runs he’s scored. From Colum: “England have to attack but the field is so conservative. Too many men in the deep when we have to take wickets. Even the first ball of the Australia innings flew through a vacant second slip. Jack Leach has to step up and help the quicks rotate. At least he’s bowling over the wicket to the left-handers which shows more intent.” Indeed. 15th over: Australia 47-1 (Harris 24, Labuschagne 20) Leach is encouragingly giving it some air to begin here, and Marnus eventually gets one down to deep mid wicket for one. Harris waits in his crease and there’s a mini leading edge as a result. Harris corrects, uses his feet and finds another single to long on. Marnus then rocks back and punches to the vacant off-side for two. Four off the over. Zero pressure here. The definition of milking. 14th over: Australia 43-1 (Harris 23, Labuschagne 17) Wood appears to have left the field - will try and get to the bottom of it. Let’s face it, I’ll check Twitter, just as you may do. So Anderson replaces him, and the field’s much the same, albeit with one extra slip. A miserly start from Anderson here - what’s new? Lots of defending, lots of leaving. The pitch, to these eyes, feels docile. Harris drives Anderson down the ground and gets two to finish the over. We’re in a new phase of the match here. 13th over: Australia 41-1 (Harris 21, Labuschagne 17) Leach to Marnus. One. Leach to Harris. One. It’s curious that Root has been keen to prevent boundaries before Australia looked to be hitting them. Marnus then goes to back cut one, it takes the outside edge and flies past Root for four. It wasn’t catchable. Labuschagne then cuts hard and only Hameeds strong left hand prevents another boundary. One. Leach to Harris. One to long on. Eight from it. 12th over: Australia 33-1 (Harris 19, Labuschagne 11) Wood continues, and Harris works another to deep square for one. Labuschagne swivels a pull around the corner for two next up. He hits the third even better - also a pull - but it’s straight to Hameed on the boundary, so just one. Harris then takes another to deep square. So we can now see that the field has spread, Root has assumed a defensive posture, and there are singles aplenty. Marnus gets another. This over has gone 1, 2, 1, 1, 1, with one to go. I feel England should’ve gone for more wickets before this approach. Harris defends the last. 11th over: Australia 27-1 (Harris 17, Labuschagne 7) Root introduces Leach, who starts with the altogether more aggressive left arm around orientation. Leach on in the 11th over is interesting. Marnus gets a single and Leach is over the wicket to Harris. Hameed is under the lid at short leg. Otherwise there are four men out. A hedge-betting field of ever there was one. Harris gets a single himself to deep mid-wicket. His last to Marnus catches him on the crease but his bat is down quickly enough. Two from the over, Leach is away. 10th over: Australia 25-1 (Harris 16, Labuschagne 6) Wood storms in to Labuschagne, he leaves on the back foot, owing to Wood’s pace. He’s back and across and punching the next but he can’t middle it. Wood’s pace seems to have him caught back on the crease at present. Nevertheless Root takes gully out and places a mid wicket...who fields the next ball. I - an internet civilian - would have kept two slips. Marnus takes a single through square leg. Harris then helps himself to a boundary as Wood offers him an over-the-wicket half-volley on leg stump. Thanks, and drinks. 9th over: Australia 20-1 (Harris 12, Labuschagne 5) Labuschagne punches his first down the ground, straight to mid off, but he hit it crisply. The next is flicked excellently through mid-wicket for three. Too full from Broad, no doubt he’ll pull the length back now. He does so as Harris defends to square leg. Broad is now over the wicket to Harris, and the opener is driving down the ground for two - full again from Broad. It should’ve been fielded by Wood, fresh from a 40m sprint to save the last shot. He’ll need a breather. Harris is solid in defence to finish the over. Australia lead by 142 runs. 8th over: Australia 15-1 (Harris 10, Labuschagne 2) So it’s Wood to Labuschagne. Wood’s managed to remove him cheaply at last few starts, and well he should - Wood’s deserved wickets for his enterprise this series. The ball is slapping into Pope’s gloves, there’s great carry. Labuschagne tucks the next off his hip and it bounces just short of leg gully. There’s the plan. Wood goes higher and Labuschagne pulls, controlled enough, out to the man at deep backward square. He gets one. 7th over: Australia 14-1 (Harris 10, Labuschagne 1) Harris is doing his jump-hop and defending Broad early. A thick outside edge squirts past Hameed at backward point, who should have stopped it cleanly at first opportunity. Labuschagne is on strike now. He pushes a single forward of point straight away, easy as you like. Harris leaves the last, which takes off a little after it pitches. 6th over: Australia 12-1 (Harris 9, Labuschagne 0) Wood replaces Broad - will we see fireworks? To this author’s eye Warner has struggled with Wood’s pace, regularly shifting his back foot away upon delivery. The first hits high on Harris’ bat, the second worked around the corner for one. It brings Warner on strike. His back foot doesn’t move, but he does punch Wood correctly and squarely through point for two. Wood might crank it up now. Warner’s high on his toes and defending. The next, he nicks! And that’s the end of that. Email from John: “Going by commentators’ view of Ollie Pope’s prowess as a keeper, have we perhaps seen the last test of Buttler’s career? Injury has done for a lot of players lately.” I’d call that an early crow! Will be interesting to see what happens with Buttler’s red ball career from here. Warner edges and it’s taken comfortably by Pope. He’s hung his bat out at it, a half/check drive, and you can hear him say “oh no” upon nicking it. Wood was wide of the crease. Simple. 5th over: Australia 9-0 (Harris 8, Warner 1) Anderson attacks the channel accurately, who is looking for runs but can’t succeed. Anderson stays there, and so does Warner. Maiden. A circumspect start from Australia, so far. 4th over: Australia 9-0 (Harris 8, Warner 1) Warner’s off the mark with a drive down the ground that Broad gets a hand to, preventing more runs. Half shout for one down the leg side, Broad isn’t interested and hotspot shows it flicked the thigh pad. He elicits a leading edge from Harris to finish the over, but it runs safely to backward point. 3rd over: Australia 8-0 (Harris 8, Warner 0) Harris rocks back and hammers Anderson’s first with a brutal pull shot through square leg. Wasn’t far from Craig Overton at square leg but one of those so heavily hit we’re not seriously calling that a chance. Harris then defends one and it evidently breaks his bat. Josh Inglis runs three or four blades on, and Harris now has a new one. A few balls later and Anderson gets one to nip back. There’s a big shout but it’s eventually turned down by DRS. Anderson is around the wicket, it nips in and beats Harris, who is stuck on the crease. Height and line will be the issue. There’s no bat. But it’s missing on height. 2nd over: Australia 4-0 (Harris 4, Warner 0) Broad - around the wicket - is full and inviting the drive and Warner accepts immediately, he strikes his cover drive nicely and it’s well saved in the ring, preventing any runs. Broad gets one to tail in, well left from “Davey”, and the next angles away and beats Warner - the 13464th time we’ve seen it. Make that 13465! Warner sees out the rest. Mine too. 1st over: Australia 4-0 (Harris 4, Warner 0) First ball and Harris wafts at one outside off stump, it floats past a vacant third slip and rolls away for four! Wow. Warner half-heartedly threw his hands at it, the ball found the edge but no one was there. The rest is altogether more peaceful. Ollie Pope is taking the gloves for this innings. Meanwhile... England were bright this morning, aiming for as many as possible before the second new ball. They achieved it, and now Australia will commence with a lead of 122 and a question over their approach: does Warner et al come out and aggressively push the game forward, anticipating some rain? For “the sake of the contest”, let’s hope so. 294 is an exceptional result from a position of 4/36. I suspect the team will take heart - this could be an interesting little period. Broad backs away to heave but it catches the splice of his bat, it’s up very high in the air, it hangs, but Carey is comfortably under it and that’s England done. Always entertaining from Broad. Boland finishes with four. 79th over: England 294-9 (Anderson 4, Broad 15) It’s Lyon to Broad, with a short leg gully in. He takes a single. Anderson leaves the first. On the second he executes a sensational reverse sweep which beats backward point and races to the boundary! Brilliant. He tries again(!) but misses. That was fun. 78th over: England 289-9 (Anderson 0, Broad 14) First ball, Broad backs away and swats Boland over mid off for four! Good length, Broad gave himself room, and bang. The next follows him and Broad can’t get it away. Only a few over until the new ball now. England aiming for as many here before it arrives, I guess. Boland zeroes in on the stumps, Broad gives himself more room and inside edges down to fine leg - Boland throws his head back. Bairstow’s back on strike. There are six inside the ring, and three out. Bairstow is then caught behind, a fantastic knock coming to an end. The innings’ end is also nigh. Boland gets Bairstow! It’s a feather through to Carey, he’s trying to run it to third but nicks it, a surprisingly conventional dismissal in the circumstances. He leaves the ground to a standing ovation, he raises his bat to all parts of the ground. Hell of a knock, Jonny. Well done. 77th over: England 284-8 (Bairstow 113, Broad 9) Bairstow almost finds the boundary with Lyon’s first ball via another reverse. Boland was wrong-footed at deep backward square, and just reels it in. It’s three. Broad then grabs a single with a dab into the ring and that will be immensely frustrating for Australia - not reading the game at all there. Bairstow sweeps for one. Wasn’t sure whether he should take it, but does. Broad laps another for a single. Smith does that thing where he tries to run around from slip, but he’s nowhere near it. 76th over: England 278-8 (Bairstow 109, Broad 7) Scott Boland’s on now, so only two overs for Starc there. Broad is cramped but heaves one over square leg for two runs. They’re here for a good time, England. Broad attempts the same shot again but misses altogether. Chris Rogers says Boland “looks a little cautious” in his action, following his injury yesterday. Broad then enacts an effective inside edge down to fine leg for two, and the next over mid on for two. Runs, runs, runs... Anonymous text from a member of the press, facetiously, reads: “Carey “injury” is so Tim Paine makes an emotional comeback for a one-off Test in Tassie ... heard it here first.” Hello! 75th over: England 272-8 (Bairstow 109, Broad 1) Some talk Carey may have injured a finger trying to take that ball in the last over. Meantime, there’s a half shout for LBW against Bairstow as he tries to heave Lyon to the leg side, but it’s hit him outside off. Bairstow connects with the next but and it lands on the first bounce to Starc. He accepts the single. Broad is on strike with three balls left. England are looking for runs here. Broad delicately laps his first ball for a single, too. They needed to keep him on strike. Australia is leaky. Lyon is flat to Bairstow, he can’t find a run. Five overs until the second new ball. 74th over: England 270-8 (Bairstow 108, Broad 0) Starc starts with a very wide one that Bairstow chases and misses. Starc winces after the delivery, possibly due to the hollowed out crease line he’s attempting to land in. The next is worked to long leg where Bairstow scampers back for a brisk two - he just makes his ground. It was close enough to check. Later on Bairstow attempts to shovel-pull a very full delivery - it just misses off bail - and Carey can’t glove it. It bursts through his hands and England is able to take a bye, bringing Bairstow back on strike for Lyon’s over. 73rd over: England 267-8 (Bairstow 106, Broad 0) Lyon - with speed dealers on - is in to Bairstow. Second ball and Bairstow reverse sweeps him to the man on the boundary for one. England are bright here. Harris is retained at short leg for Leach, before switching to silly mid off. As described, Leach then top edges Lyon and he perishes. He looked great until that point - but he didn’t need to go so hard. Why not milk Lyon to bring Bairstow on strike? From Paul, who emails: “Not wishing to be pessimistic, but Bairstow doesn’t tend to last long the next morning, even when he is 100% fit and looked comfortable and scoring easily the day before (although I don’t have the stats to back this up). Broad tends to give his wicket away cheaply in circumstances when he accompanies his fellow bowlers, while Anderson inspires such confidence for the final wicket that 0 not out is probably his modal average score. I’m saying England will add no more than 15 runs to the overnight total.” Leach tries to slog sweep Lyon, but succeeds only in top edging it. Cummins comes around from mid on and takes it comfortably. Leach tried to drag that from well outside off-stump. Too much, too soon. 72nd over: England 265-7 (Bairstow 104, Leach 10) It’s Starc from the Paddington end. Bairstow knocks him into the vacant point region - Australia has started with a boundary rider there. There’s a leg gully for Leach and Starc is aiming it there or thereabouts. There’s a lethargic and unconvincing shout for caught behind for one that Leach attempted to flick to fine leg, before Starc serves up a half volley that Leach cracks for four through mid off. Another beautifully correct drive. Inspiring start from Leach. Leach appears to play and miss at the next and Cummins reviews! Leach is nowhere near it. How strange. 71st over: England 260-7 (Bairstow 103, Leach 6) Nathan Lyon has the first over, and he’s bowling to Leach. Harris is under the lid at short leg. Third ball, and Leach lofts him over mid off handsomely, sumptious technique, beautiful feet, with elbow up! It plugs, so it’s only two. Lyon is then flatter to see out the over. Early enterprise from England as Jerusalem rings out. The accepted wisdom is that once the rain hits, we’re done for the day. From Max via email: “Hi Sam, I’ve just been at the sixes cricket bar in Manchester and only nicked off 3 times in 3 overs in the net. Should I book my flight to Hobart now?” Does anyone else have experience of these cricket bars? I’d expect to find it tremendously triggering. I’d be staying up while Bairstow is there, big time. I don’t know how “big time” amplifies it in any way, and yet, there it is. England’s best day yesterday. They are still a long way behind. England injury update More pics of the SCG, all in readiness... Want more Bairstow and Stokes gear? Top piece from Andy Bull here Hell of a knock from Jonny Bairstow yesterday. Stokes deserves great praise too. For for Bairstow to arrive at 4/36 and finish the day 103*, enduring that brutal blow to his thumb, while the team scored at 4.5 an over, was mesmeric stuff. How much further can he push it this innings? Here’s a visual Weather: play this morning, not looking great this afternoon I’ve given you the view from on the ground, here’s what the Bureau of Meteorology says: Sydney area Partly cloudy. Very high (90%) chance of showers, most likely during this afternoon and evening. The chance of a thunderstorm, possibly severe. Heavy falls possible in the west. Winds northerly 15 to 20 km/h tending northeasterly in the early afternoon then becoming light in the evening. The forecast is so untrustworthy that on SEN Radio here, Whateley, Katich and Atherton are conducting their own conversation about the forecast. Yesterday was meant to be ordinary, and they got a full day in. Hope that helps! My first on the ground report concerning all matters Sydney weather Hello and welcome! Trust everyone’s fresh from yesterday’s restorative day’s play. For many contemplating a Friday evening in front of the cricket, no doubt Jonny Bairstow’s hundred and Stokes’ half century warmed the heart. It was swashbuckling, it was gutsy, and as we’ve since learned, not without a bit of crowd boorishness to boot. So, all round, stirring stuff. It leaves England with half a glimmer in this match, but only that. Quite simply, Australia will want to knock them over and get to work setting up a target today, while England will be trying to take it as deep as is possible with the bat. I expect we’ll see Bairstow farming the strike, which will be quickly followed by conversations about bowling and fielding tactics in these situations. My early understanding is that there were overnight storms, but the weather is looking okay to start on time. I write it tentatively. I’m going to comb around now for some more detail on that, but in the meantime if you’re keen to catch up on yesterday’s action, here’s Ali Martin’s report from the SCG. I’m around on Twitter and email while bringing you the first half of the day’s play. Get me at sam.perry.freelance@guardian.co.uk, or @sjjperry on Twitter.Rarely has a film been as divisive as Adam McKay’s climate satire Don’t Look Up. Although it has been watched by millions, and is already Netflix’s third most watched film ever, the response from critics was largely negative. Many found its story of scientists who discover an asteroid heading for Earth a clumsy allegory for the climate crisis, while others just found it boring. But many in the climate movement have praised the film, and audience reviews have been generally positive. We asked four climate experts to give their views on the film. Warning: spoilers ahead. Ketan Joshi: ‘The main character of the climate crisis is absent’ The starkest thing about Don’t Look Up is the sheer depth of the emotional significance it has for the folks who’ve been in the trenches of the climate fight for a long time. They’ve encountered decades of madness, as their warnings were twisted, ignored, denied and downplayed by politicians, media and devious industry players. Those people feel intense catharsis when they watch this film. It is not a great film, but to release that painful pressure valve, it doesn’t need to be. Regardless, we have to engage with the deeper flaws of this film. It’s a massive hit, widely viewed across the world. It matters then that in attempting to hold a mirror up to humanity’s response to the climate crisis, it has strange priorities. Weirdly absent from the film is a clear analogue of the fossil fuel industry (Rylance’s techy disaster capitalist wants to exploit the mineral wealth of the comet, but he isn’t piloting the asteroid for profit). Considering the film is touted as holding up a “devastating mirror”, the absence of the main character of the climate crisis is unforgivable. Similarly, the toxicity of the fossil industry’s impact across both sides of politics would have been a richer, funnier and more accurately reflective approach. The Trump satire falls flat. The void left by the fossil industry is filled with strange choices. Media misreporting is mostly put down to air-headed morning show fluff, but in reality, journalism’s most deadly failures on climate come down to false balance (which features only briefly), or energised disinformation (there’s no News Corp analogue here, extra weird considering McKay’s EP role on the very funny, Murdoch-inspired Succession). The film wastes hours hand-wringing about celebrity culture, algorithms, memes and data privacy. But the real villains of the climate crisis aren’t citizens distracted by Ariana Grande and Twitter. They’re the decision-makers in the fossil fuel industry, their lobbyists, their marketing firms and their broadly spread political defence squad. I hope the next time this opportunity comes up, Hollywood aims for the people piloting the asteroid, and I hope they put effort into ensuring they hit those targets. Fiona Harvey: ‘The role of the techno-loon, played by Mark Rylance, struck a chord’ Writing about the end of the world is often a thankless task, so the prospect of Don’t Look Up immediately appealed. Billed as a satirical comedy, what satire could even come close to the experience of the world’s biggest climate conference, Cop26 in Glasgow, where the main achievement of nearly 200 governments and 30,000 delegates after two weeks of wrenching talks and stark scientific warnings was a resolve to return next year and try a bit harder? After 17 years of reporting on the climate crisis, I doubted at first that the film had much to tell me about the frustrations of communicating a hypothetical catastrophe. As the film’s scientists first struggled to clothe their data in sober, measured terms, then broke into swearing, arm-waving shrieks about provable imminent apocalypse, I nodded along. Yes, that’s what it feels like, and no, no one listens, not until it is too late. Yet it was illuminating in unexpected ways – something I’ve always struggled with is how rational people can fail to grasp the scale of climate breakdown, how we could leave it so late. As the film shows, it’s partly because vested interests keep it that way, but it’s also just because we’re human. Believing in disaster before it strikes is fundamentally not how we work. The role of the techno-loon, played by Mark Rylance, struck another chord. Cop26 was not a failure, though on the surface that was the obvious conclusion – it was more nuanced than that. Soon after the Cop26 circus left Glasgow, the danger of painting the outcome in such black-and-white terms became apparent, as well-meaning experts concluded – in all seriousness – as talking didn’t work, our best hope would be for billionaires to bypass the UN and geoengineer the climate from space. Because obviously the answer to a vast uncontrolled experiment on the atmosphere is to conduct a vast uncontrolled experiment on the atmosphere. Don’t Look Up is hardly subtle, which may be why climate scientists have enjoyed it more than some film critics. But in a world where the president of the most powerful democracy appeared close to inciting insurrection, where businesses argue over whether saving the planet makes economic sense, where oil apologists ally with Covid deniers, where a teenager shows more maturity than 200 heads of government – well, subtlety sailed off across the horizon a long time ago. Nina Lakhani: ‘Jennifer Lawrence’s character will resonate with many female climate scientists’ There was a lot I liked about Don’t Look Up – it’s a broadly smart satire with some zinger one-liners and in my view the film pretty successfully used the impending doom of a scientifically indisputable planet-killing comet to draw parallels to the impending doom of the climate emergency, which we’re watching play out in real time. In the film, the world has six months and 14 days to save the planet from destruction but fails to do so because short-term political gain, corporate greed, misinformation, and utter stupidity divides America. In real life the clock is also ticking but the inaction and political failures go back decades. How Kate Dibiasky, the postgraduate student played by Jennifer Lawrence who discovered the comet, is portrayed as an unhinged hysterical woman, will resonate with many female climate scientists and activists whose crucial knowledge has been sidelined. The scene where her parents declare that they’re in favour of the jobs the comet will provide will resonate with millions of people, including me, trying to deal with relatives who have bought into political lies. I appreciated the young Indian guy who pointed out that the US didn’t invite any other countries to participate in its space mission to save the planet singlehandedly, which also helped make sense of the casual and not so casual racism by American leaders scattered throughout. But I didn’t get the fleeting shots of Black and Brown people watching the disaster unfold passively, and the scene where an Indigenous man plays a sacred drum (used in many Indigenous cultures to connect with the spiritual world) as the forest burns around him felt uncomfortable. But my main beef is the “we’re all in this together” message, as if the climate crisis will impact everyone equally like a killer comet. It won’t, and those who’ve contributed least to global heating are already bearing the brunt of rising sea levels and deadly weather events such as fires, floods, extreme heat and droughts. Climate justice starts with recognising these inequities, otherwise the impending doom will arrive much sooner for some. Damian Carrington: ‘It highlights the absurdity of staring disaster in the face, then looking away’ I loved Don’t Look Up, both as an entertainment and as a climate crisis parable. But the movie has been panned by many critics, with the main charge being that it is heavy-handed, blunt and too obvious. But that is exactly the point. Scientists have been issuing blunt warnings about obvious dangers of global heating for years and have been ignored – carbon emissions are still rising. The film perfectly skewers the key ways in which they have been ignored: for short-term political expediency and short-term corporate profit. In particular, the movie beautifully portrays the incredulity of scientists that their carefully constructed evidence can be dismissed with bluster such as “we’ll sit tight and assess” by leaders more concerned about today’s political weather and a media more interested in the minutiae of celebrities’ lives. The film is a satire, but is it still too heavy-handed to reflect a deeper truth? Perhaps for critics assessing the movie solely on artistic merit, but not for scientific communicators such as Neil deGrasse Tyson, who told his 14 million Twitter followers: “Everything I know about news-cycles, talk shows, social media, and politics tells me the film was instead a documentary.” The public seems to be siding with the movie makers. In its first 11 days, Don’t Look Up became Netflix’s third most-viewed film ever, and 250,000 people on IMDb gave the film a strong average rating of 7.3, compared with a Metacritic review of just 50%. But global heating is a slow-motion disaster, not a comet set to destroy the Earth within months that needs to be nudged off course. The solutions to the climate crisis are much more complex and another criticism is that the film presents none of these. I’d argue it doesn’t need to – the solutions exist and are well known. The point of the film is savagely highlighting the absurdity of staring disaster in the face, then looking away rather than acting. In that respect, it is a triumph.Last year may not be a year on which many of us care to look back, but from a beauty point of view, it was unexpectedly fruitful. During lockdown I discovered what I can safely call my favourite cleansing balm of all time. I have now bought three large tubs of Farmacy’s Green Clean (£24), and I doubt I’ll ever be without it. It’s not thick and gloopy, but fine and elegant in formulation, liquefying instantly with fingertip warmth before removing every last scrap of makeup (including caked-on mascara, which swirls off muddily in seconds). A dash of warm water sends it milky; a swish of a flannel removes it completely without stripping any residual moisture. It’s perfect. Despite being mostly home-based and with more time on my hands, I have further streamlined my skincare routine in the past 12 months. Murad’s Vita-C Glycolic Brightening Serum (£72) does the work of an exfoliant and an antioxidant serum in one pump, applied straight after cleansing. This timesaving innovation is suitable for all skins and ages, adds instant plumpness, visible glow and lasting hydration, and is impeccably behaved beneath makeup. I eagerly await a bargain dupe I can share with you: rest assured, I shall report back when one inevitably lands. It’s probably not fair to include a whole skincare brand in my picks but, truly, Versed seems incapable of making a dud. Fairly priced and as consistent as it is prolific, Versed makes great moisturisers, serums, masks and more. Last year, its winning streak continued with Weekend Glow Brightening Solution (£16.50), a liquid exfoliant for those who don’t want the 2-in-1 concept of the Murad serum. This tonic is swept over face and neck after cleansing, to keep both flake-free, bright and smooth. It’s comparable in performance to others at three times the price. Last year was also a vintage year for sunscreens, and three superstars spring immediately to mind. La Roche Posay SPF30 Hyalu B5 Aquagel (£34.50) is a dream for dehydrated types who find most sunscreens greasy. Garnier Ambre Solaire Over Makeup Super UV SPF50 (£6.50) is arguably the most useful, bargainous product of the decade, and solves the age-old problem of needing to top up your sun protection without removing your makeup. Finally, Medik8’s Advanced Day Ultimate Protect SPF50+ (£59) is the best facial sunscreen for dry skin I can remember – in any year. Next week: 2021’s best makeup and haircare products“It’s not very straightforward – it’s not something that you’ll find every day,” Mario Marinica says. But the Romania-born British citizen, who is set to manage Malawi at the Africa Cup of Nations in Cameroon – his team kick off against Naby Keïta’s Guinea on Monday – wants to explain why a turn of events that feels bizarre is actually all perfectly normal. It was on 6 December that the Football Association of Malawi announced it had reorganised and placed Marinica in interim charge of the team for the 33rd edition of Africa’s showpiece tournament. The organisation had hired the 57-year-old on 10 November as technical director and so the move represented a radical change in his remit. And yet the twist was that the previous manager, Meck Mwase, would remain as the first assistant coach – an effective demotion – before resuming his old role after the finals. That will be when Marinica goes back to being the technical director. It begs a host of questions, beginning with how Mwase feels about it. “To be honest, he’s a very nice guy and he kind of embraced it,” Marinica says. “I had a good chat with him and said: ‘Please come and help us.’ It might be like a temporary demotion but he still has a contract and the terms are that he will get back to being the head coach again so it’s just for this tournament that I’m helping out. In a way, he was content with this arrangement.” The next question is broader but similarly simple. Why? It is because, shortly after Marinica’s appointment, Mwase’s team had lost to Cameroon and Mozambique to round off a failed World Cup qualifying campaign, featuring one win and five defeats. The Malawian FA called the performance “dismal” and, by the time that its executive committee met in early December to finalise Afcon plans, it had listened to sustained calls for Mwase’s dismissal. Marinica was there to report on his first month in the job, his findings and concerns, having spent a lot of time with Mwase travelling the country, watching the main clubs and analysing the players. To the executives, the most novel of solutions was starring them in the face. “They were saying it was too short a time [before the tournament] to bring in another coach and it was: ‘Well, Mario is already here and he knows the teams and the players …’” Marinica says. Marinica’s original brief was to reboot football in Malawi from top to bottom, prioritising the technical side of the game, the development of a clear footballing identity. He has a three-year contract because everybody knows it will not happen overnight. And yet, as the FA president, Walter Nyamilandu, has said, Malawi are “not just going there [to Afcon] to add numbers”. On their third appearance at the finals, after the group stage exits of 1984 and 2010, he wants to see a better-organised team, with Marinica introducing a new style, quicker and more cohesive, which Mwase can then take on. And he wants results. Marinica had a 10-day training camp in Saudi Arabia, which was affected by positive Covid tests. Some players could not travel, others joined late and more were infected after it began, forcing them to isolate. A friendly with Mali had to be cancelled, although they did fit one in against Comoros on New Year’s Eve, winning 2-1. In a word, how would Marinica describe the preparations? “Fantastic,” he insists. “All your life, you work to have something like this and suddenly, when it comes unexpectedly, you have to embrace it with both hands. To have this opportunity, to be with all this razzmatazz, it’s a dream come true. These are the big stages that any coach wants to be on.” Marinica moved to England in 1992. Aged 27, he had a degree and a good job in Romania as the head of a large transport and distribution company. “I was really well settled,” he says. But his dream was to become a football coach and he saw England as the place to realise it. Marinica’s break came after he took his first coaching badge. The tutor was John Sitton, best known for his spells as a player and manager at Leyton Orient. “Only two of us passed and John said to me: ‘Well, if you want, you’ve got a job at Orient.’ I worked for them on and off for something like seven years. It was football in the community courses, all sorts of jobs, helping with coaches. It put me on to my coaching path.” It has been itinerant, to put it mildly. In England, Marinica has coached at the academies of Arsenal and Crystal Palace – primarily at under-15 level – although his work as a coach educator for the London FA took him, by his own estimation, into “every single one” of the clubs in the capital. He had two stints as the manager of non-league Haringey Borough while he accumulated his coaching badges, finishing with the Uefa Pro Licence. In Romania, there have been technical roles at numerous clubs and he has worked across Africa – in Nigeria, Ghana, South Africa, Seychelles, Tunisia, Tanzania. He has coached in Hungary and Iraq and he provided analysis for Paraguay on their opponents at the 2006 World Cup. Before Malawi, he was the technical director of the Kerala Blasters in India. “Oh my God, there have been so many different jobs – I’ll probably have to write you a list,” Marinica says, and the feeling is that the aforementioned does not cover it. “Life has taken me from working with Paraguay for the 2006 World Cup to going to Brazil to lecture on coaching courses before the 2014 World Cup. In England, to mention some odd jobs … a little something with Watford, Fulham, Charlton, Wimbledon, Stockport, Notts County.” Now for the pinnacle. After Guinea, Malawi face Zimbabwe and the bookmakers’ favourites for the tournament, Senegal, and they begin as major underdogs. Marinica intends to have his day.Black women are notoriously underserved by the US healthcare system. The New York City-based founders of the digital platform Health In Her Hue aim to bridge that gap. Since its launch in 2018, the platform has empowered Black women with the community and resources to find supportive, culturally sensitive care. Last summer, co-founders Ashlee Wisdom (chief executive) and Eddwina Bright (chief product officer) secured $1m in pre-seed funding, marking a turning point in their startup’s success story. “Fundraising is never a walk in the park, especially as Black women,” says Wisdom. “No matter how credentialed you are, it’s hard for everyone. But then you add on the layer of the fact that there aren’t many Black women who are building venture-backed companies or get funding. We’ve experienced some challenges throughout that journey.” Now, the co-founders are in “build mode”. With their funding, the pair are working to develop a new web platform and membership experience, which will offer care support and resources tailored to each woman’s specific healthcare needs. “Ultimately, our vision for Health In Her Hue is to be the first touchpoint for women of color managing their healthcare,” Wisdom says. Take us back to the beginning. What led you to launch Health In Her Hue, back in 2018? Ashlee Wisdom: At that time, two things were happening: I was working in a toxic work environment, and I was breaking out in chronic hives. So I was going to see an allergist, who happened to be a white woman. She was a great doctor, but because we didn’t have that shared identity, it never occurred to me to tell her that I was dealing with racism and discrimination at work. So long story short, she was running all these tests on me and I wasn’t allergic to anything. We couldn’t figure out what was triggering the hives. After I left the job, I realized that they were related to that stressful, toxic work environment. That got my wheels turning, and made me realize that I shared much more with my Black gynecologist. If I was more transparent and felt more comfortable sharing the full picture of what was going on in my life, that allergist would’ve been able to get to the root cause of what was triggering my hives. At the same time, I was getting my master’s in public health, and got really tired of reading research papers about the disparate healthcare outcomes for Black women. And so I decided I wanted to do something to support Black women and women of color to better manage their health and also better navigate the US healthcare system. Eddwina Bright: I think our first foray into working together was when Ashlee was doing a video series on maternal health and asked me to share my birthing story – at that point, we knew each other socially. My experience giving birth to my oldest was not great. I felt very much coaxed into a C-section; doctors were not answering my questions, not telling my husband anything. It was just not a great experience. And so from that, I was able to take a step back and find a provider that was more culturally aligned with me. So when it came time to have my second child, I felt seen, I felt heard, I felt taken seriously, and was able to really advocate for myself and have a much better birthing experience. So that’s the passion that I bring to the work that we do. I’d like us to help the women that we serve to advocate for themselves without having to go through really traumatic healthcare experiences. And the company happens to align with my professional experience in finance and non-profit entrepreneurship. So we definitely have a great balance of health and business expertise. At what point did you realize that this business was making a real impact, and achieving what you hoped it would? Wisdom: From 2018 up until 2020, like right before the pandemic hit, we were building the community and seeing great feedback from women. But the resounding thing we kept hearing was that it’s difficult to find a Black doctor, or a doctor of color, on existing platforms. So that was the impetus to build out a curated directory of Black physicians across the country. When we launched that directory in June 2020 – given the pandemic and the racial reckoning – people were ready. Thirty-four thousand people logged in within the first week or two. Bright: Separately, we also had articles and videos that people could engage with on our website, as well as a community forum where women could talk to each other. So we brought all of those components together to continue the momentum, and realized we had tens of thousands of women in our community. We only had six doctors at first, and now we have more than 1,000. What do you envision for the future of Health In Her Hue? Wisdom: We really want to continue to grow and expand the community so that Health In Her Hue is the go-to, safe space for women of color for all things healthcare-related. That’s my overarching big vision for what we’re building. Bright: I completely 100% agree. I’d love for us to also become a resource for Bipoc women to better navigate not only their individual health, but the health of their families: their kids, their spouse, their parents. Because we know that community health is very important for the collective. I would also like us to help support the talent pipeline of culturally sensitive health care providers. Maybe that means helping with scholarships and internships, putting students into doctor’s offices and teaching them the business of medicine. That’s a major gap in the market, which I’d love to see us fill.My boyfriend and I are standing on a pile of manure-smelling, clay-thick earth, tentatively licking a plant root. “Is that peppery?” I run my tongue over my teeth. “I think it might be peppery?” “I can’t taste anything,” my boyfriend says, treading on a courgette seedling. “Let’s take it home, anyway,” I reply, wiping muddy hands down my thighs. “We could always just boil it.” It’s easy to be good at things: the praise, the sense of instant satisfaction, the positive reinforcement. It’s harder, and altogether more rewarding, to be bad at things. I am really quite bad at having an allotment. We took on our 10 poles’ worth (I am told that this is a standard allotment size, dating back to Anglo-Saxon times) last winter. We weren’t the only ones. Unsurprisingly, interest in allotments soared during the first lockdown. According to the National Allotment Society, 40% of English councils reported a “significant uplift” in applications, while it experienced a 45% increase in requests for information through its website. But growing vegetables – if you haven’t done it much before – isn’t always terribly easy. My boyfriend and I planted a couple of tomato seedlings during a hot spell in April. They were effectively burned to death in less than three days. I hadn’t thought to water them each evening, being somewhat preoccupied by watering my three-year-old son. We planted a gooseberry bush atop a red ants’ nest: tending it was both spicy on the knees and pretty pointless: the ants soon infested the root system. I cut back a grapevine left by the previous owner as the sap was rising, possibly killing off large sections. Our pièce de résistance has been the free shed a saintly member of the allotment committee members provided us. At the time of writing, the shed lists, its roof wrapped in tarpaulin and its door nailed shut in order to stop it swinging open. There’s a guy who owns a plot two down, who got his allotment at the same time as ours. He’s already ploughed it over, producing mountains of sweetcorn, tomatoes, chard and potatoes. He built a series of metal structures, like an electricity substation, to grow beans and peas along, and scored out verges so straight you could tear paper on them. We, by contrast, have put up a large plastic children’s slide, found a rats’ nest under a pile of wood, and at one point were watering the whole thing with a child’s beach bucket. During late summer, when we were made temporarily homeless by the madness of the British housing system and delays in a chain, we managed to grow eight pumpkins. It’s a strange thing to have no fixed abode – to be sleeping on your dad’s kitchen floor – while simultaneously owning a patch of huge orange pumpkins. We started to leave them behind as thank-you presents for people who let us house-sit. My aunt took one back to London sitting on the passenger seat of her car like a cultivated squash co-pilot. But the thing is, I love it. I love it precisely because we’re bad at it. Everything is new; everything is an experiment; everything is hard physical work, and therefore rewarding. As I sit on an upturned bucket, drinking coffee from a vacuum flask, looking out across the tangle of weeds, I feel utterly content. Even when I’m failing. I love the pitying looks other allotment owners give us as they slowly walk past, on their way to their unbelievably fecund sites. I love that our allotment neighbours – an elderly couple who shout at each other in Urdu from either end of their plot – give us pity bunches of coriander. I love that my son can entertain himself for a few hours doing nothing more productive than cutting grass with a pair of scissors. I love it because it’s good to be bad at things sometimes. In order to learn how to do something new, you have to be rubbish at it first. You make mistakes, lose heart, forget your plans and see what works. And then, plough on. Nell Frizzell is the author of The Panic YearsScotland’s mountain rescue teams have begun using sophisticated drones to search for injured and missing climbers lost in often dangerous and isolated terrain across the Highlands. The drones, weighing just under a kilo, can be fitted with torches, heat-detecting cameras, loudspeakers and even radio handsets, enabling rescuers to search inaccessible gullies and remote areas more quickly and safely than before. The technology has been quickly taken up by Scotland’s 28 volunteer rescue teams over the last year, helping in recent searches for casualties and missing people on Ben Nevis, the southern uplands, in Fife and the Trossachs. Drone experts believe the devices could soon act as emergency mobile phone masts, providing coverage deep in the mountains, over moors and remote coasts, allowing rescue teams to detect signals from missing walkers or link up rescuers in mobile dead zones. “The drones are definitely an asset, there’s no doubt about it,” said John Stevenson, a team leader for Lochaber mountain rescue team in Fort William, which covers Ben Nevis and now operates four drones. “We’re putting drones into places where years ago we might have thought twice about putting people in.” Tom Nash, the founder of the Search and Rescue Aerial Association Scotland (Saraa), a charity that trains drone pilots, said the technology had the potential to transform rescues and search operations. In 2020 the 24 teams that were members of Scottish Mountain Rescue had 671 callouts. “Risk reduction is a key use of a drone. Previously where someone has needed to do a rope rescue or a stretcher lift, you would have some poor person dangling over the edge of a cliff, roped back, peering over saying ‘I think we should put the rope down here’,” Nash said. “Well now, just put the drone 20 yards out the other side of the cliff and look back, you can see where the casualty is. And our rope experts can say ‘our safest rope line is here down to here’. You can floodlight that at night. We can put a speaker on and if we know it’s going to be a while, we can speak to the casualty and say help is on the way, ‘give us a thumbs up if you’re OK but can’t move’. That’s a really critical use.” A former RAF Tornado navigator who became a commercial drone operator, Nash has helped train 15 volunteers with eight rescue teams across Scotland to become qualified drone pilots. Saraa has six operational drones of its own and in 2020 had four callout requests for drone support; in 2021 that jumped to 15. Separately, rescue teams such as Glen Coe and Lochaber have their own equipment. Nash and Stevenson said there were limitations: drones cannot be used in rain, snow or fog. There are legal height restrictions and they are limited currently to line of sight, meaning a pilot has to be able to see the craft. Rescue teams also, at present, keep their drones on the ground if a search and rescue helicopter is involved. But Lochaber has learned they can be programmed to carry out systematic searches across a hillside far faster than a search team on foot, allowing rescue coordinators to study the footage back at base. “They’re terrific. You can get a bird’s eye view of where you are,” said Stevenson. His team had seen them used by French rescue teams operating on Alpine ski slopes. Nash said their roles could expand as pilots’ skills and the technology improve. Nash said they could copy the communications firm OpenReach, which uses drones fitted with 4G phone equipment to “drape” mobile coverage over a large area when phone masts are out of action. In time, drones could be able to deliver supplies and equipment to casualties or rescue teams in difficult terrain. “It’s so exciting because it can and will revolutionise things,” he said.Olly Alexander bounds down the stairs of his flat to greet me with a hug. It’s a big flat, stretched over two floors, huge windows overlooking a pretty London park. There are books everywhere, in scattered, haphazard piles; he is just about to start Two Serious Ladies by Jane Bowles, a gift from a friend. There’s a Joni Mitchell songbook propped up on his piano, and there are massive houseplants all over the place. He left his old flat, not too far from here, after several lockdowns, because it didn’t have any outdoor space. This one, which has a huge balcony, is rented, so he didn’t buy the furniture, but the plants are his. “I’m a plant gay,” he quips, drily. Alexander has a puppyish energy. He is lively and charming and clearly very sensitive. On his sofa, he curls his legs underneath him, his trademark red hair (he once told Rihanna she inspired it) tucked under a baseball cap on which is printed Business of Pleasure. He is fun and chatty and acutely self-aware: he was in the audience for the Adele ITV live special recently, among an extraordinary buffet of celebrities, and he serves up good gossip about a couple of them, doing a brief, uncanny impression of Mel B. Boy George was sitting near him, which leads us on to The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills, a reality show that Boy George appears in and that Alexander became obsessed with during lockdown. “I won’t go on and on about The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills, even though I could … ” he says – and then he does. Fame fascinates Alexander, and it also seems to repel him. Throughout our conversation, he treats it like a puzzle he is trying to solve. Now 31, he has had a fair taste of it, both as a singer and an actor. From the age of 18, he was an actor on the up, appearing in, among other things, Skins, and Peter and Alice in the West End, alongside Dame Judi Dench and Ben Whishaw. When he was 20, he joined the band Years &amp; Years and became a pop star. Years &amp; Years – of which he is now the only member, more on which shortly – sell out arena tours, win awards, and have topped the album and singles charts. He has done Celebrity Gogglebox with his mum, Vicki. In 2021, he performed with Elton John at the Brits. The weekend after we meet, he performs his new single live on Strictly Come Dancing. But at the end of 2019, he returned to acting, playing lead character Ritchie in the phenomenal drama It’s a Sin, which came out in early 2021. Ritchie is a young man who moves to London and hits the gay scene just as Aids arrives in the UK. We watch as tragedy after tragedy unfolds over the course of a decade. The show captured joy as well as pain, though, and Alexander’s impish spirit fed into Ritchie’s outlandishness and vulnerability. He has just been nominated for a US Critics’ Choice TV award for best actor in a limited series, for which he will compete with Paul Bettany and Michael Keaton. It has been quite the acting comeback. But he hasn’t acted since It’s a Sin, and now he’s here with a third Years &amp; Years album, written during lockdown and recorded solo. He found lockdown hard, he explains, though he is careful to point out that, relatively speaking, he had an easy time of it. But he was living alone; he suddenly stopped working for the first time in years, and felt the weight of what he describes as “the world imploding”. Normally, he loves his own company. “I actually crave alone time. But then having all of it in one go was just … it was quite overwhelming,” he says. Alexander has been frank about his mental health in the past. In 2017, he made a moving, raw documentary for BBC Three called Growing Up Gay, in which he talked about mental health in the LGBTQ+ community, and shared his own experiences of being bullied and feeling ashamed of who he is. He talked about bulimia and self-harm, some of which was news to his mother, who heard about it for the first time on camera. He is something of an open book, I note. “I know! It’s all out there. I just think, ‘God, there’s nothing else I can say.’ It’s a compulsion, I think, more than anything else. Not to pathologise it or anything.” Alexander made a decision to be honest about who he was from the very beginning, when people first started to pay attention to Years &amp; Years. “If people are going to ask about sexuality or mental health, then what am I going to say? If you’re honest, you don’t have anything to hide. Everyone deals with it differently, but I thought, ‘OK, I’ll try that.’” Just before Years &amp; Years released their debut album in 2015, Alexander, then a rarity as an out male pop star clearly singing about men, expressed his sadness that there weren’t more like him. While there hasn’t exactly been an avalanche of male-on-male love songs, Lil Nas X, the singer and rapper who is gay and who gave the devil a lapdance in his video for Montero, has ascended to the pop throne and is now one of the biggest pop stars in the world. Does Alexander think there has been a shift? “When Lil Nas X went to No 1, I literally felt like running down the street naked, screaming in celebration, because it was such a huge moment for me,” he says. “I had begun to think, ‘God, will it ever happen? Will we ever get someone that is this huge crossover star, who’s gay?’ I just think it’s incredible, what he’s done. I’m in awe.” After 10 years together, Years &amp; Years have gone from being a three-piece, comprised of Alexander, Mikey Goldsworthy and Emre Türkmen, to a solo act. But rather than start releasing music under his own name, Alexander has kept the Years &amp; Years moniker. “I just didn’t want to let Years &amp; Years go. I put so much into it. It was a tricky decision in some ways, because I think, possibly, it might have been a bit simpler for everyone if I had just been like, ‘Oh, I’m a solo artist now.’ But I just didn’t want to.” The official line is that the split was amicable. “The new album has been an Olly endeavour and we’ve decided that Years &amp; Years will continue as an Olly solo project,” read a statement put out by the band last March, adding: “The three of us are still good friends.” Goldsworthy will be playing live with Alexander when the band goes on tour. But band break-ups are rarely so clean. “Bands are like marriages,” Alexander says. “Any separation is difficult, and I think it went as well as it could, with us.” He first joined Years &amp; Years in 2010, and there is a strong sense that he was calling the shots from the beginning. “They didn’t really have a singer. And I came in, and I was like, ‘No, I’m the singer, I’ll be writing songs.’ So you can see, over that trajectory, perhaps this was sort of inevitable.” By the time of their second album, Palo Santo, in 2018, Alexander’s red hair had arrived. He was starting to become more pop star than indie-pop star, and it became clear that the band had different ideas about what their music would sound like. “Early on, we were more or less on the same ship, trying to steer in the same direction, and then just clearly we weren’t any more.” He sighs. “It was definitely the best thing for us, to go our separate ways, rather than try to make it work.” Which different directions had you all started to go in? “Well, I love pop music. I wanted us to play our song on The X Factor, for instance. Not that that ever happened – we didn’t get booked. But that was a huge issue within the group, because that felt like it would be too pop, and that being on TV like that was kind of lame.” There were the familiar “musical differences”, too. “When you think of a band, you imagine them all together in a house making music and coming up with ideas like that. But that was never how we did it. It was always quite separate, and then you figure out a way where you all feel good about it. After the first album, we never felt good about anything as a band. That’s when it all started, really.” He says he was proud of Palo Santo. “But it was not loved by everyone in the band, and that was hard for me.” The three of them still got on well enough to go on tour and have a good time, he says. “And obviously, I don’t want to speak for them, because I can’t.” But it sounds as if the split wasn’t a huge surprise. “It was coming for a long time.” *** Around the time that Years &amp; Years were coming apart, he was making It’s a Sin in Manchester. It was an experience he loved, but one that was, he says, incredibly intense. For one thing, during a short break in filming, over Christmas 2019, his grandmother Rosemarie died. She had been a singer in her youth: she was a chorus girl who went to New York to perform and had a few leading roles on stage. She was his mother’s mother, and they were extremely close. “I was with her when she died, and then went back to work, and then came off that, and then the pandemic felt like it happened straight away. I hadn’t processed my gran’s death, really. And then I was thinking, ‘Oh my God, I’m trying to make this pop album. What’s the point? What is actually the point? Does anyone need another pop album? Not really.’” He giggles nervously. “I was having all those thoughts.” Then he turned 30, in July 2020, just as the first set of lockdown restrictions began to ease. “Maybe it sounds a bit silly, but it really felt like quite an achievement, to be 30. When you’re younger, you don’t ever imagine you’ll get to 30.” It felt, to him, like the first “big age”. Once he’d passed 25, he started to realise that he liked himself a bit more. “I was feeling like, ‘OK, maybe something is working here. I may finally be able to be a bit more at peace with myself and have a more solid foundation.’ And in terms of feeling like I’m too old, I felt too old when I was 27, 28, and coming back with the second Years &amp; Years album. I found the transition from being ‘the young one’ really hard. I was looking at other pop stars who were in their early 20s, and I was thinking, ‘Oh my God, I’m ageing out of this. Like, I’m too old!’” I can’t help but laugh; he is still the picture of youth. “I know! It’s crazy. But that’s how it felt. Like, ‘Oh no, I’m past it!’” That feeling has quietened down. He celebrated his 30th with a trip to the treetop rope-bridge experience Go Ape, of all places (“the perfect thing for me: activity, outdoors, slightly scary”) and a nice meal, and he is much more comfortable with himself. “I feel so much more at peace with myself than I ever did,” he nods. “I’m just holding on to that feeling.” Why is that? “Time helps, you know.” He pauses, then adds, with a cackle, “And I’ve had a lot of therapy.” Eventually, Alexander decided that even if the world didn’t need another pop album, he was going to make one. Night Call sounds as if it burst out of lockdown. There are no slowies, no ballads, only bangers. “All I wanted to make was uptempo music you could dance to in a club,” he says. It’s a tribute to nightlife and freedom, and the sex that can go with it. On one song, he sings about “All that muscle, getting me into trouble … ” Another, 20 Minutes, celebrates the joy of a fleeting sexual encounter. “A lot of the songs are about sex and hookups because it was something that was absent from my life,” he says, laughing. “I was trying to manifest some physical contact and thinking about the past few years before lockdown. It’s not like I was having tons of sex, but I was having some sex.” He found that he was inspired by the different ways in which people express desire, including himself. “I thought, I can write songs about this.” He pauses on the edge of saying something, trying to work out whether he should or not, then decides to jump off. “But I have to say, um, that I’m lucky that I do have someone that I like – love, actually – a lot. Who loves me back.” He claps his hands, joyfully. “So that’s nice!” Is it a new thing? “It’s not actually a new thing. I’ve known him for six, seven years, I think. Over that time, we’ve called our relationship different things, if that makes any sense. And now we don’t have a name for it. But he really supports me. Over the past year, I’ve really leaned on him a lot. I’m going to be super private about him, but that’s part of my story, so I have to say it.” Is he your boyfriend? “I’m just not … ” Defining it? “I’m not defining it.” To me, or in general? “I mean, we talk about this kind of thing a lot, but it’s like the word is too much, or something, so I’m not going to put it out there.” So the hookups you’re singing about on the album are a past life? “No. I mean, I still hope to hook up again, some day,” he grins. “We’re not in that situation.” We both start to laugh. “It’s complicated, isn’t it, all that stuff?” Night Call is about dancing and shagging and hedonism. You can practically feel the sticky floor underfoot when you listen to it. “What I love so much about dance music and disco is that idea of liberation on the dancefloor. It’s communal, you come together and feel free, to the beat,” he says. In some ways, I suggest, it feels like a companion piece to It’s a Sin. “Definitely. It became super-present in my head,” he says. Russell T Davies, who wrote and created It’s a Sin, says he only auditioned one actor for the part of Ritchie, and that was Alexander. Davies is about to return to Doctor Who as its showrunner, but before that was announced, Alexander found himself on the front page of the Sun, being announced as the new Doctor. How did that happen? “It genuinely was news to me, I promise you,” he says. We gossip for a bit, off the record, but he insists he isn’t doing it. “I definitely am not Doctor Who, and I’m not going to be Doctor Who,” he says. I fix him with a stare. “Promise!” Really? “It’s not happening! I can tell you I’m definitely not doing it.” *** In It’s a Sin, Ritchie moves to London from the Isle of Wight to become an actor, and arrives with gusto on the city’s gay scene, partying and sleeping his way around town. When Aids begins to tear through his social circle, he is in denial, at one point giving a petulant speech accusing the government of fear-mongering and trying to stop gay men having sex. He values his freedom as a gay man; he votes for Thatcher. He is afraid and he is defiant. He is a complicated character, which makes his story all the more affecting. It feels authentic. Given that Alexander moved to London (from Gloucestershire) at 18 to become an actor, there are parallels, aren’t there? “For sure. Except he’s a fucking Tory,” he jokes. “I’m so angry at Russell! Making me play a Tory on TV.” What does he think Davies saw in him? “I don’t know. But it’s not often you see a character that’s so connected to your life that’s gay, that had these big ambitions, that was hiding something from the people around him. I felt all of those things. So I thought, ‘Oh yeah, I could do this. I can get into his head.’” He put acting on the back burner for Years &amp; Years, and hadn’t acted for six years when It’s A Sin came along. He was intimidated. “I just thought, ‘What have I got myself in for, thinking I could do this?’ I was doing well as an actor, but I had never read something like It’s a Sin. You could wait your whole career and not get something as good as that, so I was like, ‘I have to do it, and do a good job.’” The reaction made it clear that he pulled it off. The programme won over critics and audiences in the UK and in the US. Unsurprisingly, for a drama about the Aids crisis in Britain, one that so tenderly and furiously memorialised the lives that were lost, it was devastating. Alexander often cried while reading the script and when learning his lines. “I know a lot of us on set felt the same. So I suppose it isn’t surprising that some people were similarly affected by watching it, or had an intense response. I hadn’t realised how much of a shadow it had been for lots of people, and the need they had to cast some light on it and say, ‘I was there, I remember it.’” He was born in 1990; it wasn’t his world. By playing Ritchie, he was just bearing witness to it. “But what to do next with that? I don’t really know.” Alexander says that at times he found the public reaction to It’s a Sin “overwhelming”. “My favourite word,” he smiles, a little sadly. “I felt like maybe some of what people experienced watching the show, I went through it in my own way, just by learning more about the history, because there were huge gaps in my knowledge of what happened in the UK in the 80s. That was a really deep, profound experience for me, as a human, but also as a gay man. It felt like it contextualised a lot of my experiences growing up.” Even now, Alexander still gets messages from people who have seen Growing Up Gay and identified with the struggles he went through as a young, closeted teenager who was bullied at school. It is a powerful film that distills complicated ideas about shame and internalised homophobia, for example, into a deceptively breezy format. “I’m glad you say that because obviously these things are so complicated and so different for everyone,” he says. “It’s so weird to be in a position of spokesperson or representative in any way of my community, as a gay man. You bump up against so many issues, like representation politics. But I think if you can give people some of the foundations of an idea or concept or a way to discuss something, even if it’s just an opening, then people can do the rest themselves. That’s a good thing, I think.” I wonder if the documentary is similar to It’s a Sin, in terms of it opening him up to hear about other people’s pain? “Mmm,” he says. “It’s hard, sometimes. I’m just trying to figure out a way of answering you and not crying myself, right now.” But he starts to cry, anyway. “This is what I mean, when it’s overwhelming, because you see how much people are in pain,” he says, his voice wobbling. “It’s sad to see that. And obviously I am someone that feels that stuff, too. And it just comes out like this.” I give him a hug. “Sorry,” he smiles. “It happens a lot. Like, in every interview, to be honest.” It’s not just me? “Don’t think you’re special!” He composes himself, carries on. “You know, I do these quite big, exposing things. Like, even It’s a Sin, obviously I’m playing a character, but then I have to really step back from it.” How does he do that? “I think of it happening slightly separately to me. It’s all part of something that is connected to me, but it’s all part of something else as well. And I still can’t quite figure that out. But that feels so much larger than me, Olly, and what I can contain in my brain, day to day.” Pop star duties are calling Alexander. He has Years &amp; Years CDs on his kitchen table that he needs to sign, some social media posts to do to promote his latest single. I ask if he’ll return to acting soon. He hesitates. “I think I will, yeah,” he says. “When it’s something I want to do.” But he doesn’t exactly sound desperate to do it. “I know! Haha. I’m not, really. It’s such a bizarre job. And I feel like I left it behind for a reason, to make music and do Years &amp; Years. It’s a Sin reminded me of how incredible that circus can be, so it would be fun to do again. But I’m just going to wait until it’s the right thing. Or make my own thing, at some point.” What would you make? “Like a queer horror thing? I love horror. Something in the vein of Twin Peaks, or Mulholland Drive.” Alexander once said that he had planned out his life until he was 25. Is there a new plan in place now? “No plan any more,” he says easily, but then he changes his mind. “Actually, have you seen Grace and Frankie?” He’s talking about the Netflix show starring Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin. “I just love their setup. They’re two women who are best friends living in this gorgeous place by the sea, in their 80s, still having sex, getting stoned and getting up to all sorts of trouble.” He grins. “My vague plan is to end up with something like that.” • Night Call will be released on 21 January.The myth: shaving your legs causes the hair to grow back thicker and darker Nope, says trichologist Anabel Kingsley. “Your hair is not like a lawn that is stimulated by cutting. If you cut your hair short, shave your head, legs or anywhere else, hair will not grow back thicker.” It’s the stubby length and squared-off (rather than naturally tapered) hair tips that give the illusion of greater thickness in regrowth – which is why regular trims make the hair on your head appear (falsely) denser and thicker. However, waxing legs (where hairs are pulled from the root, sometimes disrupting hair production) can in some cases cause hairs to grow back more sparsely. The myth: plucking grey hairs causes more to grow in their place People are commonly warned that yanking out grey hairs will only cause multiples to appear at their funeral. If only, says Anabel Kingsley, who treats clients with hair thinning and alopecia: “It would be a great way to get thicker hair. Sadly, it isn’t. And pulling out hairs repeatedly can damage the follicle, creating areas of hair loss.” Kingsley says this oft-repeated myth is most likely perpetuated by the fact that the discovery of one grey hair usually results in a careful search for more. The myth: darker skins don’t need sunscreen It isn’t just a myth that olive, brown and black skin needs no sunscreen – it’s a serious public health issue. While it’s true that rates of melanoma and other skin cancers are lower in Black and Asian populations, those that do occur tend to be diagnosed much later, lowering the survival rate. Dija Ayodele, skincare expert and author of Black Skin: the Definitive Skincare Guide, says people of colour must be diligent in their sun protection: “Because Black and darker skin tones are less likely to develop sun-induced skin cancer, the suncare market doesn’t engage with this demographic. Skin of colour should be included, with the explanation that, yes, melanin (more present in darker skin) gives protection, but it doesn’t mean you should be complacent and forgo sun protection completely.” Ayodele adds that the trend for modern chemical skin peels and the residual popularity of bleaching products, as well as a propensity towards hyper-pigmentation and discolouration in darker skins, is all the more reason to slather on the SPF. The myth: parabens are dangerous Nothing infuriates a beauty expert more than the belief, widely popularised by the “clean beauty” movement, that these common preservatives are a danger to health. Cosmetic scientist Sam Farmer is no exception: “Parabens are ingested by most people every day in fruit and vegetables. They are safe, found in nature, skin-friendly and a fantastic preservative. Saying all parabens are bad is a bit like saying all mushrooms are bad.” Farmer says that rather than protecting us from harm, the replacement of parabens may actually be putting consumers at risk: “The move away from parabens has led to all sorts of problems with their replacements. Recent product failures, particularly in the US, have led to people reporting mould growth in their cosmetics and led to product recalls.” The myth: washing hair too often is bad for it Not according to celebrity and fashion hairstylist Neil Moodie, who has worked with Kate Moss, Gemma Chan, Sandra Oh and Jodie Comer. “Haircare is all about your hair type,” he says. “Straight and fine hair needs to be washed more frequently, as the natural sebum from the scalp travels down the shaft more easily, giving the hair a flatter, oilier look and feel. Thicker, curlier, coiled or wavy hair can be left longer, allowing the oil more time to travel down to the tips and stop them drying out.” If you’re using gentle products, you can wash oilier hair as often as you like; drier hair will benefit from less frequent washing, to allow the natural oils time to travel down the shaft. Moodie says the regular users of styling products should also ramp up the shampooing, so they can’t build up and irritate the scalp or damage hair. For frequent washers, he recommends using an SLS/detergent-free shampoo to massage the scalp and root area, then a conditioner only on mid-lengths to ends. The myth: sunscreen makes us deficient in vitamin D Many have argued in recent years that our increased awareness around sun protection has led to widespread vitamin D deficiency. But many people living in Britain are already vitamin D-deficient, sunscreen or no sunscreen. The dermatologist Dr Sam Bunting says for most of us it’s a non-issue: “For the vast majority, there should be no concern with vitamin D levels [and sunscreen] because of ‘real-world application’ (what a regular person would slather on). But those who practise rigorous protection by wearing photo-protective clothing, hats, staying in the shade and applying sunscreen at the correct dose (2mg per sq cm), do have a higher risk, so oral supplementation is advised.” For others, sitting outside for a few minutes with unprotected forearms should top up vitamin D levels nicely, though dark-skinned people tend to require more exposure to generate the same amount of vitamin D. The myth: false lashes and extensions damage natural lashes Teresa Smith, the founder of I Love Lash salon in central London,encounters this belief constantly, and lays the blame at shoddy practitioners. “A skilled lash artist works meticulously, adding hand-crafted extensions to one natural lash at a time,” she says. “I’m always mindful of the length and thickness of the lashes applied, to ensure they’re not too heavy/long and that they’re properly isolated, to allow the natural lashes to continue growing healthily without any irritation.” Extensions or none, she believes lash maintenance begins at home: “Scrubbing off mascara every day is damaging to the natural lashes.” Instead, gently stroke lashes with cleanser or remover. “I often see clients’ natural lash health improve with extensions, because they encourage wearers to be gentler.” The myth: you can’t use active skincare ingredients when you’re pregnant Information on skincare during pregnancy, particularly those with active ingredients such as vitamin C, Bs and ingredient du jour niacinamide (found in meat, poultry, fish, nuts and vegetables), is among the most conflicting and confusing online. Doctor and aesthetician Ahmed El Muntasar provides clarity: “You can absolutely use actives when you’re pregnant, and actually a lot of my clients who get botox and filler with me pre-pregnancy move on to some form of active when pregnant to retain skin glow and vibrancy.” There are a couple of exceptions, he says: “With retinol and salicylic acid, there is a theoretical risk of developing issues with the pregnancy around haemorrhages and development of the placenta and the foetus. These products have not been tested in pregnancy, because that isn’t possible, but in lab studies and in theory the risk is there, so we err on the side of caution.” The myth: never pluck your own eyebrows This isn’t entirely true, but expert Shavata Singh, CEO and founder of Shavata Brows, does believe DIY brows should be a case of knowing one’s limitations. “The best thing anyone can do is to begin by getting a professional to create the ideal brow shape for you, then follow their design at home, by tweezing away stragglers,” she says. You will naturally lose your shape over time as fine hairs grow in, but this method will mean less-frequent appointments. If you must shape at home, Singh suggests drawing in your design with a brow pencil, not straying too far from the natural shape (anything below the arch is fair game), before picking up the tweezers. Avoid plucking from above, and take care not to overdo it. The myth: your skin gets used to skincare and it stops working This can be debunked by looking at ingredients with substantial and expansive long-term clinical findings (known as “long-term follow-up studies”). Consultant dermatologist Dr Jason Thomson from the Skin+Me service, says: “Tretinoin, the most active form of retinoid, is a prescription-only medicine and the best studied of all the retinoids. Studies have been done where people have used tretinoin regularly for one to four years, and these have shown that clinical improvements (as well as improvements seen under a microscope from biopsies) are seen over long periods and the benefits actually increase over time.” So it seems the theory of “overfamiliarity” carries little weight. Thomson says: “Studies give us evidence that the opposite is true and they form the basis for dermatologists’ advice that consistency is key with skincare. Sticking to ingredients that have proven benefits is the best approach, not chopping and changing your products and routine.” • This article was amended on 8 January 2022. Dr Sam Bunting is a dermatologist, but not a consultant dermatologist as stated in an earlier version.The Hype House, a collective of some of TikTok’s most famous stars in the hills north-west of Los Angeles, appears to be a very lonely place even with somewhere around 10 residents between the ages of 17 and 23. Bird’s-eye shots of the house in its eponymous Netflix reality series – to date, arguably the most prominent attempt to translate TikTok fame to the formulas of major streaming platforms – capture a property of isolation and excess: a grandiose villa with a cluster of palm trees atop a barren, brown hill, an empty driveway save for a brightly painted school bus. Inside, a collection of social media influencers and creators – Instagram, YouTube and, most predominantly, TikTok – traipse about impersonally deluxe rooms trailed by a constant cloud of content. They’re either making some (planning, rehearsing, filming, being filmed), lamenting the pressure to do so, or avoiding the churn entirely in an anxious, bored malaise. In confessionals which open the series and recur throughout the five episodes made available for review, the Hype House stars attempt to explain their fame, their jobs and the experience of being known by millions of people and having your worth — and income — quantified by followers. Like sisters Charli and Dixie D’Amelio, the TikTok stars and former Hype House collective members in Hulu’s Kardashian-esque The D’Amelio Show, and Gen Z music superstars Billie Eilish and Juice WRLD (who both blew up on Soundcloud) in their respective 2021 documentaries, the kids find the experience of social media fame basically inarticulable. “A million people who know who you are – it’s just … weird,” says 20-year-old Mia Hayward (3.7 million followers, the show notes; it’s unclear on what platform). “I don’t even know how this is my life. I don’t even know how this many people follow me, or even just care about me,” says Larri “Larray” Merritt (24.3 million followers). “It feels like a dream. I just posted a video on an app, now I’m living in a mansion,” said Jack Wright (8.1 million followers). “So you just woke up one day and became an internet celebrity?” an unseen producer asks Kouvr Annon, 20 (13.5 million followers). “Honestly? Kinda,” she responds. Hype House is the latest TikTok-adjacent content, to use the overused, air-quotable term, that tries to capture the “behind the scenes” dynamic of a life that is constantly on camera anyway. Like The D’Amelio Show, it’s a project whose aim seems unclear beyond the mandate of fame maintenance – is the point to turn the participants into mainstream stars? To reveal a more “authentic” experience of celebrity? To convince people to take the profession seriously? To be a fly on the wall? – whose interpersonal drama is at best half-hearted and whose stakes exist on an off-camera app. Both end up being intriguing not for the charisma of its stars, whose professional futures remain a constantly stressful question mark, but because they are human beings undergoing an ineffable, relentless experience of extremes, happening too fast and at too large a scale for anyone to process and which few people seem to actually enjoy. Hype House isn’t as deliberate with mental health messages as The D’Amelio Show, which is bookended by content warnings and resource lists and witnesses both girls have panic attacks. But it’s an effectively depressing portrait of one’s life as a voracious business. No one appears to be having a good time. The kids are constantly stressed out by the prospect of getting canceled (ie a scandal which prompts a flood of hate messages and sponsorship cancellations) and the lashings of toxic fans (such as when possessive female fans of heartthrob Vinnie Hacker, 18, post death threats for a girl whom he kissed as part of a prank video.) It is perhaps best described as a work-from-home reality show whose drama basically boils down to threatened income. The main plotline of the first few episodes is a rift between Hype House co-founder Thomas Petrou, the 22-year-old leader of the house, and Chase “Lil Huddy” Hudson, 18, a TikTok e-boy archetype perhaps most famous to outsiders for dating Charli D’Amelio, and who moved out before filming. Throughout the season, Petrou laments a lack of interest from the Hype House residents to post content, which keeps the business afloat. But the lethargy reads less like laziness than exhaustion and anxiety; the residents (mostly indistinguishable teenage boys) are hesitant to produce more cringey sponsorship videos, gin up plot for clicks, or mine themselves for more attention. Hudson, just barely out of high school, is openly done with TikTok, preferring to parlay his notoriety into a music career as a Green Day-esque alternative rocker. Hype House takes time to delineate the different lanes of internet fame each member has capitalized on and now finds themselves trapped by. Hudson is the charismatic tortured soul, sly and withdrawn. Alex Warren, 20 the YouTuber with expensive Jackass-lite style pranks perpetually stressed about finances (“your money depends on the numbers,” he says during a week of less-than-ideal viewers); with Annon, his girlfriend of over two years, he also produces aspirational “relationship content”. Nikita Nguyen, AKA Nikita Dragun, is a 25-year-old trans beauty Youtuber turned makeup mogul always in glam mode. Merritt, a YouTuber turned TikTok star from Compton, is the collective’s lone black member, dealing with fans’ charges of selling out or whitewashing. Hacker, the house’s star du jour at time of filming, is trying to convert his “thirst traps” (being hot and shirtless) into a following for livestreaming video games on Twitch. But this fame mostly lurks outside of the frame and in the psyche – there are barely any fans seen in this show in person; most of the real beef, such as an infamous Twitter feud between Nikita and fellow controversial YouTuber Trisha Paytas, or the Hype House’s notorious partying during the 2020 pandemic lockdowns in Los Angeles, is alluded to but not explored in depth. Stars might apologize briefly, but much more time is spent on their perception of the panopticon: feeling a need to apologize so constant and unreliable as to prompt numbness; trying to handle scandal by separating friends’ personal sides and “reputation sides”. Worrying about how to get fans to tune back in, how to tune out, how to stay positive. The Hype House, with its requirements of XYZ videos a month, comes off like a Faustian bargain: free living in exchange for control of your public persona. Despite everything, the status still elicits pride. “I worked my ass off to get here,” Michael Sanzone says to Hacker when the latter expresses lack of interest in the required collaborative videos. Hype House does effectively argue for how serious everyone takes the job. But it also implicitly asks the question: at what cost? Hype House is now available on NetflixBritain’s leading theatre companies must appoint more people of colour and from working-class backgrounds at senior levels to drive real and lasting change in the sector, a British Asian artistic director has said. Pravesh Kumar, the founder of Rifco Theatre Company, which stages productions aimed at British Asian audiences, said: “The leadership is what we really need to look at: it’s the big jobs where we need to have more diverse voices, more representative voices. “The boards need to change and the senior executive roles need to change. Then you’ll start seeing creative change.” Kumar, who was awarded an OBE in the new year honours, said: “Change is starting to happen, but it’s not going fast enough. The pandemic will make it more difficult because [organisations] will be even more risk averse and sadly people of colour are often seen as risky. “We haven’t reached anywhere near equality yet. Theatre remains a mostly white and middle-class-led industry where voices like mine are still rare.” Many theatres did not attract audiences from minority ethnic groups or working-class backgrounds because most plays and productions did not reflect their experiences and interests, he said. “Even when there are people of colour on stage, it is not authentic. It’s not how we see ourselves.” Kumar, who grew up on a council estate in Slough, trained and worked as an actor but never felt acting was his calling. After a spell as a British Airways check-in agent in the late 1990s, he and some friends staged a show called Airport 2000: Asians in Transit, at the Riverside Studios in west London. He said: “It was a series of sketches, and I was writing, acting, producing and carrying the set. Everything went on my credit card. We had no marketing budget, it was all word of mouth. We had three shows, and they were all full. We were just flabbergasted that we’d hit upon this audience that not only came [to the theatre] but looked like us. And that was the accidental birth of Rifco.” The touring company focuses on accessible new plays and musicals that reflect and celebrate British Asian experiences. About 30,000 people saw Britain’s Got Bhangra, a musical about racism in the UK music industry, and more than 50,000 saw The Deranged Marriage, a play about honour and arranged marriages set in a “chaotic, ridiculous, over-the-top British Asian wedding – which they all are, by the way”. Kumar said: “What we make is authentic and entertaining, which is often a dirty word in theatre now. We are talking about issues within our community – honour, LGBTQ issues, arranged marriages – but we’re doing it in our own voice, through our own lens. It feels like you can have a good night out, but we can also talk about all those issues that are important.” He said the Black Lives Matter movement had given “real impetus to [the arts community] to sort things out, but my fear is how long will this momentum last.” Venues that he approached for his productions “often want to book me into the ‘diverse slot’, and I’m saying we’re a British theatre company and I know there’s a huge audience because we’ve proved it every year. And it’s not just people of colour, it’s everybody.” Kumar said he was still reeling from being awarded an OBE. “My mother has not got off the phone. When I left British Airways to commit myself to the arts, it was: ‘How dare you give up a good job?’ For a lot of British south Asian families that’s still the case. Hopefully, people like me getting awards, being recognised, will change that.”On 2 January you tweeted: “Teachers and support staff across the country have put in a Herculean effort over the past 18 months and more, and I know we can count on their steadfast support in the coming weeks as we weather this storm.” I’m a great fan of metaphors but when it comes to pandemics, we have to be pretty careful to choose appropriate ones. Is a Covid pandemic a “storm”? I’ll put it like this: we breathe on each other. That’s how we get Covid. Storms come from up there in the clouds. We don’t breathe storms on each other. More on metaphor and analogies later. In the meantime: on both parts of that sentence, you’re absolutely right. It has been a Herculean effort and we can all count on teachers in the future. So it’s annoying to reflect how little teachers have been helped or praised by your government for their hard work throughout the pandemic. Partly as a result, insults and idiotic comments have appeared about them being workshy or having it easy. You also wrote: “I have asked former teachers who have either left the profession or retired to come forward to temporarily support workforces for the new term. I know many have stepped forward and it’s this blitz spirit that will be essential in turning the tide on Covid.” Have you read the responses to this tweet? I’ll summarise the points that people make, while saving you from the anger. They remind you that people who retire are among the most vulnerable to Covid on account of their age. Though you’ve introduced the requirement that secondary school students wear masks, primary schools are largely mask-free zones. What’s more, schools have many unventilated places that are often full of people very near to each other. These specific conditions are what are sometimes called “super-spreaders”. What is the government’s problem with ventilation? Once scientists had explained to your government that this was an airborne virus, you could have figured out that one way to hinder it from circulating in the atmosphere surrounding a group of people would have been to do all you could to enable fresh and/or filtered air to circulate instead. You appear to know this, because the government has now offered to provide 7,000 air cleaning units for education settings. This number was of course greeted with hysterical and derisory laughter. Many took the figure of 7,000 as a cue to do some arithmetic. It went like this: how many classrooms are there in England? A common estimate seemed to be around 300,000, though some came in at quite a few more, and I don’t know. But whatever the real answer is, it’s clearly not 7,000, or anything like it. I’ll leave you to do the percentages on how many classrooms will be reached by your offer. So what was this announcement for? Who was supposed to be fooled by it? Teachers? Other school staff? Children? Older school students? Parents? Or the British public who don’t have a sense of how many classrooms there are? Did you think that the vast majority of the population would say to themselves: “7000? Wow, this government is really rolling up its sleeves and fighting the virus now!” Did you? Let’s go back to the first tweet I quoted. It’s full of praise. But if you can only come up with 7,000 air filters, the praise is just hooey, isn’t it? And asking retired teachers to go into schools without one of the 7,000 air filters is both unkind and dangerous. Then you invoked the “blitz spirit”. Do you really want to make an analogy between a living human enemy trying to kill us and a virus that has no human intentions? Our main source of help to curb the numbers killed or maimed by Covid is medical science, not self-sacrifice – if that’s what you mean by the blitz spirit. The advice or help from government has repeatedly been confusing, wrong or inadequate – . So whatever this blitz spirit was, how will it be “essential” in “turning the tide” on Covid? My parents told me about the blitz: like getting into shelters that couldn’t withstand a hit. Come to think of it, that could be a bit like you sending retired teachers into unventilated schools. My mother told me that she did try to follow government instructions. One time when she was out and heard a doodlebug in the sky, she knew that the guidelines were to find a gutter and lie in it. She did just that. It was by White City station. If it was the blitz spirit that made her lie down in the gutter, I’m not sure that her doing it turned back the Nazi tide – if that was the tide you were talking about. So, I’ll sign off this letter with: Yours, annoyed, worried, but mostly confused, Michael RosenWhile George Saunders was writing his latest book, A Swim in a Pond in the Rain, he noticed something strange. The book examines seven Russian short stories, which Saunders has taught on the creative writing course at Syracuse University, New York, for 20 years. Many writers teach, and many have a difficult relationship with teaching, but Saunders long ago “decided to not let it be like that”. He sliced his weeks into three days of teaching, four of writing, a clear division of roles. But when he started the Russian book, however, his two lives merged. He adopted his “teaching stance” while he wrote, and was amazed by “how much fun” he had. “There’s a different sensibility when I walk into a classroom,” he says. The outward appearance is the same – “sloppy balding hippy” – but “I’m a slightly nicer and less egotistical person”. With this slightly nicer, less egotistical person at the keyboard, interesting things began to happen, and his fiction-writing self “got a real boost”. Last month Saunders launched the “natural extension” to his teaching and that book: Story Club, a subscription newsletter on Substack. In his twice-weekly newsletter, Saunders promises to look at what makes stories work – and “what [we can] learn about the mind by watching it read and process a story”. He will also look at what makes stories not work, including sharing his own early drafts of tales knocked back by the New Yorker. One week after launch, thousands had already subscribed. But why does Saunders want to do it? What wisdom, if any, does he want to impart? He won MacArthur and Guggenheim fellowships in 2006 off the back of his first short-story collections, and since then the awards and accolades have rolled in. There was the Folio prize for Tenth of December in 2014, and in 2017 a Booker for Lincoln in the Bardo, his first – and so far, only – novel. It is set in the graveyard where Abraham Lincoln’s son was buried, and populated by a troupe of restless ghosts. But even before he wrote it, Saunders was a literary celebrity. David Sedaris, Lena Dunham, Miranda July and Ben Stiller voiced the audiobook. All of which means: “At this point,” Saunders says, speaking on the phone from his home in Corralitos, California, “I’m like a grizzled eminence.” He could be locking himself away to write the “big War and Peace-type novel that spans 10 or 15 years and goes into a lot of people’s heads” that he’s spoken about recently. But instead, eminence has taught Saunders to weigh the extra potency it gives his teaching. “If my bit of disapproval or indifference or praise has an undue effect, good.” He is 63, and his age seems to fidget at the edge of his vision. In a podcast with Substack, he said he joined the platform because he “hated” the idea of losing the wisdom that students have imparted to him over the years. (It is typical of his magnanimity that he posits himself as the gatherer of others’ wisdom rather than the purveyor of his own.) “I thought: ‘So when I’m done with this life, that’s gone …’” Confronting that idea made him feel “a little miffed”, so he came up with Story Club. In his genial introduction he describes how he sees the club working: “The writer is a person running through some winter woods, wearing ice skates. The creative writing programme (or Story Club) is a frozen pond that suddenly appears: you are, of course, still using your own natural energy (because what else could you use?), are still headed in ‘your’ direction – only now, you’re moving faster. “So, as in that metaphor, the writer doesn’t have to worry, or obsess, or get her ducks in a row, or plan: she just has to skate, which means she has to be energetic in relation to the challenges the teacher puts in front of her; willing to take them on in a spirit of: ‘Well, what the heck – it might help.’” His first newsletter includes a photograph of his solitary writing shed in the woods behind the house in Corralitos. His wife, Paula, bought it for him a few years ago, and it’s a writer’s dream. No fences or distant rooftops. Just the shed surrounded by trees and the shadows of trees. Writers’ rooms are usually reclusive. But Saunders is using his to host a writing community. Why does he care? “I suppose one of the things that a person worries about along the way is, ‘Does this really matter?’” He got an answer to this question as soon as the letters started to arrive from readers of A Swim in a Pond in the Rain. Saunders has always had a healthy mailbag. “But those letters about the Russian book … People were saying they were going through a hard time and the book spoke to them. It wasn’t anything philosophical. It was just the feeling of another human voice talking to them.” Saunders is a great writer, and part of the greatness is that reading him feels very much like being spoken to kindly. This might be why some people wrote to add their observations to his readings of the stories. Others wrote to disagree. One woman argued for close study of the horse in Tolstoy’s Master and Man. “And she’s absolutely right,” he says. When somebody writes to say “‘I hated your novel’, that’s not so fun”. But if they respond to a story, “that’s a classroom conversation”, right there in the shed. Saunders’s wisdom of teaching is: “Make energy. You feel the temperature rise, then it’s like everybody in the room has ripened.” A Swim in a Pond in the Rain advocates the closest kind of close reading. There are diagrams and grids, nuts and bolts. Saunders studied engineering at university and he loves “that close, almost engineering way” of approaching text. “I find it really comforting to think that it’s a process,” he says. But the approach provides other kinds of solace, too. “To go up in that shed every day was so helpful.” It was, he says, a way of saying: “‘I can’t control the world.’ We do so much projective worrying. There are all these feeds coming into our house, into our heads, telling us all the horrible things that are happening … And we welcome it in … ” But if a person chooses instead to “check on a cool story, you are concentrating on something, and you are watching your own mind react to it. I think that is good in the way that meditation is good. “For me, the pandemic – I see it as a little bit like dying and being a ghost. Because you can see the world. It’s still there. And you can remember being in it and loving it and not having to worry about wearing a mask … You can remember that but you can’t do it. So it does, in the same way being a ghost would, make a little pause. Like: ‘Hah! Wow! This world is crazy. It’s wonderful. I wish I was in it again!’ And of course the hope is that we’ll get back in it.” As well as lifting you out of the anxiety of the pandemic, such close reading, he believes, is key to writing your own work. When Saunders went into teaching mode in his shed, he says, “I suddenly was seeing ideas all over the place.” Ordinarily he’s “a one-or-two-stories-a-year person”. But after he finished A Swim in a Pond in the Rain, he wrote four in 18 months, and has sent off the manuscript for his next collection. The effect of reading so closely was “like listening to a bunch of great albums and trying to take them apart, and suddenly you’re musical”. “This is so corny,” he says, but one night, soon after he had completed A Swim in a Pond in the Rain, he “actually had a dream of the first four or five lines” of a story. He got out of bed, went to the kitchen and sat down to write. “I don’t usually do this. But I got all the way to the end of it at three in the morning.” He then spent a year revising. Saunders says Substack won’t take him away from the great novel, “because I don’t know what it is”. He just knows there is a hankering for such a thing, and he wonders if he “could write about regular people in America”. As he puts it: “I got to come to the table as a published writer with the first couple of books that were very funny and sci-fi and dystopian. So now I feel like I’m coming on a journey to figure out to what extent that chimes with my actual feelings about life. I guess I want to make sure that what I’m doing is not in any way trivial. In other words, that it would speak to people in the future, that it would be a properly, very properly, recognised book, the light and the darkness in human existence. When I think about War and Peace, that took a real swing at it … So I just want to take a really good swing at it.” Besides, he says: “I don’t like relaxing. My policy is [to] overload myself. I work better with less sleep and I work better with more work.” • To learn more or to subscribe to receive George’s work in your inbox, visit Story Club at georgesaunders.substack.com Seven ways to improve your creative writing 1 Revise “Intuition, those momentary flashes of judgment that we have when we are editing, that’s really where the gold is,” Saunders says. In Story Club, he describes his mental compass, which has a needle that points to P (Positive) or N (Negative) according to how he feels when he rereads his own words. He checks the needle each sentence. If it points to N, he revises. He revises till the needle points to P for the entire text. 2 Number the drafts Saunders calls this “psychological self‑gaming”. Every time there’s a big change, he renumbers the draft. “I can go back, and say: ‘Oh, I’m on 98.’” Does he get into the thousands? “It depends how you count them.” 3 Print Revision is “not meaningful unless I print,” he says. “There’s a visual difference in reading on the page versus the computer. I don’t trust it unless I’m reading a hard copy.” 4 Know when you over-revise Those new to writing should overwrite just “to get a familiarity with their particular world. We have to learn our individual symptoms” of over-revision. “For me,” Saunders says, “the symptom is the humour goes out of it.” 5 Any time can be good time “Productivity and time at desk are not necessarily linearly related,” Saunders says. “When I used to have that engineering job, I was never writing more than 40 minutes at a time. And then I would sit down and do that little mental thing: ‘I hereby permit you to write at your desk. Go ahead. Cut the bullshit. Cut to the chase.’” 6 Face the problems in your story “If you try to deny the problem and write in spite of the problem in a story you’re writing, it is not going to be very good. But if you say to yourself in the story: ‘You got a problem, haven’t you?’ then the result is going to be better because it’s honest.” 7 Avoid thinking about your book’s big themes “If there’s a little idea that comes to me that’s not sucky, that kind of interests me, I go: ‘OK, I’m going to do that.’ But at that point your mind starts saying: ‘And the reason I’m doing that is because it’s a critique of patriarchy.’ I cut that off. ‘No, no. We don’t know why we’re doing it. We’re just doing it because we like it, and it will tell us what it’s about.’”It has already been described as the year of the squeeze, and whichever way you look at it, 2022 looks set to go down as the year that most of us became worse off. Increases in rail fares, phone bills, national insurance and mortgage repayments have all been announced, and energy bills could rocket if wholesale gas prices remain high and the government resists pressure to act. It will be a particular disaster for those on fixed incomes and benefits but even those on generous incomes are going to feel the heat. The next four months are crucial. Here’s what is heading your way. Gas and electricity bills If you think your domestic energy bills have gone up a lot in recent months, you had better prepare yourself for a shock. Bills could rise by another 50%, to as much as £2,000 a year on 1 April, for an average household paying by direct debit. Those in bigger properties, or working at home, people who live in the coldest parts of the country, and those who need to keep warm for medical reasons, could pay much more. A spate of energy supplier collapses and high wholesale gas prices have left the majority of UK homes paying gas and electricity tariffs capped by the regulator, Ofgem. Ofgem reviews the cap – the maximum amount it will allow suppliers to charge for each unit of gas and electricity – every six months. In early February, it will announce the new rates to be applied to bills from 1 April. All the indications are that prices will rise and the current cap equal to £1,277 a year for average use will rise to something closer to £2,000. That will mean savvy customers, who were on the best deals and paying as little as £1,000 a year last autumn, will have seen their energy bill double in a little over six months. High energy prices are going to make the biggest impact on most households’ disposable incomes this year – not least as they start to feed into the cost of other items. Businesses are facing even steeper increases and are not protected by the cap. This week, Boris Johnson appeared to rule out a temporary VAT removal. Currently, VAT is charged at 5% on energy bills and accounts for £65 per average bill, which would be closer to £100 after the cap is increased as expected. Winter fuel payments, paid to those born on or before 26 September 1955 and on some benefits, could be increased. These are currently worth between £100 and £300. The warm homes discount is worth £140 to those on certain benefits but is not available to customers of smaller suppliers. Food bills Households are already having to make their food budget go further, with the price of staples such as beef mince and crisps, as well as toiletries, rising fastest. Fresh increases are also in prospect as City analysts say struggling firms are eager to pass on higher costs now Christmas is over. Annual food price inflation reached 3.5% in December, adding almost £15 to the average monthly grocery bill, according to the data firm Kantar. Fraser McKevitt, its head of retail and consumer insight, said food prices rose sharply in the spring of 2020 when promotions were cut to maintain product availability but before that you would have to go back almost four years to January 2018 to see inflation running higher. Prescription charges Millions of people in England could face a double blow on 1 April as rising charges may go hand in hand with the over-60s being made to pay for the first time. In July last year, ministers proposed raising the qualifying age for free prescriptions in England from 60 to 66, thereby aligning the age for NHS prescription charge exemptions with the state pension age. No starting date has been announced but some have suggested it might come into effect in April. Campaigners say the move would result in 2.4 million more people paying prescription charges, with the average person in their early 60s paying £50 to £100 a year unless they qualify for another exemption. Prescription charges have risen every 1 April in recent years and currently stand at £9.35. The expectation is that they will rise again, probably by at least 20p. Rail fares Normally a 3.8% increase in rail fares would lead to a huge outcry but this year the percentage increase looks relatively modest in comparison to some other price increases faced by consumers. The 1 March increase officially applies to regulated fares – such as season tickets, long-distance returns and anytime urban fares – in England alone but is likely to be reflected throughout UK rail. An annual five-day season ticket from Guildford in Surrey to London terminals currently costs £3,936, or £4,868 with tube travel thrown in. Anyone going back to the office full-time after March will pay £150 more, or £185 if they use the underground, too. A peak-time single from Bristol and Bath will rise by 33p to £9. Phone and broadband This week, Virgin Media announced its customers will be paying an average of £56 a year more for their TV and broadband packages from March. The company has not published what the percentage increase is for TV and broadband bills but did admit its Virgin Mobile customers are facing increases of close to 10% on their airtime charges from April. What Virgin does is usually followed by companies such as Sky, TalkTalk and BT. BT customers who signed up or recontracted with BT after September 2020 can look forward to an annual price increase in line with inflation (January’s CPI figure) plus an additional 3.9%, which could turn out to be a rise of close to 10%. Last year, Sky increased its bills by an average of £36 a year up to a cap of £72. In the past, these firms have raised their tariffs on 1 April, now dubbed the UK’s price increase day. Tesco Mobile pay-monthly customers face a series of price increases from 9 February. Sending a picture message will go from 25p to 55p and calling countries such as Australia, South Africa and the US will go from 25p a minute to £1 a minute. Customers who use more than their monthly allowance will be charged 55p a minute (up from 25p), while listening to voicemails goes from 15p a minute to 55p and texts from 10p to 20p each. Don’t forget the return of roaming charges for those visiting Europe this year, courtesy of Brexit. A family of four all taking their phones to Spain for a week will pay £56. Mortgages and council tax Borrowers who are on their lender’s standard variable rate (SVR) will see their monthly payments go up after the Bank of England’s decision to increase the base rate in December. Although not tied to the base rate, SVRs tend to move up in line with it, and this time is no exception – most of the UK’s biggest lenders have announced that from 1 February they will increase borrowing costs by 0.15 percentage points. For a borrower with a mortgage of £150,000 arranged over 20 years, this will add just under £12 a month to repayments. Most changes to tracker mortgages will come in at the same time. According to the banking trade body UK Finance, about 850,000 borrowers have a tracker mortgage and will pay an average of £15.45 a month more after the Bank’s December increase, while about 1.1 million are on an SVR and will pay an average of £9.58 a month more. The next base rate decision will come in early February. A further increase would automatically mean higher costs for anyone with a tracker mortgage, and would be likely to be added to SVRs. Every 0.1 percentage point increase will add about £7 to a £150,000 mortgage. There hasn’t been much change in the cost of new fixed-rate mortgages, although Nationwide this week announced it was putting up prices. The biggest increase was on its three-year fixed-rate at 75% loan-to-value, which has gone up from 1.44% to 1.64%. Meanwhile, council tax bills are expected to rise on 1 April by 2.99%. Councils are permitted to increase bills by an average of 1.99% a year, without consulting residents, plus a further 1% to be spent on social care. This week, research by the Local Government Chronicle found that two-thirds of councils plan to up bills by the maximum allowed. The average band D council tax bill in England is currently £1,898, and a 2.99% increase would add £57. For many in larger houses, 2022 will be the year their annual council tax bill tops £2,000 for the first time. Tax and national insurance As well as price rises to contend with, there is also the prospect of taking home less of your cash, as national insurance contributions increase at the start of the new tax year. From 6 April, workers will pay a 1.25 percentage point levy to go towards funding social care – the charge will be applied to class 1 contributions for employees and class 4 contributions for the self-employed. The tax on dividends will rise by the same amount at the same time. For an employee earning £25,000 a year, the levy will mean a fall in their take-home pay of £152 a year, or just under £13 a month, according to the Which? calculator. Higher earners will pay more. Someone on £40,000 a year will pay an extra £339 a year, or £28.25 a month; while someone earning £65,000 will take home £652 less a year, or £54 a month. There won’t be any change in income tax rates or thresholds but that is not all good news. The personal income tax allowance has been frozen at £12,570, which means you won’t benefit as much from any pay rise as you would had it gone up as in previous years. In England and Wales, the higher-rate threshold has stayed the same, too, at £50,270. Government figures suggest that compared with if the threshold had risen in line with 1.6% inflation, a basic rate taxpayer will have an average real loss of £41, a higher rate taxpayer will have an average real loss of £165, and an additional rate taxpayer will have an average real loss of £73. Additional reporting by Zoe Wood and Shane HickeyHaiti, the western hemisphere’s poorest country, has often been a byword for deforestation and environmental calamity. It is often said that its border with the Dominican Republic can be seen from space, so marked is the difference between the lush forests to the east, and the scarred wasteland to the west. “In nature everything is connected to one other,” said Jean-Baptiste Chavannes, who in 1973 founded the Papaye Peasant Movement (MPP), which works to tackle deforestation and the climate crisis in Haiti’s poorest regions. “To disturb one is to disturb all.” Haiti’s woes seem to deepen with each passing month. Widespread protests and rolling fuel shortages have marked daily life for two years. In July last year, the Caribbean country’s president, Jovenel Moïse, was assassinated in his own home. The following month, its impoverished southern peninsula was struck by a 7.2 magnitude earthquake, killing at least 2,200 people and destroying tens of thousands of homes. Then, in September, a wave of deportations of Haitian nationals from the US, amid an alarming increase in kidnappings, thrust Haiti into further instability. But underpinning much of the vibrant yet embattled country’s troubles is environmental injustice and food insecurity, with 4.4 million people (of a population of nearly 11 million) at risk of hunger. Widespread deforestation over centuries, largely owing to the colonial timber trade as well as more recent felling for cooking fuel, has damaged fertile lands, and left them vulnerable to erosion, flooding, and drought. Seasonal hurricanes wreak havoc on homes and livelihoods, and contribute to the agricultural degradation each year. Previous top-down international development projects flooded Haitian marketplaces with unsustainable food staples, hamstringing local farmers’ attempts to achieve food sovereignty. MPP is a grassroots organisation that seeks to tackle the climate crisis and related food insecurity by working with subsistence farmers across Haiti. With more than 40 years of experience in Haiti’s rural Central Plateau, MPP works with 60,000 members to improve deforested landscape so people living there can eat, while increasing forest cover to help reduce carbon levels. “The struggle for food sovereignty is the fight against global warming,” Chavannes said. “All actions aimed at food sovereignty will have a direct impact on the climate crisis.” MPP carries out its work directly with local people, while trying to reduce farmers’ reliance on multinational organisations and charities, which have often mismanaged resources and contributed to Haiti’s challenges, said Jusléne Tyresias, MPP’s programme director. “A local approach is better because it creates direct employment, values local knowledge, skills, and resources,” she said, adding that large international NGOs often spent resources on pricey hotels and transport, rather than using local knowhow. “Locals living in the territory will be more involved because they know the severity of the problem better than those who come from outside.” This grassroots approach has won plaudits from its international backers, including the Clima Fund. Global Greengrants Fund UK, one of four charity partners in the Guardian and Observer’s 2021 Climate Justice appeal, is a member of the Clima Fund, and will use its share of appeal donations on grassroots projects such as MPP. “MPP is a fantastic example of the kinds of grassroots movements the Clima Fund resources in over 160 countries globally; they demonstrate the efficacy of building solutions from the bottom up – not just what is built, but also how it’s built with whom,” said Lindley Mease, Clima’s fund director. “They meet the material needs of a climate-ravaged island through culturally appropriate and abundant food, sustainable water recapture systems, and increased soil health, while also maintaining an active membership of 61,000 people governed by a circle of women. As part of the 200-million member [international farmers’ movement] La Via Campesina, they are modelling how strategic, collective organising can cool the planet at scale.” As a result of MPP’s work, swaths of the Central Plateau, once ravaged by deforestation, now teem with life. MPP’s network of peasant farmers has planted tens of millions of trees, while organisers have installed water infrastructure for homes and crops while training women and young Haitians in agro-ecology. Solar panels have been installed on homes, reducing reliance on burning wood for fuel, and a radio station broadcasts training and ecological advice. “Regionally and internationally, the MPP is part of global efforts to strengthen grassroots feminist movements, and is part of a global movement of small-scale farmers advancing food sovereignty with La Via Campesina,” said Sara Mersha, director of grant-making and advocacy at Grassroots International, after a visit to one of MPP’s projects. “It’s this combination of strategies – with a focus on powerful organising and a connection with the earth – that make me understand what it means when MPP and La Via Campesina assert, ‘small farmers cool the planet!’” MPP has also used rapid response teams during Haiti’s frequent natural disasters, including the earthquake that struck the south of the country in August. In the immediate aftermath of that tragedy, MPP provided food, water and shelter, before introducing long-term resilience strategies, such as seed distribution and developing local infrastructure. In 2010, when an earthquake levelled much of the capital, Port-au-Prince, and the surrounding areas, killing more than 220,000 people, MPP set up eco-villages, in which survivors and victims were taught to live and farm sustainably. Despite such a wide-ranging remit, MPP’s founder regards the movement’s work as grounded in one central tenet: sovereignty. “Sovereignty is nurtured as the right of every person to define environmentally friendly food production policies,” Chavannes said. “Respect for human life; respect for the rights of peasant families over agricultural land; the rights of indigenous peoples over their territories; respect for women’s rights and respect for culture; and the ways of feeding people.” • Donations can be made online by credit card, debit card or PayPal, or by phone on 0151 284 1126. We are unable to accept cheques.Henri Cartier-Bresson had a simple maxim about the craft that he had mastered so completely. “Your first 10,000 photographs are your worst,” he would tell fledgling snappers. And as the years roll on, I have begun to find comfort in his advice. I began wielding a camera a very long time ago and I reckon I am now approaching Cartier-Bresson’s magic quota. By his arithmetic, I will soon step off the lowest rung in the ladder of photography and progress to the next-to-worst ranking. Things can only get better. And I cannot deny I have taken many badly focused, clumsily framed images in my time. The blurred negatives in my files confirm that sad fact. However, as the years have passed, I have also managed a few decent photographs that have brought me a sense of fulfilment and, occasionally, the satisfaction of seeing my efforts in print. Mastering an acceptable image is a pleasing business, I have found. Photography brings other rewards, of course. For a start, I now possess records of so many episodes of my life: from my early days as a hill-walker in Scotland, to the births of my children, and to my travels to distant lands on Observer assignments. It is a treasure trove of images that make my memories tangible, a pleasure that can now be achieved by anyone with a decent camera on their smartphones. These have made the business of record-sharing straightforward. There is more to photography than merely documenting the passage of one’s life, however. First, there is the simple physical satisfaction you get from learning how to master your camera – learning to balance film speed, aperture and shutter speed, for example. In this way, you can tailor the needs of your subject – be it a fast-moving animal or a moodily lit portrait or a landscape teeming with detail – to produce a striking image, one that is more than a simple record of an event. An understanding of these basics is essential and mastering them brings its own fulfilment. Seeking better and better images also brings a drive and a purpose to the way you use your spare time. This has been particularly true in recent years, when I have become increasingly keen to photograph UK wildlife, an urge that has taken me to parts of the British Isles that I might never have otherwise visited. My efforts to photograph the otter provides a good example. Frustrated at every attempt to get near one in England, I decided to visit a place that is notably replete with the species: Shetland. And after a long, initially frustrating day with a wildlife guide, I was rewarded with the sight of a solitary female cavorting near me on the seashore for more than half an hour. It was glorious. Then I had time to look at Shetland, a hauntingly beautiful place, I discovered, and came across the Broch of Mousa, one of Britain’s most remarkable buildings. Built 2,000 years ago, this towering iron age roundhouse – whose double lined stone walls contain an internal, curved stone staircases – is among Europe’s best preserved ancient buildings: a lowering, beautifully constructed monument that rises out of the mist and whose purpose defies precise historical explanation. For good measure, the island of Mousa has one of the world’s biggest colonies of European storm petrels and their chattering, staccato calls added an eerie soundtrack to my visit. Had I not chosen to tackle my first photographic goal, I would not have gone through this dazzling experience – and that is the real satisfaction I get from photography. It drives me on. Capturing wildlife in action is especially satisfying. Your subjects are utterly unpredictable, often infuriatingly so, but occasionally rewarding – when a recalcitrant bird of prey or an elusive dragonfly flits into your viewfinder at the right moment. From this perspective, photography is therapy, right down to capturing south London’s herons and cormorants – in Brockwell Park – and the woodpeckers that visited my garden in Brixton during lockdown last year. However, I should add a coda to this photographic panegyric. There are times when you should ignore the camera round your neck and just look at what is unfolding in front of you. I have been privileged to witness rocket launches in Florida, Kazakhstan and French Guiana and every time I photographed each spacecraft – from take-off to its disappearance into the upper atmosphere – in a frenzy of shutter clicking. I have some satisfactory images but it is only now that I realise that, just for once, I should have simply watched the whole breathtaking experience of humanity propelling its way towards the heavens without trying to capture it on film. So yes, take lots and lots of photographs but sometimes take a pause and just look. The break is worth it – now and then. How to do it The range of photography lessons available online is now so vast that you can be taught by the likes of Vanity Fair portrait photographer Annie Leibovitz or Vogue cover photographer Tyler Mitchell without leaving your sofa. Masterclass has a lot to answer for. If you want a less starry teacher, there are courses available from University of Arts London and the Photographer’s Gallery. Also look at the The Royal Photographic Society website which has lots of information about qualifications and training. Redeye is a not-for-profit society which offers advice and information to photographers around the world.When outspoken South African professor Adam Habib took over last year as director of Soas University of London, an elite research university next to the British Museum in central London, it seemed like a poisoned chalice. For some time, the university, which focuses on the study of Asia, Africa and the Middle East, had been widely rumoured to be at risk of going under. Habib says that when the pandemic hit in 2020, bringing fresh uncertainty about income from international students, Soas was already in “deep financial crisis”. And as an institution usually regarded as staunchly leftwing (despite counting Enoch Powell among its alumni), there was no guarantee a Conservative government would want to step in and save it. Moreover, Soas specialises in social science and humanities, which many academics believe the government has no real interest in backing. Last year, ministers pushed through controversial cuts to arts and humanities subjects, in order to invest more in science, engineering and maths. There are fears they may inflict more damage in 2022, with ministers considering plans to limit the numbers of students studying for degrees in non-priority subjects in an attempt to rein in student loan debts. Habib, a political scientist who was previously vice-chancellor of the University of the Witwatersrand (Wits) in Johannesburg, one of South Africa’s top universities, believes the “failure to sufficiently appreciate social science, arts and humanities subjects” is one of the “biggest mistakes” the UK government is making with higher education. He says the way Covid is playing out is all the proof needed of why the government is wrong. “The pandemic has thrown up profoundly social questions, about how people live their lives and their social relationships,” he says. “Much of the work in containing it is to do with human and social problems. We were told we needed a global vaccination programme in April 2020, yet governments in the west did exactly what they were advised against and focused on their own population. And now we have Omicron. That’s a social science question.” Habib is adamant that for the first time in history many of the biggest problems are global rather than national – not only pandemics but also the climate crisis and inequality – and none of them will be solved without social science. “How do you tell a man in the Congo that he shouldn’t be mining or cutting down forests?” he asks. “Sure, you can tell him that it will destroy the planet and in 80 years we will all die. But he will say: ‘My child is starving today.’” Habib is determined that his university, which he says had been drifting with no definite sense of its purpose, is uniquely positioned to help answer these intractable global questions. Of course, to do that it has to be solvent, and after painful job cuts, the sale of valuable central London property and an increase in student numbers, Habib says Soas ended 2021 with a surplus of £11m and is projected to run a surplus again this year. However, one of the most “painful” and difficult challenges of his new job so far had nothing to do with finance or government priorities, he says. In March, four weeks after he and his wife arrived in London, Habib was forced to step aside temporarily because of fury over his use of the “N-word” in a video call with students. An independent investigation cleared him of racism and the board reinstated him in May, concluding that he had made an error in using the word but had been trying to explain that it would not be tolerated at the university. “To suddenly find myself accused of not being sufficiently appreciative of the injustice of people’s experiences was brutal,” he says now. “That had a really profound impact on me. I have spent the whole of my adult life involved in social justice. It is what defines me.” Habib grew up in what he describes as a typical “middle-class Indian family” in apartheid South Africa. His aunts helped to raise him after his mother died of breast cancer. His father, a grocer, was “mildly political”, he says, and had his passport confiscated in the 1960s for moving money through his business for an anti-apartheid party. Habib himself was an anti-apartheid activist in the 1980s, involved in youth movements, unions, anti-apartheid parties and NGOs, and was briefly imprisoned by the apartheid state in 1986. He led a national project on racial redress initiatives as head of democracy and governance at the Human Science Research Council in Pretoria. Last year, while angry Soas students demanded his resignation, senior black activists and professors in South Africa spoke out in his defence and insisted he was not a racist, while South Africans in London reached out and invited him for supper. Those gestures kept him going, he says. Looking back, he remains annoyed that the video clip that went viral was edited to “remove the context” of what he was saying. But he admits he misjudged “how fractious the UK is around issues of race and identity” and he should not have used the word. The experience has left him with grave concerns about the freedom of debate in universities. “We need to be able to have difficult discussions about race, about statues, about trans rights and identity without creating this sort of paralysis,” he says. He is far from reassured by the government’s new higher education freedom of speech bill making its way through the Commons. “I am horrified that politicians think they can stipulate how academic freedom is enabled,” he says. “This government has interfered more aggressively in universities than any government since the Thatcher years. We’ve allowed that to happen.” Instead, he is calling for collective leadership and “real courage” from vice-chancellors to set clear guidelines for allowing difficult debates to happen. Habib is already demonstrating on other issues that he does not intend to quietly toe the line. He is openly critical of the way in which UK universities treat international students as cash cows, despite knowing that their fees of more than £20,000 a year must be part of the financial solution for Soas. “We claim we are global institutions, but basically we just want to make cash out of the global market,” he says. “We aren’t looking at the consequences of taking the best people from developing countries or weakening their institutions.” He says British universities tell themselves that they are educating people who will take their new skills home. In reality, he says, many will fall in love, have families, get jobs, and end up staying. Before he left South Africa he attended a conference where Prof Abdoulaye Gueye, from the University of Ottawa, showed that historically 83% of students from India and 90% of those from China did not return home after studying abroad. Habib believes data on Africa would tell a similar story. “By accelerating the brain drain in Africa and Asia we are weakening their institutional capacities. It means places like hospitals and universities won’t be able to deal with these huge challenges like pandemics and climate change and inequality,” he says. As Soas director, with his eye firmly on the bottom line, he knows he cannot shut the door to students from developing countries, but he is determined to do things differently. He wants to work with up to eight universities in Africa, Asia and the Middle East to build joint degrees that will be less of a one-way pipeline away from those areas. Such partnerships would also involve research, with universities in the global south able to use the Soas brand to help win grants, and Habib’s academics gaining a much deeper understanding of the countries they are researching. “If you have a centre for the study of race in Africa, why locate it in central London and not in Uganda?” he says. Soas recently announced a plan to appoint five new sustainable development professors. Habib says they are talking to potential candidates from developing countries, but he aims to recruit them in a 50/50 partnership with their home university. Young postdoctoral researchers are being recruited on the same basis. “Some UK universities are focused entirely on their brand,” he says. “But what about their mandate? We should be asking what we are here to do.”Mark Rylance is dressed for rehearsals in loose black trousers and top, plus a puckish red knitted cap beneath which irrepressible tufts of dark hair sprout. His smile is wide, his face open, his dark eyebrows faintly saturnine – although heaven knows he can transform himself at will, creating Thomas Cromwell’s inward features and calculating mind, or Rooster Byron’s air of dangerous, Dionysian provocation. He was lucky during lockdown. Although theatres ground to a halt, film production was able to press ahead, and he made six – six! – films. First out was a student short (lucky students). Then there were a bunch of other things, including Don’t Look Up, which came out in December: a climate-crisis allegory about scientists trying to warn a heedless world of a massive comet about to hit Earth, with a ridiculously starry cast including Leonardo DiCaprio, Jennifer Lawrence and Meryl Streep. Here he is now, though, on his lunch break while he works in a deeply ungrand arts centre just south of the Thames in London. He is in rehearsals for a play called Dr Semmelweis that he has created with writer Stephen Brown. Tom Morris, he of War Horse, is directing. And Rylance couldn’t be happier. He has not worked on a play since Othello at the Globe in 2018. It has been the longest time he’s ever been out of a rehearsal room. “The first day here, oh God! It was so joyous to be in a room with other people. Theatre is so flexible and it’s so different from being an actor in a film. It’s a thousand times more enjoyable.” So speaks the actual winner of an Oscar. He won best supporting actor for his role in Steven Spielberg’s 2015 cold war drama Bridge of Spies, a role he was offered after “my friend Dan Day-Lewis brought Steven to see me doing Twelfth Night on Broadway. So, the first time I met Steven was in the basement of the Belasco theatre, where Houdini used to drop an elephant through a trapdoor into a tank of water to make it disappear.” A few weeks later, Spielberg offered him the part of the spy Rudolf Abel (to be fair, he’d tried to get him to be in Empire of the Sun in the 1980s, but Rylance turned him down). “It was a good part,” he says of Bridge of Spies. “And it got even better after Joel and Ethan Coen rewrote it. Looking at the two versions, it was like looking at the first and second quartos of Hamlet.” Throughout our conversation, he will refer to the world of movies – dining out with Joel Coen, exactly what it’s like working with Terrence Malick – as if it’s an amusing sideline, a hilarious hobby he has somehow stumbled into (“Really a funny fun thing,” he says lightly at one point). But film is not the point of his life; movies don’t do for him what the theatre does. Even working with Malick, playing Satan in the forthcoming The Way of the Wind, it’s not the same. It doesn’t have the same element of play, the same connection with an audience. Rylance, at this point in our conversation, suddenly takes on the role of Malick, leaping up to act out his directing technique for my benefit. Given that the famously publicity-shy Malick never does interviews and barely speaks in public, this is completely fascinating, and I can only apologise that the medium of print cannot do justice to Rylance-as-Malick’s breathy tenor as he conveys him darting around a cave in Malta with a GoPro camera, issuing instructions such as: “‘Ah, Mark, just take the script as a kind of indication of what you might say. Say whatever you want, really … Say: ‘God is beautiful’… No, say: ‘God is everywhere.’” The idea behind the play Rylance is rehearsing came after he read a brief, furious biography of Ignaz Semmelweis, written by Louis-Ferdinand Céline (the French novelist who became notorious for his antisemitic diatribes of the 1930s). Working as a doctor at the Vienna general hospital in the early 19th century, Semmelweis noticed that new mothers and babies had much less chance of dying from puerperal fever when they had been cared for by midwives and nurses than by doctors. Why? He eventually discovered that the doctors were attending to women almost in the same breath as conducting autopsies. If they thoroughly washed their hands, fatalities were drastically reduced. The trouble is, his discovery fell on deaf ears. He just wasn’t taken seriously. It would take Joseph Lister, Louis Pasteur and the use of microscopes to prove the existence of bacteria, 40 years later. The result, Rylance explains, was that “literally hundreds of thousands of women were killed accidentally by doctors. It’s an example of an incredible advancement in human understanding that doesn’t land.” Semmelweis, says Rylance, was “like the sharp knife in the drawer”; here he brandishes the available prop, an excellent wooden-handled, folding knife with which he’s attacking his salad. The doctor was, partly, his own enemy: he wasn’t a natural persuader; he was angry, impatient. The story isn’t as if written by Aeschylus, he tells me – the hero destroyed by a cruel fate – but more like something by Sophocles, the hero unwittingly complicit in his own downfall. Despite the fact that Rylance has been thinking about the play for years and that it was meant to premiere in the spring of 2020, the material – trust in scientific evidence and hand hygiene, for heaven’s sake – seems ridiculously prescient. Soon after Dr Semmelweis’s run at the Bristol Old Vic, Rylance will be on stage again, this time in London, with Jerusalem. The play by Jez Butterworth, directed by Ian Rickson, was a sensation when it premiered in 2009, running for 420 performances in London and on Broadway. A twisted pastoral marinated in the deep, dark mythology of England, it was an extraordinary piece of ensemble theatre lit up by Rylance’s central performance as the magnetic Johnny “Rooster” Byron, a character brimming with Falstaffian, punkish energies. It will be an event. Jerusalem is a “state-of-England” play, one that poked and prodded, albeit indirectly and allusively, at the politics of the time. It will mean something different again when it returns to a post-Brexit, austerity-hit, Covid-beset country. The original production was never filmed, except for archival purposes (“I’m not interested in filmed plays,” he admits). That means that for the past decade, Rylance’s performance has existed in the memory of those who saw it, which is the true essence of theatre: irreproducible. There was talk of turning it into a film, he says, but “I wouldn’t be interested in that. They’d have to get someone else to do that. It would be a dry bob, as some used to say.” (Later I find this phrase in a 19th-century Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, in which it is defined as “copulation without emission”.) For him, it’s all about being in the room with an audience. What made him want to go back to Jerusalem? Well, before TV and film, he says, actors used to return to their best parts, and tour them. If It’s a Wonderful Life had been a play, Jimmy Stewart would have reprised it endlessly, he reckons. Eugene O’Neill’s father, the actor James O’Neill, even called his summer house Monte Cristo Cottage after his most celebrated part, Edmond Dantès in The Count of Monte Cristo. “And if you’re lucky that will happen in your life as an actor, as it did with Jerusalem for me, and for Ian Rickson and Jez Butterworth, with the three of us moving into something that was greater than any one of us.” He would like to do it every decade. He is 61 now, and was 49 when the play premiered. Back then, in the first run, “I always said that I’d like to do it again in 10 years. I’d like to do it 10 years from now, if I can. I would like to do it at 71, and 81. I’d like to do it and see if it emerges into being something that’s more than just about that time when it hit so powerfully.” Micky Lay, the real person on whom Rooster was loosely based, now dead, was 74 when Rylance went to visit him in Pewsey, Wiltshire, proffering a bottle of whisky. “That was the second time: the first time he told me to fuck off, then I remembered that you always need to take a dragon a gift.” Most of the original cast has agreed to return, even those who had tiny parts, although the younger roles have been recast (the teenage characters needing to be played by young actors, plus some changes made to improve diversity, since times have moved on in other ways, too). Rylance was worried that Mackenzie Crook wouldn’t want to come back, but no, “he’s more fired up than I am”. He adds: “I had dinner with Ginger … ” – he uses Crook’s character’s name before correcting himself – “with Mackenzie the other night, the first time for maybe six or seven years, because he’s a very private gentleman. Ahhh, he’s a genius,” he says with disarming fondness, and chuckles. “I said to him: ‘It’ll be quite a moment when I say: ‘Morning Ginge,’ for the first time in front of people at the Apollo again.’” He is right. It will. Another anniversary is looming: this summer, it will be a decade since Rylance’s beloved stepdaughter, Nataasha van Kampen, died, aged just 28, of a suspected brain haemorrhage, on a flight from New York to London. Rylance had married her mother, the theatre composer Claire van Kampen, when Nataasha was very young; the whole family, including Chris van Kampen, Nataasha and her sister Juliet’s father, were very close. It was shortly before the London Olympics opening ceremony, which Rylance was supposed to begin with Shakespeare’s words from The Tempest, “The isle is full of noises …” Kenneth Branagh stepped into the breach. I ask him how he and his family are now. In the early, shocked days after her death, he tells me, they had an open house at their home in Herne Hill, south London: “Someone came who had lost a child 20 years before, and she said: ‘It never changes. This is it, it never gets better.’ And Juliet kicked Claire under the table, as if to say: ‘That’s not going to be us. There’s no way that ’Taasha would want us to stay in this absolute pit.’” It has, of course, been unspeakably hard. It was as if the family was a string quartet, he says, and they had suddenly lost a violinist; each of them had to learn to play the violin “and step in and play it” when needed, keeping Nataasha’s character, her spirit, her way of seeing the world close-held in the family. In fact, it was because she’d always been keen on his doing film work that Rylance started acting in more movies. “Though there’s not a day we wouldn’t wish her here, growing in the physical world, she feels both very far away and very, very near,” he says. “For me, love is stronger than death. And you know, we are very sad sometimes. But we’re also very happy sometimes, and we feel her come with us as much when we’re happy, if not more, than when we’re sad.” At a certain point during our conversation, I ask Rylance how he does it. How he acts, that is. Absurd question: you might as well ask a great chef how she cooks or a great soprano how she sings. But he answers seriously. He tells me about his teachers: Mike Alfreds who founded Shared Experience, and Philip Hedley, once artistic director of east London’s Theatre Royal, Stratford East. “They had digested Stanislavski, you had a real awakening of how you could layer and layer and develop things.” But it’s not quite that, he says. “What I am looking for is something that is moving. I am hunting for some engine … By now, at 61, I have discovered that my mind is really a helpful host into the room, but it’s not the cook.” There has to be something living, something playful, in the performance itself. And it comes partly, and powerfully, from the audience. He tells me about playing Hamlet at the Barbican in London with the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1989. It was 5 June. He had seen the news: seen the footage of a man walking out in front of a line of tanks in Tiananmen Square, then stopping, right in their path. “And I remember coming on and saying: ‘The time is out of joint. O cursed spite, that ever I was born to set it right.’” In his imagination the auditorium itself, in that moment, became that line of tanks. “Or was it,” he wonders, “that a lot of people in the audience were also aware of that thought? That you might, at some point, find yourself in a time that’s out of joint, and be the one standing in front of the tank, stopping it?” Whatever it was, Rylance has a kind of extreme porousness that means worlds, not just words, can flow through him. And when he speaks those lines of Hamlet’s, I feel my stomach flip. It doesn’t matter how he does it. He just does. • This article was amended on 8 January 2022. Rylance visited Micky Lay in Pewsey, Wiltshire, not Pusey, Oxfordshire. Dr Semmelweis is at the Bristol Old Vic from 20 January to 12 February.‘I bought 200 turkey chicks – and learned to rear them on the job’ Paul White, 35, Lancashire In May 2018, I became leader of my local council, Pendle, in Lancashire. A year later, after nearly a decade in local politics, I quit. Alongside my council duties, I had been growing a business: milk and grocery delivery to 100,000 customers, locally and elsewhere in the country. I had a 3am milk round, so I’d be up before dawn delivering bottles, jumping on a train to Westminster after lunch to meet government ministers, and heading back to chair a council meeting that evening. My heart was constantly racing. Shortly before my election as leader, I’d been diagnosed with cardiomyopathy – heart failure. I’d been fitted with a pacemaker and defibrillator, and put on medication, but I’d torn up the doctor’s note, convinced I was too busy to take time off. I wasn’t bothered if my demanding life killed me. I was single and had no time for a family. After one 21-hour work day, towards the end of 2018, I told my mum I planned to quit; as soon as I uttered the words, I felt the weight lift. I moved to a barn conversion in Laneshawbridge, the Lancashire village I grew up in, and sold my stake in the business. For a while, I did nothing, which was an enormous and uncomfortable culture shift. Then I remembered dreams I’d harboured as a kid, when I’d draw maps of farms I wanted to own. I had studied rural enterprise at university, but the idea of working in agriculture got lost in business and politics. I’d kept an eye on the farming press and, in early 2021, still reeling from the pandemic, I spotted warnings of a turkey shortage at Christmas – a result of supply chain and labour issues stemming from Brexit. I rented an acre of woodland in the village, bought 200 turkey chicks for £2,000, and read up on how to rear them. I set up the business in three weeks, figuring I’d see a return in 20 weeks, when the local pubs and butchers were ready for their birds. Each day, I get up with my turkeys at dawn and close them in at dusk. I work alone, but I’ve learned a lot, educating myself on the job – the weird ways the turkeys react to noise, how much they eat, and how loud they are; farming with a hangover is a nightmare. I’ve rented 11 more acres and, this year, I’ll start a commercial flock of egg-laying chickens, then move on to sheep. When I was in politics, I thought it was the most important thing in the world. I was named Young Lancastrian of the Year in 2018, but, when I look back at photos, I seem grey, thin, ill. Now, I spend hours outdoors. I lead a walking group, and clock up even more miles with my dog. I tend to my turkeys by the river, and potter around the village talking to people. Before, my family were neglected. Now, my mum pops in for a brew after work, and I spend time with my baby niece. Practically, there are downsides to life on the farm: rain, animals die, and you have to be very smart to make a living from it: a £10 turkey chick can eventually sell for up to £90. Emotionally, it’s been hard to come to terms with the change. Handing over the keys to the town hall was a huge relief, yet I toy daily with going back – it feels like unfinished business. People who wanted my attention for years, whom I considered friends, disappeared. I’ve also found it hard to reconcile myself with the idea that I’m not contributing to the world or achieving in the same way: once you’ve tasted success, you feel compelled to fill your days with it. Now, I question if it’s OK for life to feel this simple. I suspect I will look for another endeavour alongside this one, but it will have to be just right. Everyone tells me how lucky I am to have made the leap. It is never going to make me rich in money but I think, in time, it could make me rich in happiness. ‘After the Brexit referendum, my Dutch husband said: we have to move’ Dawn Connor-Van der Horst, 49, Nijmegen, the Netherlands In the run-up to the Brexit referendum, the roads near our north Devon home were lined with red Vote Leave signs. I was strongly pro-remain and attended our local count on vote night. As the piles of paper grew, they confirmed my fears. In the early hours, I went home to my Dutch husband, Eric, and cried. Our sons, seven and 10, were in bed while we watched the result come through on TV. Eric turned to me and said: “I think we have to move.” By the end of 2017, we had left for the Netherlands. We never wanted to take the decision – nor could we have predicted how much we’d lose in the process. As a family, we identified strongly as European. We lived in the Netherlands when we were first married. When I fell pregnant and we moved home to Britain, it never felt like emigrating; we just rocked up and moved in. Leaving, a decade later, felt different, as if I didn’t belong in my own country. The entire campaign had been traumatic. I’d found myself in arguments with staff at nursery who held opposing views. Strangers had a go at my husband for speaking Dutch to our kids in the park. We ran a cycling business – organising biking holidays for tourists and cycle training in schools – and I remember one of our employees commenting, as we looked out over the rolling hills late in the campaign: “This country is too full, we need to leave.” There was anger and hatred on people’s faces. It was exhausting. We began to think about moving. We loved being European and wanted to be in the EU. Once we’d decided, we told close friends and gradually withdrew from our work and social lives. The hardest part was people who knew how hurt we felt and said nothing to comfort us. My husband lined up a job with a TV company, and we moved to Nijmegen, a city near the Dutch border with Germany. We were the first people in our new housing estate. The atmosphere felt cold; we all found it awful. Back in Devon, we had known our neighbours and fellow business owners. The boys had thrived in the village primary school, and enjoyed archery and surfing. After his first day of school in the Netherlands, my eldest son simply declared: “The horror.” The kids had never wanted to move, but I’d tried to make an adventure of it. I felt terrible for putting them in this position. My sister said that my youngest never smiled properly in the photos I sent. At his primary school, there was no allowance made for him being unable to speak Dutch. I tried to find them clubs, like they’d had at home, but it was difficult to make friends. I started teaching English, but I’d lost my support network – and as an adult, that’s hard to replace. My husband was relieved to slip back into a job he had done 10 years before. But four years in, our lives have shrunk and are much less interesting than they were. It isn’t that I wish we’d never moved – but there have been days when I’ve wished we’d never had to. I used to tell my children that they were still British and could go to a UK university. However, the rules are unclear and “Brexpat” campaign groups are now lobbying on behalf of teenagers who have been asked to pay international fees because they don’t attend British secondary schools, despite retaining citizenship. We’ve been back to the UK twice. What happened feels less personal than it did, but nothing has changed and I see no reason to return. We are not wanted there. We have grown accustomed to our smaller world. Materially, we are better off. We live in the biggest and best insulated house we’ve ever lived in, and have a new car for the first time. We’ve enjoyed holidays to Luxembourg and France. That’s the Europe I wanted on my doorstep. I still fight Brexit through campaign groups and social media. Trolls tell me I’ve moved and should shut up, but it’s not as if we walked off into the sunset. It’s sad to think of all that we built, and all that we lost. I’m reconciled with it – but it’s gone for ever. ‘When the pandemic hit, it cemented my ambition to work remotely from a beach with coconuts and beers’ Raj Goodman-Anand, 39, Bangkok A few years ago, after my wife, Suvekchya, survived breast cancer, a therapist asked what my ideal life looked like. I was born in Kuwait, but was living in London. I said I wanted to live somewhere sunny again, near the sea, doing the job I love – but that I couldn’t. “Why not?” she asked me. When I broke it down, there was no real answer. I had moved to the UK at 18 and met Sue at university, in Brighton. We married in 2012, in Nepal, where she is from. In April 2016, she was given the cancer diagnosis. There were points where we didn’t know if she’d survive, and it changed our lives completely. It was the first time we’d realised our time was finite, that things change in a heartbeat. We didn’t want to miss a day, an hour. We made small changes. Sue turned vegan. I went from taking 280 flights in a year for work to making my entire company work remotely, long before Covid. Life was fun but fast-paced. The decision to sell up and leave was an accumulation of too many rainy London Sundays, £8 sandwiches, and days spent entering and leaving the office in the dark. When the pandemic hit, and followed by the birth of our daughter Raaya in September 2020, it cemented our ambition to get out and enjoy what we love: food, culture, travel. Instead of being stuck in our two-room apartment, we could keep the business going while working remotely from a beach with coconuts and beers. We left the UK on 30 January 2021 with our belongings packed into five bags. We sold our furniture, my beloved Brompton bike, and the wine, beers and artefacts I’d gathered on travels. Our UK friends and family were pretty shocked that we were doing it with a four-month-old baby; the only downside, now, is how much we miss them. We spent the first three months in Kathmandu with Sue’s family, trekking, eating great food and working flexible office hours. When Nepal introduced a lockdown and went on the red list, we extended our stay, spending two months indoors – but in contrast to our London lockdowns, we were living with family and had space. Travel restrictions prevented us flying directly to our next destination, Bangkok, so we spent a month in Albania. We rented Airbnbs in the capital, Tirana, then Sarandë on the coast, where the sea is turquoise. Arriving in Thailand was hard. Our daughter was quarantined for four days in a hospital room, because she had what turned out to be a false positive Covid test result, which was incredibly worrying. Really, though, that has been the only tough bit. There’s a rhythm to life here, now. We’ve rented an apartment, which will serve as a base to travel Asia. We hope to go to Malaysia, the Philippines, Japan – and I’d like to move to Latin America in the next five years. I spend mornings with the family, go to the gym, play paddle tennis or see friends. I start my working day about 3pm and break at 7pm, for a massage or some awesome Thai food, then I go back to work at 10pm for a couple more hours. Weekends are often spent at the beach. Meanwhile, the business has grown, partly because of the flexibility my staff and I enjoy. I know we will have to settle somewhere when my daughter starts school, but my idea of how that may look has changed. It wouldn’t have to be in the UK and it would no longer require me to work traditional office hours. Living the way we do has made me realise anything is possible. Raaya is growing up in a melting pot that is the entire world. And without cancer, our daughter, the pandemic, I’m certain we’d still be in London. ‘Taking in a refugee, I didn’t know what to expect – she had nearly drowned in the Mediterranean’ Debbie Connolly, 58, Liverpool I had never been someone who could see a problem and not stop to help. I began fostering, in 2010, after volunteering with prisoners. I had been divorced for 11 years and was a single parent, raising my daughter, Megan, then 13. I was shocked by how many of the prisoners I worked with came from a care background. I saw the same pattern with homeless people, whom I would chat to and offer hot drinks when I was out shopping. I was eager to do something substantial to make a difference, so I made contact with a fostering charity, Tact. I knew that fostering would change our lives. As a lone carer, I would have to cut back on volunteering and my job, as a counsellor. It would also stop me doing some of the activities I used to enjoy, like going to the theatre, or out with friends. My daughter would also have to learn to share me with another child. First, we took in a teenage boy; then another after he left. When, in 2015, the charity asked if I’d take in a refugee, I knew it would be different, maybe harder, but I didn’t know what to expect. I was told there was a child from Eritrea. She had nearly drowned crossing the Mediterranean in a dinghy. She eventually arrived in Liverpool. In that moment, all I heard was that there was a child in need, and I said, “Yes.” Only later did I think about the language barrier, the culture shock, her trauma. Kokob arrived the next day, in the clothes she’d been wearing when she left Eritrea two years earlier; her shoes were two sizes too small. She looked terrified. She was about 13 – she had no paperwork, so she didn’t know when her birthday was; we began communicating through body language and expressions. Social workers placed her in a language school, with adult refugees, and I fought tooth and nail to get her into mainstream education. Within six months, she was speaking English, and opening up to me. My daughter was in her 20s and treated her like a sister. Kokob started calling me Mum and writing me Mother’s Day cards, which warmed my heart. She was never going to see her own mother again – I was the closest thing she had. I learned about her culture and diet, through books. I took up vegan cooking and found her an Eritrean church. I remember taking her to a restaurant for her birthday and discovering she’d never before celebrated one. A year after she arrived, I was asked to take in Ghidey, too – a 15-year-old boy, also from Eritrea. I’d never had a son, and he was affectionate and great at sport. He got on the refugee football team and then into Liverpool FC’s college. I felt immensely proud. Kokob and Ghidey were black children in a white family, but we never experienced racism. I’d walk into town with them both, holding hands, and we’d get the odd look, but mostly people smiled. One of Megan’s friends once asked, “How come Kokob doesn’t speak scouse?” Kokob was with me for four years, and Ghidey for three. They moved out as they approached 18. I invited them to stay, but they could receive better state support starting their independent lives young; now they both live near me. Fostering has been stressful at times. I suffer from fibromyalgia and osteoarthritis in my spine, so I had to consider my own health when faced with some challenging behaviour that comes from the trauma the children have endured. Even so, taking them in was the best change I ever made. When I think back, I’m struck by how nervous and vulnerable they were when they arrived, and how their confidence soared. Ghidey has a job, and Kokob is at college; she wants to be a chemist or a nurse. They still call me Mum and I think of them as my son and daughter. Kokob was at my wedding, last year, and at Megan’s two years ago. My husband, Andrew, has become an approved foster carer, too, so we can help more children in the future. Caring for refugee children gave me an appreciation of the things we take for granted – family, love, a nice home. Being able to make a difference in their lives has been humbling. Megan is 26 now. In job interviews, she tells people it is the most positive thing that has happened to her. It taught her empathy and gave her strength of character. A year ago, Kokob texted me out of the blue. She wrote: “I want to thank you for what you’ve done for me. You’ve given me so much. I love you.” That meant everything. ‘Working in the woods as a pizza chef has brought me emotional stability’ Gino Scrigna, 31, Greater Manchester I was working 70-hour weeks in a concrete metropolis at the start of 2019. Every day, I commuted, by train and tram, into work where I managed teams of up to 50 people, serving thousands of delegates at Manchester’s convention centre. At home, my mind was constantly on my job. I convinced myself that things were good because I was putting money in the account, but I was so exhausted from working late nights, early mornings and weekends that my wife, Katy, was basically functioning as a single mother to our two children, then four and three. In June that year, my grandmother died, followed by my dad, three months later, both in Italy. Katy and I had been married for five years, and she was pregnant with our third child, but everything fell apart. The web broke. I spiralled into depression, gave up work and grew detached from people I loved. It was a wake-up call. I had grown up in South Africa and came to the UK at 21. My mum had left when I was three, making Dad my caregiver, but he had never spent time with me and had been emotionally unavailable. My only memories of him were as a workaholic. I had turned into him. If I didn’t change, my children would have no memories of days out or playing games with me, either. Katy made it clear I would lose them altogether. She’d been suggesting I change jobs for a while, and not long before Dad’s death, I’d answered an advert for a pizza chef, and got a job working in the woods at weekends. A guy, Adam, wanted someone to cook, on the back of a trailer, for walkers and local people on a beautiful seam of woodland near Cheshire. It was a way to earn some extra cash and try a different way of working. I enjoyed it, and I’d come home happier. When Dad died, I quit both my jobs and, by 2020, I’d run my family into debt. I hid it from Katy – everything was a mess. During the pandemic, I took a job in a scotch egg factory and, in summer 2020, picked up some hours serving gelato for Adam. By early 2021, his beautiful spot in the woods had become popular: all the time people spent outdoors during lockdowns had given it a boost. There was a coffee shack and tents, alongside the pizza oven, and hundreds of people were coming down at weekends. Adam offered me three days a week, and enough money to pay my bills. I left the factory, and made the forest my office. It was the change that Katy knew I needed. On Sundays, Katy and the kids – we have four now – come down, eat my pizzas and play all afternoon. On other days, they’re just 20 minutes away – waiting at the window for me to drive home and put them to bed. We have days out and play games together. I was conditioned to believe that the corporate world was the only way to stability. Now, I have emotional stability, and I’m working to break my generational curses. I wish the recognition had come easier – that I hadn’t had to make it all the way to the bottom to climb back up. But the alternative was a life with money in the bank and no family under my roof. It has been a steep learning curve. My life feels more balanced, and I spend my days in nature. My family doesn’t have the luxury of going on fancy holidays – but I can’t put a price on being in their lives.Democrats were already facing a bleak landscape for this year’s midterm elections, with Joe Biden’s approval rating languishing in the low 40s and his party holding narrow majorities in both the House and the Senate. Now, with Senator Joe Manchin’s refusal to support the Build Back Better Act, the chances of Republicans regaining control of the House of Representatives, and possibly the Senate as well, appear higher than ever. If Democrats cannot pass Biden’s signature legislation, which includes massive investments in childcare, healthcare and climate initiatives, their failure may convince enough voters to support Republicans in November. However, if Democrats try to move forward with a version of the bill that Manchin supports, as some strategists have suggested, the final product may not be as attractive to voters. Democrats’ unappealing options will probably aid Republicans, who were already favored to take back the House after the midterms. Historically, the president’s party loses House seats in midterm elections, and Republicans need to flip only five districts to regain the majority. The decennial redistricting process has aided House Republicans’ cause, as the party controls the governorship and the state legislature in 23 states, compared with 14 states for Democrats. That advantage has allowed Republicans to draw more favorable congressional maps in a number of crucial swing states. Democrats have also accused Republicans of using voting restrictions, which were approved by at least 19 states last year, to limit their supporters’ access to the ballot box. In the evenly divided Senate, Republicans need to gain just one seat to take control of the chamber. Rick Scott, who leads Senate Republicans’ campaign arm, has already said he expects the party to have “a hell of a year”. Democrats’ possible failure to pass the Build Back Better Act may further assist Republican candidates, as it could strengthen their argument to voters that the $1.75tn spending package is the wrong solution for families struggling to recover financially from the coronavirus pandemic. Emma Vaughn, a spokesperson for the Republican National Committee, attacked the Democratic bill as a “reckless spending spree”, telling the Guardian, “Americans reject their failed agenda and Republicans will continue to fight for American workers and businesses.” But despite Manchin’s surprise announcement last month that he would not support the Build Back Better Act, the White House and Democratic congressional leaders are still voicing optimism about getting the bill passed. “We have a very slim majority in the Senate. That means you need every single senator from across the spectrum of the Democratic party agreeing to what a package looks like moving forward,” the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said last week. “We’re not naive about how challenging that is and how challenging it can be, but we feel good about the possibility of getting something done. What the final package looks like, I can’t outline that for you at this point in time.” However, just hours earlier, Manchin had insisted that there were no conversations happening between him and the White House. “I’m really not going to talk about Build Back Better any more because I think I’ve been very clear on that. There [are] no negotiations going on at this time,” Manchin told reporters on Capitol Hill. Manchin’s opposition to the bill has intensified concerns among Democratic leaders that many vulnerable members may lose re-election this year, as voters blame the party for failing to follow through on their campaign promises despite having full control of the White House and Congress. “Voters have shown time and again that they want a robust economic environment creating good opportunities to build a better life for themselves and their family,” said Congressman Brad Schneider, chair of the political arm of the centrist New Democrat Coalition, the NewDem Action Fund. “At the end of the day, we have to show working families we’re responsive to their kitchen table concerns.” Some Democratic strategists have argued the party’s best option now is to work with Manchin to craft a version of the Build Back Better Act that he can support and then move forward with that proposal. “Mr Manchin said at various points that he could support a scaled-back bill that made long-term commitments to fewer priorities,” David Axelrod, a former adviser to Barack Obama, said in a recent New York Times column. “If, through a retooled Build Back Better Act, Mr Biden can achieve significant and durable progress on some major priorities that will benefit children and families for generations, Democrats would be wise to celebrate and tout those gains instead of complaining about what wasn’t possible.” Schneider echoed that argument, telling the Guardian, “Since the start of negotiations, New Dems have been advocating to do a select number of things better for longer, and we still believe that approach is the best path forward.” But a Manchin-approved version of the Build Back Better Act does not come without potential pitfalls. Manchin has raised concerns about the cost of the legislation and the impact on the national debt if all of its programs are made permanent. (Under the current version of the bill, many of its programs expire after a year or a few years.) The child tax credit, which was expanded under the coronavirus relief package signed by Biden last year, is particularly worrisome for deficit hawks. The current version of the Build Back Better bill calls for the expanded program to continue through 2022, at a cost of $185bn. However, if the expanded program is made permanent, as many Democrats would prefer, the 10-year cost of that policy would be $1.6tn, according to the Congressional Budget Office. Despite the cost of the policy, many Americans have come to rely on the monthly checks from the expanded child tax credit, and failing to extend the program could be disastrous for families’ budgets and Democrats’ electoral prospects. “If [Manchin] brings down the price tag below $1.75tn, if he cuts really popular things like the child tax credit especially or any of the pharma provisions, then that could be disastrous for Democrats,” said Adam Green, the co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee. But Green argued there may be an upside to Manchin’s deficit concerns. If Manchin is determined to lower the national debt, it could provide an opening for progressives to advocate for revenue-raising proposals that they support, such as a tax on billionaires. “There’s actually a scenario where we raise $1.75tn and invest that money, and then on top of that implement a very popular billionaires tax, the majority of which goes toward debt reduction,” Green said. “What that would do is give Democrats this extremely popular talking point that we’re the ones who finally taxed billionaires.” Of course, that scenario will only be possible if Democrats are successful at bringing Manchin back to the negotiating table and actually getting a bill across the finish line. “Depending on how the negotiations go, Manchin’s current involvement could make things disastrous or very good for Democrats,” Green said. “It really depends on where things land.”Many teachers across the US are resisting immediate school reopenings and asking for improved safety measures this month as a record number of Covid-19 cases have been recorded as a result of the spread of the Omicron variant. A few school districts have opted to restart school after the winter break remotely for the first week or two, while most others are grappling with tightening or reinstituting Covid-19 safety protocols. Several teachers who spoke to the Guardian expressed concerns over severe staffing shortages, a lack of adequate and promised personal protective equipment, difficulties in accessing Covid testing and worsening overall working conditions. Rori Abernethy, a teacher in San Francisco, California, said teachers are being faced with severe staffing shortages that are forcing teachers to serve as substitutes during preparation time and are increasing their classroom sizes due to teachers and other staff retiring, resigning, or calling out sick. “This is the hardest teaching year I’ve had in 20 years,” said Abernethy. “Morale is low amongst teachers and it feels like the whole city is fighting over politics and no one cares about what teachers are going through in the classroom. If we do complain, people are cruel and tell us to quit or that we don’t care about kids.” She also noted staff and students haven’t received enough personal protective equipment such as proper masks, that Covid testing is difficult for teachers given stringent drop-off times and is not mandated or easily available for students, and that Covid sick leave for teachers expired at the end of 2021. According to Abernethy, four teachers at her school quit before winter break, and 25 staff were absent on the first day of school after the break, on 3 January, though student attendance was normal. There were 575,000 fewer local and state education employees in October 2021 than in February 2020. Before the pandemic, teacher shortages were widespread and growing throughout the US, while many public school buildings were crumbling, in dire need of repairs, proper upkeep or replacement. Retha Roblero, an elementary school teacher in Columbus, Ohio, participated in a safety strike on 3 January with other teachers who were working in their school building while students were remote, as part of the building had no working heat. Less than an hour after the strike began, teachers were permitted by the district to work remotely. “There’s no good answer,” said Roblero, about the choice between in-person or remote learning in response to Covid surges. “I want to be in person teaching every day. But I also don’t want to carry something or somebody else to carry something.” Alison Ross, a teacher for about 20 years based in the Atlanta, Georgia, area, resigned from her school district position in fall 2020 over a disregard for Covid protections as she is immunocompromised. She has been tutoring and teaching remotely part-time, while relying on savings, and is dismayed at the prospect of returning to a full-time position as the pandemic continues to spread in the US. “I feel like my livelihood was stolen from me,” said Ross. “We could afford N95 masks for everybody, we could afford good ventilation, we can afford paying teachers more and having smaller classes. These are all choices that as a society, our government has made. People just think that’s just how it has to be and that’s not how it has to be.” A teacher in Crested Butte, Colorado, who requested to remain anonymous for fear of retaliation described a lack of testing options for staff and students, with long wait lines at testing sites and no at-home tests available. The teacher says staff have been reporting to work after testing positive and there’s a lack of transparency in contact tracing compared with previous periods during the pandemic. “We have been told that they simply do not have the staff or time to deal with it, so contact tracing is out the window,” the teacher said. “The morale is quite low because staff feel uncared for. I know several teachers with the mindset that we will all get it eventually so let’s just get it over with. As teachers, we’re the ones that take on the brunt of it to protect the kids.” Staffing shortages in their school district have also extended to a lack of school bus drivers, substitute teachers, cafeteria workers and a decline in student attendance. They already used up their Covid sick leave earlier this school year when they tested positive after their son caught it, despite being fully vaccinated. “To the general public and administration, it just feels that staff and student health doesn’t matter. We should have tested to return. No one wants to wear masks or go to school virtually, however now we may be forced to do so without a plan in place,” the teacher added. “I have been searching for jobs that are safer and value my family’s health and safety more. We feel so undervalued.” In New York City, teachers held a protest during the first school week in January over school reopenings and a lack of Covid safety measures for students and staff. “We’re concerned about not having a negative Covid result as a requirement for returning like other school districts and private schools had,” said Ronnie Almonte, a teacher at Bard High School Early College in Manhattan, who noted Bard College requires a negative test to return to the campus this spring. He also expressed concerns with the new Covid isolation guidelines, which decreased isolation days from 10 to five days. Teachers in Chicago voted to return to remote learning over lack of Covid safety measures, though Chicago public schools cancelled school and locked out teachers from electronic accounts in retaliation. Sarah Caswell, a science teacher in Philadelphia, argued the push to continue in-person school during a pandemic hasn’t accounted for the problems facing public education systems before the pandemic began, from overcrowding to excessive standardized testing and socio-economic disparities, with Covid further exposing those problems. “Morale is the absolute lowest that I’ve ever seen it,” said Caswell. “This goes from the top all the way down through the building administration. They expect that we’re going to treat families and students with grace and understand that everybody’s living through these crazy times and be supportive and encouraging, which is absolutely what we have to do and should be doing right now. But they don’t show the same grace with us.” In Philadelphia, 81 schools switched to remote learning with less than 24 hours notice, and Caswell noted that numerous staff at her school tested positive during the first day of school. “It’s this constant anxiety and stress,” added Caswell. “It’s just a lot of pressure from a lot of different directions and not a whole lot of compassion and grace. My belief is the academics will work their way out. Kids are resilient when you provide them with the right support, and instead we’re saying that we’re going to go back to what we’ve always done. That didn’t work before the pandemic, so why does it work now?”The Mississippi officials met in the heat of summer with a singular goal in mind: stopping Black people from voting. “We came here to exclude the Negro,” said the convention’s president. “Nothing short of this will answer.” This conclave took place in 1890. But remarkably, approximately 130 years later, the laws they came up with are still blocking nearly 16% of Mississippi’s Black voting-age population from casting a ballot. The US stands alone as one of the few advanced countries that allow people convicted of felonies to be blocked from voting after they leave prison. The policy in Mississippi underscores how these laws, rooted in the explicit racism of the Jim Crow south, continue to have discriminatory consequences today. One of those affected is Roy Harness, a 67-year-old social worker, who may never be able to vote because of a crime committed decades ago. In the mid-1980s, he was convicted of forgery after he ran up a debt to a drug dealer and cashed a series of fake checks. He spent nearly two years in prison and hasn’t been back since. In recent years, Harness, who is also an army veteran, has been on a new path. He enrolled in college when he was 55 and got his bachelor’s degree when he was 63. He got a master’s degree in 2019. Now a full-time social worker, Harness keeps a shelf behind his desk filled with awards and accomplishments – a reminder to his clients of all they can accomplish. In 2013, he tried to register during a voter registration drive at his college, but saw on a pamphlet that forgery, the crime he had been convicted of decades earlier, was a disenfranchising crime in Mississippi. “It makes me feel bad. I’ve served my country, nation … got a degree and [I] still can’t vote, no matter what you do to prove yourself,” he said. Mississippi also makes it nearly impossible for anyone convicted of a felony to get their voting rights back. Fewer than 200 people have succeeded in restoring their voting rights in the last quarter-century, the Guardian can reveal, based on newly obtained data. Now, Harness is involved in a new effort to change Mississippi’s law. *** After slavery ended in Mississippi, following the US civil war, newly enfranchised Black voters in the state were beginning to wield political power. In 1870, Mississippi sent Hiram Revels to the US Senate, the first Black person to serve in the body. By 1890, the delegates who gathered for a constitutional convention in Jackson, the state capital, were determined to blunt this trend. They faced a significant roadblock to their racist goal. The new 15th amendment to the US constitution explicitly prohibited states from preventing people from voting based on their race. And so the delegates came up with a plan that would effectively prevent Black people from voting without explicitly saying that was their intent. The delegates enacted a poll tax and literacy tests, measures that would become widespread across the south, as a way of keeping people from voting. But they also enacted a provision that disqualified people convicted of specific felonies from voting. The crimes they picked were those they believed, based on prejudices, Black people were more likely to commit. Bribery, burglary, theft, arson, bigamy and embezzlement were among the crimes that would cause someone to lose their voting rights. Robbery and murder were not. Mississippi continues to see the legacy of its efforts to shut Black voters out of the political process today. It has one of the highest concentrations of Black people in the country, yet has not elected a Black person to statewide office in well over a century. It was among the states with the lowest voter turnout in the US in 2020. Even though Black Mississippians comprise about one-third of eligible voters in the state, they account for more than half of the 235,152 people who can’t vote in the state because of a felony conviction, according to an estimate by the Sentencing Project, a criminal justice non-profit. Overall, more than one in 10 citizens of voting age can’t cast a ballot in Mississippi because of a felony conviction – the highest rate of disfranchisement in the US. And it is astonishingly difficult for those affected to get their right to vote restored. To vote again, people with disqualifying felonies in Mississippi must first convince a lawmaker to introduce a bill in the legislature on their behalf to restore their voting rights. In other words, they need their own, individualized piece of law. The bill must then pass both chambers of the legislature by two-thirds vote and be approved by the governor. Mississippi is the only state in the country where people convicted of felonies need to go through the legislature to get their voting rights back, said Christopher Uggen, a professor at the University of Minnesota who studies felon disfranchisement. The only other path to get one’s voting rights back is a gubernatorial pardon, which hasn’t been granted in Mississippi in nearly a decade. The process is the same one the delegates spelled out during the 1890 racist constitutional convention, where the felony disqualification rule was created. It was included as a safeguard to ensure that well-connected white Mississippians who committed one of the disenfranchising crimes had a way of gaining their voting rights back. Mississippi does not keep track of how many people successfully get their voting rights restored each year. But data compiled by Blake Feldman, a criminal justice researcher in Mississippi, shows it’s almost no one. Feldman began tallying the data in 2018 for the Southern Poverty Law Center, and has continued to track it since. Since 1997, an average of about seven people have been successful each year. In the 2021 legislative session, just two people made it through the process. There are no posted instructions anywhere online, said Hannah Williams, a research and policy analyst at MS Votes, a non-profit that works to expand voter access. Applicants must submit a paper form – there is no online option – to their lawmaker and convince them to vouch for them. After that, their fate is in the hands of lawmakers, who can reject an application for any reason. “There really isn’t a way to guarantee anything because the process doesn’t really make sense. There’s no information. You can’t go to a website. And to be honest, you can’t even call the capitol to get information, because they don’t really know what the process is,” she said. “Unless you know somebody that knows somebody that knows somebody who has their ear to the floor, you don’t know when you have to turn these applications in,” she added. Nick Bain, a Republican who chairs the Mississippi House judiciary committee, which oversees the bills for rights restoration, acknowledged the process was “convoluted”. Both chambers can set whatever criteria they want people to meet before they restore someone’s voting rights. Those criteria, which are not posted publicly, do not have to agree. “I do believe it’s patently unfair the way that we do the process. And maybe as a Republican, that may not be the Republican thinking on that,” he said. “We have a problem with consistency. The process, it’s by no means perfect. By no means is it efficient … But right now it’s the only process that we have.” *** While the law today continues to disproportionately affect African Americans, white Mississippians are affected too. Dennis Hopkins, a 46-year-old maintenance supervisor from Potts Camp, Mississippi, was convicted of grand larceny as a teenager in the 1990s, released from prison in 2001, and hasn’t been able to vote since. Because he was convicted of a felony when he was a teenager, he’s never been able to vote in his life. Even though he has raised nine children (he’s adopted several), become a local fire chief, and coached many school sports teams with hundreds of kids, he can’t vote. “I’m thinking ‘you sentenced me to four years in prison and you’re giving me a life sentence,’” he said. “I feel like I’m a branded man and I’m not equal to everybody else.” Harness and Hopkins are now the lead plaintiffs in two separate high-stakes federal lawsuits challenging Mississippi’s felon disfranchisement laws. One suit argues that the list of original disqualifying crimes unconstitutionally targeted Black people and therefore should be struck down. The second, filed by the Southern Poverty Law Center in 2018, also challenges the Mississippi policy and takes aim at the arcane restoration process. “The process is fundamentally arbitrary and inherently susceptible to discrimination,” lawyers wrote. “There is no oversight of any kind to ensure that legislators do not exercise their discretion to vote against a proposed suffrage bill on the basis of an individual’s race, religion, or political leanings.” Even though the core of Mississippi’s policy remains what was drafted during the 1890 convention, lawyers for the state have argued its discriminatory taint has been removed. There have been small tweaks to the law; voters chose to remove burglary disenfranchising crime in 1950 and added murder and rape in 1968. In February, the US court of appeals for the 5th circuit upheld Mississippi’s policy, writing that 20th-century tweaks to the law removed the discrimination written into it in 1890. But the court later agreed to rehear the case, and there were oral arguments in September. A decision is expected in the coming months. In late October, both Harness and Hopkins traveled to the state capitol and appeared before a panel of lawmakers. They were there for a hearing convened by Bain, who wanted to explore new ways to fix the process for getting voting rights back. At the end of the hearing, one of the lawmakers approached Hopkins and offered to file a rights restoration bill on his behalf. Hopkins was unaware the process was even a possibility – he had been told there was no way for him to get his voting rights back. Still, he refused. “That’s not gonna help everyone else. I told them no – I’d prefer not to do that,” he said. “I tell my kids how important the vote is … it shames me to tell them I can’t vote and here is why,” he said. “I know there’s a lot of people who say, “my vote doesn’t count. Well I beg to differ. It does count.”Almaty, the commercial capital of Kazakhstan, is the kind of mirage that oil-rich nations so often produce. It has all the trappings of comfort and consumer excess: swanky shopping malls, luxury car dealerships, high-end hotels. This is the image of prosperity that the country’s rulers enjoy projecting to the world. For decades, Kazakhs have been encouraged to take out expensive loans to experience their share in the dream: to buy flats, cars and even holidays they can barely afford. Beyond the limits of Almaty and the capital city, Nur-Sultan, however, the illusion begins to look threadbare. And the causes behind the protests currently gripping the central Asian nation come into focus. Average monthly salaries are less than £450 ($600). Police, doctors, teachers and all kinds of government workers supplement their meagre pay with bribes. In the distant west of this vast country, which is 11 times the size of the UK with about a quarter of its population, there is the arid Mangystau province, where most of Kazakhstan’s oil reserves lie. It’s where the unrest now gripping the country has its roots. The government is all about bringing in free-market rules and finally burying the vestiges of the command economy that prevailed when Kazakhstan was a Soviet republic. It was in that spirit that it gradually phased out subsidies for liquid petroleum gas, the fuel that many people in western Kazakhstan use to power their cars. On New Year’s Day, motorists awoke to find it would cost twice as much as the day before to fill their tanks. Demonstrations ensued. This sort of high-handedness smarts particularly acutely in the west of the country. Why, they wonder, when their regions contribute so much to the country’s wealth, is there so little investment in basic infrastructure? Why do foreign oil workers earn so much more than Kazakhs? Why doesn’t the government listen to the complaints of the people until they come out in numbers on the streets? This last question is key to understanding what is happening today. Kazakhstan’s government, like so many of its authoritarian counterparts, has chosen to wreck its feedback mechanism. It has parlayed considerable funds into a system known as the “state order”, funding media outlets – even those not belonging to the state – to convey news about the government’s policies with a cheery gloss. The few outlets trying to strike out and produce critical coverage face harassment and legal action. Some issues are absolutely off-limits. In October, one news outlet, Hola.kz, took the liberty of reporting stories made possible by the Pandora Papers leak relating to the former president, Nursultan Nazarbayev (he stepped aside in 2019, but was until this week believed to still wield considerable sway over the running of the country). The website was immediately blocked. The state claimed that it had not banned the website; it was back online 10 days later. Legislation adopted in 2010 made any coverage of Nazarbayev and his family deemed insulting, defamatory or overly invasive an offence worthy of imprisonment. This tight control creates frustration and masks evidence of deep social ills. Teen suicide is a huge problem, for instance. In 2008, Kazakhstan became one of the world’s worst places for suicide among 15- to 19-year-olds. Numbers came down in the decade that followed but sprang back up as the Covid-19 pandemic hit. It took a deadly fire in the city of Nur-Sultan, which killed five children from the same family in February 2019, for the government to refrain from sending in the police to bust up rallies of people demanding more help for low-income households. Even the Kazakh police did not have had the stomach to quell those protests as they normally do with even the smallest gatherings. One symptom of this malaise is that when protest seasons begin, they quickly broaden in scope. The residents of the western oil town of Zhanaozen came out on 2 January to demand lower fuel prices. Two days later, by the time people in Almaty, around 1,200 miles away, had hit the streets, the slogans had changed. Chants of “shal ket!” – Kazakh for “old man go!”, a reference to Nazarbayev – have become a mainstay in anti-government meetings. In a grim echo of uprisings in many other authoritarian nations, the exuberance quickly turned sour. Riot police swooped in with teargas and stun grenades to disperse the columns of peaceful demonstrators that marched to Almaty’s Republic Square. The message was clear: mass shows of dissent are not acceptable. And so a more violent contingent has now stepped into the breach. It is difficult to know what exactly is going on in the country since the government has turned off the internet, and telephones don’t work. Eyewitnesses in Almaty who have managed to get the word out have talked of sustained exchanges of gunfire right in the centre of the city. Authorities claim some gunmen tried to seize a television tower. Dozens of people, including at least 18 law enforcement officers, have been killed. The authorities on Friday described what was unfolding in Almaty as a sophisticated, well-prepared assault against Kazakhstan by an armed terrorist gang numbering in the thousands. “We’re dealing here with armed and trained bandits, both local and foreign,” the president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, declared on TV. “We must destroy them. This will be done soon.” It is a mystery so far who these people are supposed to be. Tokayev has ominously now turned to raging against the media and civil society. It was the “so-called free media” and outside actors who had abetted and instigated the unrest, he claimed. The remarks portend more crackdowns and denials about the reality of hardship in Kazakhstan. The old illusion of free-market abundance and popular contentment has been spoiled, so the government will now have to work twice as hard to make the next one more convincing. Peter Leonard is Central Asia editor at the news and analysis website EurasianetEvelyn Forde, the headteacher of Copthall school in north-west London and vice-president of the Association of School and College Leaders, shares her diary from the first week back at school in 2022 as she grapples with staff absences due to Covid and reassures students anxious about lost learning. Tuesday (4 January) First day back after the Christmas break. It’s a staff inset day, with Covid testing for three year groups. That first day of term is always filled with a mixture of excitement and nervousness. I arrive at 6.30am as I want to make sure everything is ready to welcome staff back, and to check that our testing centre is ready. We’re good to go, but then at 7am my cover manager tells me we have 13 staff absent. Within this figure there are some long-term absences but the significant majority is made up of staff who are having to isolate because they tested positive for Covid. Towards the end of last term we were averaging 10-13 staff absent a day, but I had really hoped the start of the new term would be better. I’m worried how I’m going to run the school and the impact it will have on staff and student morale. It feels like we are going all the way back to square one. Wednesday A normal school day, with testing for the remaining two year groups. Did I mention that yesterday we had five students test positive for Covid in the test centre and a stack of emails from families telling us their daughters had tested positive? I work with my senior team to put a plan together to cover for absent staff and to ensure that we have everything in place for those students isolating so they can remote into their lessons on Thursday. The sense of doom prevails as the number of absent staff rises from 13 to 14 and the list of supply teachers gets longer. I’m worried about how I’m going to pay for the spiralling supply costs and everything else we had budgeted for. But I look for the silver lining as I greet students at the start of the day and walk the school. It’s one of the nicest parts of the job. I come upon three year 13 students who want to speak to me about their January BTec exams. They are really anxious about staff being absent and worried what will happen if they are off with Covid when they are meant to sit their exams and how this might impact on their grades. I offer reassurances that it will all be OK, because that’s what we do as heads, but I’m worried too. I do some follow-up work on exam guidance and a final check to see if we can cover any additional absences tomorrow. Thursday The staffing challenge continues. I arrive at 7am, the same time as my deputy, who comments: “Are we able to cover even with so many out?” I consider it a win when I realise we are stable with 13 staff out and one who has confirmed that she will come back tomorrow as her isolation period ends and she feels well enough to return. Hurrah! We still have to juggle cover for those staff who are too ill to remote in. It is definitely a challenge, but with only one day to go it feels as if we have coped reasonably well. I am also feeling positive that a call from a retired teacher yesterday offering to come in and teach will mean my students will have a specialist in front of them next week to cover a long-term absence. But I am a realist and know things could change at any time. We check our remote learning policy and verify that all students remember their log-in details. We are increasing our communication to parents to remind them that their daughters need to take a lateral flow test twice a week as I am worried that we could end up with huge swathes of students out. Today we had 11 confirmed Covid cases and 23 waiting for their results to come back. Friday Feels like we are turning a corner today with only (I say only!) eight staff out today. We’ve still got seven supply teachers in, so my meeting this morning with my finance director is going to be interesting. Confirmed cases of Covid among the student body has risen slightly, with 13 positive results and 26 now awaiting results, so the challenge of providing remote teaching will remain for some time to come. As I reflect on a week which began with hope and optimism only to find myself worrying whether we would be able to manage with such high staff absences, I feel as if while we have ended the week in a much better position, I’m still anxious about the weeks ahead and what that holds for schools and colleges. I listened to the radio while driving in this morning to hear that the armed forces have sent 200 personnel into NHS hospitals across in London to plug staff shortages and while we don’t have an army of retired teachers to plug our staff shortages, what has become evidently clear is that we are a profession that is agile, flexible and committed to making sure that we do our best to maintain teaching standards despite the challenges we face. Let’s see what Monday brings …As director of the Massachusetts Highway Safety Division, Jeff Larason first noticed the two streaks of light from the window of his third-storey office. He would have been preparing for the day, nursing a morning coffee. He would watch as a cross formed on Stuart Street, Boston, at around 8am. It would hold for only a few minutes in the earliest spring weeks. The shape intrigued him, and he recognised its potential; alongside his main job, he had been photographing the streets of Boston for 40 years. Still, it took two years to get this shot. Larason used his phone, which had a better zoom lens than his usual camera. “It was a lot of waiting, and watching people cross the street,” he recalls. “I didn’t mind. I’ve always been drawn to the way people hold themselves, and the story that tells. Do they have a bounce in their step? How are they holding their shoulders, tipping their head? How have the years of their life weighed on them?” The photo is entirely organic, the three men unaware of the serendipitous moment they’d created together. Recently, a building has gone up in the adjacent street. This dance of light has gone for ever. “But that’s the case with all street photography, and all light,” Larason says. “It’s transient. It’s there, and then it’s gone.”At least 22 people have frozen to death after heavy snow trapped them in their vehicles as tens of thousands of visitors thronged Pakistan’s hill town of Murree, officials say. Videos circulated on social media in which people are seen dead in stranded cars covered with the snow. In the past few days, more than 100,000 cars entered Murree, a hill station 24 miles away from Pakistan’s capital, to enjoy the snowfall. In the past 24 hours there has been heavy snowfall, and all routes leading to the hilltown were closed due to heavy traffic, leaving thousands of cars stranded. The interior minister, sheikh Rashid Ahmed, in a video message said tourists visiting the area in large numbers for the first time in 15 to 20 years had created a huge crisis. Ahmed said administrations were working to rescue the stranded people and five platoons of the Pakistan Army had been called on to help. One man, Tayyab Gondal, shared the last voice messages he had received from his cousin Naveed Iqbal, with local media. Iqbal is heard saying: “We are stranded in the car for 18 and 20 hours and waiting and how much more to wait. May God something work out and we are really worried.” Many tourists stranded in Murree told local media they are having issues getting food, accommodation and help. The prime minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan, tweeted: “Shocked &amp; upset at tragic deaths of tourists on road to Murree. Unprecedented snowfall &amp; rush of ppl proceeding without checking weather conditions caught district admin unprepared. Have ordered inquiry &amp; putting in place strong regulation to ensure prevention of such tragedies.” But hundreds of activists, journalists and politicians criticised the prime minister’s response and described his tweet as insensitive. Replying to Khan’s tweet, Absa Komal, a senior journalist, said: “Insensitive and shocking response, it is your administration’s failure, accept it at least! They could have easily taken preventive measures knowing that a huge number of people were heading towards Murree.”Comparing different sides from two wildly different eras, nearly 40 years apart and straddling the shift from amateurism to professionalism, is never easy. Yet Ian Smith, the captain of Leicester Tigers for the 1983-84 season that began with 16 straight wins – a record Steve Borthwick’s side will hope to match on Sunday – sums it up well. “When we played we wanted to win every game,” says Smith, who made 331 appearances for Leicester. “When they play now they have to win every game because if they don’t it’s P45.” Smith is better placed than most to pass judgment on the two sides, having been part of the Leicester fabric for the best part of 30 years as a player and coach – “I’ve had more job titles than you could poke a stick at.” His son, Matt, made 228 appearances for Leicester and is now one of Borthwick’s assistants, and Smith Sr still pops along to cast his eye over training every now and then. There is another obvious difference for Smith: “We thought we were cosmopolitan because Les Cusworth came from Yorkshire and Dusty Hare from Nottingham.” But there are traits of Borthwick’s side that remind him of yesteryear. The chairman, Peter Tom, recently remarked to Smith that the current crop were closing in on his record but no one would be happier to see it matched against Wasps – the side who snapped the 1983-84 run. That season was Smith’s first as captain and Graham Willars’s first as coach. Smith was part of a formidable back row featuring John Wells and a 20-year-old Dean Richards, who “could turn the game in the blink of an eye. He had this uncanny knack, he was never the quickest man but he always seemed to be where the ball was. I’d say to him: ‘Have you worked out some secret tunnels under the pitch?’” There was star quality throughout the backline. At scrum-half was Nick Youngs – father of Tom and Ben – Cusworth was at fly-half, Clive Woodward and Paul Dodge occupied the midfield while Hare scored point after point from full-back and a young Rory Underwood was breaking through on the wing. Two things immediately spring to mind when Smith casts his mind back. First was how the 16-match winning run included 41-3 and 29-24 victories over Cardiff and Swansea respectively at a time when “you never beat the Welsh, just scored more points than them”. The other was a rare clanger from Woodward in a cup final. “It became infamous because Clive Woodward did what was commonly referred to as his Devon Loch – he was clear to score, nobody near him and he fell over. It would have won the game.” Woodward was, however, one of six Leicester players – with Youngs, Dodge, Cusworth, Hare and the national captain, Peter Wheeler – who beat the All Blacks twice in the space of 10 days that November, once with the Midlands and again with England, in a further measure of the quality in the Tigers ranks at the time. “I don’t think those boys have ever been given the credit they deserve for those memorable victories,” says Smith. “We had some real characters in the team. Peter Wheeler was a big part of England’s grand slam success in 1980 with Paul, which was the year of our centenary tour in 1980 to Australia and Fiji. All the work that Chalkie [White, coach from 1968-83] had done laid a massive foundation.” It soon becomes clear that above anything else, Smith most values the friendships made during that time, the bonds forged and though the professionalism has changed much about the club, under Borthwick he sees similarities with the past and notes how players have adapted to the new regime. “I’ve been in a few times and watched a few sessions and seen what they’re trying to achieve. It is amazing that these players have responded in such a way. “People come and go, and it’s a professional game and people are paid a lot of money. I thought Matt would be the last one-club man but we’ve still got Ben Youngs and Tom Youngs and Dan Cole who are contemporaries of Matt. They hopefully will finish as one-club men and that is an absolute rarity in the current game. “Look at the Saracens game, look at the Bristol game, look at the five-point try against Newcastle. Those moments are only born out of, not being paid an extra few quid, but an inner strength and a friendship and a desire to reach something Leicester haven’t been able to do for a while. “The hallmark of Leicester is being able to win without playing particularly well and that gives you a five-point start because the opposition are thinking: ‘Oh crikey, it’s Leicester.’ Throughout Tigers history that has been the case.” It will come as no surprise that Borthwick has given short shrift to any talk of records. He was part of Eddie Jones’s coaching staff when England equalled the international record of 18 straight wins – a streak that slowly but surely became an albatross around the necks of the players. Indeed, Jones has recalled how “a small part of me was glad the run was over” when it ended. For Smith, however, it could be just the start. “As I say to players now, the most important pages in history aren’t those that have been written, they are the ones you are going to write and I sincerely hope these boys write themselves into the history books by breaking the record, doing well for the rest of the season, more of them getting international recognition and it continues long into the future. “There’ll be no one cheering them on louder than me and hopefully they break the record and set one that will never be beaten.”Garlic noodles, french fries loaded with steak and shrimp, crab legs the length of an adult’s forearm – a brief scroll through the popular Instagram account of Bayareafoodz is enough to put you in a digital food coma. In a region known as one of America’s culinary capitals and a playground for Instagram foodies, Darion Frazier’s page stands out. He amassed more than 126,000 followers not with slickly produced videos at the hippest restaurants but with homages to the taquerias, greasy spoons and small soul food joints. “I live for wear and tear on furniture and menus at mom and pop restaurants. That tells you that the food is good as hell,” said Darion Frazier, the page’s owner, of the spots that hold a special place in his heart. His playful personality and enticing images have drawn thousands who come to see Frazier eat, sometimes while donning a black Versace robe, and letting his followers know whether a dish is “bussin’” (really good) or a letdown. Now, Frazier is expanding his dedication to small, local eateries with a food delivery service, Plate Pick, that will help home chefs and independent restaurants reach customers. Frazier says the site, which charges restaurants a 5% commission, is meant to be a viable alternative at a time when many restaurants are struggling with the costs of operating on platforms like Doordash, GrubHub and UberEats, which take a cut of 20% or more. Plate Pick also offers resources for home chefs to get legal services and marketing help. The Oakland native spoke with the Guardian about his hopes for the new venture, the challenges of being a Black influencer, and why he wants to be a positive force in the San Francisco Bay area food scene and wider community. ‘Our food scene is something special’ Frazier, 29, first encountered the Bay Area’s rich food scene in the homes of friends. He grew up in a low-income apartment complex in west Oakland and says that sleepovers and playdates exposed him to new smells, tastes and cultures. “We all were living in the same poverty, but at the end of the day, everybody is going home to a different dish,” Frazier recalled. “I would spend the night at my Filipino friend’s house and eat adobo, fish and lumpia. Or I’d be at my African friend’s house another night, and we’ll be eating fufu.” Travelling to France, Mexico and Thailand in his early adulthood also helped him appreciate the Bay Area’s food scene. “We’ve got some of the best tacos on Earth, and then you can go to another place and get the best burgers you ever had in your life. You can get Chinese food, Indian food, Moroccan food, jollof rice,” Frazier says. “The Bay Area has something special.” With this in mind, Frazier launched Bayareafoodz in late 2014 to shine a light on the mom and pop businesses that have fed residents for decades and were losing business due to gentrification. “Spots that have been around for multiple years that locals know about don’t have their regulars any more, so I wanted to help.” Barring the occasional selfie, Frazier rarely showed his face until he was two years deep into Bayareafoodz. But since he’s become more front-facing, the page has grown into a place where people go to hear Frazier’s unfiltered opinion. “My personality is the secret weapon,” he says. Toriano Gordon, the chef behind Vegan Mob, an always-busy Oakland restaurant that serves plant-based barbecue, soul food and Creole dishes, agrees that authenticity is a central component of Frazier’s appeal. “He ain’t trying too hard and that’s why he is doing so well. His posts are always entertaining, but you can tell it’s the real him,” says Gordon. “He’s a guide to Bay Area food, instead of going to Yelp, you’ll have better luck with Bayareafoodz.” Gordon was familiar with Frazier’s page by way of the Bay’s larger food scene and the pair met in late 2019, shortly after Gordon opened Vegan Mob’s brick and mortar location in Oakland. Before they began a professional relationship Frazier would post videos in front of the location and promote new menu offerings. Then once they got a chance to talk, Gordon and Frazier found common ground in their love of food and dedication to lifting up and supporting others as they climbed the ladder of success. “I’m big on unity, it’s imperative to support each other,” Gordon adds. “I may inspire him but he inspires me too, what he’s doing is innovative and special.” The challenges of being a Black creator That success has built slowly over the last few years. At first, Frazier says he never saw the page as a way to make a living. But as its popularity grew, a $3,000 offer for his page, combined with restaurant owners telling him about the sales boosts that came immediately after a post, caused him to reconsider. Frazier chose not to sell the page and in 2017 began charging for food reviews. His first paid restaurant visit was for $25 at a San Francisco deli. Now he charges up to $700 for a review, and generates income from sponsored posts from food and beverage companies and Facebook advertisements. And recently, he decided to quit his day job at a Kaiser pharmacy to focus on his burgeoning food businesses. “I realized that if I built Bayareafoodz with a portion of this time, I figure I should go all in on something I enjoy doing,” he said. But he says there have been plenty of challenges along the way, especially as a Black creator on Instagram, which Frazier and others have said can pose barriers to their work. In recent years Black social media influencers on Instagram, TikTok and other platforms have waged strikes and digital campaigns to call out pay disparities and alleged limitations that silos their content based on their race and stifles their exposure. During the protests and racial reckoning of the summer of 2020, Instagram said they would examine potential racial biases in the algorithms they use, but there’s been little news about progress since. “Algorithms can guess the race of users and when they start to associate it with Black content they might put it in a corner,” said Kalinda Ukanwa, assistant professor of marketing at the University of Southern California. “There’s an assumption their content won’t have a broader appeal which creates an issue with monetization because they’re not getting that exposure.” Frazier says he is experiencing this phenomenon first-hand. “I’m the only Black foodie that I know of in Oakland and I worked really hard, but these algorithms can make it difficult to grow a brand,” he says, “but I have to roll with it.” A platform for home cooks With his next venture, Plate Pick, Frazier is looking to leverage his social media fame to support home chefs in Alameda county. The county recently established a program that allows people to run a business from their kitchens, after California made these types of operations legal in 2018. Frazier became the co-owner of the business in 2021 alongside the tech CEO Andrew Fede. In addition to bringing Bay Area restaurants such as Vegan Mob to the website, Frazier and his team organize “legal nights” with staff from the county health department and attorneys who can help people get the permits and certification they need to sell food from home. He hopes the business can succeed without charging home chefs the exorbitant rate taken by other delivery companies. “I want to make sure we do the best that we can to help everybody in our community,” Frazier says. “We’re here to say, ‘You can do this! But be legal.’” Even with his business goals for the Instagram page and delivery service, Frazier says his ultimate motivation is to be a positive influence in the Bay Area and a role model, especially for young and impressionable residents. Aside from his food work, he has organized scavenger hunts that drum up business for local restaurants and is increasingly speaking out on local issues such as gun violence. “There are plenty of talented people in the Bay, especially young African American men and women. But the youth only see where the light shines and sometimes it’s on things that aren’t fully positive like guns, drugs, and alcohol,” Frazier says. “I wanna let people know that you can be a designer, you can be an author, you can be a photographer, and still be popping.”January You will notice the slight lengthening of the days even now, and the plants and birds certainly sense it: it’s not unusual to see buff-tailed bumblebees out and about on a mild January day. Snowdrops are flowering, green shoots are pushing up through the earth, catkins are unfurling and the garden is grinding back into life. Key job Planning. This is the time to sit down with your seed catalogues and dream of the crops and flowers you want to grow in the year ahead. Do you want armfuls of cornflowers, cosmos and zinnias? Juicy beefsteak tomatoes and crunchy mangetout? Time to put aside past failures and dream big. In the kitchen and flower gardens Buy and chit potatoes on a frost-free windowsill. Place forcers over rhubarb plants. Plant fruit trees – apples, pears, quinces and medlars – and prune existing ones. Sow sweet peas if you haven’t already. Plant roses when the ground is frost-free. Don’t forget … Chop, roast and eat up your winter squashes, perhaps sprinkled with crumbled feta, chopped mint and a squeeze of lime – there is not much to harvest in the garden now, so it’s time to get through your stored produce. February Falling on 1-2 February, the ancient Celtic celebration of Imbolc is a fire festival, associated with seeds and new life. The ancients felt an urge to get sowing, but resist – for now. Sowing too early leads to rotten seeds and disappointment; only aubergines and chillies will appreciate such an early start. Don’t let the odd mild day and spring-like feeling tempt you. Key job Preparation. Use this month to get yourself ready for sowing time. Wash old seed trays or buy new, and buy compost. Make neat piles and be ready to leap into action. Weed veg beds and cover with black or clear polythene to help the sun warm the soil. In the kitchen and flower gardens Sow chilli and aubergine seeds indoors, ideally in a heated propagator. Sow broad beans and hardy peas in pots in a sheltered spot outside or in a greenhouse. Lift, split and transplant large clumps of woodland bulbs such as snowdrops, bluebells and winter aconites, to propagate them. Order dahlia tubers. Plant lilies in pots. Don’t forget … Buy British-grown flowers for Valentine’s Day to support local businesses and reduce the number of flowers being flown in from around the world. Try Cornish Blooms and the Real Flower Company. March According to lore, if March comes in like a lion, it goes out like a lamb, which implies rather more predictable weather than we often get in March. Generally, winter starts to relent now. Daffodils pop up, and there is a soft haze of lime green over trees and hedgerows. Key job Finally, this month we can begin to sow in earnest. Pace yourself, sowing a couple of crops every few days, and don’t over sow. The soil is still cold, so sow in containers or a greenhouse for planting out later. In the kitchen and flower gardens Sow brussels sprouts, cabbages, celery, Florence fennel, lettuce, sprouting broccoli, peas, spinach, Swiss chard, carrots, turnips, beetroot and radishes – . Sow tender crops – tomatoes, cucumbers, winter squash, aubergines – indoors, ideally in a heated propagator, midway through the month. This is the perfect time to start an asparagus bed, using crowns. Other perennials will do well planted now, including rhubarb, strawberries and artichokes. Don’t forget … Wild garlic is up, and perfectly young and tender, and you’ll find it – by nose – in old woods. Pick bags of it and whiz up with toasted hazelnuts, hard goat’s cheese and olive oil to make a woodland pesto. April Frosts are still highly likely and nights are still cold. Good Friday (15 April) is the traditional day for planting out potatoes; 23 April, St George’s Day, heralds the start of the asparagus season. Key job You can start sowing direct this month, but protect new plants and seedlings with cloches. Harden plants off gradually when moving them from indoors to out: a few hours outside, then back in and so on. In the kitchen and flower gardens Plant out potatoes in trenches or in pots. Under cover, sow: french beans, runner beans, cabbages, cauliflowers, courgettes, cucumbers, Florence fennel, kale, winter squash and sweetcorn. Sow direct: lettuces, peas, rocket, summer purslane, corn salad, spinach, Swiss chard, carrots, beetroot, parsnip, turnip, leeks and spring onions. Harvest asparagus. Pot up dahlia tubers and protect from frost and slugs. Sow half-hardies: snapdragon, zinnia, nicotiana, cleome, cosmos, tithonia, sunflowers. Plant out sweet peas with shrubby “pea sticks” or netting for them to scramble up. Don’t forget … Get out among the bluebell woods during their brief and glorious reign at the end of April. Check the National Trust for sites to visit (usually for a fee). May All of the plants I have teetering on windowsills can finally go into the ground. But beware that the “ice saints” (Saints Mamertus, Pancras and Servatius), whose feast days fall on 11, 12 and 13 May respectively – can herald a cold snap that can bring the final frosts of spring. The end of May will see a frenzy of planting out. Key jobs Planting out, watering and feeding. In the kitchen and flower gardens Pot chillies into their final pots. Sow coriander, chervil, dill and parsley direct into the ground under cloches. Sow basil in pots indoors. Earth up potatoes. Plant hanging baskets and window boxes with colourful bedding plants. Plant lilies and gladioli in pots. Pick bunches of fragrant lily of the valley to give to your loved ones on 1 May, which is the Fête du Muguet (lily of the valley day) in France. Water and feed. Don’t forget … Pick globe artichokes while they are still small and before their “choke” has formed. Peel away the harder dark green “petals” and pare off any leftover tough bits, then boil for 10 minutes or until a knife tip pierces them easily. Drain, quarter and eat with vinaigrette. June Summer arrives and the work switches from manic sowing and planting out to leisurely maintenance, perhaps wandering around the garden on a warm evening with a watering can in one hand and a glass of wine in the other. Key jobs Tending to veg, and enjoying its bounty. Enjoy the garden – you’ve set it up well for the rest of the year. In the kitchen and flower gardens Pinch out the side shoots of tomatoes, tie them up, and start feeding every week. Pick salad: lettuce, peas, broad beans, artichokes, asparagus and sorrel are all at their best. Strawberries are abundant and it is time to make the first jam of the year. Pick roses early and plunge them up to their necks in water for a few hours before arranging in big bunches with alchemilla leaves and heads of cow parsley. Don’t forget … Traditionally at midsummer, doors were hung with birch, fennel, lilies and wildflowers, food was laid out for neighbours, and fires and lamps were lit at dusk to keep burning throughout the shortest night. Lia Leendertz is author of The Almanac: a Seasonal Guide to 2022 (Octopus,£12.99). To buy a copy for £11.99, including UK p&amp;p, visit guardianbookshop.comA cost of living catastrophe is what British families are facing in early 2022. The government has been understandably focused on Omicron but has woken up to this crisis, and is now discussing policy action to address it. But there is no magic bullet. What’s worse, this comes on the back of a decade of stagnant living standards. The big-picture driver of the cost of living crunch is rapidly rising inflation, which is already at 5.1% and forecast to hit a 30-year high of more than 6% this spring. Fast price rises mean pay packets were already shrinking in real terms late last year – for the third time in a decade. Prior to the financial crisis, real wages basically never fell. The fact that it’s now become almost normal says a lot about the weak growth of our economy, and explains why Britain has spent the past 10 years or more in an unprecedented living-standards disaster. But there are specific features that will turn our current cost-of-living crunch into a cost of living catastrophe this April – rising taxes and soaring energy bills. Both are painful, but taxes at least have the merit of being borne by those with the broadest shoulders, while the £12.5bn of extra revenue from higher national insurance contributions is badly needed by the NHS. There are no merits to soaring energy bills, unless you’re reading this in Moscow. Rising gas prices mean that typical energy bills could increase by £700 or more when the energy price cap is lifted in April. And unlike tax rises, this squeeze will be felt most keenly by low-income families. If typical energy bills reach £2,000 a year, that would mean – according to the Resolution Foundation’s latest analysis – the poorest third of households spending at least 10% of family budgets on energy bills alone. This is comparable to what richer households spend on the likes of restaurants, hotels and holidays. The scale of this catastrophe is so huge, and so difficult for low-income families to cope with, the government will have to step in. Doing so isn’t easy. An unlikely coalition of Labour and Brexiteer Tory MPs want to cut VAT on energy bills. This would make some difference, cutting individual bills by about £100, at a collective cost of £2bn. But on its own that’s tiny compared with the average estimated bill surge of £750, and doesn’t target support at those needing it most. The top priority is support for lower-income families, unable to simply cut nonessential spending, or draw down on savings as energy bills rise. This support could be most simply given via the benefits system. But the government is reluctant to consider this option, having recently removed the £20 uplift to universal credit. The good news is that there is potentially another ready-made route to provide support: the warm homes discount (WHD). The bad news is that it’s an absolute stinker of a policy design-wise that will require major surgery to make it fit for purpose. The first step to improving it would be to increase eligibility from poorer pensioners and some low-income working families to all poorer households. The payment will also need to be automatic to ensure the help gets through. Second, the normal payment of £140 might be enough for a normal winter, but won’t wash when bills surge by 50%. Third, WHD currently funds help for some people by increasing everyone else’s energy bills. But for obvious reasons higher bills aren’t exactly what we need today – so the taxpayer would have to pick up the tab. Collectively paying higher taxes tomorrow for lower bills today is the right answer to such a big price spike for an essential good. How much might all this cost? A £300 one-off payment to all 8.5 million low-income households would cost up to £2.5bn. A large amount, but the minimum we’re going to need to mitigate rising energy bills. And once we’re through this crisis we mustn’t forget the bigger picture – the need to tackle our failing energy sector, poorly insulated housing and reliance on fossil fuels. The surge in Omicron cases means the equally staggering rise in energy prices has taken a while to get debated in Westminster. We’ve now got a matter of weeks to turn that talking into something more useful for households seeing their budgets squeezed: action. Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution FoundationTucked into hedgerows or peeping out from under trees, the stinking iris, Iris foetidissima, is in full glory right now, its vibrant coral berries bursting from their seed pods amid the deep-green foliage. In summer, Iris foetidissima is easily overlooked. Its flowers are quite beautiful up close, with their delicate veining, but from a distance are a dull-leaden blue, or blue and beige-yellow, tempered and not inelegant, but perhaps too easily lost among the dagger-like foliage (which has a meaty smell when crushed, hence its name). However, they save their best trick for last, with brilliant berries appearing in late autumn and persisting right through the winter and into early spring. The berries are deeply poisonous to humans, but not to birds, making this native plant a very valuable food source for wildlife. The birds won’t touch them till late in the season, when they have softened some. I notice mostly blackbirds devouring them. Stinking iris’s ability to thrive in extreme dry shade means it’s particularly useful for, say, jollying up the base of a leylandii hedge that you can’t get rid of, or for a dark, basement courtyard that only sees a sliver of sunlight. Its tolerant nature means it is also unfazed by the battering of seaside weather; you often see it growing in shady parts along cliff tops. What is less well known is the smattering of interesting cultivars and varieties of this species. These will take some hunting down, and may require a visit to a few rare plant fairs, but they are well worth the hunt. If you chance upon Iris foetidissima “Citrina”, a yellow-flowered form, jump on it. The flowers are a muted, yet joyous yellow with a deeper purplish bronze centre, and you still get those vibrant orange/red berries in the winter. Two further cultivars are selected for their leaf forms: “Variegata”, with its cream and green striped foliage (it reminds me of deckchairs, but I can see that in the right space it could work); and “Paul’s Gold”, which is yellow-leafed, particularly in spring with new growth. It also has a dwarf form, making it very useful for pots and containers. Finally, a few forms have different-coloured berries. There’s a golden-seeded one which appears naturally in the wild, and is often sold as either “Golden Seeded” or “Golden Gobbet”, but “FructuAlbo” is the one to lust over. I saw it once years ago and foolishly passed it by and, oh, do I covet it now. Instead of vibrant orange berries, it has polished white ones that sit inside the furry interior of the seed head like brilliant pearls – the only sort of jewellery I long for.In the first moments of his presidency, Joe Biden called on Americans to set aside their deep divisions inflamed by a predecessor he intentionally ignored. He emphasized national unity and appealed to Americans to come together to “end this uncivil war”. Nearly a year later, as a divided nation reflects on the first anniversary of the 6 January assault on the US Capitol, the uncivil war he sought to extinguish rages on, stronger than ever. In a searing speech on Thursday, Biden struck a different tone. He said he was “crystal clear” about the dangers facing the nation, and accused Donald Trump and his political allies of holding a “dagger at the throat of America, at American democracy”. In the course of the 21-minute speech, delivered from the US Capitol, Biden offered himself as a defender of democracy in the “battle for the soul of America”. “I will stand in this breach,” he promised. “I will defend this nation.” That moment of visceral speech-making marked a shift in strategy for how Biden has chosen to engage Trump – whose name he never uttered but instead taunted as the “defeated former president”. The decision to break his silence about Trump comes at a challenging moment in Biden’s presidency, with his Build Back Better agenda stalled, the Covid-19 pandemic resurgent and economic malaise widespread. It also reflected the reality that, far from being shunned, Trump remains the most powerful force in the Republican party and a potential rival to Biden in 2024. Confronting Trump was a calculated risk. Trump seized the opportunity to hurl all manner of insults and accusations at his successor, whose remarks he said were “very hurtful to many people”. But Biden’s speech was an acknowledgment that there were dangers in continuing to ignore Trump and what Biden called his “web of lies”. Recent polling suggests the vast majority of Republicans believe Trump’s unsubstantiated claims about the election fraud while a growing percentage of Americans are willing to tolerate political violence in some instances. Republican-controlled states are pursuing a raft of new voting restrictions, motivated in part by the doubts they sowed about the 2020 election results. At the same time, Republicans are passing laws that inject partisanship into the administration of elections and vote-counting while stripping power from and driving power from election officials who resisted pressure to throw out votes or overturn the elections in their state. “It was essential to be specific about the problem, and the source of the crisis,” said Julian Zelizer, a historian at Princeton University. “Otherwise the vague rhetoric, without agency, that we hear about polarization misses the way in which Trump and the GOP are the source of so much instability.” But he warned that a speech can only do so much. “Without holding people accountable for January 6 and the campaign against the 2020 election, and without real legislation to protecting voting rights and the electoral process, the ‘dagger at the throat of democracy’ won’t go away.” In his remarks, Biden argued that protecting voting rights was paramount to safeguarding American democracy. He sought to connect the dots between Trump’s promotion that the 2020 election was tainted by fraud and Republicans’ coordinated effort to “subvert” and undermine the electoral process in states where they control the levers of power. “Right now, in state after state, new laws are being written – not to protect the vote, but to deny it; not only to suppress the vote, but to subvert it; not to strengthen or protect our democracy, but because the former president lost,” he said. Biden will follow up on the theme on Tuesday when he delivers another consequential speech on voting rights. In Atlanta, Biden and Vice-President Kamala Harris will call for the passage of two voting rights bills that face daunting odds in the US Senate: the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. The issue of voting rights has taken center stage after hopes of passing Biden’s sweeping domestic policy agenda were dashed by the opposition of Senator Joe Manchin, the conservative Democrat from West Virginia. So far Republican opposition has blocked passage of the legislation in the evenly divided chamber, where Democrats lack the 60 votes needed to overcome a filibuster. Manchin again holds the keys on voting rights legislation, which he broadly supports. But his opposition to eliminating the filibuster has forced Democrats to pursue other avenues such as creating an exception in the rules for certain legislation. The Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, said he would schedule a vote on easing the filibuster rules not later than 17 January, which is Martin Luther King Day. Biden has faced immense pressure from civil rights leaders and voting rights advocates frustrated with his handling of the issue, seen as critical to the president’s legacy. Indeed, a coalition of Georgia-based voting rights groups warned Biden and Harris not to bother coming to the state unless they delivered a concrete plan to move forward, according to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, told reporters this week that Biden planned to stress the “urgent need to pass legislation to protect the constitutional right to vote and the integrity of our elections”. Spencer Overton, an election law expert and the president of the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, hopes Biden will use his bully pulpit to explain why passing federal voting rights legislation is so essential to combatting the lies and conspiracies undermining faith in the nation’s system of government. “Those lies have real consequences,” said. “Sometimes they’re graphic, as we saw a year ago on 6 January, but sometimes they silently erode democracy by preventing average citizens from participating in our democracy, and exercising their freedom to vote.” “This is the most important legislation in Congress now,” he added. “There’s just no benefit in waiting. The moment is now.”On her first visit to HMP Belmarsh, Rona McCandlish got lost. The prison is in a sprawling, out-of-the-way 1990s estate in Thamesmead, south-east London. It was November 2018 and McCandlish was on her way to interview for a volunteer position with the charity Pact, which gives advice and support to prisoners and their families. “I had to sprint half a mile in the end to get to the prison,” says McCandlish, who is 63 and lives in nearby Lewisham. She had got so lost, she showed up uncharacteristically late. “It helped me understand how alienating and confusing visiting a prison for the first time can be.” At the time, McCandlish was feeling burned out. She’d worked as a midwife before becoming a professor of midwifery, a midwifery adviser to the government, then a consultant in NHS maternity services. “I was working 80 hours a week,” she says, “flying all over the country, staying in different places.” She needed to do something more community-focused, at a slower pace. “I was always dipping in and out of communities. Now I feel part of my own. Volunteering is much more than what you do for other people. It also does so much for you.” Despite her tardiness, McCandlish got the position. She volunteers at Belmarsh’s visitor centre, welcoming friends and family who are there to see inmates, and supporting them through the confusing and sometimes arcane regulations that govern prison visits. Visitors are forbidden from wearing ripped clothes, low-cut tops, short dresses, even watches. First-time visitors who aren’t aware of the rules risk being sent away. “People feel humiliated when they don’t have the right clothes,” says McCandlish. She and fellow volunteers have created Boutique Belmarsh: a rail of neutral, plain garments they lend to any visitor who falls foul of the dress regulations. McCandlish takes all the clothes home to launder between visits. But McCandlish does much more than just facilitate visits. “Rona is an amazing woman,” says her manager, Pact’s Monique Joseph. “She makes an extra effort to know each family member by name, creating a haven when they’re visiting. What makes Rona truly special is her ability to speak with people from many different backgrounds, faiths and ages.” McCandlish says: “It’s about listening to them, whether they’re hurt or angry or feeling hopeless. They’ll say things like, ‘Why didn’t I stop him from doing it? He was a good lad and I knew he was going off the rails’.” A young woman recently visited with her small baby. Her partner had just been given a seven-year sentence. “She was really in a lot of despair,” McCandlish says. “She never expected her partner to be put away for so long, and to have to bring the baby to see dad in prison.” It’s not all doom and gloom at the visitor centre, though. “It can be a joyful place at times,” she says. “People don’t expect it to be OK when they come here, yet after they visit, they feel relieved. They’re happy to see that the person they’re visiting is OK, and they know they’ve done the right thing by coming.” During the pandemic, visits were paused and resumed only in May last year. “That was emotional,” she says. “Watching visitors come for the first time in 18 months.” All these years witnessing the dehumanising effects of prison up close makes McCandlish question why we spend so much money locking people away, often for non-violent crimes. “I feel quite desperate sometimes,” she says. “There needs to be a focus on doing more than just building cages. It’s a great waste of resources to lock people up and not offer meaningful education, rehabilitation, support or therapy.” McCandlish wants to bring a sense of humanity to an otherwise drab and cold place. Outside the visitor centre, for example, hangs a tatty, withered plant that has seen better days. For her treat, McCandlish requests a fresh one to replace it, and some low-maintenance houseplants to dot around inside. Community garden centre the Nunhead Gardener provides McCandlish with a selection of plants and flowers, including a sansevieria “snake plant”, with its long, upright leaves, and the glossy zamioculca. “The new plant is huge and amazing,” says McCandlish of the hanging plant. “I’m slightly worried it will fall down, because it’s so massive.” The response has been overwhelmingly positive. It may seem like a small change, but the plants represent McCandlish’s approach to volunteering: finding ways to bring the light in and give a personal touch to an otherwise impersonal institution. “I want to make the centre a lovely place to come to,” she says. “Not a hard place. The main thing is for the people visiting to feel hope and connection.” There was some muttering about who would water the plants, but McCandlish, ever the volunteer, has taken full responsibility: “Plants are good for us. They make our lives better.” Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comAfter weeks of a diet whose main food groups comprise paté, cheese and Ferrero Rocher, I’ve started the new year with mind and gut crying out for a change. I won’t be indulging in any crash dieting, though. Instead, I’ll be shifting my focus to foods that nourish and satisfy and, in particular, feed the gut microbiome. These dishes rely on pulses, which are naturally full of fibre, to provide sustenance to all the microorganisms that make a home in our digestive system and help to keep us healthy. Both are also great to make in bulk and freeze, for days when you can’t face cooking but need something warm and comforting. Peanut bean stew with tofu and roast garlic This stew is inspired by some of my favourite south-east Asian flavours. The beans keep it filling, but you could serve it with rice or noodles, if like. The stew freezes well, but the garnish of toasted garlic, coriander and cucumber should be made fresh. Prep 10 min Cook 20 min Serves 6 100g whole raw peanuts 1½ tbsp vegetable oil 4-5 (20g) garlic cloves, peeled and minced 20g ginger, peeled and minced ½ tsp ground turmeric ¼-½ tsp chilli powder, to taste 300g brown onions, peeled and sliced 2 x tins mixed beans – I used kidney and black-eyed beans 150g smooth peanut butter 1 x can coconut milk 150ml boiling water Zest and juice of 1 lime 3 tbsp fish sauce 1 tbsp soy sauce 2 tsp dark brown sugar 1 x 230g bag deep-fried tofu puffs – I like the TofuKing brand To serve 1 cucumber, cut into thin matchsticks 4 garlic cloves 2 tbsp oil 1 small bunch coriander leaves, roughly chopped Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Spread the peanuts on a baking tray and roast for six minutes, until browned and aromatic. Set aside to cool, then roughly chop. Meanwhile, warm the oil in a large saucepan over a medium heat, then fry the garlic, ginger, turmeric and chilli for one to two minutes, until the garlic starts to brown. Add the onions, fry, stirring, for eight minutes, until softening, then pour in the beans, peanut butter, coconut milk, water, lime zest and juice, fish and soy sauces, and sugar. Simmer for two to three minutes, then add the tofu and simmer for another five minutes. While the stew simmers, prepare the garnish. Peel the garlic cloves and slice them as thinly as you can. Warm the oil in a small frying pan over a low heat, then fry the garlic for a couple of minutes until hazelnut brown. Pour immediately into a heatproof bowl to stop it overcooking. To serve, divide the stew into bowls and top with the cucumber and a scattering of roasted peanuts, coriander, toasted garlic and its oil. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Black lentils with miso, mushrooms and spring onions Miso soup is one of my favourite quick lunches. If you want to make this particularly moreish, use king oyster mushrooms – you can usually find them in south-east Asian shops. They’re a bit pricier than regular button mushrooms, but are far more flavoursome. Prep 10 min Cook 20 min Serves 4 3 tbsp vegetable or olive oil 25g fresh ginger, peeled and minced 250g beluga lentils 300g mushrooms, sliced 1 bunch spring onions, thinly sliced 80g dark miso paste – I use Clearspring’s brown rice miso Chilli oil, to serve Put a tablespoon of the oil in a saucepan over a medium heat, then add the ginger and fry until it’s just starting to brown. Pour in the lentils and 600ml boiling water, cover and simmer for about 20 minutes, until the lentils are tender. While the lentils are cooking, fry the mushrooms in a second pan with another tablespoon of oil for six minutes, until reduced in size and browning at the edges. Turn out on to a plate, then turn up the heat to high, add the final tablespoon of oil and stir-fry the spring onions for a couple of minutes, until charred. Stir the miso through the cooked lentils (you may need to add a little more or less miso, depending on its strength), then stir in the fried mushrooms and decant into bowls. Serve topped with the spring onions and a drizzle of chilli oil. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoAmerican democracy is in peril and nearly everyone paying attention is trying to find the best way to say so. Should we in the intellectual classes position our warnings in satire, in jeremiads, in social scientific data, in historical analogy, in philosophical wisdom we glean from so many who have instructed us about the violence and authoritarianism of the 20th century? Or should we just scream after our holiday naps? Some of us pick up our pens and do what we can. We quote wise scribes such as George Orwell on how there may be a latent fascist waiting to emerge in all humans, or Hannah Arendt on how democracies are inherently unstable and susceptible to ruin by aggressive, skilled demagogues. We turn to Alexis de Tocqueville for his stunning insights into American individualism while we love to believe his claims that democracy would create greater equality. And oh! how we love Walt Whitman’s fabulously open, infinite democratic spirit. We inhale Whitman’s verses and are captured by the hypnotic power of democracy. “O Democracy, for you, for you I am trilling these songs,” wrote our most exuberant democrat. Read enough of the right Whitman and you can believe again that American democracy may yet be “the continent indissoluble … with the life-long love of comrades”. But just now we cannot rely on the genius alone of our wise forbears. We have to face our own mess, engage the fight before us, and prepare for the worst. Our democracy allows a twice-impeached, criminally inclined ex-president, who publicly fomented an attempted coup against his own government, and still operates as a gangster leader of his political party, to peacefully reside in our midst while under investigation for his misdeeds. We believe in rule of law, and therefore await verdicts of our judicial system and legislative inquiry. Yet Trumpism unleashed on 6 January, and every day before and since over a five-year period, a crusade to slowly poison the American democratic experiment with a movement to overturn decades of pluralism, increased racial and gender equality, and scientific knowledge. To what end? Establishing a hopeless white utopia for the rich and the aggrieved. On this 6 January anniversary is it time to sing anew with Whitmanesque fervor, or is the only rational response to scream? First the scream. On 6 January 2021, an American mob, orchestrated by the most powerful man in the land, along with many congressional and media allies, nearly destroyed our indirect electoral democracy. To this day, only Trump’s laziness and incompetence may explain why he did not force Vice-President Mike Pence to resign in the two months before the coup attempt, install a genuine lackey like Mark Meadows, and set up the formal disruption of the count of electoral votes. The real coup needed guns, and military brass thankfully made clear they would oppose any attempt at imposing martial law. But the coup endures by failing; it now takes the form of voter suppression laws, virulent states’ rights doctrine applied to all manner of legislative action installing Republican loyalists in the electoral system, and a propaganda machine capable of popularizing lies big and small. The lies have now crept into a Trumpian Lost Cause ideology, building its monuments in ludicrous stories that millions believe, and codifying them in laws to make the next elections easier to pilfer. If you repeat the terms “voter fraud” and “election integrity” enough times on the right networks you have a movement. And “replacement theory” works well alongside a thousand repetitions of “critical race theory”, both disembodied of definition or meaning, but both scary. Liberals sometimes invite scorn with their devotion to diversity training and insistence on fighting over words rather than genuine inequality. But it is time to see the real enemy – a long-brewing American-style neo-fascist authoritarianism, beguilingly useful to the grievances of the disaffected, and threatening to steal our microphones midway through our odes to joy. Yes, disinformation has to be fought with good information. But it must also be fought with fierce politics, with organization, and if necessary with bodies, non-violently. We have an increasingly dangerous population on the right. Who do you know who really wants to compromise with their ideas? Who on the left will volunteer to be part of a delegation to go discuss the fate of democracy with Mitch McConnell, Kevin McCarthy or the foghorns of Fox News? Who on the right will come to a symposium with 10 of the finest writers on democracy, its history and its philosophy, and help create a blueprint for American renewal? As a culture we are not in the mood for such reason and comity; we are in a fight, and it needs to happen in politics. Otherwise it may be 1861 again in some very new form. Unfortunately it is likely to take events even more shocking than 6 January to move our political culture through and beyond our current crisis. And if and when it is 1861 again, the new secessionists, namely the Republican party, will have a dysfunctional constitution to exploit. The ridiculously undemocratic US Senate, now 50/50 between the two parties, but where Democrats represent 56.5% of the population and Republicans 43.5%, augurs well for those determined to thwart majoritarian democracy. And, of course, the electoral college – an institution more than two centuries out of date, and which even our first demagogue president, Andrew Jackson, advocated abolishing – offers perennial hope to Republicans who may continue to lose popular votes but win the presidency, as they have in two of the last six elections. Democracy? And now the song? Well, keep reading. Of all the books on democracy in recent years one of the best is James Miller’s Can Democracy Work? A Short History of a Radical Idea, from Ancient Athens to Our World. A political philosopher and historian, Miller provides an intelligent journey through the turbulent past of this great human experiment in whether people can actually govern themselves. He demonstrates how thin the lines are between success and disaster for democracies, how big wins turn into reactions and big losses, and how the dynamics of even democratic societies can be utterly amoral. Intolerant new ruling classes sometimes replace the tyrants they overthrow. “Democratic revolts, like democratic elections,” Miller writes, “can produce perverse outcomes.” History is still waiting for us. But in the end, via examples like Václav Havel in the Czech Republic, Miller reminds us that the “ideal survives”. Democracy does require the “best laws”, Havel intoned, but it must also manifest as “humane, moral, intellectual and spiritual, and cultural”. Miller does the history to show that democracy is almost always a “riddle, not a recipe”. Democracy is much harder than autocracy to sustain. But renew it we must. Or simply pick up Whitman’s Song of Myself, all 51 pages, from the opening line, “I celebrate myself, and sing myself,” to his musings on the luck of merely being alive. Keep going to a few pages later when a “runaway slave” enters Whitman’s home and the poet gazes into his “revolving eyes”, and nurses “the galls of his neck and ankles”, and then to his embrace of “primeval”, complete democracy midway in the song, where he accepts “nothing which all cannot have”. Finally read to the ending, where the poet finds blissful oblivion, bequeathing himself “to the dirt to grow from the grass I love”. Whitman’s “sign of democracy” is everywhere and in everything. The democratic and the authoritarian instinct are both deep within us, forever at war. After 6 January, it’s time to prepare thee to sing, to scream, and to fight. David W Blight is sterling professor of American History at Yale and author of the Pulitzer-prize winning Frederick Douglass: Prophet of FreedomPaul Pogba has been ruled out for at least four more weeks after the Manchester United midfielder suffered a setback in his recovery from a thigh injury. Pogba last played for United in the 2-2 draw at Atalanta on 2 November but was expected to return in early January. A month ago Ralf Rangnick said it would be around four weeks before the 28-year-old would be in contention again. But the interim United manager has now said: “A week ago I was told it would take another four or five weeks. I’ve seen him this morning before the training session but currently I don’t know how long it will take. “He’s not training with the team yet. As far as I know from the medical department, it will last another three weeks, four weeks, and once he is then fit for training it does not necessarily mean he is also match fit. “It will probably take a couple of weeks before he is really able to compete for the first team.”Sinéad O’Connor’s 17-year-old son has died, two days after he was reported missing. The musician shared the news on social media, writing that he “decided to end his earthly struggle” and asked that “no one follows his example”. In the early hours of Saturday morning, O’Connor tweeted: “My beautiful son, Nevi’im Nesta Ali Shane O’Connor, the very light of my life, decided to end his earthly struggle today and is now with God. May he rest in peace and may no one follow his example. My baby. I love you so much. Please be at peace.” Police confirmed the news of the teenager’s death on Saturday. Shane O’Connor had been missing since Thursday, with the Gardaí launching an appeal for his whereabouts. The 17-year-old was missing from Newbridge, County Kildare, and was last seen on Friday morning in the Tallaght, Dublin 24 area, the Gardaí said. In the appeal, which was reissued on Friday, officers said they were concerned for his welfare. At the time, the singer had posted heartfelt messages on social media asking her son to contact her. “Shane, your life is precious. God didn’t chisel that beautiful smile on your beautiful face for nothing,” she tweeted. “My world would collapse without you. You are my heart. Please don’t stop it from beating. Please don’t harm yourself. Go to the Gardai and let’s get you to hospital. “This is a message for my son, Shane. Shane, it’s not funny any more all this going missing. You are scaring the crap out of me. Could you please do the right thing and present yourself at a Gardai station. If you are with Shane please call the Gardai for his safety.” The Gardaí have confirmed that the search for the 17-year-old has ended. “Following the recovery of a body in the Bray area of Wicklow on Friday 7 January 2022, a missing person appeal in respect of Shane O’Connor, 17 years, has been stood down,” a spokesperson told the Irish Mirror. The musician was sent messages of condolences on social media, with Cáit O’Riordan, formerly of the Pogues, tweeting: “I’m so sorry Sinéad.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Carolyn Andriano, who testified in the trial of sex trafficker Ghislaine Maxwell in New York last month, has claimed that Virginia Giuffre told her in 2001 that she slept with Prince Andrew. The claims, made in an interview with the Daily Mail, will ratchet up the pressure on the prince, as it is a contemporaneous report of his alleged sexual assault of the then 17-year-old Giuffre. He has vehemently denied the claims and his lawyers have been urging a US judge to dismiss Giuffre’s civil suit against him. Andriano, then 14 and living in Florida, said she was texted by Giuffre (formerly Virginia Roberts, before her marriage) in 2001 from London, who claimed she had slept with the prince. “[Giuffre] said, ‘I got to sleep with him’,” Andriano told the Mail. The accusations come after Andriano, now 35, waived her legal right to anonymity to tell the full story of her grooming and sexual assault from the age of 14 to 17 at convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein’s £13m mansion in Palm Beach, Florida. Andriano previously gave evidence anonymously at Maxwell’s trial, alongside two other women who opted for anonymity, and Annie Farmer, 42, who chose to testify publicly. At the trial, Andriano testified as “Carolyn” and said that it was Giuffre who introduced her as a 14-year-old to Maxwell and Epstein. In her Mail interview, Andriano recalled Giuffre texting her in 2001, saying: “You’ll never guess who I’m with… ” Andriano replied: “Who?” Andriano told the Mail: “[Giuffre] said, ‘I’m in London with Jeffrey and Maxwell and Prince Andrew.’ “She said they were going to have dinner. I kind of didn’t believe her, but I had no reason not to. I thought it was far-fetched but, then again, she knew wealthy people and had been to fancy parties and stuff like that.” Andriano said she had asked Giuffre if she’d been to the palace. “And she said, ‘I got to sleep with him’. She didn’t seem upset about it. She thought it was pretty cool,’ Andriano recalled. Andriano told the Mail that Giuffre later showed her a picture of her with the prince. The Guardian was unable to immediately verify the claims independently. Representatives for the prince declined to comment, according to the Mail. Maxwell, 60, was found guilty of sex trafficking in her Manhattan federal court trial last month. She was arrested in July 2020, charged with involvement in ex-boyfriend Epstein’s sexual assault of teenage girls. The Mail said Andriano was not paid for her interview. She told the paper she was speaking out to let “all young women to know what happened to me when I was a teenager and how it has affected my life. This is my story and I want to tell it”. Andriano waived her right to anonymity for the Mail interview. • This article was amended on 9 January 2022. Andriano said Giuffre showed her the picture of her with Prince Andrew in person, she did not send it via text as stated in an earlier version.It is three years this week since Jojo Wollacott lined up for Gloucester City at East Thurrock United in the National League South before a crowd of 242 supporters. That game was a month into the eighth loan move of a career that has taken him on a remarkable journey from Truro to Norway’s fourth-tier and now the Africa Cup of Nations, where he is set to be Ghana’s No 1. No one can accuse the Swindon goalkeeper of not putting in the hard yards when he starts against Morocco on Monday. “It was always my ambition and I told myself it was going to happen one day,” he says. “To play for your country at a major tournament is every boy’s dream … I’ve got to pinch myself again.” Wollacott, who was born in Bristol, qualifies to play for Ghana through his mother, who was raised in Accra. He recalls watching Richard Kingson, now the Ghana goalkeeper coach, at the 2010 World Cup and getting a flavour for the nation’s obsession with the game. In October, he made his debut in a World Cup qualifier against Zimbabwe. They beat South Africa a month later to reach the play-offs for Qatar 2022, which take place in March. “I was a bit emotional after the game because it just hit me,” Wollacott says. “That was when I realised: ‘I’m playing international football for Ghana.’ It is going to be a busy few months but I am looking forward to it.” Wollacott has developed as a goalkeeper this season, becoming more comfortable in possession and improving his distribution, but arguably his most attractive trait is his humility. He has a laser-like focus and after an hour discussing everything from his Ghana debut shirt having pride of place in his hallway to the prospect of facing Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang – albeit now in doubt since the Arsenal striker has Covid – when they take on Gabon in Group C and his love for jollof rice, it is clear he will not be getting carried away any time soon. “I am pretty grounded,” he says. “I’m quite aware of my situation. I’ve had a good upbringing – that is down to mum. She does keep me in check every now and then, but not as much as when I was a little kid.” No one was prouder to watch Wollacott win his first cap than his mother, who ferried him to games as a boy. He had trials at Bristol Rovers and Bristol City, who accepted him at the third time of trying, and he spent 10 years at the club without making a first-team appearance before joining Swindon last summer. His adviser, Eric Anyan of JIA Sports Agency, and Anyan’s son, Elijah, a talent scout, previously alerted the Ghana Football Association to Wollacott’s eligibility. “My mum told me her phone was going off because everyone was messaging her,” he says. “She sacrificed a lot for me when I was younger.” It has been a slow-burning career for Wollacott in many ways but he is determined to seize his latest opportunity. Playing alongside the Ayew brothers and Thomas Partey at a major tournament was a distant dream when he was on loan at Weymouth and Woking. Ghana players and staff converse in English and Twi, a dialect Wollacott is getting to grips with. “I need to get better at it, but I can get away with the basics,” he says. He values the importance of those loans, including one where he pitched up at an archipelago in Norway, spending three months at Bergsoy IL. “I don’t think I had anything else on the table in England, so I thought I might as well just take a chance and go abroad, see how it is. “Norway was another really good life experience. At the time it opened doors for other things when I got back. You need to go out and experience winning three points and being in high-pressure situations. There comes a point when you’re in the reserves or under-23s where it is just not relevant any more. It is not realistic.” The initial backdrop when he arrived at Swindon was far from ideal – two weeks before the start of the season the League Two club had eight contracted players and no manager – but a takeover lifted the gloom. The goalkeeping coach, Steve Mildenhall, who has had a profound impact on Wollacott, was the de facto manager. “I signed for John McGreal and a week later he left due to the circumstances. It was a big risk to sign but it was one of the best decisions I made because I needed to play. I’m 25 now. Hopefully, the next few months we can keep pushing, climb the table and get promoted.” He acknowledges it has been an incredible rise from Gloucester to Ghana. “I know, I know,” Wollacott says. “It still has not sunk in yet. But it is just the nature of football. It is a game of opinions. You have to believe in yourself, trust the process and understand that if you keep doing the right things and the opportunity comes, you just need to be ready to take it.” Wollacott has not had much time to stop and reflect but is adamant his life has not changed much over the past few months, aside from no longer breezing through the airport terminal on arrival in Accra. “The first time no one really knew who I was,” he says, laughing. “The second time I think people started to recognise me a bit more. “I don’t think anything has really changed. I’m not getting ahead of myself. I am just going to stay consistent with what I’m doing. I’m not a superstar. I’m the same person. I’m not going to change.”Some people are art collectors. I’m not one of those. I’m not rich enough and, even if I were, I’m not interested in that kind of acquisition. I’m just someone who likes pictures a lot and who buys as many as I possibly can. Naturally, this depends – mostly – on my funds at any given moment. But not exclusively. When my passion first overcame me, after all, I was about as broke as it was possible for a salaried person to be. It was 1992, and I was trainee reporter in Glasgow, where I rented one small room, from whose single bed I could see everything I owned, which was mostly a load of letters from my bank informing me that I was overdrawn. I can’t remember whether the idea of travelling to Jura to write about Julie Brook, an artist who was living and working in a cave on the uninhabited side of the island, was my idea or my editor’s but, either way, I was mad keen to do the story, mostly because I knew that it was there that George Orwell wrote 1984. Of my interviewee’s work, I had rather less knowledge. Apparently, she liked to build stone structures on the beach in which she would then set a fire, the idea being that, as the tide came in, it would briefly look as though flames were rising from the sea itself. I arrived by ferry. Julie had hiked to Craighouse to meet me and, in the bar of its hotel, we talked, and she showed me some photographs of her land art, which was indeed dramatic. Then she took me outside, where some huge oils were propped against a wall. This was when it happened. Standing in front of a painting of two salmon, my heart began to pound. “I would like to own this,” I heard a voice rather like my own say. “But I’ve got no money.” Julie must, I think, have felt my longing, which was extreme. She didn’t hesitate either. “Pay me in instalments,” she said. Which is what I did, for the next 18 months. It was all quite mad. Why was I buying this enormous canvas when I’d nowhere to hang it? More to the point, why was I spending money I didn’t have? But though I could hardly justify what I’d done, I didn’t regret it either. I was… relieved to have the painting in my possession, a sense of satisfaction that only grew as I transported it to Glasgow, and then, some weeks later, drove it to London in a hire car (I was moving again). When friends remarked on it, their disbelief (“you… bought this?”) induced in me only a crazed kind of pride. Better my salmon than any number of dresses from Top Shop. For a time, this was the only art I owned. But in my 30s, more flush at last, I started buying more. An abstract print by Victor Pasmore (he was less fashionable then, and his prices less loopy). A tiny oil of an old-fashioned newsagent, its window bedecked with tinsel, by no one you would ever have heard of. A portrait by John Aldridge, one of the (very much) less well-known artists associated with Great Bardfield in Essex. In each case, the feeling was the same. If a vaguely affordable picture speaks to me, the tips of my fingers seem to tingle and burn. I’m like Raffles, the gentleman thief, in the presence of a diamond tiara. It is still possible, if you’re clever, to get amazing things for the price of a couple of easyJet flights (I’m including the taxi to the airport). I have a drawing by Edward Burra that cost me less than £200; I bought it at Abbot &amp; Holder in Museum Street in Bloomsbury, where I’ve had a lot of luck down the years (Tom, who runs it now, is very knowledgeable, but also very kind and non-intimidating). I haunt online auctions and sales – for the latter, I recommend Liss Llewellyn, which specialises in 20th-century British art – and I favour galleries outside London, such as Zillah Bell in Thirsk, Yorkshire, home to an archive of work by Norman Ackroyd, master of the aquatint. But my collection is not about big names. For me, value has nothing whatsoever to do with fame. There’s something thrilling about hanging a picture you scrimped and saved to buy next to one for which you paid £50 in a street market, and finding both equally beautiful; it’s like having a secret. I do own some pictures by fairly well-known artists (though I won’t name drop here). But one of my most beloved finds – a delicately gorgeous 1939 engraving by an artist whose name is illegible of Rachel’s Tomb in Hebron, in Israel/Palestine, where I lived as a child – I picked up for £40 at a Suffolk antique fair. Friends who were there will testify that I almost fainted with excitement as I handed over the cash. The judgmental cliche goes that either a person can spend money on stuff, or they can spend it on experiences. But a painting is both. Ben Nicholson thought people should hang a picture on the wall and “eat their meals with their back to it every day for a month”. Only then would they know how they felt about it; whether it was dead or alive. I think he was right. A painting will seem to change as you live with it. Like a person you’ve known for a long time, it will always be capable of surprising you. Perhaps you’ll move it to a new spot; perhaps the light will shift, falling on it in a new way; perhaps you’ll find yourself staring at it unexpectedly as you try to remember what you were going upstairs for. At any rate, you’ll see it anew, and suddenly interest and affection will rise inside you. Before you know it, you’ll be back in the first flush of love, delighted by the absolute rightness of your own taste; by what your eyes and heart once whispered to you, and are now telling you insistently all over again. How to do it There are many art history or art appreciation courses on offer, including those at the Courtauld, the Royal Academy of Art, University of Arts London or the National Gallery. Most are online. For more hands-on activities, Create is a charity which helps disadvantaged and vulnerable people access the arts. ActionSpace is for artists with learning disabilities and the Association for Cultural Advancement through Visual Art runruns educational arts programmes for diverse communities. Most local art schools also run evening classes. If you want other deep delves into the art world for inspiration, Russell Tovey and Robert Diament’s Talk Art podcast is enthusiastic and approachable, while The Great Women Artists podcast tells some shamefully overlooked art stories.Justin and Dan Hawkins are the Lowestoft brothers behind rock band the Darkness. Puncturing the genteel Dido and Keane-era mainstream of the early noughties with their stadium rock and low-cut catsuits, their music had a short-lived period of ridicule before their debut album Permission to Land went on to sell 3.5m copies. At the peak of their commercial powers they won three Brit awards, an Ivor Novello, and penned the modern Christmas classic, 2003’s Christmas Time (Don’t Let the Bells End). The band split in 2006 after the release of their second album, but they’ve since reformed and released five more records. They are currently on tour. Justin Hawkins Based on this image, I wonder if my parents looked at our physiques and temperaments and decided to try and equip us for what they thought would be our career paths. They saw me as the office junior and Dan as the sports hero. Or perhaps I’m dressed so smartly because somebody had died. Although I look a bit too cheerful and my tie is a bit too wide to be respectful. Growing up, me and Dan were never bored. We had a moped and we’d shoot guns and fire arrows. We really loved music, because our parents did. They were in the right place at a particularly exciting time in the 60s; mum’s got stories about Brian Jones and my dad’s got stories about Peter Sellers. They were always having parties. We’d hear the bass pumping through the walls: Mum was into reggae and the Stones, and Dad liked dad-rock. As a result, Dan and I were fanatic about old artists – industrial bands, hair rock, Aerosmith and Fleetwood Mac. From a really young age, around 12, we would be guns for hire in other people’s groups. Eventually, I joined one with Frankie [Poullain, the Darkness’ bassist] and Dan – but as a peripheral character in the dynamic. We had a really good singer but he didn’t know how to connect with an audience, so I ended up speaking to them instead, even though I was hidden at the back – I must have sounded like a disembodied voice booming from the side of the stage. In the end we sacked him; there was a pivotal moment when I did a special dance to Bohemian Rhapsody and Dan realised I’d be able to entertain folks. Unfortunately, I didn’t look like a frontman then. I’d been writing music for adverts in the 90s, for Ikea, Mars bar and Tango. But I never thought I’d be a rock star so I didn’t look after myself. I drank beer all the time and sat around being useless. When the Darkness properly formed, Dan was a driving force in terms of ambition whereas I was doing it in a defiant way: “What’s the point doing the same thing as everyone else? Let’s do something inspired by the music we loved growing up!” We’ve always been drawn to absurd masculinity. Plus I wanted to piss a few people off by not caring about the “cool” house of cards built during the 90s. Dan’s drive was a bit clearer: win an Ivor Novello. We both achieved our goals. But the latter was really significant. When we won the Ivor Novello songwriter of the year award, in 2004, we were surrounded by people we adored, and our parents were there. We spent the whole night looking at each other and going: “Yay!” At that point, everything I did was determined by drug addiction. It was really damaging; we would have achieved much more if I’d been able to keep it together. I can remember doing interviews and just about holding on to being conscious. I was white knuckling it and it affected all my relationships – the most important one being the one with my brother. When I went into recovery, I had to leave the whole infrastructure around the Darkness, the lifestyle and people – everything was a trigger. My heart would have exploded if I didn’t. My brother and I went through a two-year period of not really speaking. That was after I left the Darkness. The news didn’t go down well, which is fair enough. But blood is thicker than water; everyone knew we would be all right. We just needed a bit of time. These days, my relationship with Dan is fearsome. We’re the Hawkins brothers. People are terrified of us. And rightly so. Dan Hawkins You can see how different we are from the picture. We’ve been like that throughout our lives. It’s why we get along so well. Physically, we aren’t alike, and Justin is an extrovert while I have moments of being introverted – although on a big night out, you probably wouldn’t realise that. At school, Justin was two years above me. We got teased for having long hair, but Justin and his friends were also really hard. It was a weird situation where the geeks ruled. He protected me, but we didn’t get along a lot of the time. It was like a boiling pot. Between the ages of 14 and 16, I didn’t speak to my parents, apart from some grunting noises. Typical teenager, blasting music in his bedroom. Justin, however, got on famously with Mum and Dad. When he left home at 16, we became mates again. The pressure was gone, and I’d visit his little hovel in Lowestoft and make music. At one of our early Darkness gigs in London, it was the first time Justin wore a white catsuit with thunderbolts on the legs. He got changed into it in the toilet backstage. We all thought it looked amazing. Within three minutes of the first song he’d sweated straight through it. You could see everything. I had terrible stage fright at the start. Then one day we were playing in some small but pretty packed club and I looked up and saw that no one was looking at me. They were all looking at Justin. I realised, what am I worrying about? After that I could just crack on with playing the guitar. I was really thankful. When I was 31, I had testicular cancer, and I had to have one of my testicles removed. While I was recovering, I stayed away from my family, so I was going to get chemo on my own. Justin said: “I’ll go. I’ll take you.” I remember sitting there, in the hospital and wondering how many people realise that this bond is still there between us. People didn’t even know we were friends. It was a tender moment. Tender for weeks! When I got married in 2014, Justin was my best man. He organised the greatest stag I could ever have imagined in Switzerland. When it came to the big day, he made a speech. “You know, Dan’s had a tough time, he’s recovered from cancer,” he said, and the room went quiet. “I don’t know about you, but I often wondered what happened to the other testicle … Well, don’t worry, I found him! Say hello to Tezza!” Justin then brings out a homemade, Jim Henson-style puppet testicle with his own hair sprinkled on it and sings a duet of the Spice Girls’ 2 Become 1 with it. It was the best thing I’ve seen. Justin and I did have a moment when we needed to be apart. When the band split, it was similar to when Justin left home at 16. It got to boiling point – puff – then we came back stronger. Now we have proper life rules in place that will enable us to avoid reaching boiling point again. So get used to this pair of prats.If you are going to make a statement, you might as well make it emphatic. That has been the attitude reflected in Usman Khawaja’s feats in Sydney at the fourth Ashes Test as he followed his first-innings 137 with an unbeaten 101. He joined the rare club of batters to have made twin centuries in a Test, alongside 16 other Australians, and in scoring his 10th Test ton he drew level with Lindsay Hassett, Bob Simpson and Simon Katich. The first century was the work of an opener, even if in this match he was required to bat at No 5. Khawaja left the ball with dedication, waited out good spells and was restrained in his shot selection before gradually expanding it. He faced 260 balls at a strike rate of just over 50. His only close call was a fast edge from the left-arm spinner, Jack Leach, that hit the wicketkeeper’s leg and bounced clear. His second hundred was the work of Khawaja circa 2016, when he made 104 not out in the semi-final and 70 in the final of the Big Bash to carry the Sydney Thunder to the title. In the second innings in Sydney he settled himself in with 35 off 74 balls before tea and after launched 66 off 64 balls. He played the reverse sweep to crisp perfection, deflected lap shots over his shoulder and smashed slog-sweeps off the spinners into the stands. There was little pressure, coming in 190 runs ahead against a team whose batting has struggled, but he drove Australia’s advantage all the way home. In doing so, Khawaja has introduced a very interesting selection quandary for those running his team. Four days ago, he was supposed to be a one-match gap-filler while Travis Head sat out the required time after a positive Covid test. Even scoring a hundred in the first innings did not mean that was going to change. But scoring two in two makes it far harder to leave out Khawaja for the game in Hobart. That said, leaving out Head would be harsh as well. He made 152 in the Brisbane Test to set up Australia’s first win, putting them on a path to an Ashes win in straight sets. At 28 years old, Head has been heavily invested in as Australia’s future. Having just turned 35, Khawaja is something else. But age should not exclude him. Chris Rogers had a profitable Test career from that age onwards, Adam Voges much the same. Khawaja, enjoying a mastery of his game, could still have several years to offer. Retaining him need not necessarily be a straight shootout with Head. The two centuries in Sydney constitute the entirety of Khawaja’s experience batting at No 5. He is a career first drop or opener, internationally and domestically. It is illustrative of England’s series that by the end of day four their openers had made 187 runs for 14 dismissals, while Khawaja had made 238 for one. It is also illustrative to put Khawaja’s tally from two innings against Marcus Harris with 179 from seven. Harris does not deserve to be punted in his own right – his 76 in Melbourne was an important innings – and he has looked better since then. But he is strongly inclined to loose dismissals for middling scores, of which his nick behind from Leach for 27 to end his match here was just the latest. If the question is purely who is the better player between he and Khawaja, there are no grounds for debate. At 29 years old with 14 Tests behind him, Harris cannot keep being defined as a project player. None of which means Khawaja is some batting god. He was dropped in England in 2019 after underwhelming returns from many opportunities over a decade. By then he had played in four Ashes series with an average of 29. He had played three great innings – in Dubai against Pakistan, Adelaide against South Africa, and Wellington against New Zealand – but had a lot of uninspiring efforts in between. What he is now, though, is a player in supreme form, full of confidence, evidently more relaxed in the middle than he has ever been, having built an understanding of his game from experience while retaining the physical capability of delivering it. That he found a method against spin in the UAE in 2018 means he could be significant in the coming year with nine Tests to be played in Asia. It is possible Khawaja will not play in the fifth Test. Team management backed Harris before the series to go the distance. Head has claims to return. But under the chair of selectors, George Bailey, Australia have shown a more flexible approach to picking the right players for the right conditions. Khawaja may not be opening in Hobart and will probably take that in his stride. But when Australia take the field in Karachi in March, it is very hard to believe he will not be among those running on.Housing campaigners and MPs have cautiously welcomed plans to pressure developers to cover the cost of removing dangerous cladding from buildings taller than 11 metres, but warned they do not go far enough. In an apparent climbdown, the housing secretary Michael Gove is expected to announce that leaseholders in buildings between 11 and 18 metres (36-60ft) tall will no longer have to take out loans to cover costs. Instead, Gove will try to make developers pay £4bn, according to a leaked Treasury letter reported by BBC Newsnight. Under rules introduced in England after the Grenfell Tower fire killed 72 people in 2017, only leaseholders in buildings of more than 18 metres can access grants to replace unsafe cladding. However, excitement will be tempered as the Treasury letter that states approval for funding applies only to fixing cladding. That means leaseholders who are facing bills for defective fire compartmentation, fire doors and other non-cladding faults still face bills and uncertainty over whether mortgage companies will lend against their homes so they are sellable. Also, there is no new money. The £4bn may all come from existing housing department budgets, according to the letter. In addition, it only threatens a tax on developers or legal action – both of which have been largely unsuccessful in getting developers to pay to fix defective buildings so far. Giles Grover, the co-leader of the End Our Cladding Scandal campaign, said it was “another step in the right direction” but that they needed to see the detail as well as action on the ground. “You can talk about extra funding and positive steps but it’s taking so long to make the buildings safe.” He also called for legal protection for leaseholders. “We need legislation to protect us, that’s how we’ll get certainty.” Grover said his group was meeting Gove on Monday morning when he said they would “see what he has to say”. He said that in Gove’s short time in the role he had done considerably more than his predecessor Robert Jenrick, but warned: “Still we need to see the money on the ground getting out.” Another campaign spokesperson, Paul Afshar, said he welcomed the news but said the “devil’s in the detail”. “Obviously it’s welcome news. I myself live in a building that’s under 18 metres and previously there was nothing in place in terms of financial support … I’m cautiously optimistic about it. We need to see the exact detail on it in terms of the scope of what it’s going to cover and how much money is going to be put aside.” Steph Pike, a lawyer, leaseholder and campaigner, tweeted: “This is another announcement with no real substance. How is Gove going to ‘make developers pay’ without legislating for it? What about non-cladding fire safety defects? Who pays for them? More spin. More words. No real action.” The leaked letter to Gove, from chief secretary to the Treasury, Simon Clarke, said loans for smaller buildings would be replaced by a “limited grant scheme”. “You may use a high-level ‘threat’ of tax or legal solutions in discussions with developers as a means to obtaining voluntary contributions from them,” it read. “I am pleased to see that you acknowledge the principle that the taxpayer should not be on the hook for further costs of remediation. To reiterate, my approval of this new package for 11-18m buildings is therefore conditional on no further exchequer funding.” Peter Bottomley, a senior Conservative MP and co-chair of the all-party parliamentary group on leasehold and commonhold reform, urged the government to go further. “From what we’re hearing, progress is being made – it’s not enough,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “We need to get the money, spend it properly, and we need to overcome the hurdle” of indemnity funding so landlords can make claims from developers and manufacturers, he said. The government must tell insurance companies to “come to the table with, say, £8bn and then innocent leaseholders will live in homes which are safe and saleable”. Matthew Pennycook, Labour’s shadow housing minister, said: “Any new measures that help resolve the building safety crisis are welcome, but on the face of it these appear far less significant than they sound. “Nothing on non-cladding defects, no new developer levy and the position on leaseholder liability unchanged. We await further detail.” An announcement on the measures is expected on Monday. A department for levelling up, housing and communities spokesperson said: “We would not comment on speculation.”When Damien Hirst bought a historic manor in the Cotswolds he had grand plans. The crumbling 19th-century Toddington Manor, which the world’s richest artist bought for £3m in 2005, would be restored to its former glory, turned into his family home and a spectacular gallery for his personal art collection. But 17 years after its purchase, the property remains uninhabited and covered in scaffolding and tarpaulin. Locals have branded it an “eyesore,” a “white blob” and “a blight on the countryside”. Frustrated local residents in Toddington, 10 miles east of Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire, are now taking matters in their own hands. This week the parish council will meet to come up with a plan that it hopes will force Hirst to finally make good on his promise to restore the property. “We want to see what can be done, if anything at all,” said Toddington parish council’s chairman, Nigel Parker. “It is one of the biggest eyesores in the area. People are fed up with it. Damien Hirst has had this property for 17 years now, but it is still clad in scaffolding and tarpaulin, and as far as we can tell there is no restoration in sight.” Hirst found fame in 1992 when his pickled tiger shark proved to be the centrepiece of the acclaimed Young British Artists exhibition at the Saatchi gallery. A sliced cow and calf, and pickled sheep followed in quick succession, but Hirst’s twin obsession with death and publicity perhaps reached its apogee with his controversial 2007 platinum skull encrusted with diamonds, which he claimed sold for £50m. Hirst’s work – and the prices it sold for – became synonymous with the new wealth of the late 1990s and 2000s. This reached a climax in September 2008 with the sale of more than 200 of his artworks at Sotheby’s for a total of $200m – on the same day that Lehman Brothers collapsed, sparking a global financial crisis. When Hirst bought the sprawling estate in Gloucestershire, which bankrupted the family that built it, locals were told that it was destined to be his family home and a spectacular gallery for his personal art collection. But in the wake of his split in 2012 from his long-term partner Maia Norman, the mother of his three sons, the project has stalled, with locals complaining they have been kept in the dark. The property is on Historic England’s “at risk” register and the heritage organisation said it was intending to work with Tewkesbury borough council “to encourage the owner” to press ahead with the restoration. Malle Hague, who lives near the manor, said: “I wish he would bloody well get on with it. It would be nice if he could at least camouflage this white blob. He’s an artist – he could just paint it. “It is a blight on the countryside. This is an area of outstanding natural beauty but you can see this for miles. At the start he did a lot of good work but this has gone on too long now.” Completed in 1840, Toddington Manor took 21 years to construct. It was built by Charles Hanbury-Tracy MP, later Lord Sudeley, and the scale of the undertaking would eventually bankrupt his family in 1893. Composed of a quadrangle and surrounded by cloisters, the house has a large entrance hall, a grand staircase, a 40ft-long oak-panelled dining room, and two libraries, with intricate stone and wood carving. It is one of the earliest examples of what became known as Victorian gothic, and when Sudeley helped to select Charles Barry to rebuild the Houses of Parliament, the architect reportedly took Toddington as one of his models. Councillor John Evetts, chair of Tewkesbury council’s planning committee, said: “It’s been a hell of a long time since he bought it. I am told Hirst has never applied for planning permission. “As the chair of the local planning committee, as far as I am aware he has never spoken to us. I work in restoration and conservation and I think it could cost £50m to restore and still not be finished. As far as I am aware there have been no further planning approaches or further permissions granted. It appears he has just abandoned it or got bored with it. It is the biggest white elephant I have ever seen. ‘Folly’ would be a good word.” Bert Alvis, a local farmer and parish councillor, complained that his repeated inquiries to the estate management company had failed to elicit any answers. “I have asked the agent, which manages the estate, and they have no idea. We heard he was going to use it as a private house and private gallery for his collection,” he said. “But after the crash, everything stopped. It is odd: no one is telling anybody anything.” Last year it emerged that the artist, who is reportedly worth £315m, had taken out £15m in Covid loans and furloughed staff at taxpayers’ expense. Although his main company, Prints and Editions, has £183m of art on its books, it has failed to turn a profit since 2016, and Hirst has closed many of his companies in the last four years. In 2018 it was revealed that Hirst was closing down his high-profile restaurant in Ilfracombe, Devon, just a year after he had shut his gallery in the town. This was billed as part of a restructuring of his sprawling Science Ltd empire but also drew some local criticism that the artist had left some properties vacant. Hirst has built up a formidable property portfolio since he exploded on to the British art scene. Toddington Manor, however, was meant to be his piece de resistance. A Tewkesbury council spokesman said it was “satisfied there are intentions to repair it”. But he added that there were no current planning application listed and “we are not aware of any work that has taken place”. Parker, chair of the parish council, said: “After the meeting we may write to Damien Hirst and his representatives, or it may be that Tewkesbury will. But, either way, it is time this was resolved.” Hirst’s representative did not respond to requests for a comment.School’s outre Perhaps every generation gets the teen TV show made by adults it needs. In 1991, we had Brandon taking ecstasy at a rave before things went south in Beverly Hills 90210 (lessons were learned). Now we have Euphoria, HBO’s high-school drama with more visceral drugs, sex, violence and trauma (and less learning). Superstar-in-the-making Zendaya is in the lead again. The Holland funnel Elsewhere, Zendaya is reportedly dating her Spider-Man co-star, Tom Holland. The English actor is the son of comedian and author Dominic Holland, who through Eclipsed, his blog/book/stand-up show, charted in self-deprecating (and in no way seething) terms what it’s like to be upstaged by your own child. I got you Pegged! Holland (Dominic) was nominated for the Perrier award at the Edinburgh fringe in 1996; he lost out to the acerbic surrealism of Dylan Moran. The Irish comic occasionally acts, too. In 2007, he featured in the Simon Pegg vehicle Run Fatboy Run, unexpectedly directed by David Schwimmer. “Disappointing,” declared Peter Bradshaw. Join the hunt Simon Pegg, of course, now has a role as a Tom Cruise sidekick in the Mission: Impossible films. Also in Cruise World is Vanessa Kirby, as the villainous White Widow, first seen in 2018’s Fallout. One fan site describes her character as an “affable arms dealer” – you don’t see a lot of those. Last year Kirby earned an Oscar nomination for her role in harrowing drama Pieces of a Woman (Netflix). Bringing it all back home Among the producers of Pieces of a Woman was one Sam Levinson. He’s a busy fella: during the pandemic, he knocked out Malcolm &amp; Marie (Netflix), with John David Washington and Zendaya having a domestic row. More pressingly he’s been making … Euphoria, whose long-awaited, Covid-delayed second season is finally upon us (Sky Atlantic/Now TV). Pairing notes Watch In Diner, Sam Levinson’s father, director Barry Levinson, made one of the great films of the 1980s for college-age young people sitting around and talking crap. Eat Zendaya and Holland Jr have been spotted eating in Harlem hot spot Melba’s, which serves up southern classics. Chef Melba Wilson’s fried chicken and eggnog waffles is a cult favourite.Throughout December, clusters of green and yellow symbols began to festoon Twitter feeds like festive decorations. The posts related to a simple, free online word game, Wordle, which has become a must-play trend in the past few weeks, with hundreds of thousands of people proudly sharing their daily score on social media. The game has the elegance of a daily newspaper puzzle – a five-minute conundrum that slots pleasingly into even the most harried routine: guess the five-letter word. You have six attempts. After each attempt the game marks your guess. Letters are marked green if they are present and correctly placed, yellow if they are present but incorrectly placed, and grey if they do not appear in the target word at all. As in the board games Battleship or Mastermind, you can use this meagre information to improve your next guess and close in on the target word. (Infuriatingly, the game offers no indication as to whether a letter appears more than once in the target word, a design choice that inspires howls of online anguish whenever, say, a “TRUSS” appears.) According to the New York Times, Wordle was created last year by a Brooklyn-based software engineer, Josh Wardle, as a gift for his partner. The game soon became a favourite among his wider family. Then its popularity steadily spread across the internet, from 90 players on 1 November to 300,000 on 2 January. The simplicity is the charm. One Wordle is released each day, and it’s the same one for everyone around the world. There are no advertisements, no niggling notifications begging you to return each morning, no novelty skins with which to alter the appearance of your letters, and no offer coupons in exchange for recommending the game to friends. With so much traffic, the incentive to profit from Wordle’s success is considerable. But the game’s rejection of the capitalistic systems that define so many video games today has a refreshing, innocent quality. Long may Wordle remain so pure.Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, KG, GCVO, CD, ADC, turns 62 next month. It is long past the age at which a man is expected to stop being a cause of concern and embarrassment to his parents. And yet Andrew, who is said to be the Queen’s favourite child, has exposed his mother to the greatest threat to the royal family’s reputation in living memory. As he awaits the decision of a New York judge, Lewis Kaplan, in the sex assault case brought by Virginia Giuffre, the prince finds himself in the deeply unedifying position of trying to evade court with a secret silencing deal struck by his late friend and convicted sex offender, Jeffrey Epstein. The agreement, signed in 2009, stated that in exchange for being paid $500,000, Giuffre, then using her maiden name of Roberts, would “release … and forever discharge … second parties and any other person or entity who could have been included as a potential defendant … from all, and all manner of, action and actions of Virginia Roberts, including state or federal, cause and causes of action”. Giuffre maintains that in 2001 when she was 17 she was trafficked by Epstein and his sometime girlfriend Ghislaine Maxwell to have sex with the prince on three occasions – once in Maxwell’s house in Belgravia, where the infamous photograph was taken of her with the then 42-year-old prince’s hand around her waist, on the second occasion at Epstein’s mansion in New York and finally on Epstein’s private island, Little St James in the US Virgin Islands, with a group of other girls. The prince denies all allegations and says he has no recollection of ever having met Giuffre. The prince’s lawyers have taken an aggressive approach to protecting their client. They first argued that the court summons had not been properly served, then attempted to get the case thrown out on the grounds that Giuffre doesn’t live in the US. Now they are seeking their client’s salvation with the grim fact that he qualifies as a potential defendant in any sex abuse case connected to Epstein. In other words, it appears his possible culpability is being used as his defence. Even if this legal loophole works, and Kaplan dismisses the case, it will be an outcome that will not clear the prince’s name, which his friends insist is his prime aim. Instead, added to all those letters that come after his title, will be a toxic question mark. And that’s the best-case scenario for the prince. If, instead, Kaplan gives the go-ahead for the case to be heard, then the prince would be obliged to make a deposition and then, in the autumn, appear in court. He could in theory refuse to do either, but again the optics would be disastrous. However, if he did go to court, the world’s media would be offered a daily diet of sordid details. And if he were to lose the case, courtiers suggest he may no longer be able to travel internationally, for fear of criminal extradition. As the royal expert and author Robert Lacey puts it: “The prospect of Virginia Giuffre’s allegations against a senior member of the Windsors being aired in court and reported around the world is just impossible to contemplate from the point of view of the royal family, and I’m quite sure there would be some settlement out of court.” Given that Giuffre has waited over 20 years for recognition of the damage that she says was done to her, that settlement would presumably involve a large financial figure – which raises the question of who will pay it. The prince has spent the better part of his adult life cosying up to the super-rich, precisely because he lacks that kind of money himself. So again his mother, who is thought to have bankrolled his defence, would be his benefactor. That brings into the spotlight the contested question of whether her wealth is private or a product of her position as head of state, and therefore subject to some kind of taxpayer oversight. Monarchists insists her private wealth and her public dispensation are completely separate things, but any settlement paid by the Queen would provide republicans with ballistic ammunition. What seems extraordinary is that this conclusion has been moving steadily closer for more than a decade, and the prince, and all those he has repeatedly reassured of his innocence, have been frozen in a state of denial, just hoping that it will all go away. Catherine Mayer, the author of a biography of Prince Charles and co-founder of the Women’s Equality party, says that Buckingham Palace did “something very stupid” when the scandal first surfaced in 2011. Shortly after he was photographed with Epstein in 2010 strolling in Central Park, New York, following the American’s release from prison on charges of procuring a minor for prostitution, Andrew was removed from his position as international trade envoy and redeployed on other matters, including as a royal business guru with the Pitch@Palace initiative. Mayer believes that decision was symptomatic of a wish to sidestep the issue rather than confront it. “The whole story is a genuine tragedy because of all the lives it has ruined,” she says. “But there is also a soap opera quality to it in that you see characters ignoring things, of trying to cover them up in the belief that they will make things better, and you, as the viewer, know that they’re going to get worse. I’ve had that feeling watching this.” One problem, says Mayer, is that there has been no comprehensive strategy across the royal family on what to do. Although its members talk about the family as “the firm”, lending the idea of disciplined business entity, this, says Mayer, is a misconception. “It has always been, and increasingly in latter years, not one institution but a series of institutions or courts and households frequently in conflict with each other,” she says. Royal observers note that staff working for Prince Charles and Prince William have briefed against Andrew. A mixture of the Queen’s protectiveness, the wary exasperation of other royal households and Andrew’s stubborn resistance to sound advice, left him to forge his own ad hoc strategy. It resulted in his fateful decision to put his side of the story across in the excruciating November 2019 Newsnight interview with Emily Maitlis. As a textbook example of how not to do damage limitation it is unlikely to be surpassed any time soon. “You saw how completely untethered he is to outside reality,” says Mayer. Looking back at that disastrously revealing encounter, it is notable how often the prince used Maxwell to try to put some distance between himself and Epstein (who hosted Andrew on many occasions and gave large sums of money to his ex-wife, Sarah Ferguson, and possessed 16 separate phone numbers for the prince). At one point he describes the financier as a “plus one”. But now that Maxwell herself has been convicted of sex trafficking a minor, among other serious charges, it leaves the prince with no one to saddle with his poor judgment of character. In among a catalogue of evasions and failing memories, his one line of consistent defence is that he was not aware of anything untoward going on in any of the Epstein or Maxwell households at which he stayed. For Lacey, among many other observers, this is simply not a credible proposition. “He consorted for 10 years with a couple whose lifestyle revolved around the sexual exploitation by Epstein of vulnerable women and underage girls, a number of them trafficked by Maxwell. The overtness of this predatory way of life was apparently inescapable. What do you imagine when you travel in a private plane nicknamed the ‘Lolita Express’? And then you invite these degenerates to stay at Balmoral?” When challenged on his apparent blindness by Maitlis, the prince came up with an explanation that Mayer sees as a self-indictment rather than exoneration. He effectively said that he lived among servants all the time and was used to not taking any notice of them – even, presumably, if they were scantily clad teenage girls. “It shows his extraordinary arrogance and disconnection,” says Mayer, “and he unintentionally spoke a truth that is deeply damaging to him and the wider institution.” In fact his brusque manner with servants is well-documented. A senior footman once told a reporter who worked undercover at Buckingham Palace that on waking the prince “the response can easily be ‘fuck off’ as good morning”. Of course, Andrew would not be the first obnoxious royal, nor the first dissolute prince. The institution’s history is full of badly behaved characters. But we are now living in the third decade of the 21st century, in a time of transition not just for the royal family, as they prepare for the prospect of a new monarch, but society at large. Ten years ago, in the pre-#MeToo days, a movie mogul such as Harvey Weinstein could terrorise and abuse women with impunity. His friend Epstein all but got away with rape and sex trafficking thanks to the political influence he was able to exert. And back in 2011 it may well have seemed that Giuffre’s allegations against Andrew were destined to remain the outlandish cry of an inconsequential person, an unprovable rumour that would fade along with all the other neglected claims made against the rich and powerful. Even a photograph taken inside Maxwell’s home could be dismissed as fake – although how could a young woman get access to an image of the prince that no one else has ever seen to put it in a mocked-up picture? It never did add up, and with the passage of time, the attempt to remove himself from that troubling scene in his friend’s house looks more and more like a desperate tactic. Just as the prince’s claim that he stayed with Epstein for four days to tell him that he could no longer be his friend out of a sense of “honour” was always far-fetched and miserably self-serving. It seems unlikely after all these years that the prince will change his story, and if there is a settlement it will doubtless come with a non-acceptance of any personal responsibility. Yet this is unquestionably a watershed case. It’s hard to imagine that any royal will again be afforded the indulgence that has accompanied Andrew around the globe. Although the monarchy will survive this current crisis, it may well do so in a more streamlined version with fewer passengers. The days of overgrown playboys trading on the family name in exchange for paid-for company and pay-offs to ex-wives should be numbered. And if they are it will be in no small part due to the efforts of a group of women from largely humble backgrounds who refused to back down in the face of their abusers. “I am looking forward to vindicating my rights as an innocent victim and pursuing all available recourse,” Giuffre said seven years ago. “I’m not going to be bullied back into silence.” As even Prince Andrew would have to concede, she has certainly not allowed that to happen.In college I worked as a tour guide on the Costa del Sol. It was a weird scene. I saw some wild stuff; some violence I’d like to forget. I lived in one hotel room with four or five people for a while. I worked in a discotheque. But it inspired my first attempt at really writing. I needed to get it all down. I think most writers have impostor syndrome. On the one hand you think, “I suck, I’ve got nothing to say, this isn’t working at all,” and the next moment you have the hubris to say, “I’m going to write 500 pages and people are going to pay me to read it.” My advice for writers? Just get it out. You can fix bad pages. You can’t fix no pages. There’s a lot of me in my stories. No writer likes to admit this, but when I started my Myron Bolitar series a lot of it was wish fulfilment. He’s smarter than me, faster, stronger. I played basketball; he was a better player than me. As the series went on, I created a tension between us. His parents are alive. Mine died young. His dream in life is to get married and have kids. I did that. We’re jealous of each other. I used to write in the back of Ubers. I can’t write in the same place for very long. I basically finished The Stranger over three weeks of Uber rides. Then that stopped working so I tried something else. Planes were it for a while. Not that I was taking planes everywhere, but I was drawn to long flights. Generally speaking, I like being disturbed a bit. It makes me focus harder. I don’t know any writer who doesn’t like being alone. I’m an introvert. A socially adept one, but an introvert all the same. I can be fine in company, but when I go home I’m exhausted. I need to not see anyone for a while. If you’re a person who constantly wants people around you, writing probably isn’t for you. Only one of my kids had any interest or talent in writing. That’s Charlotte, she’s a really good scriptwriter. She’s worked with me on my Netflix adaptations. The rest are all science-based, like their mother, a physician. One of my daughters is majoring in computational biology. I don’t even know what that means. My son just got a job in flight control at Nasa. I like bragging about that. I’m really proud. The importance of my Jewishness changes. I’m secular, but it’s the world I grew up in. It’s in my makeup. I view my Jewishness as cultural. There’s a weird deal with Jews where they will define themselves as Jewish even if they don’t buy a word. You don’t see too many Catholics or Christians or anybody Muslim saying, “Oh, I’m a Catholic, but I don’t buy a word of it!” I can’t tell you the secret to writing a great mystery other than to say I’m always asking, “What if?” It’s a fair criticism that I twist too much. If you don’t like a twist, I’m really not your guy! But really what I’m trying to do is make every paragraph, every page, every sentence and every word more compelling. How can I make you want to turn the page even more? • This article was amended on 9 January 2022. Coben was referring to his Myron Bolitar series, not his “Harlan Coben” series as stated in an earlier version. Stay Close is available on Netflix nowDancing, ceremony, aural wallpaper: the uses of music are legion. Often, though, succour is key, a kind of aural hug you could elevate to the 10th power when it comes to cover versions. It would be limiting to cast Cat Power’s three albums of other people’s songs as mere public acts of self-soothing – Georgia-born, New York-seasoned, Miami-dwelling Chan Marshall, three decades in the game, is far too versatile and canny a musician for that. She has eight albums of her own soft-touch incantation under her belt, and a particular aesthetic all her own. Her sense of space, the way she overdubs and layers her vocals, her predilection for trance-like repetition and the gauzy veils she places between the listener and her band’s instruments, her midlife repositioning as a soul singer of soothing warmth: all attest to Marshall’s ongoing artistic imperatives and technical nous. But through The Covers Record (2000), Jukebox (2008) and now Covers, there is a sense that, for Marshall, other people’s songs provide not just tunes to tune up to, but sustenance and fellow-feeling. These tracks seem very much the aural companions to a life that has rarely been straightforward, even by itinerant musician standards: bouts of ill health, a breakdown. It’s possible Marshall has always multitracked her vocals to feel less alone. Now, she has a particularly sonorous band too – veterans of her standout 2018 album, Wanderer – making this record the best-played and arguably the classiest of the series. If there’s a recurrent theme to this set of diverse covers, it’s probably drinking. By her own admission, Marshall spent the early to mid-00s “living inside a bottle”. On Covers, she pours herself into a couple of famous barfly’s laments. It takes a lot of courage to tackle the Pogues; Marshall takes on A Pair of Brown Eyes, in which two men are wrecked by alcohol, lost love and the vicissitudes of war, armed only with a Mellotron and a couple of microphones. Her own backing vocals maintain a thread of the song’s link to Irish folk. Here Comes a Regular by the Replacements, by contrast, was on the jukebox at Mona’s, the East Village bar Marshall frequented in her 20s. This Cat Power version ditches guitar for piano, making a very sad song about being a regular – the anti-Cheers, if you will – even more bereft. Happily, this brace of songs comes at a time when the singer’s fortunes have been on the up, buoyed up by the success of Wanderer, her rebirth. Dropped by her former label, Marshall found a new one, then garnered mainstream plaudits and received generous dues and support slots from a welter of artists. She’s been tight with Lana Del Rey for some time, a sisterhood reflected on Covers in Marshall’s rendition of Del Rey’s 2017 track White Mustang. The only downside is that few artistic surprises result. Until Woman – Cat Power’s 2018 female-forward track with Del Rey on backing vocals – Marshall rarely mentioned gender in any pointed way. Here, she also covers the extraordinary It Wasn’t God Who Made Honky Tonk Angels, by the postwar country star Kitty Wells, as a slinky, bluesy roll. Although Marshall’s affection for the song dates back to childhood, it has renown too. Written by a man, JD Miller, but owned by Wells, the song despaired at women being forever blamed for the infidelity of men. In 1952 it took Wells to the top of the Billboard country charts, the first woman to get there solo, amid considerable disquiet from the music establishment. Again, pedal steel and the steady pulse of bass retain the song’s country roots. It would be unreasonable to complain about a Cat Power album sounding too much like a Cat Power album, especially when this might well be the most well-rounded and sophisticated of her three outings of homage. Marshall’s tendency to abbreviate and deconstruct songs is one of her outstanding assets as an interpreter. Witness this album’s excellent lead track, Frank Ocean’s Bad Religion, or previously, on Wanderer, her cut-up version of Rihanna’s Stay. Yet Marshall’s pointillist take on Nick Cave’s I Had a Dream, Joe, just emphasising certain lines from the song’s narrative, doesn’t land as convincingly as it might. This record is not samey, exactly. The distance travelled between the Cave cover, or Iggy Pop’s The Endless Sea – all prowly portent – and I’ll Be Seeing You, the closing lament made famous by Billie Holiday, is not insignificant. But the prevailing atmosphere remains one of wistfulness, of lives taking only many left turns. All this is perhaps not surprising, given Marshall’s long-ago backstory and the events of the past 20 or so months. If Wanderer promised more bold artistic statements, Covers pivots on sorely needed understanding. That feeling is relayed in turn to the listener: hugs galore.(Not much) sex in the city And just like that, nobody’s having sex any more. Middle-aged people aren’t having much. Young people aren’t having much. Japanese people aren’t having much. Nor are Brits or Australians or Americans. Over the past decade a number of studies have found a significant decline in sexual activity around the world, the latest example of this being a recent US-focused study showing declines from 2009 to 2018 in all forms of partnered sexual activity and a decline in adolescent masturbation. The researchers, by the way, looked at self-reported information from government surveys among people 14-49 years old; it’s possible that it’s a very different story when it comes to the over-50s. So what’s going on with young and youngish people these days? Why is sexual activity declining? While the study didn’t go into possible underlying factors in much detail – nor did it look at the effects of the pandemic – two of its authors, Debby Herbenic and Tsung-chieh (Jane) Fu, recently shared their hypotheses with Scientific American. The (very technical) summation of the conversation is that a bunch of factors are probably at play. There’s increasing social media and video game use, of course. A decrease in alcohol use could be another factor. Perhaps most interesting and worrying, however, is the researchers’ hypothesis that the mainstreaming of extremely rough sex could be putting a generation of young people off sex altogether. In recent years there’s been a significant normalisation of choking and strangling during sex. Pornography has played a big role in this, but women’s magazines and popular culture (50 Shades of Grey, for example) have also helped to make rough sex “trendy”. Hebernick and Fu told Scientific American that choking or strangling during sex “seems to be a majority behaviour for college-age students”. While in many cases it’s consensual and enjoyed, the researchers note that aggressive sex can also be intimidating. “We don’t know to what extent that may be driving some people to opt out [of sex], but we do know that some people are feeling frightened,” Fu noted. “They could consent to sex, but something like choking might happen without them being asked before.” That’s hardly an unreasonable fear: in 2019 the campaign group We Can’t Consent to This noted that, in the past decade, 30 women and girls have been killed in what was claimed to have been consensual violent sexual activity in the UK. “Rough sex gone wrong” has become a worryingly common cover for femicide. To be clear: there’s nothing wrong with rough sex as long as it’s truly consensual. What’s problematic is when young people learn about sex through porn and think that violence is a normal part of intimacy. Hebernick and Fu’s observations about the normalization of rough sex echo comments that the singer Billie Eilish made last month, about the impacts watching porn from a young age had on her mental health and how it skewed her expectations of what sex should be like. “The first few times I … had sex, I was not saying no to things that were not good,” Eilish said in an interview on the Howard Stern Show. “It was because I thought that’s what I was supposed to be attracted to.” It’s easy to turn the porn industry, which is not exactly known for overly concerning itself with ethics, into a scapegoat for everything that’s wrong with society. But if young people have unhealthy views of sex it can’t simply be blamed on porn – it’s also down to a lack of proper sex education. Between 2002 and 2014, the percentage of schools in the US requiring students to learn about sexuality fell from 67% to 48%. The US government also spent a staggering $2bn on abstinence-only programs between 1982 and 2017. If young people are learning about sex through porn don’t just blame the porn industry: ask yourself why they’re not getting better information elsewhere. Celibate man criticizes millennials for not having kids Pope Francis has chosen to start 2022 off on a combative front by telling everyone that choosing to have pets instead of kids is “selfish”. Ah yes, choosing not to bring a child into an overpopulated world that is careening towards climate catastrophe is the height of selfishness! I know the pope probably isn’t too familiar with the current costs of childcare but he might want to look into just how expensive having a kid is these days. Women 32% more likely to die after operation by male surgeon Women are 15% more liable to suffer a bad outcome and 32% more likely to die when operated on by a male surgeon, according to a new study of 1.3 million patients. Men experienced no differences whether they were treated by a male or female surgeon. First female judge nominated for Pakistan’s supreme court Justice Ayesha Malik, who outlawed virginity tests for female rape survivors last year, is almost certainly going to be appointed to the supreme court after her nomination was confirmed on Thursday. Ghislaine Maxwell’s lawyers say they will request a retrial Two jurors from Maxwell’s trial recently told reporters they were sexually abused as children – information they might not have revealed in pre-trial questionnaires. These revelations now threaten to upend the guilty verdicts returned against Maxwell on sex trafficking and conspiracy charges. It’s time to turn the spotlight on all the powerful men involved with Epstein It hasn’t gone unnoticed that a woman (Ghislaine Maxwell) is the only person who seems to be facing any real consequences for her associations with Jeffrey Epstein. She was found guilty of sex-trafficking charges, but who was she sex-trafficking the girls to, eh? Poor old Prince Andrew has to sell his £17m Swiss chalet Perhaps it’s wrong to say that no men are facing consequences for their Epstein associations: it’s been reported that Prince Andrew is trying to sell his ski house to pay his legal bills. It seems that mummy will not be paying off the Duke of York’s legal defence in a civil lawsuit brought by Epstein victim Virginia Giuffre. Arrests after fake auction of Muslim women activists in India Three people have been arrested in connection with an app that shared photos of more than 100 prominent Muslim women and offered them “for sale” as servants. A large number of the women targeted were critics of the ruling Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) government. Violent Hindu nationalism has been growing under the prime minister, Narendra Modi, and Muslim women have become a particular target. Reality TV star who made a fortune selling farts in a jar now selling fart NFTs Stephanie Matto, who apparently made $50,000 a week by bottling her emissions and selling them to weirdos, had to pivot her business after ending up in hospital from eating so many high-fiber foods. The fartrepreneur is now selling non-fungible tokens. (So, by the way, is Melania Trump.) Very healthy and functional economy we’ve got going on. The week in pawtriarchy Scientists recently stuck headphones on a bunch of dogs, put them in an MRI scanner, and played them excerpts from The Little Prince. They then deduced that dogs may be able to tell the difference between speech patterns and can recognise different languages. Good smart boys! No doubt Big Feline is already feeling threatened by this study and next week we’ll learn that cats can do algebra. • This article was amended on 10 January 2022 to remove an erroneous reference to the pope’s residence. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for order – and is far better value than a jar full of farts or an NFT of Melania’s headTed Cruz used Twitter on Friday to accuse Joe Biden of signaling “weakness and surrender to Putin” over Ukraine – but the Texas senator could not escape a crisis of his own, stoked by widespread accusations of weakness and surrender in the face of the Fox News host Tucker Carlson, over remarks about the deadly Capitol attack. On Wednesday, a day before the first anniversary of the attack by supporters of Donald Trump attempting to overturn the election, Cruz described “a violent terrorist attack on the Capitol, where we saw the men and women of law enforcement demonstrate incredible courage”. A police officer who confronted the rioters was one of five people who died. Nonetheless, having stoked opprobrium in circles where the riot is played down or denied, Cruz went on Carlson’s primetime show. Carlson, widely condemned for promoting conspiracy theories about 6 January, is rumoured to have presidential ambitions in competition with Cruz. He went fiercely on the offensive. “You called this a ‘terror attack’ when by no definition was it a terror attack,” Carlson said. “That’s a lie. You told that lie on purpose, and I’m wondering why you did.” Cruz said: “The way I phrased things yesterday, it was sloppy and it was, frankly, dumb.” Carlson said: “I don’t buy that. Whoa, whoa, whoa. I don’t buy that … I do not believe that you used that accidentally. I just don’t.” For Cruz, the interview got worse from there. The commentariat duly piled on. From the left, Jim Newell, at Slate, said Cruz had been “groveling for forgiveness” but “all Carlson would do was insist he beg harder. “This was Ted Cruz in maximal damage-control mode. He would only undergo this sort of debasement if he felt he’d made a mistake serious enough to threaten his political career and hamstring his chances in a GOP presidential primary. “It is a Cruz [we have] seen only one other time: the day after his speech at the 2016 Republican National Convention, when he refused to endorse Donald Trump. It took him months to recover his standing among the Republican base after that. “Here, he is perceiving the same level of political threat among the base for having said, merely, that the 6 January riot was a ‘violent terrorist attack’.” Whether Trump runs again or not, Newell wrote, “these will be the politics of the 2024 Republican presidential primary … condemnations of what happened at the Capitol on 6 January will be taboo.” Cruz also took hits from the right. The Republican operative and Trump ally Roger Stone called him “a pandering, philandering asshole”. Ali Alexander, an operative in attempts to overturn the election, said Cruz was “dumb and lying”. Hits came too from the notional centre, from factcheckers in particular. For CNN, Daniel Dale pointed out that far from being “sloppy” on Wednesday, Cruz had called 6 January a terrorist attack at least 17 times before. On air, Carlson ridiculed the idea. “Of all the things that 6 January was,” he said, “it was definitely not a violent terrorist attack. It wasn’t an insurrection. Was it a riot? Sure. It was not a violent terrorist attack. Sorry.” Many disagree. As the New York Times reported, “Congress has enacted a statute that defines domestic terrorism as criminal offenses that are dangerous to human life, lack a foreign nexus and appear to be seeking ‘to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion’.” Mary McCord, a senior national security official in the Obama and Trump administrations, told the paper some of the events of 6 January were therefore “acts of domestic terrorism, and that’s accurate regardless of whether it applies to each individual”. Cruz would seem to agree, writing on Twitter: “I was ONLY talking about the limited number of people who committed violent assaults on police officers. For over a decade, I’ve referred to those who violently attack police officers as terrorists. If you assault a cop you should go to jail.” But he also continued to apologise, to any Fox News viewers who might “misunderstand what I was saying”. Amid the furore, some also chose to consider past statements by Carlson. In the Washington Post, the columnist Greg Sargent pointed out: “Carlson himself has applied the T-label to … leftists, [calling] Black Lives Matter … a ‘terrorist organisation’.”An NHS doctor has challenged Sajid Javid over compulsory vaccines for healthcare workers, telling the health secretary: “I’ve not had a vaccination; I don’t want to have a vaccination.” The scene, which was caught by Sky News cameras, was first broadcast on Friday after Javid visited King’s College hospital in south London. It has been shared extensively on social media by both critics and supporters of vaccine mandates. The government has decided that all NHS staff in England who have direct contact with patients must have had their first dose of a Covid vaccine by 3 February or risk losing their job at the end of March. On Friday, trade union leaders urged the government to delay the new rule, or risk an exodus of thousands of healthcare workers. While on a walkabout at King’s on Friday, Javid had asked doctors and nurses what they thought about government plans to require vaccination for all NHS staff. After a brief silence, Steve James, a consultant anaesthetist who has been working throughout the pandemic, replied: “I’m not happy about that.” James told Javid: “I’ve had Covid at some point, I’ve got antibodies, and I’ve been working on Covid ITUs since the beginning; I have not had a vaccination, I do not want to have a vaccination. The vaccine is reducing transmission only for about eight weeks with Delta. With Omicron it’s probably less. And for that I would be dismissed if I don’t have a vaccine? The science isn’t strong enough.” “That’s your view,” Javid replied. Turning to a group of nurses he added: “And your views?” However, they did not respond. Turning back to James, Javid continued: “I respect that but there are also many different views.” Javid added: “I understand that but obviously we have to weigh all that up for both health and social care and there will always be a debate about it … ” James replied: “Maybe there is an opportunity to reconsider with Omicron and the changing picture, or at least the nuance that will allow doctors who have had antibody exposure, who’ve got antibodies, who haven’t had the vaccination, to not have it, because the protection I’ve got is probably equivalent to someone who is vaccinated.” “Yes, but at some point that will wane,” Javid said. James said: “But if you want to provide protection with a booster you’d have to inject everybody every month. If the protection has worn off for transmission after two months then after a month you’ve still got a bit of protection. But if you want to maintain protection you’re going to need to boost all staff members every single month, which you’re not going to do.” Javid answered his challenge by saying: “We take the very best advice that we can, from vaccine experts.” Half a day after the video was published on Twitter, it had been watched about 1.2m times.At half-time, Millwall’s supporters must have been convinced this was going to be their day. Leading in the south London derby thanks to a howler from the Crystal Palace goalkeeper, Jack Butland, a famous FA Cup upset seemed on the cards. Unfortunately for them Michael Olise had different ideas. A sparkling 13-minute period at the start of the second half when he equalised, hit the post and then set up Jean-Philippe Mateta for the winning goal was more evidence of the 20-year-old’s burgeoning talent. “He was fantastic in the second half,” said Palace’s manager, Patrick Vieira. “He changed the game for us but it was like watching two different players in the first and second half. We know how good he can be so it’s about trying to help him reach that level of consistency.” Apart from reaching the quarter-finals in 2019, Palace’s record in this competition has been awful since they came within nine minutes of beating Manchester United in the 2016 final, having been eliminated in the third round for the past two seasons. With that in mind, Vieira fulfilled his promise to select a strong side that included Conor Gallagher returning from injury. Since Palace’s last trip here nearly nine years ago, Millwall have flirted with the top half of the Championship table but not quite managed to reach the play-offs despite a couple of close things. Their chances of reaching the top flight for the first time since 1990 were not helped by a run of three defeats in their past five league matches and this was a welcome opportunity to make a statement against their more illustrious neighbours. While neither club would describe the other as mortal enemies there is certainly no love lost between teams separated by six miles and there was an intense atmosphere at kick-off. Palace fans set off flares and there was widespread booing from all sections of the home support of those players who took the knee. Homophobic chants were aimed at Gallagher and are likely to be punished while Olise was struck by a bottle as he prepared to take a corner in the second half. Gary Rowett, the Millwall manager, remembered this week how he had been on the end of some beatings against Vieira’s Arsenal during his playing days with Derby, but his side clearly had a gameplan from the start here and they sprang out of the traps. Millwall should have gone ahead in the eighth minute when Benik Afobe blasted wide from close range but the former Arsenal striker would be handed another opportunity soon after. Quite what Butland was contemplating when he decided to take an extra touch under pressure from Tom Bradshaw only the goalkeeper will know and Afobe was a grateful recipient of his weak clearance. Had George Saville made the most of a subsequent chance inside the area then it could have been much worse for the visitors. While Eberechi Eze – making his first start since returning from a lengthy injury layoff – started to grow into the game against his former club after Palace’s lacklustre start it was Vieira who headed down the tunnel feeling frustrated after Saville’s well-timed challenge on the Palace midfielder inside the area went unpunished. Whatever he said during the break clearly had the desired effect. Barely 40 seconds of the second half had elapsed when Gallagher picked out Olise on the right and he unleashed a brilliant curling shot that went in off the far post. The 20-year-old was inches away from doubling his tally and putting Palace in front six minutes later with a carbon copy, only for the ball to bounce off the post and away to safety this time. The loss of the influential Saville to injury left Millwall struggling to hang on and Olise again went close. They could do nothing to stop him turning provider for Mateta as an inch-perfect cross picked out the unmarked Frenchman to complete the turnaround. Mateta celebrated in front of the home fans and was pelted with plastic bottles. Several flares were also set off by the Palace fans, causing a delayed restart. “We conceded two poor goals from our point of view,” said a disappointed Rowett. He abandoned his three-man defence and threw on Mason Bennett in a bid to find a way back into the tie. Substitute Matt Smith’s header in added time was their big chance, but this time Butland was solid.Ed Aarons was our man at the Den this afternoon. His report has landed, so get clicking, good people. Thanks for reading this MBM. Patrick Vieira talks to the telly. “I was happy with the first half but we didn’t use the ball well enough. In the second half, we wanted to win the game to support Jack, because this is the way we want to play and sometimes you make mistakes, but I was really pleased with the character we showed in the second half. We changed the shape in the second half so Olise was wider, and we created a situation where he was in a one versus one. He showed his quality.” Gary Rowett speaks to ITV. “I thought we were pretty good for most of the game. On and off the ball, we were excellent. We conceded a really poor goal in the 46th minute. Olise is a good player and you have to force him onto his right foot. The second goal, again, it’s a ball in the box and a header we have to mark. You can’t give two goals to a Premier League side, and that’s a disappointment.” The outstanding Michael Olise, who has unsurprisingly been named man of the match, speaks to ITV: “It was a tough start to the game. Balls going in the air, fighting. At half-time we said we needed to respond and show our fight, and that’s what we did in the second half. I feel good. Our quality came through. Our manager said to express ourselves, and that’s what we did. The fans have been great, the atmosphere was great.” Palace were much improved in the second half. Michael Olise, who scored one, set up another, and hit the post in a wild 13-minute creative burst, was nothing short of sensational. His actions will have spoilt the day of the piece of work who hit him on the head with a bottle of pop; you’ve gotta love karma. Jack Butland, who gifted Millwall the lead in the first half, probably owes him a debt of gratitude too. The whistle goes, and Crystal Palace are in the hat for the fourth round. 90 min +5: Nope! One more! Space for Bennett down the right. He hooks in for Smith, who rises above Andersen, six yards out, but sends a weak header straight at Butland. That was a great chance for the big man. 90 min +4: Hutchinson meets the corner with a weak header. Butland flops on the ball, and Millwall’s last chance may have come and gone. 90 min +3: The free kick’s sent wide right to Burey, who fizzes a fine low cross through the six-yard box. Any touch, and it’s in. It somehow evades everyone in the middle, and finally deflects out for a corner. 90 min +2: Gallagher steps across Burey and that’s a free kick for Millwall in Palace territory. Malone will take. Everyone lines up just outside the box. 90 min +1: Smith causes some brief panic in the Palace defence, challenging for a long ball on the edge of the box. But Palace regroup well, and eventually Billy Mitchell is forced to run the ball out for a goal kick by his namesake Tyrick. 90 min: Millwall will have five extra minutes in which to rescue their situation. 89 min: A minute of sterile Palace possession. Every second counts. 88 min: Palace make a couple of changes. Schlupp and the marvellous Olise make way for Clyne and Riedewald. 87 min: Billy Mitchell curls one in from the right. It’s a dangerous ball. Guehi flicks a header away from the lurking Cooper. Boateng slides in at the far post but can’t bundle home. So close to taking this to extra time! 85 min: Long is good to continue. 84 min: Olise nearly releases Gallagher down the right. Long slides out to smother. Gallagher accidentally clips the keeper in the mouth. On comes the trainer to see what’s what. 83 min: Butland is booked for timewasting. 82 min: Palace respond by replacing Hughes with the more defensive-minded Milivojevic. 81 min: Millwall swap out their entire front line. Off go Ojo, Adobe and Bradshaw; on come Burey, Boateng and Smith. 80 min: Millwall are winning most of the 50-50s right now. Palace are dropping deeper, looking to hang onto their lead. 78 min: Afobe, his back to goal just inside the Palace box, tees up Bennett, who sidefoots carefully towards the bottom left. No oomph behind it, though, and it’s an easy gather for Butland. 77 min: Ward barges Bennett out on the left, and it’s a free kick in a dangerous position for Millwall, who load the box. Hutchinson sends it in, but it’s cleared well by Ward, mopping up his own mess. 76 min: A couple of crisp, clear C-bombs ring out across the nation on lunchtime ITV. The home fans have their dander up. 74 min: Ojo curls one in from the right. Malone hasn’t gambled, and Gallagher can shepherd the ball out for a goal kick. Millwall are finally asking a couple of questions. 72 min: A game of bagatelle in the Palace box. The ball drops to Afobe, but he can’t send an effort goalward. A little better from the hosts, though. 71 min: A bit of possession for Millwall, but they do very little with it. Palace look set for the fourth round right now, unless the hosts can haul themselves up off the canvas. 69 min: Ojo sends a directionless cross in from the right. Millwall haven’t achieved much in this second half. 67 min: As Olise prepares to take the corner, he’s hit on the head by what looks like a plastic bottle. No harm done to the player, thankfully, but what’s wrong with people? Anyway, nothing comes of the resulting set piece. 66 min: Gallagher sends a deep cross in from the right. McNamara is forced to head behind for a corner. Olise goes over to take it. 64 min: Palace respond with a double change of their own, replacing Eze and Mateta with Benteke and Edouard. No respite for Millwall. 62 min: Millwall make their second change, and this time it’s a tactical one. Bennett comes on to bolster the midfield, replacing centre-back Pearce. 61 min: The restart took a while, incidentally, a result of some dim bulb flinging a flare onto the pitch. Expect plenty of added time at the end of this game. 60 min: What a cross that was. In the first 13 minutes of the second half, Olise has scored one, set up another, and hit the woodwork. The third round of the FA Cup, right here! Olise is borderline unplayable at the moment. Palace break, and Olise is sent scampering down the right. He eases past Cooper, checks, then curls a delicious cross onto Mateta’s head. Mateta can’t miss, and doesn’t, steering a clinical header across Long and into the bottom left. That’s a lovely goal. 56 min: Local lad Billy Mitchell is booked for a cynical clip on Gallagher’s heel. 55 min: Speaking of Selhurst, here’s a reminder that there are no replays in this year’s FA Cup, a consequence of this goddamned pandemic. This tie will be decided today, after extra time and penalties if necessary. 54 min: Olise versus Malone out on the right, take three. This time, having made space for yet another shot, his curler, aimed for the top left, sails harmlessly over the bar. 53 min: Kieftenbeld balloons a long-distance effort miles over the bar. That one’s already halfway to Selhurst Park. 51 min: Olise is this close to making a carbon copy of his goal. He swans in from the right with panache, leaves Malone in his wake again, and curls a shot across Long and onto the far post. This time the ball bounces clear, rather than in. So unlucky, but what a sensational six minutes he’s had! 50 min: Saville has tweaked something and can’t continue. He trudges off glumly, to be replaced by Kieftenbeld. 48 min: That was a peach of a finish, though Malone may reflect that he backed off far too eagerly. Incidentally, Mateta was half a yard offside during the build-up, and in the Premier League, VAR would have almost certainly chalked that off. But there’s no VAR here. A mere 47 seconds into the second half, Palace are level. And what an equaliser! Olise is given too much space down the right by Malone. He enters the box, switches his feet, and sends a glorious left-foot curler across Long and off the far post and in. The sweetest of strikes! Millwall get the second half underway. Some head tennis. No half-time changes. Half-time entertainment. There’s just enough time for Andersen and Hutchinson to grapple in the box, and for a frustrated Andersen to then shoulder charge Malone to the ground. And that’s it for the first half. A good old-fashioned cup-tie, this, and it’s set up perfectly for the second half. 45 min +2: Another sliding tackle by Saville, and this one had to be perfectly timed, Eze preparing to meet Schlupp’s left-wing cross on the penalty spot. He whips the ball away from his toe from behind, and out for a corner. What a challenge! 45 min: Saville slides through the back of Andersen, who responds by cuffing his assailant around the ear as he falls. No action by the referee for that retro back-and-forth. All good clean filthy fun. 44 min: Ojo rampages down the right in style, and looks to be bodychecked by Tyrick Mitchell, but the referee’s having none of it. Ojo has looked very neat and tidy this afternoon. 42 min: Gallagher wins a free kick out on the left, then hoicks it straight out of play himself. He holds his hand up to apologise to all of his team-mates in Millwall’s loaded box. 41 min: From the resulting free kick, Bradshaw bursts clear down the inside-right channel and finds himself in on goal. The flag pops up for offside. It turns out Bradshaw was onside, but there’s no VAR, and Bradshaw fluffs the chance anyway. 40 min: Ojo skins Guehi down the right touchline, and is upended with a flick of the Palace defender’s boot. Guehi is fortunate not to go into the book. 38 min: Palace are beginning to push Millwall back. They’re not creating very much in the final third, but they’re taking a semblance of control. 36 min: Eze slaloms down the middle and briefly threatens to break into the Millwall box. He can’t quite get through, but the ball breaks to Gallagher, who sends a curler towards the top left. The effort flies inches wide, and Long wasn’t getting there. 35 min: Speaking of the length of the ref’s rope, the official comes across to the dugout to have a word with Patrick Vieira, who has been offering a critique of his work from a distance. No more than a lecture. 33 min: Tyrick Mitchell swings one in from the left. Long claims with ease, then faffs around theatrically before eventually kicking upfield. He might be testing the referee’s patience here. 31 min: This has become really scrappy again. Millwall will care not a jot. Palace can’t find their groove at all, and the home side are looking comfortable right now. 29 min: Ward and Gallagher are discussions with the referee over something and nothing. Then Mateta taps his wrist in pantomime irritation as Long takes an age over a drop kick. Palace getting a little irritable. 27 min: Ojo busies himself down the left and wins a corner off Hughes. Malone takes. It’s half cleared. Ojo, 30 yards out, whistles a shot straight at Butland, who gathers cleanly but is serenaded by saucy whistling anyway. 26 min: Schlupp is booked for some unspecified transgression of the rules. Arguing over the award of a Millwall free kick, possibly, McNamara having purchased a cheap one by getting in the way of Tyrick Mitchell. 25 min: The corner is no use. 24 min: Long finally warms his hands, parrying a swerving Schlupp shot that was heading into the top left. Corner. 23 min: Long takes his sweet time over the restart. The referee tells him to get an effing move on. Time-wasting at this stage is all a bit previous. 22 min: Bradshaw nudges Guehi to the floor, and it’s a free kick for Palace out on the left. Olise swings it into the mixer. Schlupp shanks a shot comfortably wide left. Long, getting a rare start in the Millwall goal, hasn’t had anything to do yet. 20 min: Some minor redemption for Butland as he drops on a Saville snapshot towards the bottom right. 19 min: Butland has the good grace to look thoroughly embarrassed. The Millwall press was magnificent, Bradshaw and Afobe swarming the keeper, and attempting to play out from the back is an admirable pursuit, but sometimes you have to cut your losses and bash the ball away from danger. Oh dear Jack Butland. The Palace keeper has the ball at his feet, with Bradshaw and Afobe closing him down. Instead of blootering clear, he attempts to dribble between the two Millwall men. An absurd decision. Afobe nicks the ball off his toe and slots into the empty net. What a fiasco. The Championship club lead! 16 min: Nope. 15 min: Eze hassles Hutchinson and steals the ball, setting Palace on the attack. Schlupp wins a corner down the left. Can Palace trouble Millwall with their first corner of the game? 13 min: Saville’s elbow did the damage, though the challenge looked accidental, the pair up in the air, contesting a high ball. Gallagher is good to continue, and the game restarts. 11 min: Gallagher is down, having taken a whack in the eye. On comes the physio to do his thing with latex gloves and cotton wool. 9 min: Bradshaw crosses from the left, and Afobe lashes a first-time snapshot wide left of goal from six yards. That was good play by Bradshaw, and a very decent chance to open the scoring. 7 min: Hughes goes sliding in on Ojo. He gets the ball, but follows through, his studs crumping on Ojo’s leg. Fortunately Ojo isn’t hurt, but that wasn’t clever. You’ve seen players booked for much less. There’s even a case for a red. But here we are. No free kick. 6 min: Both teams snap into a few tackles. It’s pretty shapeless, as everyone finds their feet. The fans still give it everything, atmosphere beating product right now. 4 min: Otherwise, it’s been a scrappy start. All very hectic. 2 min: Millwall are on the front foot immediately, and win a corner down the right. Malone swings it in fiercely, and it looks like nestling into the top left, with Butland beaten all ends up. But the ball clips the top of the crossbar and out for a goal kick. What a start that would have been! Palace get the ball rolling ... but only after taking the knee. Millwall, who have their own anti-racism initiatives, choose to stand. The home fans give the visitors the bird. Down pours the rain, and out come the teams. Millwall wear their dark blue, while Palace are sporting blue-and-white halves, a shirt inspired by the club’s first-ever kit, and one they sported while getting to the semi-finals of the very first FA Cup in 1871-72. The home side are also celebrating 150 years of the cup with this delicious retro programme. A rare old atmosphere at the Den, as you’d expect. We’ll be off in a couple of minutes! Millwall boss Gary Rowett speaks to ITV. “We’re confident in our team. We’re playing a side that has a lot of quality in forward areas, so a large part of our game is how we deal with their attacking numbers. We know it will be a good test. You have to relish these games, it’s what football is about.” There’s no Jed Wallace or Murray Wallace for Millwall, but George Long gets a go in goal. First-choice keeper Bartosz Bialkowski is on the bench alongside 15-year-old striker Zak Lovelace, an FA Cup fairytale waiting to be told. Conor Gallagher and Ebere Eze are back for Crystal Palace, who make five changes this afternoon. Patrick Vieira has also recalled Jack Butland, Michael Olise and Jean-Philippe Mateta. Luka Milivojevic, Christian Benteke and Odsonne Edouard drop to the bench. Millwall: Long, Hutchinson, Pearce, Cooper, McNamara, Mitchell, Saville, Afobe, Ojo, Bradshaw, Malone. Subs: Kieftenbeld, Smith, Bennett, Evans, Burey, Bialkowski, Boateng, Topalloj, Lovelace. Crystal Palace: Butland, Ward, Andersen, Guehi, Mitchell, Schlupp, Gallagher, Hughes, Eze, Mateta, Olise. Subs: Milivojevic, Clyne, Matthews, Benteke, Edouard, Kelly, Riedewald, Rak-Sakyi, Wells-Morrison. Referee: Anthony Taylor (Cheshire). It’s a big South London derby laden with expectation, as Millwall face Crystal Palace for the first time in nine years. These two great rivals have had even longer to wait for an FA Cup showdown: it’s 37 years since George Graham’s Lions won a third-round replay at Selhurst Park after a 1-1 draw at the Den. Neither club has ever won the famous old trophy, but they’ve both come close, and both have Manchester United to blame for their cup-final heartbreak, Millwall losing to the Red Devils in 2004, Palace in 1990 and 2016. With Millwall chasing a play-off spot in the Championship, and Palace fairly comfortable in the Premier League, both teams will fancy their chances of another famous cup run. Kick off is at 12.45pm, with extra time and penalties to follow should the match end in a draw. It’s on!Born and raised in east London, the mathematician Anne-Marie Imafidon MBE, 31, was announced last month as a new presenter on Countdown, covering Rachel Riley’s maternity leave. A child prodigy, Imafidon passed two GCSEs at primary school and two A-levels aged 11. She graduated from the University of Oxford with a master of mathematics and computer science degree in 2010 and in 2013 co-founded and became the CEO of Stemettes, a social enterprise encouraging young women to pursue careers in Stem (science, technology, engineering and maths). In 2020 she was named the most influential woman in tech in the UK. 1. Podcast Techish This is currently my favourite podcast. It’s basically a slightly different take on tech headlines and different things that are happening in the tech world, from two podcasters called Abadesi Osunsade and Michael Berhane. I used to physically go to events all the time, but now I don’t get to hear people’s perspectives about the things that are currently going on. Listening to these two once a week always feels like you’ve caught up with friends. I think podcasts are like that – it’s like you’re part of a conversation even though you’re not saying anything. 2. TV Insecure (Sky/HBO) I love this show by Issa Rae. The fifth and final series has just been released. It’s about millennial life and this group of friends who have all these ups and downs in their careers, love lives and relationships. The storylines are great and I love the way it’s shot: there’s a craftsmanship to the lighting, to the softness of it all – it makes everything look glorious but genuine. They use blue light, because the skin of darker people shows up better and there’s much more clarity in the way they’re seen. It also has the best soundtrack ever. 3. Food Eat of Eden I don’t order out often, but when I do I like to support local spots. I’m vegan, so that cuts things down, but there’s still quite a richness in the options you can get. This is a place I order from all the time – it’s in Walthamstow, not far from me, although it turns out they have six branches across London. It’s proper comfort food – warming and filling. It’s Caribbean-inspired: they’ve got plantain, red rice, quinoa, patties, stews, salads, dumplings. I love the flavours and the fact that it’s healthy but also tastes amazing. 4. Film King Richard (dir Reinaldo Marcus Green, 2021) I went to see this with my siblings last month. Serena and Venus [Williams] came up with the idea to do this movie about their dad and his role in their early lives, and it was a pretty cool film to watch with my own siblings – there are definitely parallels between their upbringing and ours. At a certain point he’s mad at them for being boastful, and he gets them to watch Cinderella, thinking there’s a lesson they’re going to learn in it. We were all laughing in the cinema, because it was the kind of thing my dad could have done. 5. Device Meeting Owl I’m obsessed with this. It’s an owl-looking speaker; you put it in the middle of the room and it’s got a 360-degree camera and microphones and speakers. As a team, if we’re doing a hybrid meeting often it can be quite awkward to get everyone to hear everybody on both sides. But with the Meeting Owl, if someone starts talking it zooms in on them, or if two people talk at opposite ends of the owl there’s a split screen. It’s my new best friend and I’m having to hold myself back from taking it everywhere. 6. Hair care Afrocenchix I wanted to highlight this as a cultural phenomenon: Afrocenchix are the ones who just had the first-ever afro hair Christmas advert, on Channel 4. It’s the brand of shampoo I use, and it’s been cool to be able to see the two founders take on the science of it all, build a brand, serve people and get mainstream coverage in such a short period of time. There’s genuine utility in it – the bottles are recyclable and everything they do is vegan and sustainable. I’m excited that they’ve started doing the shampoo in bigger bottles so I don’t need to buy it as often. 7. Art Àsìkò Àsìkò is an artist whose work I love – I’ve got one up in my house. He’s a visual artist who works in photography, film and mixed media. He’s Nigerian but based in London, and his art is just beautiful; he is able to find the beauty in what could look quite mundane or ordinary. The piece I’ve got is called Edo, which are the marital beads you wear if you’re from Edo in Nigeria, which is where I’m from. He also does commissions; he did a pregnancy shoot for a friend of mine and she literally looks like a goddess.Not since Words With Friends, not since Draw Something, has an online game spread with such vigour. Wordle, a short, sweet word game in which the player has six attempts to guess a five-letter word, hangman-style, is everywhere, leaving green-and-yellow-spotted grids in its wake. It was created by software developer Josh Wardle, who wanted to come up with a game that his crossword-loving partner would enjoy playing during lockdown. Then he sent it to his family WhatsApp group and then he gave it to everyone. Like many, I fell for its charms last week. When it was released to the public in November, 90 people played it, but now hundreds of thousands are on it. I failed to get my first one – for some reason, I thought “tiler” was a better option than “tiger” – but I got the most recent in three tries. I have placed a lot of hope in Wordle, which might seem disproportionate for a quick game, but hear me out. This is not an era in which good things are taken at face value. We are cynical, irritable and tired, and if there is a bad intention to be read into anything, someone will scratch away at it until they decide that they have found it. For now, Wordle seems to exist outside of that. A new puzzle appears just once a day. It doesn’t demand much time and in an attention economy built on the zombifying potential of an endless scroll or click, this seems like a generous gesture. The scarcity makes it more desirable: you can’t get tired of something so shy and retiring. The website is ad-free, there are no paid upgrades, no chance to reveal an extra letter by shelling out cash. When Wardle noticed that people liked to discuss their results, he added a function allowing them to share their grids, hence the green-and-yellow proliferating on social media like algae in a warm spell. That’s all there is to it. It is simple, fun, satisfying and free. Even its name, a nod to Wardle, is charming; even its origins – the New York Times has called it “a love story”, describing it as a lockdown gift from Wardle to his partner – are unbelievably sweet. I want to be uncynical about Wordle, I want to be unsuspicious, because right now, Wordle suggests that we can have nice things without breaking them. Kim Kardashian: like her, I too despair at the BlackBerry’s fall I got my BlackBerry for the Reading festival, somewhere around the mid-00s. Another writer, also there for the NME, had suggested that it would change the game: it meant no more running to a backstage cabin to hurriedly type up a review on a spare computer, if one was even spare; instead, you could just write as you watched, with frantic thumbs. It left more time for drinking pints from plastic cups and trying to get someone from Foals to pose for a photo with a fake moustache. (Reader, they declined.) Much like the Reading festival, I left the BlackBerry behind a long time ago, as a relic of youth. Soon after, the iPhone came along and swept away the BlackBerry’s practical good sense, the touchscreen temptress not great for typing anything at length, though in exchange it did offer the ability to pretend your fingers were riding a skateboard or playing a piano. With hindsight, that could be the moment it all started to go wrong. Nevertheless, the BlackBerry persisted. My favourite holdout was Kim Kardashian, who knows a thing or two about monetising platforms and perhaps knew something we did not. She tweeted her despair at the death of her BlackBerry Bold as late as 2016. But only last week, on 4 January 2022, after several spluttering death rattles and a number of false alarms, has the BlackBerry finally shuffled off this mortal coil, with the company ending support for its mobile devices, effectively killing off most of them. Is there a word for the specific wave of nostalgia that greets the demise of something that has long been obsolete? Betty White: farewell, the last and funniest of the Golden Girls I have always maintained that The Golden Girls is muckier, funnier and more anarchic than most contemporary comedies could ever dream of being and I treasure my DVD box set as comfort watch, style inspiration and blueprint for getting older. What a treat, then, to witness people sharing their favourite Rose scenes online, after the death of Betty White, the last living Golden Girl, who died at the age of 99, a couple of weeks before her 100th birthday. Many of the tributes highlighted White’s impeccable comic timing. It can’t have been easy to play Rose, famously the ditsy one, against Blanche’s blowsy naughtiness, Dorothy’s dour wit or Sophia’s fabulously blunt ways, but White sailed through on comedy genius, her sweetness a perfect balance to all the acidity, one look from her enough to send the audience into raptures. You can’t help but wonder how White might have felt about People magazine’s latest issue, which went to print before the sad news broke, and hit newsstands with her face on the cover and the celebratory declaration, “Betty White Turns 100!” In a certain light, you could say it looks like one final punchline. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistDiane Kruger slapping Jessica Chastain across the face with a frozen fish should be funny. The scene, sadly not played for laughs, is one of many wasted opportunities in this lacklustre action thriller. Chastain’s Mace and Kruger’s Marie, along with Khadijah (Lupita Nyong’o) and Graciela (Penélope Cruz), are international spies who team up to retrieve a “deadly cybertool” that’s fallen into the wrong hands. Simon Kinberg’s film feels aggressively focus-grouped for the girl-boss crowd. “James Bond never had to deal with real life,” says mother-of-two Graciela with an eye roll. Winking dialogue about how women have been erased from history is similarly crowbarred in. Kruger smoulders as a German goth with daddy issues, and the only agent with any sort of swagger; Nyong’o, resplendent in a sweater vest, plays a tech specialist. Cruz is as luminous as ever, despite the fact that her role is mostly limited to crying and holding the phone. “We need another round… or like 10!” jokes Mace. Not even a post-mission pint in Morocco can liven up the gang’s tepid chemistry.Jillian Lavender, a much-sought-after meditation teacher and author of a new book Why Meditate?, is on a mission to eliminate stress from people’s lives – not to manage it, or cope with, but to get rid of it. Altogether. “People talk about stress as something we have to learn to live with, particularly anxiety,” she says. “Actually we can do something about stress.” She believes we need to change our mindset around what she sees as one of the greatest causes of suffering today. There is no such thing as “good stress”, she says. “People are tired, exhausted and stressed. And they compensate for that by all sorts of behaviours and habits. I want to bring us into a normal state, a balanced state that is healthy.” Lavender is the least guru-like guru you could hope to meet. A Kiwi by birth, she talks in the no-nonsense style of the publishing CEO she was – “Rest is the funding mechanism for everything you do” – before discovering Vedic meditation in Sydney in her late-20s. In 2008, she set up the London and New York Meditation Centre with her American partner, Michael Miller, who she met on a retreat in India. The couple, now in their 50s, live in Notting Hill with their young daughter. They emit the sort of glow usually reserved for the likes of Gwyneth Paltrow. It’s not for nothing that they have built a following among burnt-out celebrities and stressed execs, with fees operating on a sliding scale from £400 to (you may need to sit quietly for a bit) £2,000 according to salary; their unwafty approach appealing to those who would run a square mile at the whiff of a joss stick. “There’s nothing weird about us. We really love what we are doing. We are here to help people,” Lavender says. “It’s that simple.” Since the London Meditation Centre began, meditation has gone mainstream, with subscriptions to apps like Headspace and Calm soaring during the pandemic. Lavender wrote Why Meditate? in lockdown (ironically she had been too busy teaching people to meditate before). The book is her attempt to redress the “sloppiness” and misunderstandings surrounding meditation, to distinguish it from all the buzz around mindfulness. She also wanted to reach a wider audience, “to get the message out wide and far, and do it in a way that is honest and clear and accessible”. As she makes clear from the off, this book will not teach you to meditate. It is a why-to, not a how-to book – the clue is in the title. As anyone with a shelf-ful of unread meditation manuals will know, learning from a book is a non-starter (reading with your eyes closed can be tricky), and the prose style can usually be relied on to send you to sleep. We already know a lot of the Whys: meditation makes us happier, healthier and nicer to be around – broccoli for the brain. But Lavender follows the science to back it up: during meditation our metabolic rate drops far more quickly and deeply than in sleep, cortisol levels go down, serotonin levels rise. My favourite takeaway is that long-term meditators have been shown to have a biological age 12 years younger than their real one. Most of us are getting through the day on what she calls “excitation chemistry”, stress hormones, sugar, coffee and alcohol. “Life is hectic. There’s no question about that,” especially over the last few years. In her work, she sees the burden falling heaviest on women, mothers in particular, for whom each day is often a caffeine-fuelled race from the school run to the evening when you find yourself trying to open a bottle of wine with a bit of Lego. “People are recognising they need a counterbalance to all this.” I’ll drink to that. This is where Vedic meditation comes in, a mantra-based technique (very similar to transcendental meditation), which Lavender believes is nothing less than “an antidote to stress”. “Why is Vedic meditation so powerful?” she asks. “Because we de-excite so quickly, so efficiently and so deeply, much deeper than in a night’s sleep.” So what’s the catch? You can only learn it from a specially trained teacher, not a book or an app. As she says, you wouldn’t expect to learn to play the piano from watching YouTube videos. Students on Lavender’s most recent course included a nurse, a mother of three and a former venture capitalist. People come to mediate for many reasons. “It might be that they are not sleeping, that they want to get off medication, that they are going through a tough time and everything is upside down,” she says. “People are desperate for change. They are desperate to feel better. And they want to do that in a way that is natural.” Learning is “a really life-changing moment. I don’t say that lightly. I see it in every person that I teach.” Jo, a city lawyer and mother of two young girls in her mid-30s, learned to meditate with Lavender back in 2017. She had recently lost her father and was recovering from surgery for breast cancer. “I was absolutely wrecked. It would take me a few hours to get up and get dressed and start functioning properly,” she says. But when she started meditating she felt better almost immediately. “I was able to get up in the morning. It was just incredible.” Clara still meditates religiously every day, as it makes her feel more in control and that “nothing is impossible”. She has just sent a friend on a course who has recently been diagnosed with breast cancer. “People think it is going to be hard work. They say, ‘I couldn’t sit still,’ ‘I couldn’t silence my mind,’ ‘I don’t have time to meditate,’” Lavender says. “You can! If you are curious and are willing to sit down and follow instructions, you can do this!” Over the years I have held my breath in yoga studios all over London, chanted in a love circle on Ibiza and taken part in a moonlit meditation in the Austrian Alps (the moon was a no-show). And I subscribe to so many mindfulness apps my phone should be on permanent snooze. None of them have stuck. I still have the excitation levels of a small child at a birthday party which, as we all know, only ends in tears. And so I find myself on a late November afternoon in a chilly Unitarian Church in west London, sitting with my eyes closed with a room full of strangers wearing masks and woolly scarves. The course spans four days over a long weekend, each session no longer than two hours. It opens with a brief ceremony, which, as Miller informed us in the free introductory Zoom talk, “you will like if you like that sort of thing, and is very short if you don’t”. Nobody runs for the door. Then we get down to business, each of us called individually into an even chillier room, to be given our mantra, a meaningless sound, our key to Vedic meditation and lasting serenity. We are so far in now, we all return to our seats like children who have just met Santa. As Lavender promises, the instructions are few and seemingly straightforward. One of them is: “Don’t try.” As one of life’s pathological over-triers, this is up there with, “Don’t breathe.” And you must practise for 20 minutes twice a day – obviously, if anyone had 40 minutes to spare, they wouldn’t be here in the first place. But one of Lavender’s aims is to help people find ways to fit meditation into busy lives. If the nurse working 12-hour shifts is going to do it, then so can I. We begin to meditate. The first thing to say about Vedic meditation is that you do not have to stop your thoughts. Purifying my head is a bit like emptying out my handbag. The stuff that comes up (gritty lip balms, pebbles, headless toys) is messy, pointless and odd. I try not to try. Really hard. I repeat my mantra silently over and over. I’m not sure I’ve remembered it right. A few minutes in and my head starts moving weirdly, all on its own, like one of those nodding dogs you see in the back of car windows. All of the knotty bits in my neck and shoulders magically unravel. It must be working! I wonder if the same thing is happening to everyone else, if we are all sitting there swaying as if listening to music on invisible headphones. I don’t open my eyes. Then, eventually, there is a strange sort of quiet. Really, really quiet – like the floaty sensation before you come round from an anaesthetic. It works! Damn, the moment bursts like a bubble when you poke it. I leave the church feeling lighter, taller and more rested than I have for years – joyful, even. Later that evening a friend says I look well – official confirmation that I have indeed begun to glow. It is still early days, but I haven’t missed a session. My kids are delighted, not only because I am less shouty, but because they get 20 minutes TV before tea, when I sneak off for my afternoon meditation. It has become my secret superpower. That nice swimming feeling (and the nodding-head thing) comes more quickly and I get better at not chasing it away. I hope the benefits are incremental and by the time you read this, I will be well on my way to enlightenment – and a little younger, biologically speaking. If you are looking to “upgrade” – Lavender’s word – your life this year, you might start by doing nothing. Do Lavender and her partner ever have a moment over emptying the bins, or who has been putting in the most hours? Lavender hesitates. “No. There’s a kind of smoothness,” she admits. “We’ve both been meditating for a long time. Do I not get pissed off at some things? Sure. But not in a way that sticks.” And this is why she wants more people meditating: “Because I know the benefits of this for those individuals and I know the spreading effect that it has on families, on workplaces, on society,” she says. “It is why I do what I do.” • This article was amended on 9 January 2022 to add the missing introductory paragraph and to correct some misspellings of meditation as mediation. Why Meditate? Because it Works by Jillian Lavender (Yellow Kite Books, £14.99) is available from guardianbookshop.com for £13.04. London Meditation Centre fees start from £400 with a free online introductory talk (londonmeditationcentre.com)The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, has questioned the BBC’s complaints process in an escalating row over the broadcaster’s reporting of an antisemitic attack in London. In a letter to Tim Davie, the BBC’s director general, seen by the Guardian, Dorries asked him to explain how the corporation has responded to concerns from Jewish leaders over the corporation’s coverage of an incident in November on Oxford Street and how he plans to “resolve the issue in a suitably timely manner”. She added: “You will know my concerns about the speed of the process which I asked officials to communicate to the BBC earlier this week.” In the letter, she suggested that the BBC’s handling of the issue raised questions over whether it handled audience complaints in a “fair and effective” way. “It is crucial that the BBC can be properly held to account for the fulfilment of its Mission and Public Purposes as set out in the Charter, including through a fair and effective complaints process,” she wrote. “I expect the Mid-Term Review of the BBC Charter to consider whether this is currently the case.” Ofcom, the communications regulator, said it has written to the BBC to request information but that it could not comment further at this stage. The Times reported that during the attack, Jewish passengers on a bus were abused by a group of men. The BBC website published a story in which it said that “a slur about Muslims” had been heard from inside the bus, a claim that was also broadcast by BBC London. The newspaper reports that it was later discovered BBC editors thought the words “dirty Muslims” had been used. However, the Board of Deputies of British Jews, which has reportedly commissioned two independent reviews of audio from the incident, concluded that the phrase was in fact “tikrah lemishu, ze dachuf”, meaning “call someone, it’s urgent” in Hebrew. Marie van der Zyl, president of the board, wrote to Davie last month, copying in Dorries. The BBC said the audio had been checked by “a number of Hebrew speakers”, reports the Times. The BBC told the Guardian: “Antisemitism is abhorrent. We strive to serve the Jewish community, and all communities across our country, fairly. “As we have stated previously, our story was a factual report that overwhelmingly focused on the individuals the police want to identify; those who directed abuse at the bus. “We know that there are some strong views about this report. We take complaints very seriously and they are being taken through our complaints process. “Tim Davie has instructed that this process is accelerated to the executive complaints unit, which is editorially independent from news and will ensure complaints are fully responded to as swiftly as possible.”If not for the freshly plastered graffiti over its walls informing passers-by of the dozens of detained refugees inside, the Park hotel looks like it could be any regular building in Melbourne. It exists in a particularly pleasant part of the world, just north of Melbourne’s central business district, right in the shadow of the city’s university and surrounded by a parade of enticing Asian restaurants. The building, meanwhile, is coloured in nondescript shades of cream and grey. In regular times, people rarely look twice. Since Novak Djokovic arrived in Melbourne and was promptly ordered by the Australian Border Force to leave the country before being whisked away to the detention hotel as his lawyers appealed the cancellation of his visa, the Park hotel has been at the epicentre of one of the most absurd sporting stories in recent memory. As Djokovic’s fans gathered, so too did those campaigning for the freedom of the refugees, some of whom have been there for years. On Monday, one way or another, those sights will be no more. Djokovic’s legal battle against his deportation from Australia began on Thursday as his lawyers secured an interim injunction for him to remain in the country until after his hearing, which the government did not oppose. That hearing begins on Monday at 10am. Despite the spectacle, the facts are simple. Upon Djokovic’s arrival in Melbourne on Wednesday night, the Australian Border Force found that he was unable to prove that he met Australia’s entry requirements, which requires arrivals to be vaccinated. As an unvaccinated traveller, Djokovic had been granted a medical exemption through a process directed by Tennis Australia and the state of Victoria in order to compete in the Australian Open, but the federal government, and no other entity, controls the country’s borders. Thus, Djokovic’s legal team will have to prove that the border force’s decision to cancel his visa and move to deport him was unlawful. On Saturday, court documents revealed that Djokovic sought his medical exemption after, his lawyers say, he was infected with Covid-19 on 16 December. His lawyers also cite his travel declaration and exemption as indication that he was entitled to enter Victoria. Of the possible outcomes, Djokovic could win the case, allowing him to leave the hotel and compete, or he could lose it and be forced to depart the country. The case could rumble on, with his presence and freedom in Melbourne at the discretion of the judge. The hearing is set to be a spectacle itself: it will be held on Microsoft Teams and be open to the public. The federal court’s website has published the link to Monday’s hearing, along with the warning in bold letters: “It is imperative that you keep your camera and audio off as this can affect the progress of the hearing.” In the wake of so much public emotion, outrage and attention, that may be the entire goal for some. From a sporting perspective, the stakes are clear. Djokovic has already fumbled one major championship recently when he was defaulted from the fourth round of the 2020 US Open after accidentally hitting a lineswoman with a ball. He does not need to do so again. Even though Djokovic remains the dominant player in men’s tennis, having stood one match from winning the grand slam last year, and will have other opportunities, every major tournament counts when you are 34 years old. He had arrived in Melbourne seeking a record-breaking 21st major singles title. Should he lose the case, there are further concerns. If the cancellation of Djokovic’s visa is upheld, he could be banned from re-entering the country for three years. It remains to be seen whether he would even want to return to Australia after how things have panned out. His cause has found support in unlikely corners. “It’s just too much at this point,” said Australian tennis player Nick Kyrgios on Saturday. “Honestly, I hope it all gets sorted as soon as possible. For the sport we need him here, it’s that simple. He’s one of the most influential sports people probably of all time.” On Saturday morning, after some rowdy days and nights, the hotel’s surroundings were far quieter. A couple of Serbian fans of Djokovic, a father and son, quietly scanned the building across the road. Meanwhile, a dozen tenacious human rights protesters continued to brandish their signs demanding the immediate release of the refugees. Policemen and policewomen stood guard, while photographers congregated around windows, their cameras clicking every time a curtain moved. Occasionally, members of the public would pass by and stop to take a look. Karen and Patrick were on their way to the neighbourhood of Brunswick, minding their business on a route they had taken countless times in their lives, when they stumbled across the scene. “We walked past this building so many times not knowing that they’ve been there for months,” said Karen. When Djokovic departs , so too will the cameras that had only briefly focused on the plight of the refugees. One activist, Asher, stood to the southern side of the building with a bright pink sign that read: “Aussie Open? More like Aussie endlessly abusing refugees,” a real tennis racket attached to each corner of the sign. His frustration was clear: “I’m kind of disgusted that it’s taken Djokovic being put in here for attention to come to these men,” Asher said. “Djokovic will be here for a few days and he’s not in the same situation at all. The media should be caring about these men – regardless of Djokovic.”A Houston mother has been charged after allegedly placing her 13-year-old son in the trunk of her car in an attempt to isolate him after he tested positive for Covid-19, then took him to a drive-thru testing site. In a statement reported by KPRC, an NBC-affiliate, the Cyprus-Fairbanks school district said police were “alerted that a child was in the trunk of a car at a drive-thru Covid-19 testing site earlier this week. “Law enforcement conducted a full investigation, resulting in a warrant for arrest.” Sarah Beam, 41, was charged with endangering a child. “Thankfully, the child was not harmed,” the school district said. Authorities say the boy was found on Monday at a testing site for the school district in north-west Houston. Beam is a teacher with the district. The charge against her was filed on Wednesday but not made public until Friday. According to a court document, the district’s director of health services, Bevin Gordon, was gathering information from vehicles in line for testing at a stadium when she discovered the 13-year-old in the trunk of a car. “[The mother] stated that she put [her son] inside the trunk to prevent her from getting exposed to possible Covid while driving to the stadium for additional testing,” the court document said. Gordon called police. Beam had not yet been arrested or turned herself in, authorities said on Friday. Court records did not list an attorney. Beam had worked for the school district since 2011, it said, adding that she was on administrative leave. Police did not say whether Beam or her unidentified son were vaccinated.The emergence of Omicron could be the “first ray of light” towards living with Covid as an endemic disease, according to a government scientific adviser. Dr Mike Tildesley, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (Spi-M) and a University of Warwick professor, said Omicron could be an indicator that in the future there may be a less severe variant that is similar to the common cold. But as Covid cases continued to rise in the UK and hospitalisations at their highest in almost a year, he said “we’re not quite there yet”. “The thing that might happen in the future is you may see the emergence of a new variant that is less severe, and ultimately, in the long term, what happens is Covid becomes endemic and you have a less severe version. It’s very similar to the common cold that we’ve lived with for many years,” he told Times Radio on Saturday. “We’re not quite there yet, but possibly Omicron is the first ray of light there that suggests that may happen in the longer term. It is, of course, much more transmissible than Delta was, which is concerning, but much less severe.” He added: “Hopefully, as we move more towards the spring and we see the back of Omicron, we can get more inter-relationships of living with Covid as an endemic disease and protecting the vulnerable. Any variant that does emerge which is less severe, ultimately, in the longer term, is where we want to be.” A total of 18,454 people were in hospital with coronavirus on 6 January, according to government figures. This marks a 40% week-on-week rise and the highest number since 18 February. Middlesbrough, Copeland and Redcar and Cleveland had among the UK’s highest week-on-week rises in Covid cases, while in London they were thought to be slowing down. Tildesley said rises in hospital admissions in the north-east, north-west and the Midlands were “concerning” and that most parts of the country were approximately two to three weeks behind London. “On the slightly more positive side, so it doesn’t sound all doom and gloom, what we are seeing from hospital admissions is that stays in hospital do appear to be on average shorter, which is good news, symptoms appear to be a little bit milder, so this is what we are seeing consistently with the Omicron variant,” he added. According to NHS England data, 39,142 NHS staff at hospital trusts in England were absent due to Covid on 2 January – a 59% rise on the previous week and more than triple the number at the beginning of December. The Health Service Journal estimated that staff absences across the whole of the NHS for all reasons, including Covid, could be as high as 120,000. About 9,300 armed forces are available on standby. Meanwhile, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation has advised against giving a second booster, or a fourth dose, of the vaccine to care home residents and people aged 80-plus after figures showed it was 90% effective at preventing hospital admission. Instead, experts want to prioritise the rollout of the first booster dose and encourage those who are still unvaccinated to have first and second doses. To date, more than 51 million people have had a first dose and more than 47 million have had a second dose. More than 35 million have had a booster or third dose.The Observer and Guardian journalist Carole Cadwalladr will appear in court in London next Friday to defend herself against an accusation of defamation brought by Arron Banks, the multi-millionaire businessman and outspoken backer of Brexit. The case concerns a remark made in a talk at the Ted technology conference by Cadwalladr in April 2019, and a related tweet. In the widely viewed 15-minute talk about the pernicious effects of Facebook on the democratic electoral process, Cadwalladr spoke about the 2016 Brexit referendum and noted briefly that Nigel Farage’s Leave.EU campaign, largely funded by £8m from Banks, the largest donation in British political history, had been found by the Electoral Commission to have broken electoral and data laws. In two sentences Cadwalladr also noted the commission’s investigation into the source of Banks’s funding, and made a passing reference to the financier “telling lies” about what she called “his covert relationship with the Russian government”. A couple of months later, after Banks had complained about the Ted talk reference, she tweeted a further reference to Banks “lying” about his contact with the Russian government. Banks, who was subsequently cleared of criminality in relation to the donation, after an investigation by the National Crime Agency, and who has always strongly denied any illegal Russian links – although he admits meeting Russian embassy officials on a number of occasions – has been pursuing the case against Cadwalladr for more than two years. In a preliminary ruling in November 2019 on the meaning of Cadwalladr’s words in the talk and tweet, Mr Justice Saini concluded that an average listener would have understood that: “On more than one occasion Mr Banks told untruths about a secret relationship he had with the Russian government in relation to acceptance of foreign funding of electoral campaigns in breach of the law on such funding.” Banks, in his legal claim, says this meaning is defamatory of him. Cadwalladr has said this is not the meaning she intended and that she had always been careful to say there was no evidence to suggest Banks had accepted any money. Although she initially defended the claim on the basis of truth, limitation and the public interest, the defences of truth and limitation were withdrawn after Mr Justice Saini set out the meanings which he had found the Ted talk and the tweet to bear. Cadwalladr is now defending the claim against her on the basis that her reporting was in the public interest. Cadwalladr, who has won numerous awards for her investigative reporting into the effects of big data and social media on the Brexit campaign and the election of Donald Trump, reporting which led directly to the American Federal Trade Commission imposing a record $5bn fine on Facebook, has spent much of the past two years trying to work with the threat of Banks’s suit hanging over her. If Banks wins the case, Cadwalladr may be personally liable for his costs, estimated at between £750,000 and £1m, together with any resultant damages. The case has been monitored closely by several British investigative reporters, some of whom have had their own libel litigation problems. There has also been support for Cadwalladr from a number of press freedom groups, concerned about what they see as the potentially chilling effect of a rich individual with a high public profile like Banks being able to sue Cadwalladr, a freelance journalist, in person, but not suing the Ted organisation, which provided the platform for her talk, and on whose website it can still be viewed. When Banks first brought his case against Cadwalladr, seven press freedom groups, among them Reporters Without Borders and Index On Censorship, called for the case to be thrown out and for the British government to defend public-interest journalism. Their open letter described the case as bearing many of the hallmarks of a so-called Slapp suit – strategic lawsuits against public participation – in which legal action will inevitably be expensive and time consuming for journalists to resist. Paul Webster, editor of the Observer, said: “Carole’s brave reporting has given the public deep insight into the secretive ways powerful people, organisations and social media companies have sought to influence our democracies and the hidden role played by technology in using our data and shaping our politics. “We will continue to support the rights of journalists like Carole to report independently and in the public interest.”At what point in the ledger of brutal, sapping days, of boundary-fumbling jeers and spiralling numbers, does a tour from hell tick over into something more human and manageable: a tour from limbo or purgatory, from the uneasy netherworld of the merely very bad? English spinners have tended to die the most public of sporting deaths in Australia. Take the long view and the realistic goal for these brave, lost boys, these gadabouts in Napoleonic uniforms marching in single file across the flatlands, is to avoid being the worst guy, the one with the quiz question numbers, the English spin bowler who gets to define this four-yearly horror. On day four of the Sydney Test, as England resisted – gassed and wobbling, but hanging on all the same – Jack Leach finally caught a break. And Leach has probably found that moment of grace now, or just enough to have something of his own alongside the bruises and buffetings. In Sydney Leach took four for 84 in Australia’s second innings, despite never really offering any sense of control. In his first spell he had Australia’s batsmen in two minds, unsure whether to cut him or drive him as he bowled too short or too full. But he did also have one wonderful moment, the kind of moment he will treasure and tend to, and place in a jar over the mantelpiece. Coming back just after lunch, with Australia on 83 for three, Leach had figures of 6-0-28-1. A little earlier, after Leach had lured Marcus Harris into a loose drive, Steve Smith had come dandying out of his crease and launched Leach in a wonderful cinematic arc over mid off, the brand of shot that reminds us what a wonderful mover, athlete and basic cricketing specimen Smith is, besides the numbers and the twitches and the chirrups. Smith was on 22 off 26 by now and cruising. There was a brief delay as Haseeb Hameed, who always seems to be tumbling out of the door with his school tie askew clutching a piece of toast, fiddled his way into a pair of shin-pads. Leach’s fifth ball was a skiddy arm ball. Smith played that weird lean-back push, the shot of a man resplendent at the prow of his yacht, missed the ball and saw it splay his stumps. For Leach, face a little puce, there was an edge of bottled rage in the celebrations. Understandably so. How long have you got? The ballad of Jack Leach is a fascinating tale. He isn’t exactly a victim – Leach has his first central contract now of an up-and-down career – more a leaf blown along the road, tossed in the to-and-fro conflicting winds, manfully clinging to his path. He took 28 wickets in six Tests in Galle, Ahmedabad and Chennai in spring and was then dropped for the entire summer. This is the level of deep thought in England’s brains trust. We’re going to play this bloke in the Ashes. Let’s leave him out for nine months. Instead Leach bowled 29 Championship overs between 25 April and 11 July, then didn’t bowl again until the end of August, then didn’t bowl between 22 September and just before lunch at the Gabba when his captain decided this was the ideal moment to shove him down the mountain and see if he was ready for the black run. He hasn’t bowled well in Australia. There will be criticism of the defensive fields at the SCG, but the fact is Leach kept pitching short and the ball kept being pounded out to the man on the fence. In three Tests he has six wickets at 53.5 and has gone at 4.3 runs an over. How bad is this? Well, here’s the thing: it’s pretty standard. Four years ago Moeen Ali and Mason Crane took six wickets at 128 between them. Four years before that Graeme Swann and Monty Panesar took 10 at 81.7. Four years before that Panesar and Ashley Giles took 13 at 49. All bled runs. Even in the great outlier, 2010-11, Swann’s 15 wickets came at 39.8. What he did so well was offer control, going at 2.72 runs an over and playing a key role in the win at Adelaide. So what, really, did we expect? The real story of Leach’s tour has been the same as everyone else’s. He needs runs, pressure leverage, games that go into the last two days. A spin bowler with no backup, no platform is basically someone bowling slowly and hoping for the best. There were some other good things on the fourth day for England. Ollie Pope’s wicket-keeping was lithe and limber. There was even something refreshing in the sound of his eager, piping chat, a pleasant change from the silent sadness of Jos Buttler, who crouches for every ball with the look of a laudanum-addled poet splayed in his garret composing his latest ode to death. And there was Leach’s final hurrah, two wickets in the slog that leave him on a hat-trick the next time he plays. When will that be? Dom Bess will perhaps get a game in Hobart. And there would be something very Jack, very much the leaf tumbling down that windswept path, were Leach never to play again, but end his career suspended on a hat-trick. More likely that moment might have to wait until the English summer, when the home crowd can gild it with some well-deserved underdog affection.Jack Saunders might possess a PhD and have lectured undergraduates for 10 years, most recently at University College London, yet in all that time job security and an above-inflation pay rise have eluded him. “I have been on a fixed-term contract since I started in 2011,” he said. “And there hasn’t been a pay award above inflation since Gordon Brown was prime minister. It means you are always searching the job market and each job is a stopgap.” Saunders, a rep for the University and College Union, a trade union representing academics, went on strike along with staff from 57 other institutions for three days last month. He is expecting to support further strikes in a war of attrition with university employers over three issues – low pay, cuts to the academic staff pension scheme and the “casualisation” of the workforce, where fewer staff are on permanent contracts. “Higher education employers have adopted a form of macho management that just makes things worse for staff every year that it goes on,” he added. The Universities and Colleges Employers Association has offered a 1.5% rise dated back to April, arguing that in the midst of a pandemic, and when it is putting increased sums into academics’ final salary pension schemes, it cannot afford any more. At the B&amp;Q warehouse and distribution centre in Worksop, and at workplaces across the country, the story is much the same. Faced with the huge squeeze on living costs, as inflation erodes wages and household bills soar, workers are demanding pay rises to keep up. About 450 staff who work for the logistics firm Wincanton and operate the B&amp;Q site in Nottinghamshire have downed tools to protest at a 2% pay offer, subsequently increased, without resolving the dispute, to 4%. One worker at the site said it was clear staff were angry about more than the steeply rising cost of living after a 96% vote in favour of strike action. “The site has been in operation for 16 years and this is the first dispute. But the employer doesn’t recognise that people are working in a harsh environment for 40 hours a week, being monitored all the time, and, on top of that, can’t make ends meet when many are paid less than £10 an hour,” they said. The Unite union is supporting workers with strike pay, though many were already using a hardship fund and regularly visiting food banks. Wincanton said: “We value the vital work our colleagues carry out every day and the offer we have put forward is fair and competitive. We remain committed to finding a resolution that satisfies all parties.” Mike Clancy, the general secretary of the Prospect union, said the rising cost of living was throwing fuel on a tinder box of grievances built up before and during the pandemic. “Pay disputes are usually the result of a deeper malaise inside the organisation,” he said. Prospect has grown to represent 150,000 members over a wide range of industries, mostly in higher, professional grades. While it has a fraction of Unite’s 1 million-plus membership, it too is involved in several pay disputes, most recently at the government agency Natural England. Staff went on a work-to-rule last week after a succession of wage freezes and low pay awards the union says go back more than a decade. Union negotiator Jane Lancastle said the agency’s management were exploiting staff who joined on starting salaries of £22,168. “The starting salary at the Environment Agency is £24,213 and £27,235 at the Forestry Commission. When more than half the staff say in the employer’s own survey their job has made them ill in the last year, it is not surprising the want to take action,” she said. A 76% vote in favour of a strike has been put on the back burner while talks with the management continue. Until a few weeks ago, the incomes expert Ken Mulkearn was convinced a spike in inflation would pass without much reaction from Britain’s 32 million-strong workforce; a decade of low average pay following the 2008 financial crash seemed to suggest that workers, fearful of an increasingly insecure jobs market, had little appetite for confrontation. “Now I’m not so sure. There are signs rising prices are having an impact,” he said. Behind the Bank of England’s interest rate rise last month was a fear that runaway prices could spark a succession of sky-high wage demands. Over the next couple of months thousands of companies will consider how much to pay staff from April and whether that means an inflation-busting, real-terms rise heading towards double figures. With the main measure of inflation, the consumer prices index (CPI) at 5.1% and heading towards 6%, officials at the Bank have scoured private sector pay-settlement data to detect whether a wage/price spiral – one that entrenches rocketing levels of inflation for years to come – has gained momentum and if they need to impose further rate rises in 2022 to calm the situation down. Mulkearn, the director of Incomes Data Research, of is one of the experts consulted by the Bank. His firm found the median pay award across the economy was 2.3% in the three months to November – with little sign of a wage spiral. Rival consultancy XpertHR says much the same. Its median basic pay monitor found increases averaged 2.2% in the same period, up from 2% in October, based on the outcome of 42 pay settlements that took effect between 1 September and 30 November, covering more than 650,000 employees. It said the rise for public sector workers was just 1.4%, down from 2.5% a year earlier. The official data, which also takes into account increases in pay when staff are promoted or change jobs, jumped in the first months of the pandemic, mostly in response to large job losses among lower-paid workers that artificially raised the average. A spike above 8% began to fade in the summer. In the latest figures, for October, the average increase in pay had tumbled below 4% and looked to be falling further in November. Mulkearn believes a wave of disputes and strike ballots mean isolated settlements above the rate of inflation could become more common. Not that there is the prospect of a general strike or even the kind of mass industrial strife that characterised the 1970s, when union membership peaked at 12 million. Stephen Bevan, head of research at the Institute for Employment Studies, said there was little evidence so far that either the 6.7 million unionised workers (4 million of them in the public sector), or the 76.3% who are not members, were buckling up for a fight over pay, other than at the margins. Union membership among private sector companies stands at one of the lowest levels on record, at 2.56 million in 2020. Bevan said that while firms like Amazon and Starbucks had gained publicity in the UK for pushing salaries above the legal minimums, they were unlikely to permit year-on-year real-terms increases. “The reality is that these are US companies and when you look at how they operate, in the US they are paying consultancies to make sure unions cannot even gain a foothold.” Most workers remained in a weak position after the shift to “individualised performance pay”, he said, which forced them to fight on their own, face-to-face with their manager. “Individual pay faded, but working from home is bringing it back.” Nevertheless, a skills shortage, especially in manufacturing after an exodus of older skilled workers, but also in professional sectors such as law, accountancy and computer services, is working in favour of staff. About 1,200 Tesco warehouse staff and HGV drivers recently rejected a 4% pay offer, threatening Christmas deliveries, before settling on 5.5%, backdated to July, plus a further 0.5% in February. The Usdaw union settled with Tesco for what is thought to be a similar amount, on behalf of 5,000 members. In November, Ford agreed a two-year deal that kicks off with a 5.1% rise before pegging pay to the retail prices index (RPI) in the second year. RPI is currently standing at 7.1%. Sharon Graham, the new leader of Unite, is credited with orchestrating a more focused campaign by the union to match pay to inflation, and exert pressure resulting from high levels of vacancies and changing work patterns to redress a decade of low pay. Mulkearn says Unite has “moved to a different footing” since the departure of Len McCluskey, who was renowned for political grandstanding; it now focuses more on nitty-gritty issues such as pay. The University and College Union says successful strike ballots at 58 universities could be joined by another 42 universities that failed last year to reach the 50% participation threshold. They are being re-ballotted, making it possible that 100 will be involved in strikes when the outcome is known on 14 January. Nurses have rejected a 3% pay offer and in a consultative ballot in December found more than half in favour of strike action. The civil service union PCS is holding similar consultation that general secretary Mark Serwotka says will gauge whether members are prepared to take strike action over pay, pensions and living standards. Kate Bell, head of rights at the TUC, said there was anecdotal evidence workers were flexing their muscles after pushing average wage rises to around 4% pre-Covid. “Lots of people have been working hard through the pandemic and understandably want to get back to pay rises at that level,” she said. “There is a broader sense that people who have battled through the pandemic want and need a real-terms pay rise.” So far, only the RMT union, which represents rail workers, looks like securing an above-inflation rise if RPI is used as the benchmark for deals. It already has a commitment that Transport for London will increase tube drivers’ salaries by RPI plus 0.1% from April. Agreed as part of a three-year deal, it looks prescient now. As a negotiator, the RMT stands out. No other can match its resolve – or its ability to bring the railways to a halt. That may mean the Bank of England is worrying unnecessarily about wages taking off – at least not with the ferocity seen in the 1970s, when union membership was strong and wage bargaining to beat inflation was the norm.This time last year my partner John and I celebrated purchasing an electric car by driving through London to see the Christmas lights without having to pay congestion or Ulez – ultra-low emission zone – charges. I gleefully tweeted that Regent Street, deserted in lockdown, seemed a London from a different era: empty roads and glittering shop windows. This was my first moment of enjoyment of the electric vehicle (EV), whose purchase had been the source of considerable domestic tension. An eternal optimist, John was convinced we should dispense with a diesel car. The arrival of a grandchild, living at the opposite diagonal corner of London, tipped the balance. It would cut 30 minutes off a hellish journey. I mainly saw negatives. I liked my nippy BMW and had range anxiety. How far could we go before the battery failed? Would we be able to do long drives? Were our meandering journeys through France finished for good? “Of course we’ll go,” John said. ‘The French are way ahead of us when it comes to electric.” Not in the Tesla price bracket, we settled on a Renault Zoe. Of the cheaper cars, it had the longest range: about 240 miles on a full charge, weather and driving conditions dependent. But all EVs are expensive – £31,000 for this small and far-from-luxury car. We opted to lease, paying a small amount of cash and then monthly payments. From the outset the whole experience was distinctly lacking in frills; a couple of young petrolheads waved us goodbye with minimal induction to the car and no information about the charging infrastructure, except to “use the Zap[-Map] app to find a charge point”. One piece of info that would have been handy for our survival was that EVs have incredible acceleration. We had been in eco-mode since purchasing the car, when, on the first trip outside London, we found ourselves labouring up a hill, accelerator flat to the floor and still only hitting 55mph. John reached over and switched off eco-mode “to see what happens”. Pinned against the seats by the sheer force, we took off like a rocket. We were on our own trying to figure out the mysteries of the country’s charging network. BP rang, offering us a charging point outside our house. This domestic charging is cheapest but, living in a London terrace, we were ineligible. Instead we became aficionados of charging lamp-posts, relatively common in our area. But, as often with EVs, there is a catch. Wandsworth borough council does not reserve the parking spaces for EVs, so “ordinary” cars park there, displacing EVs, which are forced to hunt around for one of the faster, more expensive chargers. There are numerous providers and not very numerous chargers. Each provider requires you to download its app and subscribe. They all work differently and prices vary. Many chargers are out of order. Problems are most visible on longer journeys. When lockdown was relaxed in May we booked to stay at Derek Gow’s rewilding project in Devon. We planned to stop where there were “clusters” of chargers but still got caught out, idling away an hour in a glum corner of Amesbury in Wiltshire, only to discover the charger had stopped working after 10 minutes. After that, it was a hunt for other chargers in obscure garden centres, supermarkets and garages. Some worked, some did not, but we began to meet the community of electric adventurers, passing time waiting for chargers by comparing apps, prices and “worst EV journeys”. Most places are willing to help out with charging. They were happy to sling a wire at Gow’s and on the way back, the Bull hotel in Bridport, Dorset – booked last minute – didn’t turn a hair, reserving us a place by an external charging point. “We’d better get used to this,” they said. But plugging into unprepared domestic supplies is not always successful. In June we managed to blow the electrics of our friends’ home in Kent. By July I noticed my range anxiety was fading. I didn’t think twice about a trip to North Yorkshire. I no longer watched the battery gauge. If the car said it would do another 106 miles, it meant it. Stops could be planned confidently. A new mentality was creeping in: “get as far as you can” was replaced by scheduling in longer stops and delays. But “laid-back” only works up to a point. There were still anxious moments – chargers not working, less-than-helpful helplines and ever more provider registrations. The new anxiety was charge anxiety – not that the car cannot do it, but that chargers will not be available. By August it was decision time for France. John was still pushing for the 700-mile journey in this car. I was just as set against it: I could not recall seeing chargers around and my French source said our destination village had a charger that was invariably hors service. I got my way and was also proved right. Once there and able to look around, it was clear France was not electric car nirvana after all. So the French EV adventure still awaits. By autumn the car was a useful, boring thing rather than a source of anxiety. We could drive to and fro to Kent on one charge, smugly travel across central London, laugh at the fuel shortages and reduce charge anxiety by sticking to reliable chargers. But I noticed gender division was setting in. John had most of the apps on his phone and did more of the technical side, especially midnight trips to find a lamp-post. This is typical, judging from encounters with the informal club of early adopters, mainly male, around the charging points. So, I no longer have diesel particles on my conscience and changes in driving habits augur well for the environment. Conscious of conserving energy, you drive at lower speeds, while travel by train for longer journeys becomes more appealing. But the unnecessarily complicated charger network leaves everything to be desired. There is no universal charge card for all suppliers and far too few chargers overall. This will be a huge problem when EV numbers increase. Lack of government regulation is also ridiculous: as things stand, multiple suppliers face no comeback if they fail to keep chargers working. I cannot say the electric car has widened my horizons, but it has made me plan more carefully for reaching them.Rupert Soames was driving north “one dark and stormy night” in late 2013 when an item on the 6pm news made his ears prick up. Serco, the outsourcing giant that had become synonymous with ripping off the taxpayer, had just sacked its chief executive. “I got on to the headhunter that evening and said, ‘So can I do it? Can I do it?’ I had always wanted to do a turnaround that was very large … but most importantly I wanted to do something in public service.” Soames got the job and joined in early 2014, when Serco was vying for the label of Britain’s most-reviled company. It was in the dock for having overcharged the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) tens of millions of pounds for electronically tagging offenders, some of whom were dead or still in prison; its shares were in freefall; and it was barred from winning new government work. “I have a horrible habit of walking towards gunfire,” says Soames with a grin, sitting in the central London office of his public relations adviser, wearing his trademark blue shirt embroidered with the words “Serco and proud of it”. (He ordered a batch when he was appointed.) The new chief executive’s approach combined gusto with a heavy dose of gallows humour. His initial appeal to staff was: “Bring out your dead.” In response, he says, “rather a lot of bodies came flying out”. Soames puts his appetite for danger in the line of duty down to his ancestry: his grandfather was Sir Winston Churchill. “It may come as an amazing surprise to you, but it’s something that comes with some family history of public service,” he says. “And I could never be a politician because I can’t remember people’s names.” Westminster might have been the obvious choice: his eldest brother, Sir Nicholas Soames, is a former Conservative defence minister; his father was Sir Christopher Soames, a Tory minister in the 1960s and later ambassador to France. The public service Soames chose was of an altogether grittier kind. Serco works in some of the most sensitive corners of government, dicing with scandal on a daily basis. It runs six prisons for the MoJ; it houses asylum seekers; it runs London’s Santander bike hire scheme; and it helps run * * * CV Age 62 Family Married with three children Education Eton College, followed by politics, philosophy and economics at Oxford University. Pay £4.9m including bonuses Last holiday A trip to Mallaig on the west coast of Scotland, where he has a home. Best advice he’s been given Something he read, rather than being told: J Paul Getty’s maxim, “Rise early, work hard, strike oil.” However, he qualifies that by adding: “You can’t say to people who do 12-hour shifts in a prison that they don’t work hard enough. A lot of it is an accident of birth. And a lot of it is luck.” Biggest career mistake An attempted management buyout, when he was in his late 30s, of Birmingham weighing scale company Avery. “The timing and financing were wrong and I got fired.” Word he overuses “Yes”, and another word “that’s not for a family newspaper”. How he relaxes “Walking the hills in Scotland and mucking around with boats. If I wasn’t doing this job, I would like to be coxswain of the RNLI lifeboat at Mallaig.” * * * the much-criticised £37bn Covid test and trace system for the NHS. Soames keeps a toilet brush on his desk – he calls it his “shit-o-meter” – to emphasise how precarious it all is. “Its bristles are finely tuned, so if I come in in the morning and they’re going clackety-clack, something is going wrong somewhere.” With some exceptions, the shit-o-meter has not rattled as loudly in recent years. Serco’s shares have not quite taken off, but it has restored its dividend, and is plotting expansion. Yet for all Soames’s efforts, the principle of government outsourcing – where the state pays the private sector to do its work – has rarely looked so uncertain. Water companies are under fire for pumping sewage into rivers and the sea, and a Tory government has taken to renationalising services – from energy suppler Bulb to railways. Soames says some of his predecessors were “deeply complacent” that the outsourcing trend turbocharged by New Labour would continue unchallenged – and this led to Serco’s near-death experience, and the collapse of rivals from Carillion to Interserve. Yet, he says, the principle still stands firm. “It’s called choice. It’s called competition. It’s called calling for new ideas.” Still, there are lines even Soames will not cross – “actually firing guns” in the defence business, or “taking decisions or making judgments about people’s lives” in prisons and immigration. While governments have leaned heavily on the private sector during the pandemic for everything from vaccine development to supplying PPE, accusations of profiteering, cronyism and poor scrutiny of contracts have further frayed that pact. Serco – and Soames – have been well paid for their test and trace work. At it one point, Serco had 20,000 people working on it – many of them calling contacts of the infected and telling them to isolate. Last year the company earned about £700m in Covid-related revenues around the world – the bulk of this in the UK – with a 5% profit margin. There’s a pause as Soames wrestles with whether contact tracing has actually worked, or been a waste of taxpayer money. “It’s a complicated answer. Tracing worked up to the point when the pandemic ran completely out of control,” he says. “I personally believe that it worked in between the times of the very greatest peaks.” Now, with Omicron endemic and an estimated one in 15 people in the UK infected, tracing appears futile. Soames says the issue of whether it was a good idea, or whether it worked, is above Serco’s pay grade. “The government was taking advice from scientists, who said you need to do tracing … What if there hadn’t been any tracing? I think people would have been outraged.” Soames took a meandering journey to Serco. The old Etonian went to Oxford University, where he was president of the union, a member of the notorious Bullingdon Club and a DJ. He was offered a job at GEC Marconi by its boss, Lord Weinstock, then moved to software business Misys, before turning round Aggreko, a Glasgow-based emergency power generator company, taking it into the FTSE 100. There has been anger at his pay at Serco: last year’s £4.9m package took his total earnings since joining to £23.5m. “I’m very well paid,” he says. “Of course I think about the pay differential (with the company’s lowest-paid staff), but I am made of flesh and blood.” We are almost out of time, but there is still enough for one final party piece from Soames the DJ. He triumphantly sets his iPhone on the table and the soaring chords of Samuel Barber’s Adagio for Strings fill the room, before Puff Daddy’s lament for Biggie Smalls, I’ll Be Missing You, kicks in. The chief executive of Serco leaps to his feet and does an impression of a dancing pallbearer: “This is what I want to have at my funeral.”Whoever gives out music awards should hand one to the German label Analog Africa, which has spent the past decade uncovering lost delights from the continent’s output during the 1960s to 1980s, when few people aside from those who lived there were tuning in to the sounds of West Africa and beyond, Nigeria’s Fela Kuti providing one of the few exceptions. Hot on the heels of Cameroon Garage Funk, this collection – as ever, charmingly presented with in-depth research – focuses on Ghana, whose highlife music was the wellspring for much African output. Its title salutes the Essiebons label of producer Dick Essilfie-Bondzie, who died aged 90 midway through the album’s compilation, but not before unearthing some unreleased gems. By the mid-70s, highlife’s jazzy roots had become entangled with the sound of Black America to create a funk-heavy hybrid with lots of stuttering guitars, James Brown declamations and meandering organ parts – a genre captured on tracks by scene-shakers such as Ernest Honny and CK Mann, whose Yeaba is a standout. Odder moments feature the proto-synths of the time; Joe Meah’s Ahwene Pa Nkasa typifies an appetite for psych-heavy weirdness. A surprising trip to an altogether other time and place.Record house prices, cheap mortgages, a stamp duty holiday and the “race for space” during the pandemic have meant huge rewards for UK housebuilders, Taylor Wimpey included. In the first half of 2021, the UK’s third-largest housebuilder finished a record number of homes, returned to profit, and upgraded forecasts for the full year, the results for which it will publish in March. But the company has become the latest target of unwanted attention from US activist investor Elliott Advisors, which has also picked battles with the Argentinian government, mining giant BHP and Britain’s second-biggest drugmaker, GSK, among others. A month ago, the New York hedge fund went public with its demands on Taylor Wimpey, revealing in a nine-page public letter to Taylor Wimpey chair Irene Dorner that it was one of the company’s top five investors and wanted the housebuilder to find a new chief executive from outside the organisation. In typical fashion, Elliott was scathing about Taylor Wimpey’s current leadership’s “operational and strategic missteps,” and called for an experienced external candidate to succeed Pete Redfern as chief executive. The letter came a few days after Redfern announced he would be stepping down in 2022 after 15 years at the helm (he denied that the decision was prompted by pressure from Elliott). In 2006, Redfern became the youngest FTSE 100 chief executive when, at 37, he took charge of George Wimpey and led a merger with rival Taylor Woodrow the following year. Taylor Wimpey says it is at an advanced stage in its search for a replacements, looking at internal and external candidates, including from outside the housebuilding sector. Elliott is pushing for it to choose someone from within the industry and is thought to prefer either Crest Nicholson chief Peter Truscott, who previously ran Galliford Try and also spent 30 years at Taylor Wimpey; former Persimmon boss Dave Jenkinson, who quit last year in a row over build quality (and after a controversial £45m payout); and Barratt deputy chief executive and chief operating officer Steven Boyes. Analysts say Truscott is the most likely to get the job. From within Taylor Wimpey, another strong candidate is group operations director Jennie Daly, who has long been talked about as a possible successor to Redfern. “She has lots of experience in strategic land [buying] and planning, which is the lifeblood of housebuilding,” said Anthony Codling, chief executive of property firm Twindig. “She’d also bring a great deal of operational expertise.” If appointed, Daly would be the only female chief executive of a major housebuilder; Dorner is the only female chair in a male-dominated industry. There was speculation that Jeff Fairburn, the Persimmon boss ousted after a public outcry over his proposed £110m bonus, was also being lined up for the job at Taylor Wimpey, as Elliott had also backed the takeover of east Midlands-based Avant Homes by Berkeley DeVeer, a builder controlled by Fairburn, last April. However, Avant and Fairburn swiftly denied that he had any interest in the job. Analysts said Elliott was attracted to Taylor Wimpey because of Britain’s housing shortage and the firm’s hidden potential, including its land bank, but some believed it needed to improve its operational performance. Its shares have fallen by a quarter since February 2020. Clyde Lewis of Peel Hunt said: “Elliott has some valid points. Of the major housebuilders, TW has probably been the quietest in the past few years. Persimmon has gone through a lot of management change; Barratt has made more progress in terms of strategy and margins. TW hasn’t evolved much. There’s probably a modest amount of support [behind Elliott] from other investors.” In its criticism of Taylor Wimpey, Elliott cited its “failed large-sites strategy”, which it said had led to cost overruns and sale-price erosion in 2019, as well as the £500m fund-raising and £1.7bn splurge on new land in summer 2020. It noted that the firm had suffered the sector’s biggest decline in housebuilding volumes in 2020, with a 39% drop compared with Barratt at 29% and Persimmon at 14%. The company has defended its record, noting that it was the first major builder to shut all its sites when the pandemic first hit. The housebuilder has pointed to its record first-half profits for 2021 and its upgraded forecasts for the full year. It also said that the equity increase enabled it to snap up land at low prices, investing for the future in the hope of reaping stronger growth in 2023. Despite all that, Elliott looks to be shaping up for its next fight.Tessa Hadley walks into the sitting room of a hotel in London’s West End that is a pleasant mixture of Christmassy, deserted and library-quiet – a welcome side-effect of the pandemic. At 65, she has an eager, intelligent, girlish face and an elegant angularity (I’ve not seen her handwriting but would bet on forward-sloping italics). She is wearing a long string of red beads against a white sweater that is reminiscent of her character Alice’s fashion advice in her 2015 novel, The Past: “you should go for this understated thing, that the French women do”. I feel, from the minute we meet, as if Hadley were a friend unaccountably not seen for years, and, as swiftly, recognise this as an explicable illusion because, like all her admiring readers, I have met her through her beautifully written, quietly bestselling novels, including The Past and Late in the Day (2019) – and now through her bold new book, Free Love. It is not that her writing is autobiographical, more that she has the gift for bringing everything she has, sees and knows to the characters she creates. As soon as she is sitting down, we order a pot of Ceylon tea for two – our excuse, we agree with relief, for shedding our face masks. There is so much to talk about, I say. Free Love is set in the 60s, and at its centre is Phyllis, an attractive, middle-aged woman who falls in love with Nicky, the grown-up son of a friend of her husband’s – young enough to be her child – and leaves her own children to be with him. The Washington Post has described Hadley as “one of the greatest stylists alive”, and in this novel, as in her others and in her short stories (many of them published in the New Yorker), the beauty of her prose is in its supple, non-attention-seeking articulacy. Free Love is brilliantly plotted and keeps its secret through two-thirds of its length so faithfully, I did not even begin to guess at the hugely satisfying slipknot ahead. But when I put it to Hadley that Free Love is about the cost of love, the price tag attaching to passionate relationships, she just nods in acquiescence, regretfully, as if she could not be expected to be held responsible for this or any other consequence. She is surprised-bordering-on-hurt when I tell her that while she might not condemn Phyllis for abandoning her children, I do. “Do you?” she says wistfully, “My mum does too.” (Her 90-year-old mother, as well as being a critical ally, will turn out be a wonderful presence in our conversation.) Hadley’s surprise at readers not liking some of her female characters is not new (take a look at this London Review bookshop interview), but what fascinates is what this reveals about her creative process. One of her strengths is that she never judges, and this is because she is too closely involved with her characters for the distance that judgment requires: “If I met them I might not like them. But when you’re writing, you’re more interested in getting them, seeing them, just having them there.” By suspending judgment herself, I suggest to her, it is her readers who are left holding the baby of responsibility and likely to become aghast, apprehensive and desperately sorry for Phyllis’s children. Does she feel compassion for her own characters? She wonders if that would come over as “a bit soppy”. And she decides that, anyway, she doesn’t: “It’s a little bit colder than that. When I’m writing Phyllis, I’m being her, which doesn’t involve judging her or feeling compassionate, it’s just inhabiting.” Inhabiting – this is the key; Hadley’s gift is to move in completely. And so to what extent does she see Phyllis’s tumble into love as being about the vain longing to feel young again? “A lot,” she replies, and refers back to the opening chapter, a dinner at Phyllis’s house in which she first sets eyes on Nicky and believes he is recoiling from her physically. “It upends her and destabilises the careless, unexamined assumption she has had that she will go on being herself. She suddenly thinks she is going to be old, and that there is something she has not had. And one has to be reasonably sympathetic to that anguish.” But surely Hadley could not imagine leaving her own children for a man? “I couldn’t – and that has not arisen for me, which is good – but I can imagine the women who have done it and don’t condemn them.” Phyllis’s relationship of loving reciprocity with her nine-year-old son, Hugh, is movingly described. But once Phyllis has deserted, the age of innocence is over. There is an excruciating moment when Hugh receives a birthday card from his mother, while at boarding school, and throws it away. I ask if Hugh is based on any of her sons but this proves too simple a serve and she hits it straight back over the net: “No, that was just made up.” She defends Phyllis by emphasising that she was about to lose her son anyway to boarding school: “It’s a precipitating factor in unloosing her. She has a marvellous, kind, companionable marriage but it’s not passionate on either side. The reward has been her blissful relationship with her son.” Tessa Hadley met her own husband, Eric Hadley, at teacher training college. He was her tutor and she married him at 23, “ridiculously young”, and had her first baby at 24. Elsewhere, she has blamed DH Lawrence for what she describes as “crazy life choices”. She explains now that the craziness was her belief that “a career was not what I wanted”. She was in flight from a “disastrous” year of trying to be a school teacher. She had also flirted with the academic route, getting as far as applying to do a PhD on Jane Austen, but when her husband got a teaching job in Cardiff deciding against that too: “In a Lawrentian spirit I thought there was a falsity and deadness…” she does not finish her sentence. Reading between the lines, it cannot have been an easy time. She admits she kept notebooks about the “tensions of young motherhood and marriage”. As material for a novel? “No, I had nil idea – they were for myself… I loved my sons, and being domesticated gave me alibis for not going out and getting a proper job.” But she veered “backwards and forwards” between feeling she was on the right path (her mother’s) and feeling “desolate I wasn’t in the world”. Hadley has three stepsons and three sons. Her eldest stepson is 55 – 10 years younger than she is. Her youngest son is 30. I am curious – it is something we have in common – to hear about her experience of an all-male household. She had pictured herself having daughters, but “my sons are exactly what I want because they are who they are”. She flags the positives about having boys: “Privacy and a sort of freedom in your head, although anyone who thinks boys don’t suffer from angst – there’s plenty of that. But they are ironists, jokers – you can’t get away with being too solemn. I remember a no-good book I wrote called Crazy Salad, a quotation from Shakespeare. The boys found this on my computer and would weave it into everyday conversation: ‘What’s for supper tonight, Mum? Is it crazy salad?’” They lived in Cardiff in “a house that was a bit of a slum but good for bringing up wild teenagers”. After the boys had grown up, they moved to London for 10 years but are now back in Cardiff “in a very pretty street” so her mother can be with them. “Cardiff is a wonderful city, and it’s great to be in Wales with a Labour government.” But Hadley is, by birth, a Bristolian. She is the daughter of a teacher, Geoff Nichols, who ran a music shop and was a jazz trumpeter with a successful West Country band. He died a couple of years ago (his brother, Tessa’s uncle, was the playwright Peter Nichols). Mary, Hadley’s mother, was a dressmaker and amateur artist, and vivid, positive, glamorous. “She still is. Some people resign themselves early to being elderly, but Mum was furious the other day because she couldn’t hammer in her Christmas decorations.” Over the course of the conversation, we track Hadley’s writing life to its beginnings, starting with the tiny, stitched books she wrote aged 10, illustrated on their backs by her mother: “These were imitation Frances Hodgson Burnett or E Nesbit’s The Wouldbegoods.” She still possesses a little book entitled The Countess which she disparages as “fake” and influenced by Daisy Ashford’s The Young Visiters, but which, she says, has one good line: “Frederick Fillet gazed into the dying coles [an Ashfordesque misspelling] of the fire.” Hadley went to “a horrible girls grammar school” before escaping to join her brother at the local comprehensive. And throughout this time she kept “an utterly humiliating diary”. Her early entries were sweetly uneventful: “Mummy is a pig, she won’t let Kate stay for tea.” But then she sank into the teenage mire: “I don’t think I can live if I don’t see M in the morning.” She laughs. “I don’t even know who M is now!” She was too insecure to write stories: “I’d had the stuffing knocked out of me and was too busy living – or failing to live. Mum was my role model in thinking one had always, first of all, to be loved and make a home.” When she got into Cambridge to read English, she “fell in love with other people’s writing” but still did not dare write herself. Hadley is, and always has been, a bookworm, “a compulsive, obsessive, library-going reader”. A talent for reading is seldom remarked upon but can be the making of a writer. Hadley has been compared to Virginia Woolf, Iris Murdoch and Anne Tyler. But it is the less mainstream novelist, Elizabeth Bowen (1899-1973), who matters to her most: “Bowen’s writing got into my bloodstream. It’s to do with the excitement she has at life. She can make you excited about everything from central heating in a stuffy hallway in a Regent’s Park house, to the sun setting behind hills in Ireland, to a suitcase sliding around on the back seat of a car. The work of getting those things on to the page is so vigorous.” This is Hadley’s work too: “an urge to capture what is actual around me”. And it is work that, at first, led nowhere. Her first novel, Accidents in the Home, was not published until she was 46. For 20 years she weathered rejections (she winces in explanation for her vagueness about the precise number “about 14?”). “I was trying to write and failing catastrophically. It was a compulsion so insane… I did it badly, failed, longed to stop – but couldn’t. Every time I would give up for a bit and then this compulsion returned to write about everything I was seeing, feeling, watching – not just my own thoughts but what was out there. Our moment in Britain…” The born writer in her refused to be still-born, and in her 30s, with scepticism, she says, she enrolled on an MA in creative writing at Bath Spa University, where she would later become, from 1997 onwards, a professor of creative writing herself. She enjoyed the course, but after completing it still did not feel she was where she needed to be as a novelist. She believes “the reason I wrote so badly for so long is that I didn’t have a strongly formed, authoritative self”. She had to learn not to be “in awe of the characters I used to write about in my bad books. I was trying to write as if I were writing books by other novelists I loved – Nadine Gordimer, above all.” But it was doing a PhD on Henry James, whose novels “give you a wonderful permission to make big art out of small things”, that proved to be her turning point. She knew she was a “good critic”, and she was able to harness that authority and apply it to her fiction. But it is plot, she says, that remains the “hardest thing to get right. Finding the story is the secret. I spend a lot of time with horrible brain ache… I used to say to my students (I am no longer teaching): work at the story but don’t work too hard. Just dream it… such a contradiction.” I tell her that, aside from her mastery of plot, what I love most is her ability to understand that minds are rogue and can host contradictory feelings (like Christine in Late in the Day who, devastated by her husband’s desertion, simultaneously and fleetingly exults at having their flat to herself). Hadley cannot account for this imaginative leaping, except by describing herself as having a “weird absorbency”. Before we part, I briefly refer back to Phyllis and her fear of ageing. How much does Hadley mind getting older herself? “It was anguishing in my late 40s and early 50s – that was the transition, when it felt there were things that hadn’t happened. I don’t feel like that now. But it would be stupid for there not to be a sadness in being older as well as repose and a kind of calm.” And she describes the “joy” of writing a novel and the slog, the “two to three years of haulage”, and the knowing, as she gets older, that she will not be able to produce novels for ever. But she emphasises that she feels lucky to have succeeded, and describes being published as “lovely”. Yet there remains a trace of anxiety. “I sometimes look at my marvellous daughter-in-law who is a civil servant in housing and think, ‘Good God, I’m only making things up’, and I feel a twinge of shame.” Her self-doubt must be a burden. What is it she feels she has not done? She leans forward, says she does not know, wonders: “Maybe it is to be Phyllis and have rashly run off?” She then quickly takes that back. And it’s at this point that the thought – it could hardly be clearer – arises in us simultaneously: it is through her novels that she pursues the paths not taken and leads the lives unled. Free Love by Tessa Hadley is published by Jonathan Cape on 20 January (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyOn 24 December, the movie Don’t Look Up began streaming on Netflix following a limited release in cinemas. It’s a satirical story, directed by Adam McKay, about what happens when a lowly PhD student (played by Jennifer Lawrence) and her supervisor (Leonardo DiCaprio) discover that an Everest-size asteroid is heading for Earth. What happens is that they try to warn their fellow Earthlings about this existential threat only to find that their intended audience isn’t interested in hearing such bad news. The movie has been widely watched but has had a pasting from critics. It was, said the Observer’s Simran Hans, a “shrill, desperately unfunny climate-change satire”. The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw found it a “laboured, self-conscious and unrelaxed satire… like a 145-minute Saturday Night Live sketch with neither the brilliant comedy of Succession… nor the seriousness that the subject might otherwise require”. Those complaints about crudity and OTT-ness rang a bell. It just so happens that a distinctly over-the-top satire published in 1729 attracted comparable reactions. Its author, Jonathan Swift, was an Anglo-Irish clergyman who was dean of St Patrick’s Cathedral in Dublin. Swift’s title – A Modest Proposal for Preventing the Children of Poor People from Being a Burthen to Their Parents or Country and for Making Them Beneficial to the Publick – gives only a hint of the savagery of the satire within. For the nub of the proposal was that that the impoverished Irish might ease their economic troubles by selling their children as food to rich gentlemen and ladies. “A young healthy child well nursed,” it reads, “is, at a year old, a most delicious nourishing and wholesome food, whether stewed, roasted, baked, or boiled; and I make no doubt that it will equally serve in a fricassee, or a ragout.” You get the drift. Swift’s target was the Anglo-Irish aristocracy, often absentee landlords living on the rents of their desperately poor Irish tenantry while poncing about in Mayfair. McKay’s targets are more diffuse. He aims less at a specific class than an entire way of life – at people too stupefied by consumerism, short-termism and social media, too hypnotised by the interests of big tech corporations, to worry about the future of humankind. Which brings us, oddly enough, to a contemporary obsession – the frenzy now surrounding non-fungible tokens or NFTs. For those who have not yet noticed this obsession, an NFT is basically a traceable code that is indelibly attached to a digital object such as an image or recording. Once someone has bought that object it becomes irrevocably registered to their ID and so they can be said to be owners of the code. If it sounds abstruse, then that’s because it is. And yet, over the last 18 months or so, NFTs have become a sensation in the art world or, at any rate, in the part of it controlled by the big auction houses. Last June, Sotheby’s ran an auction of NFTs with prices ranging between $9,000 and $11m. In an earlier auction by Christie’s, a digital artwork by Mike Winkelmann, who calls himself Beeple, sold for $69m. Up to that point, Mr Winkelmann had never sold a print for more than a hundred bucks. You can guess what this has triggered: an avalanche of wannabe Beeples, plus a lot of speculative hustlers who see a possibility of more modest jackpots for relatively little work (say a recording of your charming cat’s purr). Anyone can play at the game and there are useful DIY guides on the web for those interested in having a go. So what’s not to like? Surely it’s a good thing that artists who have had a hard time earning a crust in the pandemic can get paid? It is. But there is one small snag: the technology that ensures that the NFT you’ve bought is yours is a blockchain similar to the ones that power cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin or Ethereum. And the computation needed to provide the certification that is the USP of blockchains requires massive amounts of electricity, which comes with a correspondingly heavy carbon footprint. A single transaction on the Ethereum blockchain, for example, currently requires 232.51 kWh, which is equivalent to the power consumption of an average US household over 7.86 days. If McKay decides that he’d like to have another go at Swiftian satire, there’s an opening for him here. Nero merely fiddled while Rome burned: we’re enthusiastically bidding for NFTs while heating up the planet. What I’ve been reading One more thing Why I Traded My Fancy Climbing Gear for a Pair of Ramshackle Watches is a nice blogpost by Conrad Anker that will have meaning for anyone who is cursed (or blessed) with a collecting gene. Back to the future The great robotics expert Rodney Brooks does his annual review of the predictions he made in 2018. The great escape The Haunted California Idyll of German Writers in Exile is a lovely essay by Alex Ross in the New Yorker about the intellectuals and artists who fled Hitler and wound up in LA. • This article was amended on 11 January 2022 to clarify that NFTs are dependent on blockchain technology.A snow leopard at a zoo in Bloomington, Illinois, has died after contracting Covid-19. Miller Park Zoo announced the death of Rilu, 11, which the zoo previously said “began coughing and had a raspy respiration beginning on 20 November”, in an Instagram post on Thursday. Noting the animal’s spectacular tail, which was almost as long as its body, the zoo said Rilu produced seven offspring which are now part of its Species Survival Plan. “Rilu’s personality and beauty will be missed by guests and staff but he will not be forgotten,” said superintendent Jay Tetzloff, adding that masks are required in all indoor spaces at the Bloomington zoo. According to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), most animal Covid infections come from contact with humans “including owners, caretakers or others in close contact”. Among animals vulnerable to Covid, the CDC lists companion animals including cats, dogs and ferrets; several types of big cats; otters; non-human primates; binturong; coati-mundi; fishing cats; hyenas; mink; and wild white-tailed deer. The photographer Joel Sartore, whose image of Rilu accompanied the announcement of the animal’s death, paid tribute in his own post. “Snow leopards are proving extremely susceptible to the disease and it’s often fatal,” Sartore said. “If you haven’t received a vaccination and booster yet, please do so. It’s more than just human lives that are at stake. Thank you.” In December, three snow leopards at the Lincoln Children’s Zoo in Nebraska died of complications from Covid-19. Two Sumatran tigers recovered. In July, zoos in Oakland and Denver announced they would start vaccinating tigers, bears and other mammals with a two-dose vaccine first administered in March to gorillas in San Diego. Zoetis, a New Jersey animal health company, has said it has donated more than 11,000 vaccine doses to almost 70 zoos and wildlife sanctuaries, as part of an effort authorised by the US Department of Agriculture. In December, two hippos at a zoo in Antwerp, Belgium, tested positive for Covid-19. Imani, 14, and Hermien, 41, showed no symptoms “other than runny noses”, the zoo said. Francis Vercammen, a zoo vet, told CNN: “To my knowledge, this is the first known contamination in this species.”A cost of living crisis is “driving angst” among Conservative MPs about spring’s local elections, senior party figures are warning, as an overwhelming majority of voters in a survey reported that they had seen their costs rise faster than their income. With the Treasury examining an expansion of a scheme designed to help the poorest with their energy bills, influential Tories are already saying that the plan will be too narrow and that the party will suffer big losses in May’s elections. The elections, which take place across London, metropolitan boroughs and some county councils, are being regarded as the next major source of political danger for Boris Johnson. MPs are sounding the alarm because inflationary pressures are set to peak just weeks before voting takes place. Some Tories are already warning they will try to engineer a parliamentary clash with the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to force him into action. “I think it’s fair to say that the cost of living is one of the things that’s actually driving angst amongst MPs,” said Lord Hayward, the Tory peer and respected pollster. The MPs are conscious that the elections will be happening in the wake of increases in energy and national insurance charges due to come in three or four weeks earlier. “Large numbers of MPs have never been in a parliament where the government has been 15 points behind. This for them is a new experience to be even 6% or 7% behind, though the last two opinion polls have actually been better for the Tories,” Hayward said. “But certainly there is an angst amongst MPs who, confronted by 6% to 8% deficits, are looking towards their local elections.” The news comes as an Opinium poll for the Observer suggests households are already noticing price inflation. About 70% of voters said they had seen their cost of living increase more than their income over the last 12 months, despite reports of pay rises. A majority who voted Tory at the last election (57%) said they backed removing VAT from energy bills. One in eight voters (12%) would now describe their financial situation as “struggling”, up slightly from 9% from the end of lockdown in April. A huge majority of the public say they have noticed price rises. About 86% have noticed a rise in the overall cost of living, 83% a rise in grocery bills, 80% a rise in energy bills and 59% a rise in council tax. A likely remedy from the government will be an expansion of the £140 Warm Homes Discount aimed at the poorest households. However, Tories are already warning that expanding the scheme will be insufficient: some even suggested they would threaten to vote against this year’s budget without firmer action. “That is only for those on benefits, predominantly,” said one influential figure. “The just-about-managing are not helped. I hope that they introduce a green levy escalator that goes down when the wholesale energy price rises.” The government is receiving guidance that inflation could rise to as high as 7% if they fail to take action. Average annual fuel bills could rise from £1,300 to about £2,000 a year. “The whole timing of this cost of living increase, whether it’s caused by world factors such as energy prices or whether it’s caused by domestic factors such as increased taxes, is coming at a very awkward time,” said another party veteran. “Not only the local government elections, but just at a time when really everybody wants to sort of get beyond Covid. We’re all hoping that after this winter is over and Omicron doesn’t turn out as bad as everybody feared, we want to emerge from that and start to get our lives back. This whole cost of living thing – I think it’s going to become quite tricky for the government.” Energy regulator Ofgem is set to announce a rise of up to £700 in its price cap at the start of next month. Bills would increase from April, with the local elections set for 5 May. Tories have been demanding a cut to green levies, the end of VAT on energy bills or a reversal of a coming increase in national insurance to ease the pressure. Labour has so far backed cutting VAT on energy bills, but is also under pressure to go further. Stephen McPartland, the Tory MP for Stevenage, said that family finances were like a “leaky bucket that is getting leakier and leakier”. He called for the energy price cap not to be increased. Lib Dem leader Ed Davey said there was now a “growing revolt in former Conservative heartlands against this government”. He added: “As we saw in North Shropshire, even lifelong Conservative voters are fed up with Johnson’s incompetence and lack of decency. His failure to act on the cost of living crisis is simply adding fuel to the fire.”Until a month ago, pub landlord Scott Jones knew only a handful of people who had got Covid. But since then, the majority of the people he knows have had the virus – including his young son, his assistant, who was off work for 10 days, and the people he depends on to deliver supplies to his Chelmsford pub, the Railway Tavern. “It was like the perfect storm, it all happened at once,” said Jones, 40, who was left trying to juggle it all with his partner, on top of a 40% drop in pub takings. “There’s so many knock-on effects of it. Every day seems to bring a new challenge.” The Essex city is just one of many places up and down the country increasingly struggling to function properly due to Covid staff shortages – affecting everything from bin collections to the local hospital and football team. According to the latest government figures, on Friday there were 410 new cases reported in Chelmsford and one death. In the first week of January, there were 3,198 new cases recorded. Following issues with certain lagers and CO2 during previous phases of the pandemic, Jones said the latest delivery issues have centred on wine. At the same time, as Covid cases continue to rise, he is worried about the prospect of another lockdown, which he does not think the pub could survive. “Usually at this time on a Friday every table would be taken and I’d have three staff working,” he said, standing alone behind the bar, above which a sign reads “desperate times call for double measures”. Customer Phil Elliott, 61, an artist, said he has felt the impact of staff shortages on buses, which are running on a reduced timetable due to “higher than normal” staff sickness caused by Omicron. At the bus station, a driver said absences are the worst they have been throughout the whole of the pandemic and that they are cutting over 1,600 miles a day of journeys. “It’s stressful,” he said. First Essex apologised to customers and said they are doing everything they can to minimise disruption and that teams are “working extra hard to ensure as many buses run as is possible”. Meanwhile, at Broomfield Hospital staff are understood to be struggling with extra work and stress as growing numbers of staff fall ill. “Broomfield staff have never known a crisis like this. They’re absolutely wrung out from almost two years of near-constant emergency footing,” said Sam Older, eastern regional organiser at Unison, which is calling for an above-inflation pay rise for NHS staff. “With Omicron running riot, more and more are falling ill. Those left are contending with not only the fear of the virus, but the extra work and stress from the shortages.” Mid and South Essex NHS Foundation Trust, which oversees the hospital, said Omicron is leading to “higher levels of staff absence”. A spokesperson added: “Our staff are working tirelessly to minimise the impact of this and we have robust plans in place to ensure that patients who urgently need our care continue to receive it.” Meanwhile, collections of food-waste bins were cancelled for three days last week after 23 drivers – 40% of their total drivers – were off sick following the Christmas break. Councillor Stephen Robinson, the Liberal Democrat leader of Chelmsford City Council, noted that it marked the first change to bin collections of the pandemic. “It was very much an emergency decision, and this week we’re now largely back on track,” he said. He said managing services amid soaring infection rates had been a challenge and that leisure centres were having to move staff around to cover for absences. But, he added: “By and large, Chelmsford City Council has coped very well and services have kept running throughout the pandemic.” Even the football team has been taken down by Covid. Chelmsford City’s match against Braintree Town had to be postponed last Sunday because so many Chelmsford players had tested positive. And for Saturday’s match, against Bath City, Chelmsford’s manager, Robbie Simpson, who has also tested positive, was preparing to coach them remotely via a livestream from isolation. “Within the space of just over a week we’ve gone from having next to no-one to almost everybody, so it’s been crazy,” said Simpson. As an NHS worker, Simpson’s wife has had to work from home after his positive test, despite testing negative herself. Preparing for matches when many of the team have been quarantining has been tough. “Because obviously you can’t really prepare in advance because you never know when someone’s going to get a positive lateral flow,” he said. One player has converted his garage into a gym so that he can keep training while in isolation. “It seems like everybody’s getting it at the minute. Obviously, last week there was a big shortage on PCRs and some of the players had to wait at least a couple of days before they were able to get a PCR,” said Simpson. “So that just goes to show you how many people are having to get the PCR tests done … it seems to be affecting everybody and every industry.”A man died after a fire in a cannabis factory on New Year’s Eve in east London. Police said a manslaughter investigation is under way and are appealing for information after the fatal incident at a lock-up garage on Southwold Road in Clapton. Ermal Quose, 35, who was an Albanian national and had no known address in the UK, was taken to hospital and died on Sunday. His family has been informed. The Met were called to the scene by London fire brigade at about 4.10pm on 31 December. Police said a 33-year-old man was arrested that day on suspicion of false imprisonment and cannabis cultivation and has been released under investigation. A second man, aged 26, was arrested on Friday [7 January] on suspicion of manslaughter, false imprisonment and cannabis cultivation. He remains in custody. Detectives are appealing for information from the public as they investigate the circumstances of Quose’s death. DCI Mark Rogers, who is leading the investigation, said: “Ermal tragically lost his life having been trapped inside the locked garage which was being used for the cultivation of cannabis when the fire broke out. My thoughts and sympathies are with his family.” He urged people who were in the area on New Year’s Eve or with knowledge of the garage to come forward. “If you can assist and have not yet spoken with police, please get in touch. “I am also calling on those who choose to ignore the many and obvious issues caused by their own use of illegal drugs to reflect on Ermal’s death. It is well known that this trade ruins the lives of almost everybody associated with it, and that fact is all too clearly demonstrated here.”The death of Sidney Poitier is a moment of great sadness for many, but especially for people like my parents, who remember him being the first Black actor they ever saw on TV. Raised in the Bahamas by tomato farmers, he was the youngest of seven children and came from extreme poverty. He moved to New York aged 16, where he worked as a dishwasher, took acting lessons and taught himself how to read, write and enunciate by reading newspapers and listening to the radio. He was the definition of a self-made man. When he won an Academy Award for best actor in 1964, he was the first Black person to do so. He was proud of his victory but, admirably, wasn’t blinded by it. “I don’t believe my Oscar will be a sort of magic wand that will wipe away restrictions on job opportunities for negro actors,” he said in an interview. He wasn’t wrong. It would be 38 years before another Black person (Denzel Washington) would win a best actor Oscar. Poitier’s authenticity, whether thoughtfully navigating the racial politics of Hollywood or turning down roles that he felt were typecast, made him more than just an actor, but a formidable force in setting a precedent for Black actors in leading roles. “I had to satisfy the action fans, the romantic fans, the intellectual fans. It was a terrific burden.” He was a trailblazer who carved out a path for the likes of Morgan Freeman, Whoopi Goldberg, Will Smith, to name a few. Analogue love A year ago, I was given a record player by fellow poet Malika Booker and I welcomed it with open arms. Throughout my early 20s, I bought vintage items such as typewriters and sewing machines purely for the aesthetics, but something about the pandemic and turning 30 made me wander into the wilderness of analogue. Vinyl sales in the UK took its highest market share since 1990 in 2021. As a child of Limewire, I came of age at the onset of digital streaming and I love the convenience of Spotify. But hearing Grace Jones’s 1981 album Nightclubbing on vinyl for the first time felt transcendent. Brandon Taylor recently wrote about the experience beautifully: “You can’t mistake it for some imaginary thing that comes out of the air like digital can sometimes be. With a record, you know there’s another person on the other side of the music.” I wish I had known sooner that streaming takes away so much of the ritualistic magic of music. Of course, saying: “Hey Google, play I’ve Done it Again” is an effortless act, but whenever I take a record from its sleeve, set it down and delicately lower the needle, I feel I’ve achieved something. Perhaps that’s why I bought some disposable cameras before a recent trip to the Lake District. There are 26,186 photographs on my iPhone, so I clearly lack self-control. But with only 27 exposures on a disposable, I took my time. I waited for good light. I enjoyed learning the art of composition. Wise up, Molly-Mae A clip from an interview with 22-year-old influencer, ex-Love Island star and PrettyLittleThing’s creative director Molly-Mae Hague has been circulating on social media, in which she quotes the internet’s favourite proverb: “We all have the same 24 hours as Beyoncé.” I hate this productivity-shaming axiom that seems to forget that Beyoncé employs six nannies. This mythical belief that ‘‘working hard” is the answer to success is just another way to call poor people lazy. When people talk about working hard, they rarely mean working to the best of your abilities. They mean working for nothing, accepting low pay and compromising ethical and moral standards and don’t even think about sleeping. What Hague fails to realise is that success is unlikely a consequence of graft alone. In most cases, it’s down to privilege, luck, geography, nepotism and, more often than not, exploitation. Does she think that her seven-figure deal with PrettyLittleThing came from working her “absolute arse off” and not from the fact that the brand, owned by Boohoo, was selling clothes made by workers paid as little as £3.50 an hour? • Kadish Morris is a freelance arts writer and criticThe Coming Storm (BBC Radio 4/World Service) | BBC Sounds Now, Where Were We? with Barry Cryer and Bob Cryer (Acast) Gemma Cairney Gets Classical (Scala Radio) | scalaradio.co.uk Excuse me for a moment. I’ve just finished binge-listening to The Coming Storm, the new seven-episode BBC series about contemporary US politics – the fringier, loopier end of US politics – and now my brain is burnt and my synapses are frazzled. Mind-frying is, of course, to be expected. It’s what happens if you spend too long thinking about internet conspiracy nonsense. Hello birds, hello sky, hello absolute tosh about the world being run by a coordinated baby-eating and paedophile network, centred on Hillary Clinton. And hello to the good old dark underbelly of America, the longstanding subject of every keen British reporter with a microphone and a ticket to the US. The Coming Storm initially seems to be about something else, with host reporter Gabriel Gatehouse telling us he had the idea for the programme when he did an online sketching class. A red herring. Actually, his real question is pretty standard: what was behind the storming of the Capitol building on 6 January last year? Gatehouse watched it on TV, as we all did, but when he saw Jake Angeli, AKA the “QAnon shaman”, the guy in the Viking horn hat and the furs, he thought: “Uh oh.” Because a couple of months earlier, Gatehouse had met Angeli, but hadn’t interviewed him. He’d thought the Trump Jamiroquai was too much of an outlier nut. When Gatehouse began discussing this, my heart sank. I’ve had my fill of programmes about “Q drops”, pizzagate, the poisonous message boards of 4chan, 8chan and the horrible results of all of the resulting conspiracy theories. Anyone with half an eye on the news – or an active Facebook account – has been aware of the underlying QAnon story for quite some time. Even if you’ve never heard of QAnon, there have been umpteen “Blimey, what’s going on in America?” explanatory podcasts. The idea of another one, made because a hack felt like he’d missed his scoop, was not appealing. Luckily, The Coming Storm is more than a going-over of old ground. Gatehouse is trying to paint a broader picture, attempting to explain why the (untrue) stories of a paedophile elite/great awakening/stolen election are believed by so many people. He looks at the background, from ye olde cover-up of Bill Clinton’s sexual shenanigans in the 90s, to recent Facebook algorithm changes, to opportunistic Republican co-opting of fringe beliefs – and tries to understand why this all means that normal people can be convinced of abnormal things. He does this very well, though the programme necessarily goes over some familiar territory. I kept being reminded of two podcasts in particular: Nicky Woolf’s Finding Q: My Journey Into QAnon and Jon Ronson’s Things Fell Apart. (Both shows were in my top 10 audio of 2021.) Gatehouse interviews the founder of the 8chan message board, Fredrick Brennan, who features heavily in Finding Q. He goes to a QAnon conference, as Woolf’s series does. Later, he talks to an expert about the “satanic panic” of the 1980s, which was examined in Ronson’s show. He also touches on how ordinary Americans get on to school boards and neighbourhood councils and use their positions to further their own interests (obsessions). Ronson covered this, too. Woolf and Ronson concentrate on small incidents as a way of illustrating something larger. Gatehouse’s canvas is broader, not as laser-focused. This means that the programmes can feel scattered – why is he talking to this particular person? – though he manages to pull it all together in the end. Also because of his wide remit, Gatehouse’s conclusion – that 6 January isn’t the end of something, but the beginning – feels woolly. But we can forgive him that. This is an epic effort that brings together several disparate strands into an explanatory, thoroughly scary whole. Excellent production and music work throughout, too. After all that, some light relief. And look! Barry Cryer, whom I love, has a new podcast, Now, Where Were We? In it, the 86-year-old comedy veteran has a chat with a chum in the pub over a pint or two. His son Bob is there too, setting up the microphone and slightly steering the conversation. Barry himself is just here for the stories, and this is an elderly version of a bro-pod. Anecdote after anecdote ensues; tales of Morecambe and Wise, of The Goon Show, of Tony Hancock, of funny funerals and pun-filled panel shows. It’s relentless, exhausting. Stephen Fry and Danny Baker are Cryer’s first interviewees, and each is given two shows almost an hour long. A tougher editing button is required, or at least a few mattress adverts. Gemma Cairney, upbeat veteran of 1Xtra, 6 Music and Radio 4, has a new Sunday night show on Scala Radio. The idea is that she’ll mix classical tracks with her more usual musical choices, learning along the way. At least I think that’s the idea: it wasn’t explained very well. This show needs stronger production. Cairney is most comfortable when talking to others, and could have done with a couple of interviews or a short feature, chatting to a listener about their favourite composer, for instance. This would have given a more solid structure, rather than Cairney occasionally explaining that she doesn’t have much classical knowledge. Still, she’s a warm and lovely broadcaster. With a few adjustments, this could be an excellent, mind-and-synapse-soothing show.Snow and ice are expected to hit parts of the UK this weekend as bands of rain move in from the west, the Met Office has warned. Western Scotland, Northern Ireland, north-west England and north Wales are forecast to experience frosty conditions as downpours continue into Sunday morning. Flood alerts are in place across England and Wales, with the Environment Agency issuing 11 in England and six in Wales, as well as one flood warning in Walsden, West Yorkshire. Most of England’s flood alerts are in the country’s south-west and north-west, with just one in the East of England, in Norfolk. Flood alerts mean flooding is possible, while a warning signifies that flooding is expected. In the event of an alert, people are advised to prepare a bag that includes medicines and insurance documents and monitor for a change to warning, while those living in a flood warning zone are to turn off gas, water and electricity and move their family, pets, belongings and car to safety. Areas in the Scottish Highlands could see the mercury plummet to -4C on Saturday night, but most parts of the UK are expected to hover around a slightly warmer average of 2C. As well as in northern Scotland, snow is likely to fall in the Pennines and Snowdonia before the weekend is up. Met Office meteorologist Jonathan Vautrey said: “There are no official ice warnings out at the moment that we have issued but we are sending out a message in general that there is an isolated risk that any wet surfaces along with these showers could lead to icy stretches. This is mainly due to the showers that will be feeding in to the west.” Vautrey said most of the ice will probably have melted away before Sunday morning. “Most of the ice risk will have abated before people are getting out and about,” he said.As a boy Joe Ironside relished watching his idol, Alan Shearer, play centre-forward for Newcastle United. Ironside was back at St James’ Park wearing Cambridge United’s No 9 shirt and he suggested he had learned a thing or two from all those afternoons spent studying Shearer’s movement. In the 56th minute the Middlesbrough-born striker scored the sort of goal his role model would have treasured to not merely book Mark Bonner’s outstanding League One side a fourth-round place but subject Newcastle to the sort of giantkilling that makes the FA Cup so special. Cambridge are 41 places beneath Eddie Howe’s team on the league ladder but you would not have known it for much of a tie that ended with Newcastle still having won only one game all season and Bonner’s players cavorting across the pitch, hugging everyone in sight. Earlier it had seemed fate might be being tempted when, around the 10-minute mark, the first choruses of “Premier League, you’re having a laugh” drifted down from the vertiginous top tier of the Leazes End that housed 5,000 travelling Cambridge fans. Their team had started well, defending with industry, intelligence and compactness as they persistently second-guessed the intentions of the theoretically strong Newcastle starting XI. Although Kieran Trippier raised the tone courtesy of some high-calibre touches on his debut, Howe’s side played with a distinct, and disturbing, uncertainty. After registering only one victory since August, Newcastle frequently did not seem to trust their ability and instincts, often taking a touch too many or delaying a pass a couple of seconds too long. One of the few players who seems immune to such introspection and knows better than to overthink things is Allan Saint-Maximin but even Howe’s great improviser frequently found himself cleverly shadowed by his League One minders. Moreover Saint-Maximin suffered the indignity of, on more than one occasion, being all too easily brushed aside by Bonner’s captain, Paul Digby. Deployed in a defensive midfield role, Digby served as a quasi sweeper, screening the visiting backline superbly. With the home passing radar awry and pressing game malfunctioning, Cambridge sensed opportunity and Ironside troubled Howe’s back four with a mix of crafty movement and edgy presence. Even at this relatively early stage Howe cut an uneasy figure in the technical area. If Trippier’s tone-raising cameos probably afforded him a degree of reassurance, it became increasingly clear that, good as the England right-back undeniably is, this was most definitely not the sort of debut he dreamed of when he completed his £15m move from Atlético Madrid on Friday. Trippier said he likes “a challenge” and in signing up to help fix the appreciable disconnect between Newcastle’s current travails and the Saudi Arabian-owned club’s new found status as theoretically the world’s wealthiest, Howe’s new full-back has certainly embraced one. Normally, Trippier’s right-wing deliveries are stellar but here they seemed to persistently hit a wall in the formidable shape of Bonner’s commanding centre-back Jubril Okedina and his fellow defenders. On those inevitable occasions when Okedina and co were breached, the excellent Dimitar Mitov made some important saves, most notably as, late in the first half, Newcastle enjoyed their best period of the tie. Indeed Cambridge’s goalkeeper performed acrobatic wonders to twice deny Jacob Murphy and then Saint-Maximin after the latter, albeit temporarily, began confounding his markers. The moment Mitov somehow tipped Murphy’s volley on to the bar will linger in the memory. At the other end though, Ironside retained a capacity to unnerve Emil Krafth and Fabian Schär. Bonner appealed for a legitimate looking penalty when Harvey Knibbs collapsed in the area after appearing to be tugged back by Matt Ritchie but, contentiously, a VAR review revealed no foul. Schär is often much better at creating than deconstructing and the Switzerland defender momentarily thought he had scored after tapping in the fallout from a Ritchie corner but was well offside. Murphy, too, had an effort disallowed for offside early in the second period but it was not long before Ironside showed the stunned home fans precisely how it should be done. When Newcastle failed to clear a loose ball, in the wake of Schär heading Adam May’s shot off the line, Bonner’s key striker pounced, swivelling sharply before lashing the ball beyond the helpless Martin Dubravka. Newcastle’s goalkeeper injured himself in the process, playing on in apparent pain. After an inordinately long VAR check for a possible offside, the goal stood and from then on Cambridge shone, with Bonner’s narrow configuration resembling the sort of insurmountable yellow barrier certain to stalk Howe’s nightmares. Newcastle’s manager looked haunted when Jack Lankester shot beneath Dubravka but he had strayed fractionally offside and it was disallowed. No matter; Ironside had already done enough.A late pushover try proved pivotal as Gloucester claimed a first win at Saracens since 2008 to serve notice of their top-four credentials. Lewis Ludlow was credited with the decisive try with eight minutes to go – although he later claimed Ruan Ackermann should have got the credit – and although Alex Lewington’s last-gasp score in the corner gave Alex Lozowski the chance to win the match for Saracens he was wayward with his conversion attempt and Gloucester saw out the final minutes to seal victory. It was a difficult kick but Lozowski will rue striking a post with an earlier conversion he really should have made. That said, victory was no less than Gloucester deserved. Ackermann and Jordy Reid shone in the back row but they had notable performances all over the pitch. Many teams have come here, put in a decent shift for half an hour before crumbling but Gloucester remained resolute and were worthy winners. Saracens outscored their opponents four tries to three – they can take solace in collecting two bonus points – but this goes down as a first home defeat of the season in the league and ensures they sign off for Europe on a sour note. In contrast, Gloucester put last Sunday’s narrow defeat by Harlequins behind them and cemented their hold on fourth spot. “I’m immensely proud of the boys,” said the Gloucester coach Alex King. “It’s 14 years since Gloucester have won away from home against Saracens. Players like achieving milestones and not many teams come here and win. It’s a proud day and we want to build on that going into the second half of the season.” Saracens took a slender lead into the interval after an opening half that took a while to heat up but soon simmered nicely. Both sides went into the sheds with two tries apiece – Gloucester the happier having had to weather yellow cards to Santiago Carreras and Ludlow. The visitors had scored the opening try with 15 players on the pitch, succeeding where Northampton had failed last week by boldly kicking two early penalties to the corner, the second yielding a pushover try for the prop Fraser Balmain. Adam Hastings could not convert, however, and Carreras was soon in the sin-bin for a deliberate knock-on. Alex Goode kicked the penalty to the corner and after Ludlow illegally brought down the maul, Dom Morris wriggled over for Saracens after a fine dummy. Ludlow was given his marching orders but Gloucester almost held out until Rotimi Segun danced his way over after another Saracens maul was repelled. You wondered if the writing was on the wall for Gloucester but from the kick-off, Carreras – only just back on the field – knocked back the restart, allowing Reid to rampage down the right before offloading for Jack Singleton to score. Gloucester nosed ahead with a Hastings penalty but Saracens’ response was emphatic. Within seconds of coming on Theo McFarland charged down Charlie Chapman’s box-kick, picked up a favourable bounce and cruised over. Lozowski struck the upright with a simple conversion that ultimately proved costly. Ackermann’s try, which Hastings converted, put Gloucester back on top and another late penalty from Hastings stretched the advantage. Although Saracens got within one point with a fine try in the left corner from Lewington, Lozowski was unable to convert from the touchline, ensuring Gloucester held on for a statement victory. “We’re massively disappointed,” said Saracens’ director of rugby, Mark McCall. “Huge credit to Gloucester for how they played. We got a little bit out-enthused by them – that’s not something I’m happy to say when we’re at home.”Brentford are through to the FA Cup fourth round and Port Vale can only ponder what might have been after a pell-mell second half when they dominated but conceded three times. Trailing by one at the break, the League Two team gave their Premier League opponents a mighty scare via Ben Garrity, David Worrall, Kian Harratt and Lewis Cass, who led the charge before, finally, their visitors pulled away. It means there is no repeat of Vale’s famous FA Cup giantkillings of Everton (1996) or Tottenham (1988), who were both beaten 2-1 here. For this, Brentford can thank Bryan Mbeumo, whose substitute appearance featured a 21-minute hat-trick, the last a late penalty. Thomas Frank lauded his team’s attitude. “We are on top of them every day about mentality and they’re on top of each other every day,” the Brentford manager said. Brentford controlled the opening half, via the scheming of Mads Bidstrup. With Marcus Forss the lone striker the Bees were either patient or direct, as needed, such as when Dominic Thompson sent in a steepling cross the home defence had to scramble clear. In Forss the visitors, who made eight changes, had a focal point and it was the Finn who opened the scoring. Vale had not played for a month because of Covid and this rustiness was evident as Brentford’s best performers were allowed to combine: Bidstrup ran from his own half and found Forss, whose finish left Adrian Stone scant chance. At 1-0 anything could still happen and Kristoffer Ajer did well to cut out a James Wilson ball in for his strike partner David Amoo as Vale made a bright start to the second half. Amoo was then joined by Harratt – on for Wilson – and they upped the tempo, hassling Brentford’s backline or dropping deep as circumstances required. Garrity, though, will rue the decision to pass to Harratt rather than pull the trigger when Worrall was next to break but the home fans’ chants were producing a tingling Cup atmosphere. After a Garrity surge along the right Cass volleyed what appeared to be a memorable equaliser before it was blocked. Then came some undeniable class from Brentford. Bidstrup, quiet since the break, awoke, his swerve into space as smooth as the ball that had Mads Bech Sørensen racing towards goal. He found Mbeumo, who made no mistake. If this quietened Vale fans they went ballistic as Harratt threw himself at a cross and beat Jonas Lössl. It set up a grandstand finish and from their next foray Worrall found Garrity in the area, he turned back to Cass, who blazed wide at goal. Seconds later Worrall, at close range, squeezed the ball against Lössl’s left post but Brentford escaped. They were in a true fight. Worrall then dropped a cross on to Garrity’s head but the effort was high. But, in classic topsy-turvy Cup style, Brentford hit their third – the excellent Mbeumo’s zinger from distance, pinging in off Stone’s right post. This was cruel for Vale and their support – as was the final score, secured by Mbeumo’s spot-kick after Mal Benning fouled the substitute Ivan Toney.Red flares were thrown from the celebrating home end and blue from the despairing away fans, but when Amari Morgan-Smith ran away to celebrate what turned out to be the winning goal in the 82nd minute, everyone associated with Kidderminster Harriers seemed to be personally involved. Everyone in red piled on: all the outfield players, the substitutes, the goalkeeper Luke Simpson (who ran 70 yards to join in), the coaches, the manager. The bottle-washer and the tea lady were not far behind. It was pandemonium and, as the Reading fans chanted “This is embarrassing” and their coach was shown a yellow card, 14 minutes were added on before the stadium witnessed the kind of pitch invasion to warm neutral hearts and send the man on the PA into palpitations as he tried to restore order. No chance. Veljko Paunovic, the Reading manager, said “the safety of all of us was put in jeopardy and even worse things could have happened” during the pitch invasion, after his staff were seen in verbal confrontations with disenchanted fans. His points are valid but this day belonged to Kidderminster, who are four divisions and 79 places below Reading, and no one would want to deny them their chance to paint the town red. In a season when Reading have been docked six points for financial irregularities and fallen from seventh in the Championship to just above the relegation places, this was a new low. The 2015 FA Cup semi-finalists join Preston North End and Birmingham City as Kidderminster’s biggest scalps and this will be a day the 5,178 present will surely never forget. George Puscas gave Reading the lead in first-half stoppage time but even before Sam Austin, the Kidderminster captain, equalised midway through the second half, the sense of an upset was always on. Morgan-Smith is 32 and has played for 11 other clubs as well as England C around his two spells at Kidderminster but nothing, surely, can compete with this. Austin said: “It’s absolutely amazing. To get the win first was a great feeling but to get a goal as well was something special. I’ve been here six years now and to lead the boys out tonight was just brilliant.” Austin fancies Manchester City in the fourth round while Russell Penn, the Kidderminster manager, would like to face Wolves up the road, should they prevail against Sheffield United on Sunday. “I’m a Wolves fan but I’ve never played there. So selfishly I’d love to play there,” he said. “But Wolves, Manchester United, Arsenal, Chelsea – it’s mad to even be talking about these clubs. “We want to be a [Football] League club and that’s our overall objective. But these are the days that will never leave the memories of these players.” Reading went into this tie with only two wins in 11 games after conceding two late goals to draw with Derby on Monday. And when Paunovic made eight changes, naming six players aged 21 or under, to save Andy Carroll and company for Tuesday’s league game with Fulham, promotion contenders Kidderminster must have received a fillip that even falling behind could not ruin. The National League North side acquitted themselves very well in the first 45 minutes, starting aggressively and keeping their shape, and they even looked like scoring before Reading struck. Omari Sterling-James was at least 30 yards out when he let fly with his right-footed shot but, as it dipped down towards the top corner, Rafael Cabral tipped the ball over the bar. Then Danny Drinkwater, roundly jeered every time he got the ball for the crime of having won a Premier League title six years ago, played a pass into the feet of Tom Dele-Bashiru and Puscas scored his first goal for nine months with an assured first-time shot. Reading made all five of their available substitutions, the last when one replacement, Felipe Araruna, sadly had to be taken off on a stretcher with a dislocated knee after only recently returning from a year out with a serious knee injury. Perhaps the changes unsettled Reading but Austin scented a chance. He eschewed the opportunity to square a pass to Ashley Hemmings after raiding down the right wing and instead cut back inside to flash a shot just wide, but then went one step better when Caleb Richards headed back a cross from the right for him. Austin’s shot was fumbled by Cabral over the line. Aggborough has witnessed some famous moments over the years, but after 82 minutes Hemmings delivered an inswinging corner from the right and an almighty scramble ensued at the near post. Cabral failed to take his catch, and Morgan-Smith turned the ball over the line. Cue the flares and the kind of madness that only the FA Cup seems to ignite.Non-league Boreham Wood made history by reaching the fourth round of the FA Cup thanks to a rousing victory over League One AFC Wimbledon. The Hertfordshire side, fourth in the National League, ousted the visitors 2-0 thanks to goals in each half by Tyrone Marsh and Adrian Clifton, sparking ecstatic scenes among 3,500 fans at Meadow Park. “I’m on top of the world,” said Boreham Wood’s manager, Luke Garrard, who remains a cult hero at Wimbledon after making more than 100 appearances as a player. “This is my biggest achievement as the manager here for six years. It’s full credit to the players, I can’t describe it. They threw everything at us but we are good defensively and well drilled. “I feel for them, it was a proper FA Cup tie with the wind and rain. The players will, of course, enjoy tonight.” Wimbledon failed to muster a shot on target against their accomplished hosts. Garrard had guided Boreham Wood into the third round for the first time last season before their progress was halted by Millwall in an empty ground – he said he was determined to go a step further this time to repay the loyalty of the club’s chairman, Danny Hunter, who, when the Covid-19 pandemic struck in 2020, reassured staff by telling them immediately they would continue to receive their full salaries despite the club being forced to shut down. Hunter had to remortgage his house to cover the cost. On Saturday, an excited capacity crowd cheered on Boreham Wood in driving rain and saw Marsh fire the hosts into the lead in the 10th minute with an emphatic volley from the edge of the area. Marsh was substituted later and his replacement, Clifton, scored within a minute of his arrival, flicking a cross by Jacob Mendy into the net at the near post. That confirmed a famous victory for Boreham Wood over a club who, in a previous incarnation in 1988, were responsible for perhaps the biggest cup upset in history. Huddersfield, sixth in the Championship, marked the centenary of their solitary FA Cup triumph by knocking out top-flight Burnley – just as they did before lifting the trophy 100 year ago. Matty Pearson’s late winning goal at Turf Moor secured a victory that was all the more impressive because the Premier League side had taken the lead through Jay Rodriguez. Josh Koroma drew the teams level with 16 minutes left after a mislaid pass by Matt Lowton before Pearson headed in the decisive goal from a corner in the 87th minute. James Tarkowski spurned a glaring chance to save Burnley in stoppage time, heading over from close range. Huddersfield’s manager, Carlos Corberan, refused to entertain talk of another cup triumph. “What is special is to be seven games without losing [in all competitions] but I cannot talk about the future,” he said. “To go seven games without losing means the players are playing really well. The challenge is to keep playing well.” Huddersfield’s win was the latest setback in a season of woe for Burnley, who have not won since October and languish in the Premier League’s relegation zone. They were without nine players owing to injuries and Covid – and Sean Dyche was self-isolating at home, too – but were still able to send out a strong side. Corberan made 10 changes from his team’s last outing in the Championship. “There are no excuses,” said Burnley’s assistant manager, Ian Woan. “We wanted to get the game on [despite the absences]. I’m sure we could have got the game off but that is not the way we work. “We have to keep believing in what we do and hopefully get some bodies back for the next couple of weeks.” League Two Hartlepool came from behind to spring a surprise by winning at home to Blackpool of the Championship. Graeme Lee’s side have beaten four teams from League One this season in the FA Cup and the EFL Trophy but they surpassed those achievements thanks to a winning goal from a teenage substitute, Joe Grey. The 18-year-old sealed victory two minutes after being introduced from the bench, firing into the net just after the hour to claim his second senior goal with his first touch of the match. Blackpool had taken the lead through Keshi Anderson but the League Two team began turning the tables early in the second half when David Ferguson curled a shot into the net from the edge of the box. Another League Two side against Championship opponents, Barrow, went to the wire in a chaotic tie at Barnsley, where the hosts prevailed 5-4 after extra time. Leicester, the holders, made light of their many absences by dispatching Watford 4-1. Youri Tielemans, the scorer of the winning goal in last season’s final, opened the scoring from a penalty in the seventh minute before James Maddison increased their lead. Watford struck back through João Pedro but goals by Harvey Barnes and Marc Albrighton made sure of the win.More than 150,000 people have died in the UK from coronavirus since the start of the pandemic, according to government figures. Britain on Saturday became the seventh country to pass the milestone after the US, Brazil, India, Russia, Mexico and Peru. It comes after an additional 313 deaths were recorded, bringing the pandemic total to 150,057 people who have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid. However, separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 174,000 deaths registered in the UK where coronavirus was mentioned on the death certificate. In the past seven days, 1,271 people have died, a 38% rise on the week before. It comes as an additional 146,390 Covid cases were reported on Saturday, bringing the overall total since the start of the pandemic to 14,333,794. In the past seven days alone, 1,227,288 people have tested positive, according to official figures, marking more than a 10% rise on the week before. Last January, the UK became the first European country to pass 100,000 deaths. While the latest wave of the virus, driven by the Omicron variant, has not led to deaths rising as quickly as during previous waves, hospitals are under increasing pressure as admissions and Covid-related staff absences rise. Earlier this week, Boris Johnson insisted England can “ride out” its biggest ever Covid wave “without shutting down our country once again”. But the prime minister admitted that parts of the NHS would feel “temporarily overwhelmed”. While England is currently under plan b restrictions, which include mandatory face masks in most public indoor spaces and advice to work from home where possible, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have introduced tougher measures, including for socialising and events. Across the UK, 18,454 people were in hospital with coronavirus on Thursday, according to government figures, a 40% week-on-week rise and the highest number since 18 February.FA Cup: Scott Murray has the latest as the National League leaders travel to Stamford Bridge to take on the European Champions and the chances of an upset look increasingly slim ... On a day of upsets our football planners didn’t do too badly in their invariably fraught search for potential giant-killings. Kidderminster Harriers 2-1 Reading by Peter Lansley Newcastle United 0-1 Cambridge United by Louise Taylor Millwall 1-2 Crystal Palace by Ed Aarons Port Vale 1-4 Brentford by Jamie Jackson And the rest in our FA Cup round-up by Paul Doyle FA Cup: QPR prevail in a penalty shoot-out that looked like it might go on all night, with Jordan Archer saving the final spot-kick to see his side through. FA Cup: Championship side Barnsley prevail but only just against a spirited Barrow side in an absolute thriller at Oakwell. FA Cup: They’re motoring through a penalty shoot-out at the Kiyan Prince Foundation Stadium, where both QPR and Rotherham have missed a spot-kick each. I FA Cup: Neal Maupay’s winner in extra time was enough to see Brighton seal a come-from-behind win against West Brom at a sparsely attended Hawthorns. FA Cup: Crystal Palace survived a dismal first-half showing to come from behind and beat Millwall at the Den. Ed Aarons reports ... FA Cup: Bryan Mbeumo came on as a second-half substitute and scored three goals to ensure Brentford’s progress at Vale Park. Jamie Jackson reports ... FA Cup: A capacity crowd packed into St James’ Park to see Newcastle punished for yet another poor performance as they crashed out to a Joe Ironside goal for League One strugglers Cambridge United. Louise Taylor was there ... FA Cup: A Lyndon Dykes header hits the bar, bounces down and crosses the line to restore parity for QPR in extra time. Cambridge goalscorer Joe Ironside speaks: “I can’t describe it,” he tells the BBC. “I am a bit lost for words, it panned out how I dreamed about it last night. I am proud of every single one of us. “I have got to play here [at St James’ Park] and it is the stuff I dreamed of, Alan Shearer was my hero, I grew up idolising him - now I have scored the winner at St James’ Park. It doesn’t matter how they go in. It could have been that or a worldie, I don’t care. We have all dug in together and it is a momentous day for the football club.” On the increidble performance of Cambridge goalkeeper Dimitar Mitov: “He is one of the nicest kids, the hardest working,” he says. “He has kept us in the game with some brilliant saves. One at the end where he finger-tipped it over the bar He was outstanding. “He works so hard and on the big stage today he has shone. It was one of those things you will never forget, a pinch me moment, just brilliant.” FA Cup: Carlton Morris gives Barnsley the lead by the odd goal of nine in a thriller at Oakwell. According to Jeff Stelling on Sky Sports, there have been 10 shots on target in the game and nine have gone in. FA Cup: Rotherham United take the lead at Loftus Road courtesy of Hakeem Odoffin. FA Cup: Brighton have gone ahead in extra time against West Brom, where Neal Maupay has shot his side into the lead in extra time. Other big upsets: Hats off to Kidderminster Harriers, the lowest ranked team left in the competition, have seen off Reading in an upset that for my money, was entirely predictable. A tip of the hat while it’s held aloft to Boreham Wood, another non-League side who have gone into the hat for the fourth round. They’ve beaten AFC Wimbledon. Mansfield Town 2-3 Middlesbrough Bristol City 0-1 Fulham Burnley 1-2 Huddersfield Town Coventry City 1-0 Derby County Hartlepool United 2-1 Blackpool Millwall 1-2 Crystal Palace Barnsley 4-4 Barrow (extra time) Boreham Wood 2-0 AFC Wimbledon Kidderminster Harriers 2-1 Reading Leicester City 4-1 Watford Newcastle United 0-1 Cambridge United Peterborough United 2-1 Bristol Rovers Port Vale 1-4 Brentford QPR 0-0 Rotherham United (extra time) West Brom 1-1 Brighton (extra time) Wigan 3-2 Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City v Plymouth Argyle (5.30pm) Chelsea v Chesterfield (5.30pm) Hull City v Everton (5.30pm) Swansea City v Southampton (5.30pm) Yeovil Town v Bournemouth (5.45pm) FA Cup: CAMBRIDGE UNITED HAVE DONE IT!!! The League One side have beaten Newcastle United courtesy of a Joe Ironside goal. What a result that is for the Us!!! And what an embarrassment it is for Newcastle, whose stadium was packed with fans brimful of optimism. They really are the gift that keeps on giving. Newcastle 0-1 Cambridge United: We’re deep in added time at St James’ Park, where Cambridge goalkeeper Dimitar Mitov has just pulled off another sensational save to maintain his side’s lead. FA Cup: James Jones equalises for plucky little 10-man Barrow at Oakwell. FA Cup: Devante Cole fires Barnsley ahead against plucky little 10-man Barrow as the goals continue to rain in late doors in this FA Cup third round. FA Cup: Non league Boreham Wood look set fair for the fourth round after Adrian Clifton doubles their lead against AFC Wimbledon. FA Cup: The holders put the game completely beyond Watford with a late goal from Marc Albrighton. FA Cup: Down to 10 men, League Two side Barrow equalise against Barnsley from the Championship. FA Cup: In one of those upsets a lot of people were expecting, the lowest ranked team left in the competition have gone ahead at the Aggborough Stadium. FA Cup: Jakub Moder equalises for Brighton but we don’t have time to dwell on it because there are more goals elsewhere to report. Newcastle 0-1 Cambridge United: It’s backs to the wall stuff from Cambridge, who have eight minutes plus added time left to time-waste, s-house and foul their way to victory. Newcastle are making it fairly easy for them, offering precious little in front of goal since going behind. FA Cup: Bryan Mbeumo scores a fine solo goal to restore Brentford’s two-goal lead at Meadow Park. The fact that Cambridge are leading Newcastle is currently the talk of the round but we’ve had upsets already today and there are others on the cards. Mansfield Town 2-3 Middlesbrough (result) Bristol City 0-1 Fulham (result) Burnley 1-2 Huddersfield Town (result) Coventry City 1-0 Derby County (result Hartlepool United 2-1 Blackpool (result) Millwall 1-2 Crystal Palace (result) Barnsley 2-1 Barrow Boreham Wood 1-0 AFC Wimbledon Kidderminster Harriers 1-1 Reading Leicester City 3-1 Watford Newcastle United 0-1 Cambridge United Peterborough United 2-1 Bristol Rovers Port Vale 1-2 Brentford QPR 0-0 Rotherham United West Brom 1-0 Brighton Wigan 2-1 Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City v Plymouth Argyle (5.30pm) Chelsea v Chesterfield (5.30pm) Hull City v Everton (5.30pm) Swansea City v Southampton (5.30pm) Yeovil Town v Bournemouth (5.45pm) FA Cup: Talk of the jig being up for Port Vale may have been greatly exaggerated now that Kian Harratt has pulled a goal back for them against Brentford with 20 minutes left on the clock. West Brom 1-0 Brighton: West Brom defender Cedric Kipre has been sent off while Shane Duffy has just missed a sitter for Brighton. It’s all going on at the Hawthorns. FA Cup: The jig looks up for the League Two side after Bryan Mbeumo slots home with only his first or second touch since coming on as a substitute. Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: Back to that goal – Joe Ironside swivelled on a sixpence to hook the ball into the bottom corner after a poor defensive header. There was a possible offside in the build-up but after a horribly long consultation the goal was given. Newcastle United 0-1 Cambridge United: With Newcastle facing acute embarrassment, Allan Saint-Maximin cuts inside from the left and shoots from distance. His rising drive fizzes well wide of the right post. FA Cup: Harvey Barnes has extended Leicester’s lead at the King Power Stadium where, ironically, there’s been a power cut and the lights have gone out. FA Cup: Completely against the run of play, the League One side are ahead against Newcastle United and their fans get two chances to celebrate for the price of one!!! Newcastle 0-1 Cambridge United: Or have they? We’re in the middle of a very, very long VAR check for a possible offside. More news as we get it ... Cambridge lead! They take the lead through Joe Ironside. Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: No. He blasts the ball straight into the wall. What a waste of money he’s turned out to be, eh? Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: Newcastle win a free-kick just outside the Cambridge penalty area and Kieran Trippier takes it. Will he mark his high profile debut with a goal? FA Cup: Reda Khadra gives the Championship high-flyers the lead against their League One hosts and neighbours. Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: Jacob Murphy has been denied once again. This time he latches on to a ball over the top to score past Dimitar Mitov, only for the linesman to rule his effort out for offside. Cambridge are riding their luck in a tremendously entertaining game at St James’ Park. FA Cup: Callum Robinson prevails in a one-on-one with Brighton goalkeeper Kjell Scherpen to put the Championship side ahead at a half-empty Hawthorns. Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: Joelinton gets his head to a Kieran Trippier corner to the edge of the six-yard box but Dimitar Mitov rides to the rescue for Cambridge United again. FA Cup round-up: Middlesbrough survived a scare, there were wins for Fulham and Coventry City, while Hartlepool and Huddersfield both threw knockout blows while punching above their weight in today’s early kick-offs. FA Cup: Michael Olise was the star second half turn for Crystal Palace, who came from behind to beat Millwall at the Den. Ed Aarons was there for the Guardian ... Mansfield Town 2-3 Middlesbrough (result) Bristol City 0-1 Fulham (result) Burnley 1-2 Huddersfield Town (result) Coventry City 1-0 Derby County (result Hartlepool United 2-1 Blackpool (result) Millwall 1-2 Crystal Palace (result) Barnsley 2-0 Barrow Boreham Wood 1-0 AFC Wimbledon Kidderminster Harriers 0-1 Reading Leicester City 2-1 Watford Newcastle United 0-0 Cambridge United Peterborough United 1-1 Bristol Rovers Port Vale 0-1 Brentford QPR 0-0 Rotherham United West Brom 0-0 Brighton Wigan 0-0 Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City v Plymouth Argyle (5.30pm) Chelsea v Chesterfield (5.30pm) Hull City v Everton (5.30pm) Swansea City v Southampton (5.30pm) Yeovil Town v Bournemouth (5.45pm) Newcastle United 0-0 Cambridge United: Mitov denies Murphy again, tipping a goalbound shot on to the cross-bar to leave the Newcastle winger standing with his hands on his hips, staring into the sky in disbelief. Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: Cambridge goalkeeper Dimitar Mitov saves brilliantly from a close range Jacob Murphy effort. It remains scoreless at St James’ Park but Newcastle are hammering on the door like a Saudi snatch squad sent to abduct a Riyadh dissident. Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: Fabian Schar fires home for Newcastle but his effort is correctly ruled out for offside. There are no grumbles from the Swiss international. Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: Cambridge United have what looks like an excellent penalty shout turned down when Harvey Knibbs is manhandled to the ground by Matt Ritchie. He was in behind chasing a long ball from his goalkeeper and went to ground as the desperate, panicked Ritchie threw an arm around him. After a VAR check, play resumes. Cambridge were robbed there, in my humble opinion although Newcastle fans will argue it wasn’t a clear and obvious error by the referee. FA Cup latest scores ... Mansfield Town 2-3 Middlesbrough (result) Bristol City 0-1 Fulham (result) Burnley 1-2 Huddersfield Town (result) Coventry City 1-0 Derby County (result Hartlepool United 2-1 Blackpool (result) Millwall 1-2 Crystal Palace (result) Barnsley 1-0 Barrow Boreham Wood 1-0 AFC Wimbledon Kidderminster Harriers 0-0 Reading Leicester City 2-1 Watford Newcastle United 0-0 Cambridge United Peterborough United 1-1 Bristol Rovers Port Vale 0-1 Brentford QPR 0-0 Rotherham United West Brom 0-0 Brighton Wigan 0-0 Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City v Plymouth Argyle (5.30pm) Chelsea v Chesterfield (5.30pm) Hull City v Everton (5.30pm) Swansea City v Southampton (5.30pm) Yeovil Town v Bournemouth (5.45pm) FA Cup: Brentford take the lead at Vale Park, where Marcus Forss has scored his sixth goal of the season for the Bees. FA Cup: Mads Andersen fires Barnsley ahead in the game between the Championship side and their League Two visitors. FA Cup: James Maddison doubles the holders’ lead at the King Power Stadium, dinking over the keeper after running on to a reverse pass from Ademola Lookman. Moments later, Joao Pedro pulls one back for Watford at the other end. Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: Through on goal but under pressure from Cambridge defender Paul Digby, Joelinton passes up a shooting opportunity and tries to square the ball for Allan Saint-Maximin at the far post instead. His pass is wayward and a good chance goes begging for Newcastle. Newcastle 0-0 Cambridge United: Newcvastle are in the ascendency at St James’ Park but Cambridge United are coping admirably so far. They’ve had a half-chance which Adam May shot over the bar when given a clear sight on goal from distance. Boreham Wood 1-0 AFC Wimbledon: One of just four non-League sides left in the third round, Boreham Wood lead AFC Wimbledon by the only goal of the game so far. It’s Tyrone Marsh who is keeping the scoreboard operator at Meadow Park on his or her toes. FA Cup: Fulham are into the next round after seeing off Fulham courtesy of a Harry Wilson goal in the 15th minute of extra time. FA Cup: Youri Tielemans scores from the spot to give Leicester City a one-goal lead over Watford following a Francisco Sierralta push on Marc Albrighton in the Watford penalty area. Newcastle United 0-0 Cambridge United: Kieran Trippier is making his Newcastle debut at St James’ Park, where 52,000 fans have packed into the ground to watch their side take on third tier opposition. We can only speculate but one suspects a corresponding fixture last season might have attracted half that number. We’re off and running in our 3pm kick-offs ... Mansfield Town 2-3 Middlesbrough (result) Bristol City 0-1 Fulham (latest) Burnley 1-2 Huddersfield Town (result) Coventry City 1-0 Derby County (result Hartlepool United 2-1 Blackpool (result) Millwall 1-2 Crystal Palace (12.45pm) Barnsley 0-0 Barrow Boreham Wood 0-0 AFC Wimbledon Kidderminster Harriers 0-0 Reading Leicester City 0-0 Watford Newcastle United 0-0 Cambridge United Peterborough United 0-0 Bristol Rovers Port Vale 0-0 Brentford QPR 0-0 Rotherham United West Brom 0-0 Brighton Wigan 0-0 Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City v Plymouth Argyle (5.30pm) Chelsea v Chesterfield (5.30pm) Hull City v Everton (5.30pm) Swansea City v Southampton (5.30pm) Yeovil Town v Bournemouth (5.45pm) Bristol City 0-1 Fulham: They’re halfway through extra time at Ashton Gate, where Harry Wilson has given Fulham the lead in the all Championship FA Cup tie. League One: It’s finished all square between Wycombe Wanderers and Sunderland, who shared six goals between them at Adams Park. It’s a disastrous result for the mighty Sunderland, not least because the last of them was scored by Wycombe’s Joe Jacobson in the eighth minute of added time. The git. FA Cup: Despite a dismal first half showing in which they fell behind to an opportunist Benik Afobe goal, Crystal Palace roared out of the traps to come from behind and beat Millwall courtesy of strikes from Michael Olise and Jean-Philippe Mateta. They were hanging on towards the end but are safely into the FA tombola for the fourth round. FA Cup: Coventry City have beaten their fellow Championship side Derby County courtesy of a Dominic Hyam strike just before half-time. Derby, as if they haven’t suffered enough already this season, are currently being linked with a takeover by former Newcastle owner Mike Ashley. FA Cup: League Two side Hartlepool have knocked out Blackpool from the division above, also coming from behind. Keshi Anderson opened the scoring for Blackpool after eight minutes but second half goals from David Ferguson and Joe Grey won it for the team from the north-east. FA Cup: Sound the :”magic” klaxon - we have our first upset of the weekend as Burnley go out to Huddersfield Town. Josh Koroma and Matthew Pearson scored for the Championship side as they came from behind to knock out Sean Syche’s Premier League strugglers. FA Cup: Having been pegged back from 2-0 up, Middlesbrough have avoided embarrassment at the hands of Mansfield. They’ve scraped through to the fourth round courtesy of former Ireland Under-21 international John-Joe O’Toole own goal in the fifth minute of added time. FA Cup latest scores Mansfield Town 2-2 Middlesbrough (12.15pm) Bristol City 0-0 Fulham (12.30pm) Burnley 1-0 Huddersfield Town (12.30pm) Coventry City 1-0 Derby County (12.30pm) Hartlepool United 2-1 Blackpool (12.30pm) Millwall 1-2 Crystal Palace (12.45pm) Mansfield Town 2-2 Middlesbrough: League Two side Mansfield Twon have scored two second half goals to restore parity against Middlesbrough, who had looked home and hosed against The Stags. They’re in added time at Field Mill, with extra time looming. FA Cup: Having hit the post with another shot since scoring, Michael Olise turns provider. He jinks this way and that on the right flank before sending a perfect cross into the penalty area for Jean_Philipe Mateta to head home. FA Cup: Michael Olise has equalised for Palace at the Den with a sensational strike just seconds after the restart. Scott Murray has the latest ... FA Cup: Millwall’s match against Crystal Palace at The Den is one of six early kick-offs this afternoon and the Championship side are currently beating their Premier League visitors courtesy of a goal gifted to Benik Afobe by Crystal Palace goalkeeper Jack Butland as he foolishly attempted to play the ball out from the back under extreme pressure, when hoofing it into the stand would have been a far better option. Scott Murray has the latest ... FA Cup: The third round ball got rolling at the County Ground last night, where Swindon gave a decent account of themselves but the Premier League’s runaway leaders swatted their League Two hosts aside with ease. Ben Fisher was there for the Guardian ... Are there replays? As mentioned previously, because there are no replays in this season’s FA Cup third and fourth rounds, all ties must be played out to a conclusion this weekend. In the event of a draw at 90 minutes, there’ll be extra time and then penalty shoot-outs if required. Is there VAR? In a decidedly ludicrous statre of affairs, some ties – specifically those played at Premier League grounds – will have input from video assistant referees while the rest will not. One rule for them etc. and so on. Mansfield Town 0-2 Middlesbrough (latest) Bristol City 0-0 Fulham (latest) Burnley 1-0 Huddersfield Town (latest) Coventry City 1-0 Derby County (latest) Hartlepool United 0-1 Blackpool (latest) Millwall 1-0 Crystal Palace (half-time) Barnsley v Barrow Boreham Wood v AFC Wimbledon Kidderminster Harriers v Reading Leicester City v Watford Newcastle United v Cambridge United Peterborough United v Bristol Rovers Port Vale v Brentford QPR v Rotherham United West Brom v Brighton Wigan v Blackburn Rovers Birmingham City v Plymouth Argyle (5.30pm) Chelsea v Chesterfield (5.30pm) Hull City v Everton (5.30pm) Swansea City v Southampton (5.30pm) Yeovil Town v Bournemouth (5.45pm) Now based in Australia, Guardian Football Weekly presenter Max Rushden will be getting up at Stupid O’Clock to watch his beloved Cambridge United take on Newcastle United at a packed out St James’ Park. The hosts have sold 52,000 tickets for their game against the League One side, who it is fair to say will almost certainly have the backing of neutrals the length and breadth of the UK as they go toe to toe with the world’s richest football club. In other eye-catching fixtures, National League North side Kidderminster Harriers are the lowest ranked team left in the competition and host Championship strugglers Reading at the Aggborough Stadium. Their fellow non-League side Boreham Wood will fancy their chances at home to AFC Wimbledon. Yeovil and Chesterfield, the two remaining National League teams in the third round draw, are both in action later today. The Glovers host Championship leaders Bournemouth while the Spireites travel to European champions Chelsea. Greetings one and all to one of the most exciting days of the season despite what some gnarled old cynics might have you believe. Between early kick-offs, three o’clock games and the later matches we have no fewer than 21 third round ties being played today and with no replays in the third and fourth rounds this season, your humble reporter could conceviably find himself having to keep tabs on 10 different penalty shoot-outs simultaneously at around 5pm. That is the dream but in the meantime we’ll bring you team news, build-up and updates on all the goals as they go in on afternoon ripe for drama, fairytales and more magic than a Harry Potter box-set.The comeback kings come back. Of course they do. Harlequins, given all the assistance they could have asked for by Alec Hepburn’s red card on the stroke of half-time for a clear-out of Joe Marler, did their level best to butcher their advantage. In typical style, they prevailed at the death with a try by André Esterhuizen and the conversion by Marcus Smith – from the touchline, obviously. This was a rerun of the final last season across the road but Exeter had looked as if they were going to rewrite the script with a gutsy effort in adversity. Quins had missed opportunity after opportunity, their lineout also letting them down time and again. So they waited until the penultimate minute, as if deliberately, when Smith’s cross-field kick gave Esterhuizen a clear run to the puddle in the corner, just where a 15th defender might have been. Smith nailed the kick to confirm his penchant for the big moments. “That ability to kick from the tee, you don’t coach that,” said Tabai Matson, Quins senior coach. “That’s locked in. But it’s the execution, not just from him but the whole team – he’ll be wanting to be way more accurate.” A more careful team might indeed have been clear by the hour given the same circumstances. The game was in the balance at a try apiece, as half-time approached. The increasingly impressive Luke Northmore had scored an early try after Joe Marchant’s fast feet had tested the visitors, but his opposite number, Henry Slade, replied a few minutes before the break, looping round Joe Simmonds. So far, so even, but then came the key moment. There were shades of Brian O’Driscoll and the Lions tour of 2005. Unlike then, though, a shade of red was flourished from the referee’s pocket. Sam Simmonds and Hepburn went to clear out Marler, each focusing on a leg. Before he knew it, Marler was upside down, then landing on his head. There is no doubt it looked ugly. The decision to send off Hepburn was relatively straightforward, even if the clear-out happened so quickly and in conjunction with another player. Exeter took the decision to withdraw the winger Facundo Cordero, which was an equally sound decision, given the rain of the second half. The substitution would be felt keenly, however, by Quins as much as anyone. Twice in the third quarter his absence was exposed, but twice the opportunity squandered. Tyrone Green represents as much as anyone the brilliance with which Quins took the title last season. This, though, was not his finest hour. Cadan Murley was put away down the left and fed Green on the inside. Not only was the full-back run down, but his pass missed both players in the clear outside him, with another screaming on his inside. A few minutes later, he flung another pass into touch when finding Marchant with the line at his mercy may have been the easier task. Exeter survived that third quarter and soon they worked their way, via a couple of penalties, to where they are happiest, deep in opposition territory. Quins stymied their first attempts to drive lineouts, then turned them over, then fumbled their own lineout into touch. So Exeter had another chance. Down to 14 they may have been, but 12 players joined the maul to drive Jack Innard over with less than a quarter of an hour remaining. Joe Simmonds missed the conversion from out wide. The lead was five. If there is one team you want to be more than a score clear of these days it is Harlequins. If there is one fly-half. A try in the corner is not a problem. Smith almost prefers it that way.Nasa engineers have completed the final unfolding of the huge primary mirror of the agency’s James Webb space telescope. The manoeuvre was the final step of the $10bn observatory’s two-week deployment phase that began with its launch on Christmas Day. The telescope, which has already travelled more than 600,000 miles across space, is the largest, most powerful space telescope ever built and had to be folded up tightly so it would fit inside its Ariane 5 launch rocket. Since then, engineers have been directing the slow unfolding, piece by piece, of the observatory as it heads on its voyage to a gravitationally stable point a million miles from the Earth. Its tennis-court size sun shield – which will keep its delicate instruments cold – has already been deployed, as well as its secondary mirror. Last week, Nasa began the final manoeuvres involved in deploying the Webb’s main mirror, which will collect light from the furthest depths of the universe and which is made up of 18 gold-coated segments: a central section plus two three-segment side panels. In a sequence of delicate moves, the first panel was successfully deployed on Friday, a process that took five-and-a-half hours. And this was followed up on Saturday when engineers released the final, second segment of mirrors which slotted into the mirror’s central core, thus completing the telescope’s vast 6.5 metre diameter mirror. Last night engineers were completing the final latching manoeuvres that will hold this last segment in place. “I just feel this kind of glow in my chest right now just seeing that mirror deployed all together,” Nasa scientist Michelle Thaller said in a live webcast. In the Nasa control room, staff from the Webb mission team cheered and shared high-five. Described as a “time machine” by scientists, the James Webb telescope will allow astronomers to study the beginning of the universe shortly after the big bang, 13.8 billion years ago, and to hunt for signs of life-supporting planets in our own galaxy. The James Webb, named after a former Nasa administrator, still has to travel 400,000 miles to its destination and will then need five more months for its instruments to be carefully calibrated. For astronomers, the James Webb offers the prospect of capturing images of the first galaxies to form after the big bang, understanding how stars are born and evolve, and investigating the potential for life to appear in planetary systems. All this will have to be done in a decade, its maximum likely lifetime. After 10 years, it is expected the telescope will run out of fuel and slowly drift off course.Record numbers of Omicron-driven infections are turning into rapidly rising numbers of Covid patients in hospital. Staff absences, which have now reached 80,000 a day, are severely hampering the response. All on top of very high demand for non-Covid care during the most pressured four weeks in the NHS calendar. There is good news. The vaccines are working. The surge of seriously ill older people the NHS saw last January, and feared so much this time, has not yet materialised. London, the original UK epicentre of Omicron, looks like it is now stabilising. But after a decade of the deepest financial squeeze in NHS history, the health and care frontline is going to be stretched perilously thin in places over the next three weeks, as evidenced by the 25 trusts who have needed to declare a critical incident in the last week. Trust leaders tell us that, due to the dedication, professionalism and flexibility of NHS staff and managers, the line should just about hold. As we have demonstrated over the last 18 months, thanks to our national structure, the NHS can deliver in ways many other national health systems can’t. We can booster-vaccinate a higher proportion of our vulnerable population more quickly and administer a higher number of new, life-saving, antiviral drugs than any other nation in Europe. As we saw on 18 January 2021, when the NHS coped with 40,000 Covid patients in hospital on the same day, trusts can rally around to help neighbours when they hit serious trouble. We can create “insurance policy” super-surge capacity across the country at incredible pace, with the first eight hubs now in place. We can create virtual wards, using new technology to monitor less seriously ill patients remotely, only bringing them into hospital when needed. These are the advantages of a single, taxpayer-funded, national system. A system with a proper national and regional infrastructure to support local trusts to work together to meet collective patient need, free from the requirement to maximise individual organisational profit. But we must be open and honest about the impact this degree of pressure is having on patients and staff. And we need to recognise the pressure extends well beyond hospitals. Ambulances, mental health and community services, GPs and social care face unprecedented challenges too. Despite that extraordinary effort from the NHS frontline, thousands of patients are having to wait longer than the NHS would want for urgent care. For 999 calls to be answered. For ambulances to hand over patients to hospitals. For patients to be seen promptly in accident and emergency departments and discharged back home or to the care sector. And, despite trusts working incredibly hard to avoid this, they are now having to delay planned care again, adding further to the growing care backlog. There is a clear, regrettable, impact on quality of care and, in the most pressured parts of the system, a worrying increase in patient safety risk. The impact on frontline staff is also significant given that we are asking them, once again, to make an extraordinary effort. While some may live with the pressure, after two years of being on a “war footing”, others are now burning out. Trust leaders are doing all they can to support their staff as effectively as possible, while managing the personal impact on their own lives. But there are some serious frustrations that still need to be addressed nationally, such as consistent and timely access to lateral flow and PCR tests when needed. Covid-19 is, hopefully, a once-in-a-generation challenge. But when any system comes under pressure, its weakest links are revealed. It is now very clear that the NHS and our social care system do not have sufficient capacity. That asking staff to work harder and harder to address that gap is simply not sustainable. That we need a long-term, fully funded, workforce plan to attract and retain the extra 1 million health and care staff the Health Foundation estimates will be needed by 2031. And that we need a national transformation programme that embeds modern technology, 21st century medicine, integrated care closer to home and much greater emphasis on prevention at the heart of our health and care system. These are the longer-term issues we will need to address once this immediate challenge has been met. Chris Hopson is chief executive of NHS ProvidersOne of Victoria’s largest public hospitals, the Alfred, predicts as many as 15% of its staff may be unavailable because of Covid with the Omicron wave expected to last for up to another eight weeks. Staff at the hospital, which includes Australia’s largest intensive care unit, were told in an email on Friday from the chief executive, Andrew Way, to prepare for rising demand just as the available workforce was decreasing. The Alfred now has more than 50 patients in ICU, or about twice the next largest hospital in Victoria. “This week, approximately 7% of our workforce was confirmed Covid-positive and many others are furloughed due to household exposures,” Way said in the email. “With the current wave expected to run for another 6-8 weeks, we expect 10-15% of our staff to be unavailable to work at its peak.” Way requested that all “patient-facing staff” postpone leave scheduled from now until late February. “Over the next 6 weeks we need as many of our patient-facing staff who can work to do so, supporting colleagues and patients through this wave,” he said. The email came as Victoria reported on Saturday a record 51,356 new Covid cases although health authorities said almost half (26,428) were rapid antigen tests (RAT). Many of those were taken earlier in the week. All states bar Western Australia are posting big increases in Covid cases. New South Wales hospitals are bracing for a tripling of Covid patients within weeks that will likely challenge their capacity. Within the Alfred, though, staff are already concerned that care is being compromised. “The quality of care being delivered is suboptimal – no fault of any staff – we are just told to ensure vitals stable, medicate and move on, leaving a lot of vulnerable patients neglected,” one staffer told Guardian Australia. “It’s also like a game of Russian roulette with potentially [Covid-] positive staff members and at-risk patients [mixing],” said the staffer, who was not authorised to speak publicly. “The self-surveillance staff Covid tests are almost 4 to 5 days behind.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A whole range of patients were exposed. “[It’s] essentially a death sentence if they catch it off us,” the person said. “There’s no RAT tests for us to exclude ourselves prior to starting shift or even coming to the hospital. We just find out when we are on the ward or have worked multiple shifts infecting patients and staff alike.” Recent graduate and first-year nurses were also performing work normally reserved for those with at least two years’ experience. “Beforehand graduate nurses were not even allowed to check medications with other graduate nurses,” the staffer said. “Now we are so short-staffed they are checking dangerous medications on their own.” A separate email to some Alfred staff on Wednesday stated “all clinical areas in Alfred Health are reducing [nurse-patient] ratios”. “Please be mindful and support each other to do the best you can do,” the manager said. “We know that things will get missed and you might not be able to do or achieve everything you want to do. “What’s most important right now is to look after each other to do the best we can with what we have,” the manager said. The Alfred was approached for comment.Conservatives look like cranks today, not because of personal failings of this or that politician, but because they cannot deal with the crises of the modern world. It’s not that they don’t have answers – rightwing thinkers spit them out faster than a machine gun fires bullets. It’s just that their answers are irrelevant and, even in Tory terms, self-defeating. All viable responses to global warming, vaccination, the job losses artificial intelligence will bring and failing public health enhance the role of the state. It must provide jobs and benefits to society’s losers, protect their health and drastically reconfigure markets to sustain the planet. Small states that allow sovereign individuals and companies to decide for themselves now feel as antiquated as Margaret Thatcher’s handbag and pearls. At best, Conservatives will the ends but not the means, as the Johnson government does with the climate crisis and protecting the NHS from the Covid pandemic. At worst, they retreat from modernity into denial and conspiratorial gibberish. I know of no better example of the inability of the right to face the world in front of its eyes than the collapse in public health, which will become ever more visible as 2022 progresses. Inflation and tax rises are pushing a great segment of the population into poverty or a place close to it. In ways that would astonish our forebears, poverty will produce obesity. Anyone in the government who has cared to study the crisis knows that the cheapest meals are no longer vegetables and rice, potatoes or bread, the traditional diet of the poor. Now, they are ultra-processed industrial foods, whose manufacturers use the cheapest and least nutritious ingredients and economies of scale to keep the price as low as possible and lashings of fat, sugar or salt to make their gunk palatable. Government knows it, but will do next to nothing about it. Tim Lang, the author of Feeding Britain, refers me to studies showing the UK had the worst diet in Europe, with half of all food bought processed to the nth degree. The result is hundreds of thousands suffering avoidable deaths or years of painful and cramped lives as they deal with the chronic illnesses fatness brings: cancer, heart disease, strokes, dementia and, indeed, Covid. The moral argument for preventing needless pain is overwhelming. Even the most hard-hearted Tories, meanwhile, should want to limit the escalating costs of healthcare if only to hold on to their money. The NHS spends £18bn a year treating obesity-related conditions, a figure that can only rise. Dreadful diets mean higher taxes. They cannot bring themselves to act, just as they cannot bring themselves to tell the UK’s Novak Djokovices that there is a price to pay for refusing to be vaccinated or level with the public on the revolutionary changes to national life a serious attempt to cope with climate change will bring. The best the Conservatives could manage was to commission Henry Dimbleby to produce a national food strategy. Last summer, it recommended the government intervene to produce a long-term shift in eating habits, that sugar and salt be regarded as modern versions of tobacco and taxed accordingly, and that the government protect food standards in trade agreements. The report was criticised for treating food poverty as a distinct condition. Our own Jay Rayner, the Robespierre of radical restaurant critics, roared there is no such thing as food poverty, there’s only poverty. The best way to deal with today’s fall in living standards is to listen to Marcus Rashford and restore the cuts to universal credit. Dimbleby is indeed a classic establishment figure: fathered by David, schooled by Eton. But that is what makes him interesting. He offered Tories the chance to modify rather than overthrow their beliefs. Throughout its history, the Conservative party has survived by making concessions to shifting times the better to ensure that it stayed in control of change. “Tory men, Whig measures”, as Disraeli put it. Now it cannot adapt or concede. Ministers have sat on the Dimbleby report for months. In cabinet, all the familiar arguments are heard against, in that tellingly upper-class phrase, the “nanny state” interfering with free markets and freedom of choice. Civil servants are muttering that better health labelling on food products is as far as their political masters will go. Readers may scoff at Conservatives babbling about nannies. But there is a long tradition of leftwingers worrying about the middle classes telling the working classes what to do. “The ordinary human being would sooner starve than live on brown bread and raw carrots,” wrote George Orwell in 1936. “When you are underfed, harassed, bored and miserable, you don’t want to eat dull wholesome food. You want something a little bit ‘tasty’.” In other words, it’s not that worries are not justified. It’s just that they provide no solutions. History isn’t an exam. No teacher rewards the students who get the questions right. Maybe Conservative politicians can prosper by riding the reaction against the costs of the push towards net zero. Donald Trump has already shown them the way. But whatever electoral success they continue to enjoy, Conservatives can see the world Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan created collapsing. They fear a prim and constricted future when the state represses enterprise, tells you what to eat, how often you can fly, when to be vaccinated, how you must heat your home and what type of car you can drive, if any. But then, when the current wave of conservatism began in the 1980s, leftwing critics saw how it would lead to a corrupt and divided future. If Thatcher wins, said Neil Kinnock, in 1983, “I warn you not to be ordinary, I warn you not to be young, I warn you not to fall ill, I warn you not to get old”. His oratory and foresight did the Labour party no good because the left no longer seemed to have credible solutions. Now it is Conservatives who cannot respond to change. The 21st century baffles them. They don’t know what to do about it. This is why, for all their apparent self-confidence, so many speeches by Conservative politicians and articles by Conservative thinkers sound more than a little unhinged. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistIt might be an imaginary character straight out of a Dr Seuss book: The goldfish who could drive. But it’s real. Incredibly, Israeli researchers created a robotic car and report that they taught six fish – named after characters from Pride and Prejudice – to navigate it on land. It’s all in the name of science, of course. The team had been dreaming up ways to test fish navigation for a while, according to Shachar Givon from Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, first author of a study published in the journal Behavioural Brain Research. “Recently, we even ventured out to the coral reef of Eilat in an ongoing attempt to study navigation on a larger, more natural scale,” she says. “So we are always trying to challenge ourselves – and our fish. The idea of having the fish navigate on land seemed exactly like the impossible sort of challenge we like to tackle. Lucky for us it was not so impossible after all.” The technical term for their challenge is “domain transfer methodology”, which means exploring whether a species can perform tasks outside its own environment. To pull it off, they drew inspiration from work that taught rodents and dogs to use an automated vehicle to reach a target and a previously designed contraption, “Fish on Wheels”. First, the team, led by Prof Ronen Segev, created a watery tank on wheels that moved in response to the movements and orientation of the fish. Then they set about teaching the goldfish (Carassius auratus) how to drive it – much like humans learn to ride a bike or drive a car. The fish first had to connect their own swimming movements to the movements of the vehicle so they could navigate it. Then they were given a destination: a pink target board in a foreign room that elicited a food reward when the vehicle touched it. A computerised camera system attached to this “fish operated vehicle” recorded and translated the fish’s swimming directions. After several days of training, the fish successfully navigated the vehicle to the target from different starting positions in the room – even if they faced obstacles like false targets or hitting a wall. Some did particularly well. “Mr Darcy and Mr Bingley are the two fish featured in the different videos and were total rock stars,” Givon says. Although previous studies have shown that fish can navigate within aquatic environments, the authors suggest this study shows the ability to navigate – which is essential for animal survival in many domains including for finding food, shelter and mates – is universal to all species and independent of the environment. “Since on the evolutionary scale our common ancestor is very, very far back,” Givon says, “finding that fish share navigational skills similar to our own really speaks volumes to the importance of these skills in the animal kingdom”. By manipulating different variables, the team also showed that the fish used a combination of cues to navigate, including the target’s colour and location. We clearly have a lot to learn from these unassuming little marine creatures. Although fish are the largest and most diverse group of vertebrates, Givon notes they receive relatively little attention from scientists – especially with regard to their cognitive skills. However, there are suggestions that fish have rich capacities beyond our own for vision, hearing, tasting and smelling. They even appear to use electric signals to communicate with each other and may have self-awareness. The new study has other ramifications for our perception of the maligned goldfish, Givon suggests. “Maybe, just maybe, we also managed to disprove the stigma around goldfish and three-second memory …”Crisis? What crisis? It was good to see the prime minister kicking back at the cricket on Friday. Sends the right message. Life goes on. The Poms are being hammered. How good?! Another message was being sent by the nursing unit manager at Brisbane’s QEII Jubilee hospital. With 100 staff rendered unavailable by the outbreak, the manager’s advice to those remaining was to “Prioritise tasks…cry…whatever you need.” In Queensland, some 2,000 healthcare staff are unable to work. “This is like a crisis we’ve never seen before,” said Beth Mohle of the Queensland Nurses and Midwives Union. A view echoed by the Australian Medical Association’s Dr Maria Boulton: “We are in a crisis at the moment; the entire health care system is mobilising.” And that’s just Queensland. And that’s just now. New South Wales is running at more than 40,000 new cases a day. Those are official numbers, unlikely to capture the true extent of the spread – and even then they far surpass what seemed like alarmist warnings less than a month ago from the health minister, Brad Hazzard. Then, he spoke of 25,000 daily cases by the end of the January. When the prime minister emerged from Wednesday’s national cabinet declaring schools would “go back and stay back (from) day one of term one”, it took just two days for that plan to crumble. By Friday, Queensland’s Annastacia Palaszczuk was acknowledging low levels of immunisation among five- to 11-year-olds. “We will not be sending primary school students back during the first week of school if we are heading towards a peak,” she said, foreshadowing further discussions at national cabinet level. If teacher numbers are winnowed like nurses and truckies, it’s not clear how schools can stay open, let alone deliver normal classes. Last October, Scott Morrison’s lamentations over the departure of premier Gladys Berejiklian were eased by the thought of her successor. Dominic Perrottet’s instincts were always strongly towards the “let it rip” school on Covid, views that aligned with the PM. “A strong society needs a strong economy,” said Perrottet in his first speech as premier. He cited “opening up the economy” as a priority. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In mid-December, with Omicron already spreading and chief health officer Kerry Chant glowering behind him, Perrottet announced the dropping of mask and QR-code mandates outside “high-risk settings.” In hindsight, it seems nuts. Even at the time, epidemiology professor Adrian Esterman declared: “It simply makes no sense.” And then a weird thing happened. After the initial, expected rush back to bars and restaurants, Sydney folk went into swift retreat. “Diners are spooked,” reported an ANZ Research paper this week. Nationally, consumer spending “is now at its worst since (the) Delta lockdowns”. And the capital of the “let’s live with Covid” approach has been worst hit of all. “Sydney spending for the week to 5 Jan was at its weakest since Covid began”, says the ANZ paper. “Caution about Omicron transmission and disruptions of businesses due to staff shortages are central to the decline.” Workers who are sick or in forced isolation have disrupted supply chains so that supermarket shelves, especially for meat, fruit and vegetables, are increasingly bare. None of it is a surprise to economist Prof Jim Stanford. “The idea that letting it rip – you know, taking a deep breath and puffing up our chest and just facing Covid head-on – would somehow be good for the economy, was always nonsense,” he said in a widely shared tweet. “You can’t run a healthy economy without healthy people.” Faced with modelling showing NSW could find itself with barely a hospital bed to spare, in ICU or in general wards, by the end of January, at least a partial policy backflip was inevitable. Perrottet says new bans will be enforced on singing and dancing in pubs and clubs. People have been asked to “minimise mingling”. Non-urgent elective surgery will also be “paused”, to the frustration of many specialists. “This is not just cosmetic surgery or minimal surgeries,” says Prof Jeff Dunn of the Prostate Cancer Foundation. “These are potentially life-saving or diagnostic surgeries.” The modelling suggests the Omicron wave will begin to fall by mid-February. By the expected federal election in May, might the crisis be where Scott Morrison most wants to see it – in his beloved “rear-view mirror”? Troy Bilsborough from the strategic consultancy Provocate is not so sure. A former health media adviser in the Abbott and Turnbull governments, Bilsborough says Covid is no longer a “theoretical” threat. On official figures some 800,000 Australians have caught it. “Realistically, it is probably double that; it is probably up to 2 million,” says Bilsborough. By the time people vote, he says, “you’re looking at another few million people”. Long Covid will be a lived experience for some. People will question if the government did enough to protect them. He predicts difficult new issues in industrial relations as workers seek clarity over time off for chronic symptoms. His “gut feeling” is that the government might have been better placed “if they had kept a lid on the cases”. Too late now. But on the upside, we’re thrashing those Poms at the cricket.Queensland’s huge untapped Galilee coal basin was touted as a jobs and revenue bonanza by its supporters, with the potential to liberate hundreds of millions of tonnes of harmful greenhouse gases. The Galilee’s potential as a “carbon bomb” was wrapped up in a dozen or more coalmining projects and estimates of billions of dollars of investment. So far, just one project has made it through the starting gate – Adani’s controversial Carmichael mine, which sent its first coal to port late last year. The mine was supposed to be the first of many. Yet there is little sign of more coal to come, with many projects shelved, lapsed or discontinued, and uncertain futures for those that remain. “There was genuine hope, and house and land prices skyrocketed,” says Sean Dillon, the mayor of Barcaldine regional council, which covers several small towns including Alpha, Barcaldine, Aramac and Jericho in the basin. Dillon says communities have become jaded by the promises of jobs and income. “Everything was on the cusp and then it just got mothballed. It’s left a few communities scratching their heads,” he says. Dillon’s own cattle station property north of Alpha sits over one of the proposed mines, known as Kevin’s Corner. That tenement, along with two others, was sold in 2011 by Gina Rinehart’s Hancock Prospecting for a reported $1.2bn to the Indian conglomerate GVK. Dillon says his understanding is that project is now “completely dormant”. The broader failure of many of the mines to materialise is down to “geography and workforce”. All the mines are greenfield sites – largely undeveloped land still covered in scrub or fields – with high costs to develop the infrastructure needed. He says most people in the region are not opposed to new coalmines, but there’s a desire for diversification of an economy that’s dominated by agriculture. A state government-backed plan for a renewable energy precinct in the region has “got people excited”, he says. “These non-traditional jobs … people are not against them, but they are just more familiar with resource extraction jobs. But they are keen to see some alternative options.” Approved but not progressed The one project that has got off the ground, Adani’s Carmichael mine, still retains approvals to mine up to 60m tonnes of coal a year for export to power stations. But the company has said the project is currently downscaled to a 10m-tonne-a-year operation. In the early 2010s, the Queensland government passed environmental approvals for six mines in the Galilee – including Carmichael – with more than 15,000 operational jobs claimed across the projects. By 2014, a government-backed assessment of the basin’s coal identified four mines that had gained initial approval, two more going through environmental approvals and a further seven considered at much earlier stages of development. Earlier reports from environment groups and others identified nine of those projects as “megamines” which, if they gained approvals and were at full production, would produce 330m tonnes of coal a year. When burned, all that coal would emit 857m tonnes of CO2 a year, according to a report from Climate Analytics. But slowly the projects – and the jobs claims – have fallen away. The Degulla mine had an estimated 35m tonnes of coal a year waiting to be dug. But in 2013 its Brazil-based owner Vale, one of the world’s biggest miners, put the project on the market. Vale announced last year it was getting out of coal altogether and told the Guardian this week it still has “exploration tenements in the [Galilee] region that are in [the] process of divestment”. The Chinese-owned Macmines Austasia abandoned its bid for a mining lease for its $6.7bn China Stone mine in 2019. A state environmental assessment for another mine, the South Galilee Coal project, lapsed in late 2019. The project’s part-owner had already gone into administration and there’s little sign of action from the mine’s American investor. Hancock Prospecting has interests in two mines and Clive Palmer’s Waratah Coal also has two mine projects identified. Market analysts S&amp;P Global said in a bulletin in December there was “yet to be any commitment registered for these projects”. Palmer’s Galilee Coal project – once known as the China First mine – is linked to his company’s plans to build a power station in the Barcaldine region. Those plans, submitted to the Barcaldine regional council, were called in by the state government in December. Hancock Prospecting and Waratah Coal did not respond to a request for response. The Queensland Resources Council said no one was available to speak before deadline. Tim Buckley, an energy market analyst at the pro-renewables Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, says when the Galilee projects were proposed, they threatened to become “a climate bomb that was unparalleled”. “All but one didn’t even get out of the starting blocks and I think none will,” he says. Buckley says the entire economic rationale for coal has changed since the projects were announced. “A decade ago it was about catering for a growth in demand in energy across Asia,” he says. “But now it is about decarbonisation. It is accepted now that coal is on a slow but terminal decline. The world is completely different now.” A December report from the Office of the Chief Economist noted 37 coal projects in Australia at the feasibility stage, but many were delayed. There was a growing preference for expansions of brownfield sites – previously utilised land – over greenfield investments, the report said, with “an expanding list of lenders/investors who have withdrawn from financing new thermal coal projects”. Buckley says: “Everyone today that still loves coal sees it as cheaper to buy stranded assets that exist rather than go for greenfield projects.” The Queensland government is working on a development plan for the resources industry. A draft says that the global market for thermal coal “is likely to decline as countries choose their own path to reduced emissions” but there could still be pockets of growth. “Queensland’s high-quality thermal coal deposits mean that we are well placed to respond to these opportunities, while continuing to support the coal industry to decarbonise and remain competitive for longer,” the draft says. In a statement, the Queensland resources minister, Scott Stewart, said the “development of any specific project is a matter for the relevant company”. He said the government had “long held the position that we support resources projects which stack up financially, environmentally and socially”. Stewart said the plan would look at “taking advantage of the worldwide demand for new economy minerals which are critical as part of clean energy technology like batteries and renewables”.Karekare is a wild, beautiful area of the Waitakeres, west of Auckland. It’s the place I dreamed about when I lived in London, the landscape I yearned to return to. It was the location of my most intense experiences as a child: fear, euphoria, exhilaration, joy. Our parents’ bach was built on a hillside with a view down the valley, surrounded by dense bush in all directions. There was always the risk that if we went too far off a track, even close to the house, we’d quickly get disorientated and lost. The bush was so thick you couldn’t get a clear view out of it, and the only way to escape was by standing still and shouting. At the bottom of Lone Kauri Road was Karekare Beach (the beach in the movie The Piano), a glittering expanse of black sand and dunes ending in lines of rolling surf that roared ceaselessly, the sound echoing against the cliffs. On hot afternoons the air rippled with heatwaves that made mirages appear like puddles of mercury shimmering over the black sand. I was exhilarated by the hard light, the sky and the big surf. One year after a summer storm, when the sea was wild and whipped into massive swells by the offshore wind, and it happened to be dead low tide, the point when the surf is rolling over shallow water and, near the shore, the waves are breaking on hard sand, a wave picked up my father and dashed him down on his head, fracturing a vertebra in his neck. He was rescued by lifeguards and helicoptered to hospital, lucky not to have been paralysed and drowned. Karekare is a landscape always in wild motion: the boiling surf, the wind, the dancing glare off the dunes. The sand itself is a hazard in summer; its blackness absorbs heat, and if you get caught on a stretch of it without shoes you can suffer serious burns. One holiday our parents allowed me, my brother and a family friend to tramp alone into the Pararaha Gorge. We entered a wilderness of dense bush, sign-posted as a day-long hike “for experienced trampers only”, with no proper track, which ended in a remote coastal walk around surf-lashed rocks that could only be safely negotiated at low tide. My brother was ten, I was seven, the friend was five. Once we’d got a certain way in, the track disappeared, and we spent the next hours trying to find it, following false trails and sheep tracks that petered out halfway up cliffs. We realised we were lost, and that by now we couldn’t go back even if we wanted to, because the bluffs and waterfalls we’d climbed around were too hard, especially for a five-year-old, to scale. We had to deal with the dangerous, fast-flowing white-water river, steep cliffs and tangled bush for the whole day until we were found. It was only after a long period of trying to find a track and following trails that led us to dangerous places and dead ends that we understood we should just follow the river itself. I remember intense fear and despair, the hours of terrified crying as we tried to find our way, and the objectively correct understanding that we could die. We got stuck on steep bluffs, we struggled with the five-year-old trying to climb around waterfalls, we had to swim, climb and fight our way through the stark, unforgiving landscape. But I went on loving the wild, exhilaratingly beautiful place, and I’ve always returned to it, despite the terror of that day. Charlotte Grimshaw is an Auckland novelist. Her latest book is a memoir, The Mirror Book What’s your favourite wild place? If you would like to contribute to the series tell us about it in 200 words and send it to newzealand@theguardian.comWe’re standing on sand dunes at the end of a hot December day. The light’s fading fast and a thin crescent moon is rising in the clear sky. It’s still really hot; hot enough to dip in the ocean. But nobody does – not because it’s stinger season now, but because we’re here for something better. Here on Magnetic Island in Queensland, everyone’s a volunteer and everyone’s local except me. There are kids in school uniform, parents who’ve come from work, a retiree, a CSIRO scientist, a marine biologist called Paul, and an off-duty park ranger. We take turns peering into a blue plastic bucket. Now it’s my turn. Inside is a batch of freshly hatched green sea turtles. Their easy exit from an underground nest was blocked by vegetation, so these volunteers have dug them free. Paul pulls one out and it wriggles between his hands, so tiny and lively. The next moment, it’s hurtling down the thick golden sand of the beach with its brothers and sisters, towards the gently lapping waves. People are releasing them one by one. The baby turtles move so fast they might take off and fly like whirring cicadas, instead of entering the sea. There are oohs and aahs and clapping and lots of smiles as each hatchling dives down and disappears. We wait a while, carefully watching the water’s edge, hoping they’re all safely on their way. Later, Paul tells me each of these green turtles has just a one-in-a-thousand chance of surviving to maturity. Now, we’re focused on just one of these – it’s washed back up, tried to swim again and failed, and has run out of puff. It goes back in the bucket, which I hold carefully on my lap as we drive to the hospital established and maintained by a larger group of volunteers, the Magnetic Island Network for Turtles. If this runt of the litter survives the night, it will get a revival injection and hopefully stand a chance. Nearby are adult turtles well into recovery. One is decades old and moves slowly; it came in with an impossibly mangled shell, maybe bitten by a shark. Another’s younger and friskier – it was rescued with “floating syndrome”, caused by a gas build-up after a turtle ingests marine debris such as plastic, which stops food being properly absorbed. This turtle splashes and bangs excitably against the walls of its circular tank, and pokes its nose inquisitively above the water in my direction after sizing me up. Another survivor now seems to be practising a healthier kind of floating. It completely ignores me, makes balletic arcs with its flippers, and is a lot more zen. I’d recently flown from Tasmania to Queensland, years after a memorable and moving encounter with a cheeky turtle while swimming in a coral canyon on the Great Barrier Reef. This time I headed to Magnetic Island, my visit starting with a day trip back to the reef. For a few hours, we sped away from the island, on a boat that had suspended operations when Queensland’s tourist industry was smashed by Covid border restrictions. This was its test voyage just ahead of the 2021-22 summer season. We were a random mix of locals from the island and nearby Townsville, interstate visitors like me taking advantage of the quiet before the storm of imminent border openings, and international travellers stuck in Australia since we closed to the world in March 2020. So there I landed – suddenly snorkelling with a 20-something exile from Salzburg in a remarkable open aquarium. It was wondrous, floating in these warmest of seas with those tropical fish in sparkling schools and seductive pairs, and that amazing blue-and-peach-coloured coral beneath us. But part of my heart couldn’t help sinking – where’s that turtle? The next day, I walked for hours in the baking heat with borrowed snorkelling gear and a stinger suit, through the national park on the island and its sleeping clusters of koalas, to beaches to which the road’s now closed. First stop was a bay ringed by hoop pines and renowned for turtles. The spectacular beach was empty. I sat in the shadow of granite boulders and ate my packed lunch, then set out swimming to the closer reef. As I moved towards a party boat nearby, now motoring back to sea, someone shrieked – “WE JUST SAW A GIANT TURTLE!” I guessed they did, but it swam away, and the engine noise meant I wouldn’t find it anytime soon. So I kept walking to other beaches. Eventually I landed at Radical Bay, where I now know in the 1980s there was a resort with a disco playing until dawn, which isn’t there any more. It is wild land earmarked for a luxury property development that now seems to have failed. Conservationists still hope to buy it back for those elusive koalas and, I hope, visitors like me who want to float away gently from our daily lives to find something very much better – like majestic sea turtles. I didn’t get to meet any turtles face-to-face in the seas near Radical Bay that day. But I hope to return sometime soon and try my luck again. Meanwhile, I’m left with a special new memory: the sweet surprise of encountering that squirming hatchling – rescued in a bucket – which might have lived until morning.“Australia is on a different scale,” says Yotam Ottolenghi, a chef who needs little introduction. A household name, to cook his recipes has almost become its own cuisine. Preparing a tour that will take him away from the British winter to large theatres and convention centres across Australia’s east coast, I ask, does he find this experience strange: taking to the stage not the kitchen? “I pinch myself all the time, I’m blue all over,” he says with genuine bemusement. “I don’t really do that kind of size in other parts of the world.” And the audience? “I get the rowdiest crowds, really, in Australia.” His Flavour of Life tour is pegged loosely to his book Flavour, co-authored with Ixta Belfrage. Audiences will hear about the influences and experiences that have made the chef indispensable to many home cooks, alongside insights into being a restaurateur. It’s sure to be tinged with our most recent global experience. In a sign of the times, the original dates were postponed for so long, he published another book: Ottolenghi Test Kitchen: Shelf Love. “I just feel at home when I come to Australia,” he says from his home in London. “It’s weird, I’ve never lived there, I haven’t spent that much time, but it just has that kind of feeling. I have a lot of Australian friends here in London, I think I understand the culture pretty well.” There’s an “immediacy” or recognition within his Australian audience, compared to the UK and US. “[They are] the most well versed in world cuisines, because of the nature of immigration that has happened in Australia,” he says. Thanks to waves of migration from Lebanon, Greece and all across Asia, there is, he feels, “an incredible understanding of food and how it operates, and the potential of food to cross cultures”. Australian food magazines are, he says, “probably the best in the world”, because you can see there is “an assumption that the reader knows a lot, is well versed in different cuisines and has cooked”. Well versed and practised we might be, but that’s arguably also down to cookery writers of his ilk, from Margaret Fulton through to today’s chefs; those who have had a real and lasting influence on our food culture, driving speciality ingredients into supermarket aisles and giving once-timid home cooks the confidence to take culinary risks. His attitude has never been about “assuming that anyone has any prior knowledge”, he says. “I’m not saying that people don’t, I just don’t want to assume that they do.” This means “every recipe and every introduction to an ingredient, method, to cuisine, that I’ve learnt or experienced” must be accessible. He wants to make sure that “people get really deep on an instructional level” and have “a really good understanding of where they’re headed to and what results they should expect”. While he doesn’t presume high food literacy, equally he hasn’t dumbed down lists of ingredients; even when they’d be difficult to find. “I think there is a huge hunger for expanding your knowledge.” What it means to cook Ottolenghi has changed over recent years; it has become a broader church. “It moves from being about me to being about other authors that I feature or work with,” he says. “I feel like I’m a beneficiary of those collaborations.” Working with others means “the books are not as static … I would have probably stopped publishing cookbooks if I had to just rely on my resources personally. I’m quite open about that.” This is the beauty of these recent books: they bring out people that have “incredible talents and a different personal story”, yielding different approaches to cooking. Flavour with Ixta Belfrage leans on Mexican heat, ferments and umami-rich ingredients, while his latest book, Shelf Love, with the Bahrain-born chef Noor Murad is a more practical work. Borne from lockdown and people’s need to cook every meal, it’s about skills and using ingredients that have a long shelf life, “whether they’re spices or grains, jars or frozen products”. “Noor [Murad] has really spearheaded this book,” he says. “[She’s] incredibly creative and accomplished in the way that she thinks … she sets the tone. “I’m there and I taste and I give my opinion,” he says. A few years ago, he’d send over a list of ideas at the beginning of each week, “but now I’ve taken a step back”. “It’s much more about their ideas and they’re taking them from start to finish. “I think now we’re in quite a good position … we know what we’re looking for when we cook a new dish, and we publish a new book.” There’s no requirement of strict observance to ingredients, for instance. “That’s a misconception.” Substitutions have always been a part of his writing. “All those things that you could do in order to ‘get away with it’, I’ve always been supportive of … [Shelf Love] is all about that: swap the chickpeas for beans, use one grain, substitute another, remove certain items if you need to.” He’s aware of what it means for some people “to cook Ottolenghi”. The thought that it’s about unusual, hard-to-source ingredients, long and complicated processes, topped off by lots of washing up. While it’s quite true for some recipes, it’s false for others, like three-ingredient recipes and tray bakes. “You know, it’s all good,” he says. Getting away with it was never more necessary than in lockdown, when cooking’s effort and creativity went into recycling foods from previous days. While it did not change the way he cooks, “it has really changed the way I think about cooking and prioritising it”. Fritters, pies and things that you could “just throw together” to satisfy the kids’ needs took centre stage, “more nutritional stuff, but not really trying too hard to push that agenda, because kids are not very appreciative of those efforts”. He says his young sons, Max and Flynn, prefer his husband Karl’s comfort foods from British fare to tacos and ramen. “But I don’t get offended.” He has become more forgiving, lowering the level of expectation around what it means to put a meal on the table. “You know, a scrambled egg, bread and a salad for dinner is absolutely fine for me.” But those long cooks aren’t something that he’s abandoned. While we may have seen a race to the bottom in cooking times, with publishers touting 60, 30 and 15-minute meals, this perhaps ignores the restorative effect of slowing down and taking your time. “There’s nothing wrong with the notion that you put in a lot of hard work, and you get something quite special at the very end of the process.”The pandemic has been a nightmare of subscriptions, verifications, registrations, activations and the resetting of long-forgotten passwords. But for me, the tipping point came late. After months of lockdown, I met some workmates in a beer garden. We checked in but the rules were that you couldn’t approach the bar. You had to order your drink from your table via an app. Easy. Except that I was filling in the fields on a web form – email, phone number, address – just to get a $4 cranberry juice when I should have been enjoying the company of friends. Was my email address then available to marketers far and wide? Did I untick the right boxes? Who knows, but I’m sure it only added to the deluge of unwanted offers that greet me every morning when I open my inbox. So I’ve set up a throwaway email address, a place where all that stuff can be parked out of my sight. I use it for buying tickets, booking restaurants, making inquiries, ordering stuff online and for non-work Zoom meetings (like book chats). Think of it like junk mail for things that aren’t entirely junk. The emails won’t pollute your main inbox and there’s no pressure to spend time deleting them. I wish I’d done this 10 years ago. It would have been great for signing up to streaming services – Netflix, Spotify, SBS On Demand – but so much of my life is already signed up. Starting a throwaway email address is simple. Just create a new email account. Gmail is easy to set up and next-to-bottomless with its free 15 gigabytes of storage. If you want to go a little further off-grid, there are various “burner” email services in which you can set up accounts that self-erase after a few hours or days. I don’t have anything I need to hide that badly. So far, my throwaway account is happily catching tickets I need to print out later. It doesn’t have spam emails – yet. But when it does, at least it’s all in the one sinkhole that I never need to clean up.The much-anticipated Africa Cup of Nations football tournament opens today, hosted by Cameroon for the first time for 50 years. Yet behind the celebrations – slightly tempered by strict pandemic restrictions – are tensions from a security crisis spreading from anglophone regions, shaping daily life in Cameroon and potentially even the tournament. Authorities in the west African country have ramped up security, particularly in the capital, Yaoundé, and other host cities across five of Cameroon’s 10 regions – with the effect of securing the tournament and bringing the crisis into view. In Limbe, a peaceful coastal city where Mali, Tunisia, The Gambia and Mauritania will play group matches, an explosion near the city centre last Wednesday left six injured and destroyed property. Marinette Abah, 33, was returning home from evening prayers at the time. “We were home when we received a call that Marinette had been wounded in the explosion,” her brother Calvin Nang said. “We met her with blood all over her body.” A faction of the separatist Ambazonia movement claimed responsibility, and the wider movement, which has condemned the government in Yaoundé as a colonial administration, has pledged to disrupt the tournament. Tensions in the north-western and south-western anglophone regions boiled over in late 2016, when protests against marginalisation of the English language, by lawyers and teachers, were brutally put down by Cameroonian security forces. It fuelled a rise in armed activities by separatist groups seeking independence for the English-speaking parts of Cameroon. The groups have been accused of several attacks and blasts, including against schools, escalating an education boycott that began in 2017, and depriving a generation of Cameroonian children of an education, according to a report by Human Rights Watch. Cameroonian security forces have been accused of human rights abuses against anglophones, especially in rural areas. Many anglophones in Cameroon accuse the government of marginalisation and of attempting to assimilate their education and legal systems into the dominant francophone system. A spokesperson for Samuel Eto’o, a hugely popular figure as one of Africa’s greatest ever footballers a former Afcon champion as well as Champions League and La Liga winner with Barcelona and now head of Cameroon’s football association, refused to be drawn on the security crisis, focusing instead on preparations for the tournament, including 30 new or renovated football stadiums and training pitches. n an interview last month Eto’o also condemned the attempt by European football authorities to again postpone the tournament. “If the Euros took place in the middle of the pandemic, with full stadiums in several cities in Europe and there was no problem, why wouldn’t Afcon be played in Cameroon?” Last month, the European Club Association wrote to its African counterpart, the Confederation of African Football informing them they did not intend to release African players for 2021 Afcon in Cameroon citing rising infections. For many in a football-loving nation, the tournament is a proud moment, where Cameroon start as underdogs behind favourites Algeria, Egypt and Senegal. For others in the English-speaking parts of Cameroon, the tournament is a sideshow to an ongoing crisis. Wilfred Taka, a student in Bamenda, one of the cities in the anglophone north-west, said abuses by security forces were a constant reality, as well as the activities of armed separatists. “So many people have left Bamenda and the north-west to safer towns. Many of the businesses have shut down. For the past five years, things have not been easy,” he said. “Hardly will the month go to an end before you will hear of killings and kidnappings. The tournament is a good thing for the country, but would it not have been better if they had focused on peace first? But they have not done that.”Mark Bonner described his Cambridge United’s side’s FA Cup third round giant-killing at Newcastle United’s St James’ Park as a fairytale after watching Joe Ironside’s second-half goal stun the struggling home side. It represented a tactical triumph for Bonner, a 36-year-old new-school manager who never kicked a ball professionally and worked his way up after beginning his career coaching Cambridge’s under-eights. After promotion from League Two last season, Cambridge are mid‑table in League One, 41 places beneath Newcastle on the ladder. “What an occasion,” he said. “There’s always a fairytale and an upset in the FA Cup and we hoped it would be us this year but then we saw how strong Newcastle’s team-sheet was. “Our goalkeeper [Dimitar Mitov] was brilliant but I am so proud we kept them at bay. We only got promoted last year so keeping a clean sheet is an incredible achievement.” It left the Middlesbrough-born Ironside, who grew up idolising Newcastle’s former centre-forward Alan Shearer, celebrating in front of the 5,000 Cambridge fans. Bonner added: “This day will be remembered for decades. These are the moments you never forget and you never know how long it will be before you experience anything like it again. “Newcastle’s an incredible football club and an incredible city and the noise got big at times but we coped with the atmosphere and, although we rode our luck at times, we also had periods of control and managed to turn it into a great day for our supporters.” While Cambridge operate on one of the third tier’s tighter budgets, Newcastle, with their Saudi Arabian owners, are theoretically the world’s wealthiest club but are facing relegation from the Premier League after winning one game all season. They played poorly here in front of their chairman, Yasir al-Rumayyan, who had flown in from Riyadh specially for the game but departed, grim-faced, flanked by a quartet of bodyguards. Eddie Howe, who revealed that Rumayyan visited the dressing room to offer Newcastle’s players something of a pep talk after the final whistle, said: “We are desperately disappointed. “We wanted to win but we played a very strong Cambridge team and we couldn’t break them down. I have to give credit to Cambridge’s players and their manager.” “We had some good moments but their goalkeeper was outstanding and we lacked the killer instinct every team needs.” Newcastle entertain Watford in a relegation six-pointer on Saturday and Howe said: “We have some season‑defining league games coming up and I just hope this defeat doesn’t damage our players’ confidence. “We just have to take it on the chin and bounce back.”The cups are shoring up Chelsea’s season. After a run of three wins in nine games that has made a title challenge extremely unlikely and cost them top spot in their Champions League group, wins in the first leg of the Carabao Cup semi-final and the third round of the FA Cup have restored a sense of stability at Stamford Bridge. This went about as well as it could have done for Thomas Tuchel’s side: ahead early and so in control by half-time that he could afford to rest players in the second half. “It’s very good for the young boys, and again they stepped up and showed what they are capable of,” said Tuchel. “It was good. There’s no need to talk it down artificially, but there’s no need to be overwhelmed: we played a fifth-division team.” But the magic of the Cup is that anything can happen: even Timo Werner can score. He had a go both at being offside and missing, but did manage to shovel the ball into an empty net after Hakim Ziyech’s initial effort, smartly created by Mateo Kovacic, had been blocked. There was the inevitable wait for VAR to ratify it and for once, having cancelled out 16 previous Werner efforts since his arrival in west London, it did. And so, after six minutes, the chance of an upset, of the National League side beating the European champions, was in effect gone. Which, in a sense, took the pressure off. Six thousand Chesterfield fans, roughly their average home gate, packed the Shed, determined to enjoy the day – so much so that they greeted the dimming of lights before kick-off with a great gasp of amazement and delight, before perhaps realising that, even in the more remote corners of Derbyshire, lights that go on and off aren’t really that exciting any more, and trying to correct the fault by jeering and asking “Who are you?” The answer was swiftly provided: a much better football team than them. Callum Hudson-Odoi, given far too much space, curled a second after 18 minutes, before Romelu Lukaku converted a cross from the impressive debutant left-back Lewis Hall. Chelsea fans responded with applause warm enough to suggest Lukaku has been forgiven after his Sky Italia interview. Chesterfield fans responded by chanting “Romelu Lukaku, he’s Inter Milan.” And why not? With the final three-quarters of the game rendered an exhibition, they can hardly be blamed for taking their fun where they could find it. “It was a fantastic experience for us,” said the Chesterfield manager, James Rowe. “When the team sheet comes it’s exciting for everybody. That’s what we’ve worked for. It’s a remarkable day for everybody.” When a looping Andreas Christensen header, after the Chesterfield keeper Scott Loach had parried Hall’s shot, made it 4-0 six minutes before the break it brought to mind 7-1, the scoreline in 1907 when they last met Chelsea in a league game. The England international George Hilsdon, nicknamed the “Gatling Gun” for the rapidity of his shooting, scored twice in that game but when war came, the Gatling Gun went missing as he tried to dodge his call-up. He was finally found hiding in a chicken run. Badly gassed at Arras, he never played football again, and tried to scrape together a living working as a teaboy on building sites, running a pub and organising raffles. When he died in Leicester in 1941, only four people came to his funeral and he was buried in an unmarked grave. A collection from Chelsea fans bought a headstone in 2015. Hilsdon’s memory, though, lives on: the weather vane on the East Stand – which tradition (and memories of the club’s decline when it was taken for refurbishment in the seventies) says must never be removed for fear of dreadful misfortune – is modelled on him. A mismatch it may be today, but the previous season Chesterfield had been the first away side to win at Stamford Bridge. This is a fixture with history. The questions for the second half were whether Chesterfield could nick a goal and whether they could keep the margin down to under the six they lost by to Hilsdon and co. The answers to both questions were yes. Akwasi Asante gleefully knocked in after the tireless Kabongo Tshimanga’s shot had been saved to provide a proper souvenir for the away fans behind that goal. And although Ziyech scored a 55th-minute penalty, Chesterfield were resolute enough that the score never threatened to become embarrassing; as such, both teams probably ended up satisfied enough. This was the other side of a third-round mismatch: not an upset, but a gently enjoyable day out for everybody.Jonathan Wilson was our man at Stamford Bridge this evening. His report has landed, and is begging to be clicked. Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! Chelsea are through to the fourth round, while Chesterfield retain their dignity ... and Akwasi Asante will always have a goal scored at the home of the reigning European champions. Chelsea still haven’t lost a third-round tie in the 21st century. 90 min +3: Ziyech dribbles into the box from the right and wallops a shot straight at Leach, who parries. Chesterfield were three down after 20 minutes, so this has been an impressively determined last 70 from the National League side. 90 min +2: Ziyech takes it himself and pulls a poor effort well wide right. 90 min +1: Ziyech is flattened by Weston as he jinks down the inside-right channel. A free kick. Everyone lines up on the edge of the Chesterfield box. 90 min: There will be three added minutes. 89 min: Barkley shapes to shoot, 25 yards out. He thinks about it for an age, and suddenly Weston arrives from nowhere to steal the ball off his toe. 87 min: Whittle has an ambitious look at goal from a wide position on the right. High and wide. He grins widely anyway. Chesterfield are enjoying themselves. 86 min: Chelsea probe this way and that. Loftus-Cheek rolls a pass down the right channel for Vale, who clips a weak cross from the byline into Loach’s arms. 84 min: The visiting fans are giving it plenty. They’ve had a hellish few years. They deserve to enjoy the moment. It’s lovely to witness. 82 min: Yeah, yeah, Chelsea are going through with a swagger, while Chesterfield are going out. But that’s the magic of the FA Cup third round, right there. It was a fine goal, too. The loudest roar of the night as the men from the National League score at the home of the champions of Europe! A long ball down the middle. A flick on by Asante. Tshimanga barrels down the inside-right channel, turns Sarr and Baker brilliantly, and slams a shot at Bettinelli. The keeper parries, but the ball breaks to Asante, who rolls into the empty net from six yards. What scenes! 78 min: Mandeville, who has looked lively, dribbles down the inside-right channel before sending a pea-roller towards goal. Straight at Bettinelli. That’s Chesterfield’s first attempt on target. 77 min: Hall is back in the thick of it. 76 min: Chelsea have the ball in the net again, but it won’t count. Barkley slips Werner clear down the left. Werner draws Loach and crosses for Havertz, who slides to poke home. But Werner had gone a tad too early, and up goes the flag. 75 min: Chelsea are currently down to ten men, young Hall having gone down with a serious case of cramp. 73 min: Chesterfield hit long. Kerr latches onto a flick-on down the right, and lashes a shot into the side netting. As close as the visitors have come. Few would begrudge the National League side a consolation. 72 min: Here comes number ten. Oyeleke is replaced by Harry Maguire’s brother Laurence. 70 min: This game is now exactly how you’d expect it to be with nine substitutes on the field. 68 min: Barkley’s first act is to take up possession to the left of the Chesterfield D, shift his feet, and whip a splendid effort towards the top right. Inches wide. Had it been on target, Loach was nowhere near. 66 min: Barkley comes on for Hudson-Odoi, while Asante replaces Kellerman for the visitors. 65 min: Baker goes up for a header with Kellerman and lands on his back. Ooyah, oof, that’ll have taken the wind out of him. Happily he pings back up quickly enough. 63 min: Werner cuts in from the left and slices a wild effort over the bar. Seconds earlier, Ziyech had teed up Havertz, whose attempted curler towards the top left was blocked by Grimes. 62 min: All a little bit shapeless since the slew of changes. 60 min: Chesterfield replace Gunning with Grimes. 58 min: Pulisic and Christensen make way for Lewis Baker and Harvey Vale. It’s over eight years since Baker’s one and only previous appearance for Chelsea. 56 min: Mandeville takes an optimistic shy at the Chelsea goal from the best part of 30 yards. The effort flies harmlessly into the Shed. Ziyech drills into the bottom right. Loach gets fingers to the ball, but it’s travelling too fast to stop. 54 min: Havertz drives at Chesterfield down the middle. The ball’s shuttled right for Pulisic, who nudges the ball past Miller and enters the box. Miller slips and crudely brings Pulisic down. The referee has no option but to point to the spot. 52 min: Kerr gives Pulisic an awful clatter as he races towards the Chesterfield box. The ref waves play on, and Ziyech swings a cross into the box from the left. Gunning clears with a spectacular diving header. Chesterfield break quickly, Mandeville showing some fancy footwork down the right. But he can’t release Tshimanga with an overhit pass. 50 min: Gunning is good to continue. 49 min: Ziyech drops a shoulder to beat a couple of men, then threads a shot towards the bottom left. Loach parries. The ball breaks to Ziyech, who screams a shot goalwards from an angle on the left. Gunning bravely gets in the road to block, and requires some treatment as a result. 48 min: Saul very nearly releases Havertz down the left with a fine first-time pass. After a sluggish start to his Chelsea career, Saul is beginning to show what he can do. 46 min: It’s nearly a sensational start to the second half as Tshimanga chases after a long blooter and nearly gets ahead of Sarr. The Chelsea man sticks out a telescopic leg to poke the ball away from the Chesterfield striker, just as he was preparing to lob over the out-of-position Bettinelli. Chelsea get the second half underway. Both teams have made two changes. Chelsea send on Loftus-Cheek and Havertz for Kovacic and Lukaku, while Chesterfield replace Khan and King with Mandeville and Miller. Half-time entertainment. Newcastle might not be all that great at the moment, but this still registers as one of the biggest third-round shocks for a while. Penny for the thoughts of new boy Kieran Trippier, because that’s one hellish debut. Chelsea are as good as in the fourth round, though we still have 45 minutes to play. Their record FA Cup win - because it might come to this - is 9-1 against Worksop Town in 1908. Much will depend on their approach to the second half, and their willingness to show mercy. 45 min: There will be one minute of added time. Chesterfield can’t wait to hear the whistle. 44 min: This lad Hall really does look the part. He sashays down the middle and reaches the box. He’s entitled to shoot but opts to tee up Lukaku instead. The move breaks down. Chesterfield break, but who’s back in the box mopping up? Hall. He’s having one hell of a debut. 43 min: Hudson-Odoi and Kovacic shuttle the ball in from the left, teeing up Ziyech on the edge of the D. Ziyech aims for the bottom left, but the shot is weak and telegraphed, and easy for Loach. 41 min: Kellerman clips Sarr on the ankle, betraying Chesterfield’s frustration. Just a free kick, nothing more. Hudson-Odoi, out on the left, rolls infield for Hall, who takes a whack from 25 yards. Loach stoops and parries, but only straight into the air, and straight at Christensen, who loops a careful header over the keeper and into the top right. 38 min: Kovavic and Lukaku exchange passes again, this time to the left of the Chesterfield D. Kovacic’s shot is dragged wide left. 36 min: Christensen rolls a long pass down the right to release Ziyech, who cuts infield and looks to beat Weston on the edge of the box. He drops a shoulder, then falls over, claiming a free kick he’s never going to get. Had he stayed upright, a shooting opportunity would surely have presented itself. 34 min: Another long throw flung into the Chelsea box from the right. After a quick game of bagatelle, the ball breaks to Oyeleke, who bobbles a shot wide left from the edge of the box. Bettinelli had it covered. 33 min: Lukaku instigates a one-two with Kovacic down the inside-right channel, but doesn’t receive the return. Nearly a lovely crisp move. 31 min: Ziyech pulls the corner back for Lukaku, who whip-cracks a first-time shot wide left from 12 yards. Less than a minute later, a carbon-copy miss, Werner pulling back from the left in open play, Lukaku sending it wide left again. The big man could easily have pouched the match ball already; he’s had the chances. 30 min: Hudson-Odoi, Werner and Kovacic combine down the left to win a corner. Chesterfield aren’t being given a moment’s peace, which is testament to Chelsea’s relentless press. 29 min: King comes through the back of Hudson-Odoi in a very agitated manner. He quite correctly goes into the book. 28 min: Chesterfield’s 5,000-strong support are still giving it plenty, determined to enjoy their day despite the scoreline. An admirable racket. 26 min: Chelsea ping it around the back, their work tonight already effectively done. No drama required. 24 min: From Ashley Cole to Ben Chilwell, they love a good left-back at Chelsea. Lewis Hall looks the business too. He’s not been afraid to get involved, and strokes his passes around with a pleasing swagger. Just 20 minutes in, and he’s already got an assist to his name. 22 min: Kovacic tries to release Lukaku down the middle but his volleyed pass is too strong. Chelsea look in the mood to fill their boots. The debutant Hall dribbles his way down the left. He loses control, but persists, nipping between Kellerman and King to reclaim possession. He reaches the byline and rolls across for Lukaku, who pinball-flippers a shot home from close range. Hudson-Odoi drifts in from the left wing, uses a line of four defenders as a shield, and curls a delicious shot into the bottom right. Loach had no chance. Perhaps the defence allowed Hudson-Odoi too much time, but let’s not dwell on the negatives. A glorious strike. 17 min: Saul goes up with Tshimanga and accidentally clumps him with his elbow. Purely accidental, though he’s already on a yellow, so wants to watch himself. 15 min: Chesterfield are knocking it around with confidence, undeterred by falling behind. Their captain has already made his mark on this tournament, of course: Watson became the youngest finalist of all time in 2004, coming on for Millwall against Manchester United at the age of 17 years and 119 days. He’s 34 now. Time flies, huh. Feeling old? 13 min: A free kick for Chesterfield near the centre circle. King shovels it down the inside-right channel for Tshimanga, who has the chance to volley the ball that’s dropping over his shoulder, but opts to take a touch instead. Bad idea. His touch forces him wide and the opportunity is gone. 11 min: More space for Ziyech on the right. He dances his way past Croll and sends a vicious low shot goalwards from a tight angle. Loach does extremely well to parry clear. 10 min: Kellerman busies himself down the left and earns Chesterfield’s first corner of the evening. It’s wasted, driven low to the near post by King and bundled out of play by Oyeleke. A decent enough response to falling behind by the non-league club, though. 8 min: Saul is booked for an hysterical slide through the back of Oyeleke. That’s a poor challenge and he can have no complaints. Chelsea get the early goal they craved, and Chesterfield feared. Kovacic drives at the Chesterfield back line and slips a pass wide right for Ziyech, who attracts two red shirts and rolls across for Werner. A simple tap-in. 5 min: Chesterfield’s captain Weston spins out of trouble in his own box, nipping between Ziyech and Pulisic and sending both off to the shops. Delightful skill. 3 min: Ziyech takes the corner from the left. He pulls back for Lukaku, who has ghosted around the pack in the box to make space. Lukaku launches into the Shed. A lovely run to create the opportunity, a clever training-ground job, but a dreadfully poor shot. He should have scored. 2 min: Saul rakes a pass down the left to release Hudson-Odoi, who enters the box, contemplates shooting, but then pulls back for Kovacic, whose shot is deflected out for the first corner of the evening. 1 min: Chesterfield launch it long, and win a throw deep in Chelsea territory. King flings it into the box. Bettinelli gathers without fuss. Chesterfield get the ball rolling ... but only after a knee is taken. Plenty of applause all around the Bridge for the gesture. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out. Chelsea are in royal blue, forcing Chesterfield into a red change strip. The Liquidator blasts from the PA system, which can only mean one thing at Stamford Bridge: we’ll be off in a couple of minutes. Hit that Hammond organ, Winston! Thomas Tuchel talks to the BBC. “It is always a strong line-up when you play for Chelsea. We expect to win but we have to show in every single minute. It’s on us to not make it a pleasant experience for Chesterfield.” James Rowe, Tuchel’s opposite number, adds: “It’s a strong line-up, so that’s a compliment to us, and to the competition. If we don’t shut the space, we will be in trouble, but if we can do that, we can gain confidence. Enjoy it, with a smile on our face. We’ll have a right go!” Pre-match reading. Nick Ames talks to the folk who saved Chesterfield during the pandemic, putting their club “back on the map”. Can Chesterfield Make It Three dept. There are already two non-league teams in the velvet bag for the fourth-round draw. Sixth-tier Kidderminster Harriers have beaten Reading 2-1, while Boreham Wood have knocked out 1988 winners Wimbledon. Big shocks both, though the unique spirit of the FA Cup third round has best been illustrated by Cambridge United, who have knocked out Newcastle United, the richest club in the world, on their own turf. Newcastle’s wait for a first FA Cup since 1955 goes on. Barry Glendenning, fingers red raw with all the goals that have been flying in, has all the details in today’s Clockwatch. Chelsea: Bettinelli, Hudson-Odoi, Christensen, Sarr, Hall, Kovacic, Saul, Ziyech, Pulisic, Werner, Lukaku. Subs: Baker, Arrizabalaga, Jorginho, Loftus-Cheek, Barkley, Havertz, Simons, Vale, Webster. Chesterfield: Loach, Kerr, Gunning, Croll, King, Weston, Oyeleke, Whittle, Khan, Kellermann, Tshimanga. Subs: Miller, Maguire, Asante, Mandeville, Minter, McCourt, Tyson, Grimes, Payne. Referee: Jarred Gillett (Australia). Chelsea give a senior debut to 17-year-old left-back Lewis Hall, while Marcus Bettinelli makes his first appearance for the club in goal. Mateo Kovacic captains, while Christian Pulisic, Romelu Lukaku and Timo Werner hope to get the job done up front. Fraser Kerr and Jim Kellerman start for Chesterfield. The National League club are 91 league places below the European champions in the pyramid. This should have been the 1997 final. With Chelsea having seen off Wimbledon easily in the first semi, Jon Howard put third-tier Chesterfield 3-1 up in the second against Premier League strugglers Middlesbrough … or at least he thought he had. His shot hit the underside of the bar and came down well over the line, but referee David Elleray was too busy performing donuts in his square-wheeled collapsing car to notice, instead awarding a spurious free kick to Boro, who made it 2-2 soon after. Chesterfield kept battling to secure a 3-3 draw after extra time, but their moment had passed, and they lost convincingly in the replay. There still hasn’t been a third-tier finalist in the FA Cup. The Spireites have since fallen out of the Football League, and even though Chelsea are likely to make wholesale changes this evening, a shock is extremely unlikely. A side from the National League beating the reigning champions of Europe? Come off it and come on. And yet the FA Cup is the FA Cup is the FA Cup, and Chelsea have suffered losses to sides from lower divisions before, most notably when third-tier Bradford City came from two down at Stamford Bridge to beat Jose Mourinho’s men in 2015. So you never know. The Blues take on the dreaming Spireites at 5.30pm, with extra time and penalties to follow should the match end in a draw. It’s on!Covid should be treated as an endemic virus similar to flu, and ministers should end mass-vaccination after the booster campaign, the former chairman of the UK’s vaccine taskforce has said. With health chiefs and senior Tories also lobbying for a post-pandemic plan for a straining NHS, Dr Clive Dix called for a major rethink of the UK’s Covid strategy, in effect reversing the approach of the past two years and returning to a “new normality”. “We need to analyse whether we use the current booster campaign to ensure the vulnerable are protected, if this is seen to be necessary,” he said. “Mass population-based vaccination in the UK should now end.” He said ministers should urgently back research into Covid immunity beyond antibodies to include B-cells and T-cells (white blood cells). This could help create vaccines for vulnerable people specific to Covid variants, he said, adding: “We now need to manage disease, not virus spread. So stopping progression to severe disease in vulnerable groups is the future objective.” His intervention comes as it was revealed that more than 150,000 people across the UK have now died from Covid. Official figures published on Saturday recorded a further 313 deaths, the highest daily number since February last year when the last peak was receding. It takes total recorded deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test to 150,057. Boris Johnson, the prime minister, tweeted in response: “Coronavirus has taken a terrible toll on our country and today the number of deaths recorded has reached 150,000. “Each and every one of those is a profound loss to the families, friends and communities affected and my thoughts and condolences are with them. “Our way out of this pandemic is for everyone to get their booster or their first or second dose if they haven’t yet.” Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, said the death toll was a “dark milestone for our country”. Daily infections fell to 146,390 on Saturday. NHS officials are warning that patient safety has been compromised this winter because of a crippling health and social care staff shortage that would require a million additional workers by the next decade. Writing in the Observer, Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, said that the pandemic had exposed “its weakest links”. “There is a clear, regrettable, impact on quality of care and, in the most pressured parts of the system, a worrying increase in patient safety risk,” he writes. “It is now very clear that the NHS and our social care system do not have sufficient capacity. That asking staff to work harder and harder to address that gap is simply not sustainable. That we need a long-term, fully funded, workforce plan to attract and retain the extra one million health and care staff the Health Foundation estimates will be needed by 2031.” Jeremy Hunt, the former health secretary, also called for action, saying: “The pandemic has highlighted workforce pressures but they were never new. We can’t solve them overnight, but we have a moral duty to NHS and care staff to look them in the eye after the hell of the last two years and say a long-term plan is in place.” Hopson said some NHS trusts outside London would see Covid hospitalisations rise even higher than their previous record peak last year. “There are already a number of trusts whose Covid hospitalisation levels are at 100% of their January 2021 peak,” he said. “That’s before they are anywhere near their current peaks. These organisations are likely to be 10 days or two weeks away from their peak this time round.” He also said he understood that as many as 40% of care homes had stopped taking new admissions in the past week, making it hard for hospitals to discharge patients. Stephen Chandler, president of the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services, said that social care was in a “national emergency” because so many staff were off sick. A government spokesperson said “historic amounts of funding” were being provided for NHS backlogs and social care, adding: “Hospital admissions are rising, however this is not yet translating into the same numbers needing intensive care that we saw in previous waves. We’re increasing NHS capacity by building onsite Nightingale hubs, as well as creating 2,500 virtual beds where people can be safely treated at home.” Dix’s remarks on ending mass-vaccination come as the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) ruled that fourth doses were not currently needed because most older people who had received boosters were still well-protected against Omicron, three months after the booster campaign began. The UK Health Security Agency said protection for over-65s was about 90%, three months after a booster jab. The JCVI’s deputy chair, Professor Anthony Harnden, said the committee was monitoring the impact of Omicron on older and vulnerable people on a weekly basis. A debate is unfolding over fourth doses. Last week, Israel became the first country to embark on a fourth round of Covid vaccinations, for over-60s and healthcare workers who had their third jab at least three months ago. Greg Clark, the Tory chair of the Commons science and technology committee, said a fourth dose of vaccine should be considered for healthcare workers, adding: “The UK Health Security Agency found that the impact of a third dose against transmission of Covid wanes after 10 weeks. So, given the staff shortages in the NHS from self-isolation and the fact that NHS staff received their booster from mid September, it would be worth the JCVI considering whether a further dose would help reduce absences among frontline staff.” Dix was instrumental in helping pharmaceutical firms create the Covid vaccines that have transformed the risk to most people. He said he supported the current booster campaign, but a “new targeted strategy” was needed to get the UK to a position of “managing Covid”. He added: “We should consider when we stop testing and let individuals isolate when they are not well and return to work when they feel ready, in the same way we do in a bad influenza season.” Dix said the government should support research and analysis of how effective vaccines had been at producing “memory B- and T-cell immunity” – parts of the immune system that recognise Covid – and particularly how they worked for over-60s and vulnerable groups with underlying health conditions. “With this data in hand, we should influence manufacturers who have vaccines that have shown the most durable cellular responses to develop an Omicron and a Delta variant vaccine to cover the current mutation lineages,” he said, adding that Prof Paul Moss and the Covid Immunology Consortium had provided “excellent groundwork” for this. Professor Eleanor Riley, professor of immunology and infectious disease at the University of Edinburgh, said: “Everything depends on whether another variant comes up. “A fourth dose or second booster of the existing vaccine probably isn’t going to achieve very much. The evidence is that immunity against severe disease is much longer lasting. The only justification for doing a second booster for the majority of the population would be if we saw clear evidence of people, five or six months after their booster, ending up in hospital with severe Covid.” Health experts are also concerned that the take-up of the booster vaccine last month was driven by the public’s wish not disrupt their festive season. Now that fear has gone it has removed some of the drive to take up the vaccine. In addition there is a widespread perception that Omicron is milder and less worrying, added Simon Williams of Swansea University. “We call ‘variant fatigue’ which translates as people saying ‘this is what viruses do; we just need to get on with our lives.’ It’s not great from a public health perspective.” However, child health expert, Professor Helen Bedford of University College London, warned that there was a danger in lumping diehard anti-vaxxers with people who have nagging doubts about getting a vaccine. “If you do that you will miss the chance to persuade those who have genuine concerns but who could change their minds and get vaccinated. It does not help to criticise them all as talking mumbo-jumbo.”Ideally, the discussion leading up to the 33rd Africa Cup of Nations, which begins on Sunday as the hosts Cameroon face Burkina Faso in Yaoundé, would have centred on potential winners, surprise packages and stand-out players. Can Algeria defend their crown? Can Mohamed Salah inspire Egypt? Can a north African side win for only the third time in sub-Saharan Africa? Will Senegal, with their depth of talent, triumph for the first time? Why do Nigeria have an interim coach? But instead the discussion, in England at least, has centred on which Premier League clubs will be worst affected by the tournament. A lot of international football can seem like an imposition on the club game but it feels as though the Cup of Nations is always having to justify its existence. More than any other competition, perhaps, it exemplifies the difficulties of drawing up a calendar for a truly global sport. When the Ajax striker Sébastien Haller was asked whether he would be joining up with Ivory Coast or staying with his club, he reacted angrily. “This question shows disrespect for Africa,” he said. “Would this question ever be asked to a European player ahead of the Euros?” He is almost certainly right about disrespect, but equally the Euros don’t clash with the European season. The issue seemed, superficially at least, to have been resolved in 2017 when the Confederation of African Football (Caf), three months after Issa Hayatou’s 29-year presidency was ended by his election defeat to Ahmad Ahmad, agreed to move the tournament to June-July as part of a wider rationalisation of the global calendar. But in November the following year, because of issues with infrastructure, the Boko Haram insurgency and the Anglophone crisis, the 2019 tournament was shifted from Cameroon to Egypt, with Cameroon taking over 2021 (Ivory Coast, which had been scheduled to host in 2021, will now hold it in 2023, with the tournament in Guinea pushed back to 2025). Although it was moved by a week to avoid Ramadan, the 2019 tournament was staged, as planned, in the European summer. In January 2020, though, Caf decided to return to January‑February for 2021 because of “the challenge of unfavourable climatic conditions” with a June tournament catching the end of the first rainy season. Quite why this was not considered a problem in 2019 has never been explained. As it turns out, with Covid forcing the tournament to be postponed to this year, it’s just as well the tournament is January-February or it would end just four months before the World Cup starts – although as it is Al Ahly will play Monterrey in the Club World Cup on 5 February, the day before the Cup of Nations final, which seems less than ideal for the six Ahly players in the Egypt squad. The 2023 Cup of Nations is still scheduled for June-July even though average rainfall in Abidjan in June is slightly over double that of Yaoundé. Can you play tournament football when there’s 270mm of rain a day? We’ll find out. The other habitual complaint of European clubs is that the Cup of Nations comes every two years, but that is a matter both of history and financial necessity. This is the second-oldest continental tournament, older than the Euros, established in 1957 amid the wave of independence across the continent. Egypt won the first two tournaments (the second as the United Arab Republic after union with Syria) as Gamal Abdel Nasser pursued a radically anti-colonial agenda. The great team of the 60s was Ghana, which had gained independence from Britain in 1957; they bore a black star on their flag and shirts, consciously evoking the Jamaican activist Marcus Garvey. The Cup of Nations has always existed amid a battle for recognition, politically and in football. Only one of the 16 slots at the 1958 World Cup was reserved for Africa/Asia combined (and that ended up being taken by Wales, because of the refusal of numerous teams to play Israel, who were then part of the Asian Confederation; it was the play-off between Wales and Israel that meant Jimmy Murphy, who combined being Wales manager with coaching at Manchester United, was not on the flight that crashed at Munich). Not until 1970, after an African boycott of 1966, were Africa and Asia each guaranteed a place at the World Cup. Hayatou’s argument was that the Cup of Nations had been established at a time when Europe had no time for African football and, even ignoring that the revenue it generates is essential, there was no reason for Africa to change schedule just because European clubs were buying African players in large numbers. That is perhaps better as a starting point for a negotiation than a solution but, in a world of self-interest (not that Hayatou was immune from that), at least it represented somebody standing up for the greater good of African football. Patrice Motsepe, who succeeded Ahmad Ahmad as Caf president in March, is a more instinctively pro-Fifa figure. But whoever is in charge, the problem remains the same. The reality is that European football represents the summit of the club game and a January-February tournament means that, every two years, a tranche of the best African players have to leave their clubs – which cannot be beneficial to their career prospects. But when can the tournament be hosted? It may be that it is not possible to reconcile the northern European winter and the west African rainy season and that, unsatisfactory as it is, this is the best solution. June 2023 in Ivory Coast will offer a clearer picture. Recent calls for a biennial World Cup are part of wider discussions over the calendar. As those negotiations go on, the only hope – perhaps a vain one – can be that footballing rather than commercial or political concerns take precedence, and that the Cup of Nations is treated with the respect it deserves. Cameroon, unlike many recent hosts, has a match-going culture; as a spectacle, unless Covid regulations have a major impact, this can be one of the great Cups of Nations. And that, rather than the frustrations of Premier League fans, should be the focus.Ministers face claims they have allowed the ruling elite of Kazakhstan to secretly invest vast chunks of the country’s wealth in the London property market after failing to introduce promised new transparency laws. Former prime minister David Cameron pledged at an anti-corruption summit in London in 2016 that the UK would end the secret offshore ownership of property. More than five years later, a proposed register of foreign owners of UK property has still not been introduced. The uprisings in Kazakhstan last week reflected widespread anger at former president Nursultan Nazarbayev’s three decades of rule and the vast fortunes amassed by a privileged few. Property worth hundreds of millions of pounds in London and southern England has already been identified as bought by Kazakhstan’s wealthy elite in the past two decades. The government is now under pressure to fast-track new laws to introduce the register pledged by Cameron. David Lammy, shadow foreign secretary, said: “The government has abjectly failed to get to grips with the UK’s role in money laundering, corruption and illicit finance. London is the destination of choice for the world’s kleptocrats looking to store ill-gotten wealth. It is no good using tough words against the Putin regime, or criticising Kazakhstan’s human rights record, while being a soft touch for the elites that sustain and profit from autocratic regimes.” There are nearly 90,000 companies in England and Wales owned offshore by companies incorporated in secrecy jurisdictions. A report entitled The UK’s Kleptocracy Problem, published last month by the thinktank Chatham House, identified 34 properties bought by the Kazakh ruling elite from 1998 to 2002 at a cost of about £530m. John Heathershaw, professor of international relations at Exeter University and lead author of the report, said: “Most of the property is linked to Nazarbayev’s family or members of the ruling elite that are close to them.” Experts say the portfolio is likely to be “the tip of the iceberg” because many other properties will be owned by offshore shell companies which do not disclose their beneficial owners. Heathershaw said London was a popular destination for ruling elites with suspicious wealth because it was a global cosmopolitan and financial hub; it provided a range of legal firms offering aggressive reputation management services; and it offered the chance to mix with influential figures in political, royal and business circles. He said: “London has been really important for the political elite in Kazakhstan and that includes the relationships they have developed with individuals such as Tony Blair and Prince Andrew.” Blair provided advice to the Kazakh regime and Prince Andrew has been close to some of its wealthiest individuals. The Kazakh elite’s properties bought during Nazarbayev’s presidency include Prince Andrew’s marital home, Sunninghill Park in Berkshire, bought in 2007 for £15m by oligarch Timur Kulibayev, the son-in-law of the former Kazakhstan president. It also emerged in early 2020 that Nazarbayev’s daughter Dariga Nazarbayeva and grandson Nurali Aliyev own property in London worth at least £80m. The National Crime Agency issued unexplained wealth orders, which are used to track suspicious funds, against three properties: a mansion in The Bishops Avenue, one of the most expensive roads in the capital; an apartment in Chelsea; and a mansion in Highgate, north London. The orders were dismissed by a judge who found the NCA had not proved any link between the purchase of the homes and criminal funds. Oliver Bullough, author of Moneyland, a book which investigates how illicitly gained wealth can be moved around the world, said the uprisings in Kazakhstan were linked to the uninterrupted flow of the country’s wealth into cities such as London. According to a KPMG report, 162 people control about half of Kazakhstan’s total wealth. Bullough said: “Kazakhstan’s elite has been able to extract a vast amount of wealth and leave ordinary people with very little. And the primary enabler of that extraction has been the UK.” Ben Cowdock, investigations lead at Transparency International UK, an independent anti-corruption organisation, said the UK should now be examining if it can impose sanctions on any of the ruling elite in Kazakhstan who may have benefited from illicit funds. He said: “Kazakhstan is a kleptocracy and there are high levels of corruption at the highest echelons of power. The UK should be seeking the evidence to take action, but it’s extremely difficult in a country which has essentially legitimised corruption. They’ve taken control of all the country’s assets and shared them out among the ruling elite.” Nazarbayev’s whereabouts remain unclear this week and there has been speculation he may have left the country. Nazarbayev, 81, stood down as president in 2019, but until last week still wielded considerable power and was chair of the country’s powerful security council. He has now been removed from this post. A UK government spokesperson said: “The government will establish a new beneficial ownership register of overseas entities that own UK property, in order to combat money laundering and achieve greater transparency in the UK property market. It is essential that the register strikes the right balance between improving transparency and minimising burdens on legitimate commercial activity. The government will legislate when parliamentary time allows.”For many Kazakhs, the full story behind the unrest of the past week remains as murky as the mist that enveloped Almaty, the country’s largest city and the centre of violence, at the same time. People were unable to access accurate information, as an internet blackout froze almost all access to the outside world during a tragic few days of violence in which military vehicles rolled through the streets, government buildings burned and state television carried rolling threats that “bandits and terrorists” would be eliminated without mercy. Now both order and the internet have been largely restored, but there are still more questions than answers. One thing that is clear is many of the old assumptions about Kazakhstan, the resource-rich Central Asian state, have been overturned. Just last month the country celebrated the 30th anniversary of its independence, with official speeches highlighting the image of a peaceful, prosperous nation, one that had largely avoided political unrest and boasted an independent and “multivector” foreign policy. Kazakhstan, it seemed, had even successfully managed the tricky transition out of power from its long-standing president, Nursultan Nazarbayev, who led the country from independence in 1991 until 2019, to his handpicked successor, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. A month later, and the picture is very different. Peaceful protests turned into violent clashes, Tokayev announced he had ordered security forces to “shoot to kill, without warning”, and troops from a Russia-led military alliance are on the ground after being called for by Tokayev. Amid it all, dozens of deaths and a sense from eyewitness reports that the real number of casualties could be much higher than the 26 “armed criminals” and 18 security officers that the interior ministry has said were killed. More than 4,000 people have been detained. There was a suspicion all week that there may be more in play than a straightforward popular uprising, and this was reinforced by the announcement on Saturday that Karim Masimov, a powerful former security chief and prime minister, had been arrested on suspicion of treason. The move only increased speculation that the initial protests could have been used by groups within the country’s political elite to fight their own battles. A source in Kazakh business circles gave credence to this scenario, describing a situation over recent months of increasing tension between figures close to Nazarbayev and his successor, Tokayev. “In the last six to 12 months there was increased squabbling, which was paralysing decision-making,” said the source. “It has been bubbling for some time.” One of the more surprising episodes of the week was Tokayev’s transformation from placid placeholder to furious autocrat, promising to crush the revolt brutally. “We were dealing with armed and well-prepared bandits, both local and foreign. Bandits and terrorists, who should be destroyed. This will happen in the nearest time,” Tokayev said in an uncompromising address to the nation on Friday, noting that there were 20,000 such “bandits” in Almaty alone. He also posted a message in English on Twitter: “In my basic view, no talks with the terrorists: We must kill them.” It was later deleted. “Before, he came across as a mealy-mouthed quiet diplomat, but the rhetoric we saw on Friday was that of a general leading an army,” said Kate Mallinson, associate fellow at Chatham House. Amnesty International described Tokayev’s promise to shoot without warning as “a recipe for disaster”, and there is now a question of how much the government response will differentiate between peaceful protesters and violent groups. Tokayev put Kazakhstan’s already beleaguered civil society on alert when he said that free media played a role in fanning the unrest. “There is still very little independent information and a lot of uncertainty. However, one thing is clear: the peaceful protest was genuine and spontaneous,” said Diana T Kudaibergenova, a sociologist at Cambridge University. “People went to the streets to voice their grievances and we saw some self-organisation, especially in western Kazakhstan.” The protest began in the west last weekend, sparked by rising fuel prices, and quickly spread to other cities, including Almaty. There, many of those on the streets reported that on Wednesday and Thursday the demonstration was hijacked by violent groups, some of whom appeared to be well organised, and who attacked government buildings and briefly seized the airport. Tokayev, in his address, spoke vaguely about “foreign-trained” attackers, but gave no details and did not specify who they were supposedly working for. Many questions remain about the role of Nazarbayev in the week’s apparent backstage quarrels. Tokayev announced on Wednesday that he was removing Nazarbayev from head of the security council, without stating whether that was with or without the former president’s approval. There were persistent rumours throughout the week that Nazarbayev and his family had fled the country. On Saturday,, Nazarbayev’s spokesperson Aidos Ukibay denounced the rumours as “knowingly false and speculative information”. He said Nazarbayev was in close contact with Tokayev and wanted the nation to rally around the new president. But the man himself has been silent during the most dramatic week in the young country’s history. It was a surprising absence from a politician who has personified Kazakhstan for the past three decades. When he stepped down in 2019, the new capital city he had ordered created in 1997 was renamed Nur-Sultan, in his honour. But for all the excesses of the cult of personality, for a long time Nazarbayev’s Kazakhstan was a much savvier autocracy than those of the other post-Soviet Central Asian nations. Many western diplomats had a positive view of his leadership, despite the democratic shortcomings, in part because of the lucrative opportunities for western businesses the country provided. “He was able to balance Russia and China, and other external influences, and he implemented some genuine reforms,” said a western diplomatic source. At the same time, a small elite close to Nazarbayev became tremendously wealthy, while many ordinary people still lived in poverty. Over time, resentments only intensified. “In Kazakhstan, market economy means capitalism, which means big money, which means large bribes for the best connected,” as a former US ambassador put it in a leaked diplomatic cable from 2010, paraphrasing a conversation with a top Kazakh businessman. Whatever the final outcome of last week’s turmoil, the images of a statue to Nazarbayev in the city of Taldykorgan being pulled down, and of crowds chanting “Old man, out!” are likely to fundamentally alter the legacy he hoped for. Also at stake is the independent foreign policy that was one of his most prized achievements. When, on Wednesday evening, Tokayev called for support from the Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO), a Russia-led military alliance, the request was approved within hours. At a time when all eyes were on the troops massed close to Russia’s border with Ukraine, suddenly there was a different Russian intervention to contend with. Both the Kazakh and Russian sides have insisted the contingent will be limited in size, scope and duration, and so far, claims of a Russian occupation seem overblown. But even if the troops are gone in a few days, the balance of power in the region is likely to have been altered irrevocably. “Nothing comes for free with Putin, and there will be a quid pro quo,” said Mallinson.As well as geopolitical implications, the sudden collapse of the Kazakh security forces and Nazarbayev’s legacy may also have important repercussions in Russian domestic politics. “Russia and Kazakhstan are two very similar political models: post-imperial resource-based personalised autocracies,” said Moscow-based political scientist Ekaterina Schulmann. The “Nazarbayev option” had been considered as one possible way for Vladimir Putin to step aside safely when his present term ends in 2024, but it now seems a much less appealing option than it might have done a week ago. Those involved in political decision-making in Russia would likely conclude from the recent events in Kazakhstan that even managed transition is dangerous, and that security forces should be further strengthened, said Schulmann. “If you have a pet idea, whatever happens will feed into your pet idea,” she said, noting that the Kremlin is fixated on preserving the current power structures and repelling perceived outside threats through repressing dissent at home. As attention shifts to the behind-the-scenes infighting and the geopolitical implications, some inside the country are urging that the human tragedy of the past days should not be forgotten. On Saturday, a group of Kazakh civil society organisations penned an open letter to the authorities: “Unrest and violence have no place at peaceful demonstrations… We ask the authorities to carry out a full investigation of every part of this tragedy.”Back behind closed doors, every yelp from Ralph Hasenhüttl was loud and clear but when his team triumphed after a chaotic extra-time period in which there were three goals in eight minutes it was also possible to hear a collective sigh of relief from the Southampton dugout. They reached the FA Cup fourth round despite playing with 10 men for more than 90 minutes. Victory should have capped a positive week after a welcome takeover that will likely give Southampton more clout but the good news stopped there for Hasenhüttl, who confirmed Tino Livramento, a revelation in the Premier League this season, may require surgery on a knee injury. That news compounded with Yan Valery’s sending-off 29 minutes into this game and Kyle Walker-Peters being among the positive Covid cases in the Southampton squad means Hasenhüttl is without a recognised right-back for Tuesday’s rescheduled league game against Brentford. Hasenhüttl said it was impossible to guarantee that game occurring. Premier League rules state games must go ahead if a club has 13 available outfield players plus a fit goalkeeper. “We never know at the moment,” the Southampton manager said. “It is all about the lottery. You wake up in the morning, go to the training ground, have breakfast and you wait. It is super-tough but it is how it is.” The scenes at full time were muted compared with their last competitive visit here, when Southampton in effect secured their Premier League status at Swansea’s expense in May 2018. They were left with a sour taste in their mouths after their hotel booking was mysteriously cancelled 24 hours before they were due to check-in – the then manager, Mark Hughes, said there were some dark arts at play – but had the last laugh, leaving a one-star review on TripAdvisor. They prospered again this time, Shane Long stepping off the bench to tee up Mohamed Elyounoussi’s 95th-minute equaliser before scoring the winner, his first Southampton goal in almost two years. The goals were painful from a Swansea perspective and even more galling given, four minutes into extra time, they took the lead when Jan Bednarek inadvertently diverted the substitute Olivier Ntcham’s cross into the far corner past Fraser Forster. But they switched off and conceded 58 seconds later before Long feasted on more slack defending to tap in a peach of a cross by James Ward-Prowse, who again took the step of cutting oval-shape holes into his socks to aid the circulation in his calves. In truth, Swansea were fortunate to make it to extra time, Joel Piroe cancelling out Nathan Redmond’s early opener with the hosts’ first meaningful foray into the Southampton box with 13 minutes of normal time left to play. Ntcham passed up a half-chance after Forster parried a shot to level once more but ultimately Swansea, who have not played since 11 December owing to Covid, squandered their lead and gifted Southampton, semi-finalists in this competition last season, passage into the next round. “I’m really hurt by the way we lost that game,” said the Swansea head coach, Russell Martin. “It was not acceptable. Going so long without a game has not helped, but that’s not an excuse. We shouldn’t be conceding goals like their last two – one long kick and we’re opened up. Our reaction to losing the ball was nowhere good enough. But there were also some good things I liked tonight, given the circumstances and the fact we were trying a new shape.” Southampton were cruising until Valery was dismissed for picking up a silly second yellow card approaching the half hour. Valery, already booked for a crude challenge on Ryan Manning, was caught out and put his left hand on the right shoulder of Michael Obafemi as the former Southampton striker began to stretch his legs after latching on to a crossfield pass. The referee, Simon Hooper, was quick to show a red card. As for who will fill in at right-back, Hasenhüttl will broach the subject in the coming days. “Let’s ask my captain [and see] what he says,” he said, smiling. Hasenhüttl hopes Livramento’s injury is not serious but pointed to the radio silence from his medical staff as an ominous sign. “It is always an alarm for me when they don’t want to speak,” he said. “It is not good when they are not coming to me. The meniscus injury even if it is a light one – I know this from my own son – it was a year out. At the moment we try it without surgery but we have to look how serious it is.”There was a moment, seconds before Demarai Gray’s equaliser which jolted Everton to life in this dramatic FA Cup tie, when Rafa Benítez may have begun to wonder if the size of the task facing him was greater than even he had envisaged. His side were being firmly tested by Hull City, were already a goal behind and looked in real danger of falling further adrift. The pressure was intensifying, underlined by chants and banners from the travelling supporters aimed towards the club’s Spanish manager. Benítez’s last visit to Hull was in May 2010, when a 0-0 draw proved to be his final match in charge of Liverpool. Anything other than victory here and talk of the same outcome in his spell as Everton manager would have intensified. In the end, while his side made hard work of this and were rescued by a long-range strike from Andros Townsend in extra time, it was job done, with Everton progressing to the fourth round of the FA Cup. However there is little doubt that the frailties that have haunted Benítez and his side so often this season remain. They were laid bare here against a Hull team who deserved to take the tie to extra time at the very least. Everton eventually hauled themselves over the line though, and avoided joining the list of sides on the wrong end of Cup shocks on Saturday. “We could have scored three or four and finished the game but we didn’t, and we had to suffer until the end,” Benítez said. “We put ourselves in a difficult position for a while but they showed character. A team that reacts is a team that cares. We made things difficult for ourselves but you could see the reaction was good, and the players care.” That it took extra time to finally end a spirited challenge from Grant McCann’s side underlines Everton’s issues, given the number of chances they had to end the tie inside 90 minutes. The drama had started early, with Hull going ahead after less than a minute when George Honeyman’s free-kick was converted by Tyler Smith. If there was pressure on Benítez pre-match, there was even more when Hull went ahead. But he and his side reacted, with goals from Gray – so often Everton’s go-to player this season – and André Gomes putting them ahead by half‑time. Gray and Anthony Gordon combined to impressive effect several times either side of the break and had Everton had a touch more composure in the final third, the tie could have been over long before it actually was. However, as a litany of chances for Gray, Gordon and Michael Keane came and went, it felt as though Hull’s efforts would always create at least one more opportunity. That chance arrived with the game heading into its final quarter, when the ball fell to the feet of Ryan Longman. Everton could not clear their lines and Longman curled past Asmir Begovic and into the top corner to make it 2-2. It was no less than the Championship side deserved. “We’ve gone toe-to-toe with a Premier League team and pushed them right until the end,” McCann said. “I’ve told them they’ve got to be proud of themselves.” Longman’s equaliser not only took the tie to extra time but also piled the pressure firmly back on to the shoulders of Benítez and Everton. The onus was now on the visitors to see if they could avoid a result that would have turned the heat up on the manager to an intensity perhaps not yet seen in his time in charge. There were nervy moments even before extra time. Keane Lewis-Potter hit the post, and at one stage Everton looked to be hanging on for another 30 minutes instead of going in search of a winner in normal time. But just as Gray had changed things earlier in the contest, when Benítez introduced his other go-to option on numerous occasions this season, you felt he had a moment in him that could define the contest. That proved to be the case, with Townsend’s strike from distance packing enough bend and dip to beat Nathan Baxter and spare Everton’s blushes. The goal would prove to be enough for Everton to progress to the fourth round, but the performance will have done little to assuage the discontent towards Benítez from the travelling supporters.Novak Djokovic faced fresh controversy over his attempt to enter Australia to take part in the Open tennis tournament after pictures emerged on social media of his appearances at public events after a positive Covid test was recorded in mid-December, which allowed him an exemption from the country’s strict Covid rules. Djokovic has spoken against vaccine mandates but has always refused to say what his own vaccination status is. He has been kept in a Melbourne hotel since Thursday after his visa was cancelled due to problems with the medical exemption from vaccination granted by the organisers of the Australian Open. Djokovic faces decision day on Monday as his appeal against the cancellation of his visa gets under way, after which he could be deported from the country. According to court documents released on Saturday ahead of the hearing, Djokovic’s Covid-19 infection was recorded by the Institute of Public Health of Serbia on 16 December, which provided the basis for the medical exemption he received from the Tennis Australia and Victorian state government medical panels. He was granted his exemption on 30 December. However, pictures on social media of Djokovic attending indoor events without a mask shortly after his Covid-19 test was recorded raise questions about Djokovic’s infection. On 16 December, Djokovic attended an event commemorating his own personal stamp. Pictures were posted of Djokovic a day later at the Tennis Association of Belgrade for an award ceremony. Djokovic was additionally pictured on the streets of Belgrade on 25 December despite Serbia’s rules requiring 14 days of self-isolation. It is not clear if he knew he had Covid when the earlier pictures were taken. Djokovic had attended a Euroleague basketball match between Red Star and Barcelona in Belgrade in the days before, during which numerous people present tested positive for Covid-19. Djokovic’s PR team have told Serbian journalists that they will not be making any statements until after his case. Since his visa was revoked in the early hours of Thursday morning and he was ordered to leave Australia, Djokovic has been detained in the Park hotel – an immigration detention hotel in Melbourne – as he awaits his hearing. The federal government control the Australian borders and the border force decided that Djokovic had not satisfied entry requirements. In his submission to the federal circuit court, Djokovic says he was granted a temporary visa to enter Australia on 18 November, and received a letter from the chief medical officer of Tennis Australia on 30 December recording he had a “medical exemption from Covid vaccination” on the grounds he had recently recovered from the virus. On New Year’s Day, Djokovic had also received a document from the home affairs department about his Australian travel declaration, which told Djokovic “[his] Australia travel declaration [had] been assessed” and that “[his] responses indicated that [he met] the requirements for a quarantine-free arrival into Australia where permitted by the jurisdiction of your arrival”. Djokovic claims that he was denied access to his legal team during parts of the eight hours of interviews he endured upon his arrival at Melbourne Airport on Wednesday night. L’Equipe, the French sports newspaper, reported on Saturday that Djokovic gave a long interview to one of its writers on 18 December, for its Champion of Champions award, two days after his positive Covid-19 test. Djokovic was masked during the interview but then unmasked during the photoshoot. Meanwhile, Renata Voracova, the Czech doubles specialist who had initially passed Australia’s border checks with the same medical exemption as Djokovic, has been deported from the country following her own subsequent detention. Voracova was pictured leaving the Park hotel on Saturday afternoon and in an interview with Czech publication iDNES.cz she explained that she had planned to vaccinate herself in the off-season before catching Covid-19. Voracova had competed in one tournament in Melbourne before she was detained and then she chose to voluntarily leave the country. “Apparently the Australian Tennis Association has misled us, which is annoying. I wanted to focus on tennis, not visas, quarantine. It’s really weird that I spent a week here, played a match … and then they came for me,” she said. The Australian health minister, Greg Hunt, on Sunday said the investigation of Australian Open visas had been finalised and Voracova and one official had left the country. “My advice from border force is their assessment of any visas relating to the Australian Open has now been completed and two other individuals have now voluntarily left the country,” Hunt told reporters. Earlier on Saturday, a leaked video obtained and published by News Corp showed Craig Tiley, the Tennis Australia boss, sending a video to his staff explaining his silence since Djokovic’s detention and commending their work. “We’ve chosen at this point not to be very public with it … simply because there is a pending lawsuit related to entry into Australia. Once that has run its course, we’ll be able to share more with you,” Tiley said.Two presidents and Democratic leaders in Congress joined on Saturday to commemorate Harry Reid, the former Senate majority leader who rose from poverty in Nevada to become one of the most powerful US politicians. “Being tough, being a fighter was once of Harry’s signatures characteristics,” Barack Obama said, at the service in Las Vegas. “He didn’t believe in high-falutin’ theories or rigid ideologies. Harry knew who he was. In a town obsessed with appearance, Harry had a vanity deficit. He didn’t like phonies. He didn’t like grandstanding.” Reid died on 28 December at home in Henderson, Nevada, at 82 and of complications from pancreatic cancer. He served for 34 years in Washington, leading the Senate through the great recession and a Republican resurgence after the 2010 elections. His work to push Obama’s signature healthcare act through the Senate was prominent among memories expressed at his funeral. Obama credits Reid for helping his rapid rise from the Senate to the White House. He delivered the eulogy. “He was more generous to me than I had any right to expect,” he said. “He was one of the first people to encourage me to run for president believing that, despite my youth, despite my an experience, despite fact that I was African American, I can actually win. At the time, that made one of us.” The turnout at the memorial service testified to Reid’s impact on some of the most consequential legislation of the 21st century. President Joe Biden escorted Reid’s widow, Landra Reid, to her seat before an honor guard bore Reid’s flag-draped casket to auditorium’s well. “Harry would always have your back, like the kids I grew up with in Scranton,” Biden said. “His story was unmistakably American. He was proof that there is nothing ordinary about America, and that Americans can do anything given half a chance.” Remembering a Senate colleague, Biden said America had lost “a giant, an honorable, decent, brave, unyielding man”. For Reid, Biden said, politics wasn’t about power for its own sake. It was about “power do right by people”. “That’s why you wanted Harry in your corner,” he said. Biden also worked with Reid for eight years after the senator from Delaware became vice-president to Obama. On Saturday, Biden spoke of his own decision to run for president in 2016, repeating themes outlined when he declared his campaign to oust Donald Trump from the White House and again last week, on the first anniversary of the Capitol attack. “The idea of America itself is under attack,” he said, “from dark and deepening forces. We’re in a battle for the soul America.” The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, and Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, also spoke. Schumer described Reid as a “truly honest and original character” and joked about receiving sartorial advice. Reid’s son, Leif, recalled his father’s well-known habit of abruptly ending telephone conversations without saying goodbye, sometimes leaving the other person – whether a powerful politician or a close family member – talking for several minutes before they realized Reid was gone. In a letter to Reid before his death, Obama recalled their close relationship, their different backgrounds and Reid’s climb from an impoverished former gold mining town in the Mojave desert to leadership in Congress. “Not bad for a skinny, poor kid from Searchlight,” Obama wrote. “I wouldn’t have been president had it not been for your encouragement and support, and I wouldn’t have got most of what I got done without your skill and determination.” On Saturday, Obama spoke most clearly of Reid’s contribution to democratic principles. ”He understood we don’t have to see eye to eye on everything in order to live together and be decent toward each other,” he said. “That we can learn to bridge differences of background, race and religion. “He knew that our system of government isn’t based on demanding that everybody think exactly the same way.” In what almost amounted to a requiem for a vanished political era, Obama said Reid presumed to live in a big and diverse country and for people to still work together. “He may have been a proud Democratic partisan,” he said, “and he didn’t shy away from bare-knuckle politics. But what is true is that I never heard Harry speak of politics as if it was some unbending battle between good and evil.”It was around the end of the 2000s that keen-eyed Tottenham fans began to realise something special was happening at Spurs Lodge. While the senior team were beginning to revive their fortunes under Harry Redknapp, behind the scenes Spurs were quietly nurturing one of the most promising generations of academy footballers the club had seen in many years. When you talked to the sort of people who had their ear to the ground and tended to know about these things, the same names kept cropping up. Watch out for Ryan Mason, plays just off the striker, scores for fun. Danny Rose, left winger from Leeds, quick as anything. Andros Townsend, another left-footed winger, tidy player, hell of a shot on him. And there’s a striker in the under-18s called Harry Kane who may just turn out to be something. “The most talented and exciting group of players I have worked with,” said John McDermott, the then academy coach who is now the FA’s technical director. But if you were to ask regular followers of the Spurs youth sides in about 2008 or 2009 which of their homegrown strikers would end up playing for England, the most popular answer would not have been Kane but a bustling, powerful forward called Jon Obika. The top scorer in the academy, winner of the fans’ award for best young player, an England under-19 international and already on the fringes of the first team: yes, pretty much everyone agreed that Obika was a star in the making. All he needed was a chance. Obika is now 31. It’s fair to say he didn’t become a star, at least not on the level many at White Hart Lane predicted. He has had a perfectly serviceable career, going from Charlton and Brighton in the Championship to Swindon and Oxford in League One to his current club, Morecambe, via a successful stint in Scotland with St Mirren. But he never did get that chance at Tottenham. At least, not until now. From the moment Morecambe’s name was plucked from the metaphorical hat to face Spurs in the FA Cup third round, Obika has had this Sunday ringed in his diary. He only joined the League One side in the summer and has spent most of the season recovering from a serious hamstring injury. But now he can look forward to a reunion with the club he joined at the age of 10, and where he has only happy memories, even if there is still a note of wistfulness in there, a hint of what-if. “I would have loved some opportunity to showcase my talent,” he admits. Those were heady times to be a young player at White Hart Lane. Redknapp had just taken Tottenham into the Champions League for the first time, spirits were high and Obika was testing himself against world-class players on a daily basis: Gareth Bale, Luka Modric, Rafael van der Vaart. “I can’t even remember Modric losing the ball in training,” he remembers. “He set the standard: this is where we have to get to. You had to raise your level.” Towards the end of the 2008-09 season he made his first and last start for the club, a Uefa Cup game against a Shakhtar Donetsk side featuring Willian and Fernandinho. He played well too, but these were hardly the most auspicious times for a young English striker to break through. The transfer budget was plentiful, standards were rising sharply and for all his personal skills Redknapp was the sort of coach who preferred to work with the finished article. Peter Crouch arrived in the summer of 2009 to supplement Jermain Defoe, Robbie Keane and Roman Pavlyuchenko. Emmanuel Adebayor would follow in 2011. Meanwhile Obika found himself on the inevitable treadmill of dead-end loan moves: Yeovil, Millwall, Crystal Palace, Peterborough, 11 separate spells in the space of five seasons. Each time he would return to find himself a little further away from the centre of things, his path to the first team blocked by fresh bodies. Even so he wishes now he had been a little braver, had a little more confidence in himself, made himself unignorable. “I’m probably my biggest critic,” he says. “There’s always things I could have done better. Whether it’s asking for those opportunities or proving it on a consistent basis. Even though I was scoring a lot in the youth team, when you train with the first team you have to be consistent every day. You don’t get too many chances and you have to take them.” So in 2014, just as Tottenham were hiring a forward-thinking young coach called Mauricio Pochettino, the 23-year-old Obika left for Swindon Town. “As a young player you just want to play games,” he says. “When I left to go to Swindon I thought: ‘Should I have gone on loan that many times?’ But you just have to trust the process.” And after almost 250 games for Swindon, Oxford, St Mirren and Morecambe as a robust, physical striker, equally adept at running the channels or holding the ball up, he can hardly claim football has not been good to him. “Jon’s one of the nicest guys I’ve met in football,” says his manager, Stephen Robinson, himself a former Tottenham academy prospect back in the 1990s. “He got injured in his first pre-season game for us, only made his debut three weeks ago and scored on Saturday [in a thrilling 4-3 win over Doncaster]. I’ve never seen a boy work so hard off the pitch to get fit. It’s nice to see one of the good guys back, and this will be a brilliant occasion for him.” Plenty has changed at Tottenham in the eight years since Obika left, but a few things have not. Mason, now a first-team coach, remains a close friend. Some of the medical team and academy staff have stayed in touch. And so Obika returns to Tottenham without bitterness, but perhaps with a point to prove. For all the years he spent there, the work he put in, he never really managed to leave his mark at his boyhood club. Scoring a goal at their new stadium to put them out of the FA Cup? That, you feel, would do the trick nicely.This live blog has now ended. For up-to-the minute news, join our correspondents in Australia. Brazil reported 49,303 fresh cases of Covid-19 in the past 24 hours, and 115 deaths from the virus, the health ministry said on Saturday. The South American country has now registered 22,499,525 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 619,937, according to ministry data. Brazil’s Covid-19 death toll trails only that of the US and Russia, according to Reuters calculations. Since a hacker attack on 10 December, some ministry databases have been offline, affecting monitoring of the pandemic, Reuters reports. The US company Moderna donated 2.7m doses of coronavirus vaccine to Mexico on Saturday, after Mexico passed 300,000 test-confirmed coronavirus deaths this week. The Associated Press reports: [S]o little testing is done in the country that a government review of death certificates puts the real toll at almost 460,000. Mexican officials welcomed the arrival of the shipment at the airport in Toluca, just west of Mexico City, and said the vaccines will be used to inoculate teachers. Teachers in Mexico were second after only health care workers to be vaccinated in the spring. In April and May, over 2.7 million teachers got initial shots. But most of them got the single-dose Chinese Cansino vaccine, whose effectiveness appears to decline over time. Mexico has now obtained more than 200m doses of vaccines, and has been trying to reopen in-person learning at all levels. Education secretary Delfina Gómez said: “We are grateful to recieve this donation, which will undoubtedly help more boys, girls and youths to come to classrooms with greater safety and confidence.” Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon has warned UK prime minister Boris Johnson that axing universal free lateral flow tests would be an “utterly wrongheaded” approach to dealing with coronavirus. She urged Johnson against the move after it was reported they could be limited to high-risk settings – such as care homes, hospitals and schools – and to people with symptoms. Sturgeon said the Scottish government had not signed up to the move, but if Johnson was “really considering this” it would be “utterly wrongheaded”. “Hard to imagine much that would be less helpful to trying to ‘live with’ Covid,” she tweeted. She questioned what would happen to funding for UK nations for testing under the Barnett formula if the British government went ahead with the move, adding: “Testing so vital, we’d have to consider continued funding but it would then come from existing budgets.” The Department of Health and Social Care is yet to comment, but a government source disputed the report and said it was too early to say what the future holds for free lateral flows, PA reports. The rapid tests were made available to everyone in England, including those without symptoms, in April. The US has administered more than 518m doses of Covid-19 vaccine in the country as of Saturday morning and distributed 639.7 million doses, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Reuters reports: Those figures are up from the 516.6m vaccine doses the CDC said had gone into arms by Friday. The agency said 246.4 million people had received at least one dose while 207.45 million people were fully vaccinated as of 6am EST on Saturday. The CDC tally includes two-dose vaccines from Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech , as well as Johnson &amp; Johnson’s one-shot vaccine. More than 74.6 million people received a booster dose since 13 August, when the United States authorised a third dose of the vaccines for people with compromised immune systems who are likely to have weaker protection from the two-dose regimens. The UK Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer said Britain’s official coronavirus death toll passing 150,000 was a “dark milestone for our country”. “Our thoughts are with all those who have lost someone, and we thank everyone supporting the vaccination effort,” he tweeted. “We must ensure the public inquiry provides answers and that lessons are learned.” The British government may stop giving out free lateral flow tests under plans for living with Covid, which prime minister Boris Johnson will announce within weeks, the Sunday Times reports. After more than £6bn of public money has been spent on testing the population with lateral flow devices, the government could move to providing free tests only in high-risk settings such as care homes, hospitals and schools, and to people with symptoms, while the tracing of people who have come into contact with the infected by NHS Test and Trace is also likely to be scaled back. A senior Whitehall source said: I don’t think we are in a world where we can continue to hand out free lateral flow tests to everybody for evermore. It’s likely we will move to a scenario where there is less testing but where we have a capacity to ramp it up if necessary, such as in the winter. Dissident Iranian poet and filmmaker Baktash Abtin, 48, has died after contracting Covid-19 in a hospital in the capital Tehran after being released on a furlough from prison where he was infected twice, Iranian news agencies said on Saturday. “The poet and documentary filmmaker [...], who had contracted Covid earlier also while serving his sentence, was transferred to a hospital in Tehran [but] the treatment did not succeed and he died today,” the semi-official ISNA news agency said. Rights group PEN America said on Twitter: “Covid is a natural killer, but Abtin’s death was aided and abetted by the Iranian government every step of the way.” Abtin was also hospitalised last year, when a picture showing him apparently shackled to a bed caused an uproar on social media, prompting the head of Iran’s prisons, Mohammad Mehdi Hajmohammadi, to tweet that those responsible had been “dealt with,” Reuters reports. Abtin, who was serving a six-year sentence for “anti-government propaganda” and “actions against national security,” died shortly after PEN America and 18 other rights groups voiced concern over his treatment in a letter to Iran’s Supreme letter Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. “Unfortunately, mistreatment of prisoners and denial of medical care is a systemic problem in Iranian prisons,” said the letter, posted on the website of Human Rights Watch. Iran denies any mistreatment and its prisons directorate said Abtin was granted furlough 35 days ago to be moved to a private hospital by his relatives, state media reported. The Philippines broke its own record for the highest single day tally of new Covid-19 cases, with 26,458 new infections reported by the health department as of 8 January 4pm local time. 102,017 people are currently reported as being sick with the virus, while the positivity rate also reached a new record high of 43.7%. Acting presidential spokesperson Karlo Nograles on Saturday denied rumors that a “total lockdown” will be imposed in the country, CNN Philippines reports. 265 new deaths were logged, taking the death to toll to over 52,000, as well as 1,656 recoveries. British prime minister Boris Johnson recognised the “terrible toll” on the UK after the total number of people to have died within 28 days of testing positive for coronavirus passed 150,000. In a tweeted statement, Johnson said: Coronavirus has taken a terrible toll on our country and today the number of deaths recorded has reached 150,000. Each and every one of those is a profound loss to the families, friends and communities affected and my thoughts and condolences are with them. Our way out of this pandemic is for everyone to get their booster or their first or second dose if they haven’t yet. Prof Andrew Hayward, who advises the British government as part of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said the statistic was “absolutely tragic”. After hearing the testimony of a woman who lost two close relatives during the pandemic, the University College London academic told BBC Radio 4’s PM programme: It is absolutely tragic and to think that’s been repeated so many times is awful. I think we could have done better. I think some of the deaths are even more tragic for the fact that many of them were avoidable if we had acted earlier in the first and second wave. Italy reported 197,552 Covid-19 related cases on Saturday, against 108,304 the day before, the health ministry said, while the number of deaths fell to 184 from 223. A week ago, the country recorded 141,256 daily cases and 111 deaths. Italy has registered 138,881 deaths linked to Covid-19 since the pandemic began, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth highest in the world. The country has logged 7.28 million cases to date. The current explosion of infections with the Omicron variant in the US is causing a breakdown in basic functions and services across the country, with hospitals reaching capacity in Kansas, employee shortages in New York City causing delays in trash and subway services and diminishing the ranks of firefighters and emergency workers, and schools across the nation struggling to find enough teachers. The Associated Press reports: “This really does, I think, remind everyone of when Covid-19 first appeared and there were such major disruptions across every part of our normal life,” said Tom Cotter, director of emergency response and preparedness at the global health nonprofit Project HOPE. “And the unfortunate reality is, there’s no way of predicting what will happen next until we get our vaccination numbers – globally – up.” First responders, hospitals, schools and government agencies have employed an all-hands-on-deck approach to keep the public safe, but they are worried how much longer they can keep it up. In Kansas’ Johnson County, paramedics are working 80 hours a week. Ambulances have frequently been forced to alter their course when the hospitals they’re heading to tell them they’re too overwhelmed to help, confusing the patients’ already anxious family members driving behind them. [...] [The Omicron variant’s] easy transmissibility has led to skyrocketing cases in the US, which is affecting businesses, government offices and public services alike. In downtown Boise, Idaho, customers were queued up outside a pharmacy before it opened Friday morning and before long, the line wound throughout the large drugstore. Pharmacies have been slammed by staffing shortages, either because employees are out sick or have left altogether. In Los Angeles, more than 800 police and fire personnel were sidelined because of the virus as of Thursday, causing slightly longer ambulance and fire response times. In New York City, officials have had to delay or scale back trash and subway services because of a virus-fueled staffing hemorrhage. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority said about one-fifth of subway operators and conductors – 1,300 people – have been absent in recent days. Almost one-fourth of the city sanitation department’s workers were out sick Thursday, Sanitation Commissioner Edward Grayson said. “Everybody’s working ‘round the clock, 12-hour shifts,” Grayson said. The city’s fire department also has adjusted for higher absences. Officials said Thursday that 28% of EMS workers were out sick, compared with about 8% to 10% on a normal day. Twice as many firefighters as usual were also absent. At Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, two checkpoints at the airport’s busiest terminal were shut down because not enough Transportation Security Administration agents showed up for work, according to statements from airport and TSA officials. Meanwhile, schools from coast to coast tried to maintain in-person instruction despite massive teacher absences. In Chicago, a tense standoff between the school district and teachers union over remote learning and Covid-19 safety protocols led to classes being canceled over the past three days. In San Francisco, nearly 900 educators and aides called in sick Thursday. In Hawaii, where public schools are under one statewide district, 1,600 teachers and staff were absent Wednesday because of illness or pre-arranged vacation or leave. The UK government said on Saturday a further 313 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, bringing the total number of deaths recorded in this way to 150,057. The UK is the seventh country to pass 150,000 deaths, after the US, Brazil, India, Russia, Mexico and Peru. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have now been 174,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. I’m Jedidajah Otte and will be taking over for the next few hours. If there’s anything you’d like to flag, feel free to get in touch via Twitter @JedySays or via email. Here are the main developments in Covid-19 news from around the world so far on Saturday: Novak Djokovic had written clearance from Australia’s immigration department before travelling to the country with a medical exemption from its vaccination rules, his lawyers said in a court filing on Saturday. According to the filing, the world No 1 tennis player contracted Covid-19 last month. Two people connected to the Australia Open have left Australia, with the the Australian Border Force (ABF) saying the individuals voluntarily departed. The ABF did not confirm their names, but one is understood to be Czech player Renata Voráčová, according to Sky News. Video of an NHS doctor challenging the UK health secretary over vaccine mandates for healthcare workers went viral on social media. The scene, which was caught by Sky News cameras, was first broadcast on Friday after Javid visited Kings College Hospital in south London. The Omicron variant could make Covid endemic in the UK, a government adviser said. Dr Mike Tildesley, a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Modelling group (Spi-M), told Times Radio that the latest mutation of the virus was more contagious but less severe than previous iterations. Two million new coronavirus cases were recorded on average across the world every day between 1 and 7 January, with figures doubling in 10 days, according to a tally kept by Agence-France Presse. New global case numbers have soared 270% since Omicron was discovered in South Africa in late November. The crown princess of Sweden has tested positive for Covid-19 and is experiencing cold-like symptoms, the country’s royal court announced. Victoria’s parents, the king and queen of Sweden, both also tested positive this week, according to the Reuters news agency. Cyril Ramaphosa, the president of South Africa, has said the country needs to step up Covid-19 vaccinations, as its campaign founders in the face of apathy from the public. Nearly 40% of South Africa’s adult population has been fully vaccinated, less than the government had hoped for by this stage. Anti-vaccine protesters have rallied in cities across France, responding to Emmanuel Macron’s threat to “piss off” people refusing Covid vaccines with the chant: “We’ll piss you off”. The protesters accuse Macron of trampling on their freedoms and treating citizens unequally. And that is it from me, Damien Gayle, for today. By for now! Anti-vaccine protesters have rallied in cities across France, denouncing Emmanuel Macron’s intent to “piss off” people refusing COVID-19 shots by tightening curbs on their civil liberties. The French president this week said he wanted to irritate unvaccinated people by making their lives so complicated they would end up getting jabbed. In Paris, protesters retorted by adopting his slangy wording, chanting “We’ll piss you off”. Others carried signs saying “No to the vaccine pass”, a reference to Macron’s legislative push to require proof of vaccination to enter venues such as cafes, bars and museums. TV images showed skirmishes between protesters and police at one site. Protesters also rallied through the streets in Marseille, Nantes and Le Mans among other cities. “(Macron’s remarks) were the last straw. We are not irresponsible,” said hospital administrator Virginie Houget, who has avoided a mandatory vaccine order for health workers because she caught COVID-19 late last year. The protesters accuse Macron of trampling on their freedoms and treating citizens unequally. He says freedoms carry responsibilities that include protecting the health of others. France recorded more than 300,000 new coronavirus infections for the second time in a week on Friday. Hospitalisations, including COVID-19 patients in intensive care (ICU), are rising steadily, putting the healthcare system under strain. Some hospitals have reported that some 85% of ICU patients are not vaccinated against COVID-19. Data shows that 90% of over-12s eligible for the COVID shot are fully vaccinated. People in France already have to show either proof of vaccination or a negative test to enter restaurants and bars and use inter-regional trains. But with Omicron infections surging, the government wants to drop the test option. Three months before a presidential election, Macron’s blunt language appeared to be calculated, tapping into a mounting frustration against the unvaccinated. Conservative challenger Valerie Pecresse said Macron was driving a wedge through the country. Far-right candidate Eric Zemmour denounced what he called the president’s puerile remarks. On the capital’s streets, protesters accused Macron of politicising the pandemic ahead of the election. “I want him to piss off drug dealers and criminals, not the average person,” said one 55-year-old protester who requested anonymity because he runs a business. Hundreds of people have rallied in Beirut to protest measures against the unvaccinated, saying individuals should have the right to decide whether to be inoculated or not. Vaccination is not compulsory in Lebanon, but in recent days authorities have cracked down on people who are not vaccinated or who do not carry a negative PCR test result. Saturday’s protest by nearly 300 people in downtown Beirut came a day after the daily number of new coronavirus cases hit a record 7,974, the Associated Press reports. The protest came days after authorities imposed fresh restrictions — including the requirement of a vaccination certificate or negative PCR test for entry into restaurants, hotels and similar venues. “No to the dictatorship of vaccination,” read one banner carried by protesters. The health minister, Firass Abiad, criticised the protesters, saying that over 20,000 people were vaccinated on Saturday alone as part of a government campaign focusing on students and teachers. Educational institutions are to resume classes on Monday. “Vaccines are not mandatory, and are free. They are offered to everyone, including refugees and foreign migrant workers,” Abiad tweeted. “Finally, vaccines save lives, but for some, ignorance is bliss.” “An Omicron wave that started three weeks ago in turning into a Tsunami. The situation in hospitals and ICUs remains stable, capacity is being boosted,” Abiad added. Lebanon, with has a population of six million including a million Syrian refugees, has registered more than 760,000 cases and 9,250 deaths since discovering its first COVID-19 case in February 2020. The crown princess of Sweden has tested positive for Covid-19 and is experiencing cold-like symptoms, the country’s royal court has announced. Victoria’s parents, the king and queen of Sweden, both also tested positive this week, according to the Reuters news agency. The royal court said in a statement that the crown princess, who has contracted the virus once before and has received a full course of coronavirus vaccines, was isolating at home with her family. Superman, Cinderella and Minions were among characters from films, comics and fairy tales who greeted children at a Covid vaccination centre in Prague on Saturday to ease their nerves as they came to be inoculated. Some children cried, but less so while talking to their favourite characters, Reuters reported. “We thought it would be better to have a day just for the kids,” said Nikola Melicharova, a vaccination centre worker dressed for the day as Snow White. “And because kids are usually a bit afraid of vaccinations, we decided for a fairy tale day so that it was a little more pleasant.” The Czech Republic is trying to boost vaccination rates before widespread infection by the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. Some 62.4% of the population in the country of 10.7 million has had a full course of coronavirus vaccines, compared to a rate of 68.6% in the whole of the EU, according to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The Czech Republic started giving shots to children aged 5-11 in mid-December. Figures from the health ministry showed just over 27,000 shots had been administered to this age group by Friday. Scotland has recorded 26 new deaths within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test, and 12,602 new cases in the past 24 hours. The figures published by the Scottish government on Saturday showed that of 57,907 completed tests for Covid-19, 25.1% were positive, up from 21.7% on Friday. The newly recorded deaths take the toll of those who have died after recently testing positive for the virus to 9,931. The figure will be different from the number of people for whom Covid-19 appeared on their death certificate. The figures include a note advising of delays between tests being taken and results being reported but saying Public Health Scotland is monitoring the situation. There were 1,362 people in hospital on Friday with recently confirmed Covid-19, up 39 in 24 hours, and 48 were in intensive care, the same as the day before. A total of 4,390,076 people have received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccination, 4,041,550 have had a second dose, and 3,082,231 have received a third dose or booster. Cyril Ramaphosa, the president of South Africa, has said the country needs to step up Covid-19 vaccinations, as its campaign founders in the face of apathy from the public. Nearly 40% of South Africa’s adult population has been fully vaccinated, higher than in many other African countries but less than the government had hoped for by this stage. Late last year, the government was forced to defer some vaccine deliveries because of slow uptake of vaccinations in the country. “We can do better as South Africans, so I therefore urge all of us who have not yet been vaccinated, let us go out in our great numbers (and get the vaccine),” Ramaphosa told an ANC anniversary event, according to Reuters. “The recovery of our economy is very much dependent on many of us being vaccinated.” The ANC wants a policy on vaccine mandates to be finalised, Ramaphosa added. He had raised the possibility of vaccine mandates for certain places and activities in late November after local scientists warned about the Omicron coronavirus variant, but that is yet to be implemented despite months of talks between the government, businesses and trade unions. “We now need to give our people an incentive to go and be vaccinated, because that is the only defence and shield that we have,” he said. The ANC is due to hold a leadership contest at the end of this year at which Ramaphosa is expected to seek re-election. An American company has suspended some of its cruise operations due to the rising number of Covid cases caused by the highly transmissible Omicron variant. The Royal Caribbean Cruises has paused the sailings of three of its ships – Serenade of the Seas, Jewel of the Seas, Symphony of the Seas – while its Vision of the Seas ship will not return to cruising until 7 March, the cruise line said in a statement on Friday. “We regret having to cancel our guests’ long-awaited vacations and appreciate their loyalty and understanding,” the company said, adding that these measures had been implemented “in an abundance of caution”. Earlier this week, Royal Caribbean called off its Spectrum of the Seas cruise for 6 January after nine guests on its 2 January trip were identified as close contacts to a local Hong Kong Covid case. They have tested negative so far. Two people connected to the Australia Open have left Australia, with the the Australian Border Force (ABF) saying the individuals voluntarily departed. The ABF did not confirm their names, but one is understood to be Czech player Renata Voráčová, according to Sky News. The ABF said: “The Australian Border Force investigation into the visa status of two other individuals connected to the Australian Open has concluded. “The ABF can confirm both individuals have now voluntarily departed Australia. We will not be making any further comment about these individuals at this time. “All travellers who enter Australia must do so in accordance with our strict laws and entry requirements, regardless of their status or their reasons for entering the country.” It comes amid Novak Djokovic’s court battle to enter Australia without proof of a Covid vaccination. Hello, I’ll be covering the blog for the next hour while Damien takes a break. Do send me a DM on Twitter, or an email, if there’s something you think I’ve missed. Thanks in advance. Two million new coronavirus cases were recorded on average across the world every day between 1 and 7 January, with figures doubling in 10 days, according to a tally kept by Agence-France Presse. According to the French state-backed news agency, an average of 2,106,118 new daily infections were reported over the seven-day period, shortly after the 1 million case threshold was passed in the week beginning 23 December. New global case numbers have soared by 270% since the Omicron variant was discovered in South Africa in late November. But Covid-related deaths were at their lowest level since October 2020, with an average of 6,237 per day recorded in the period between 1 and 7 January. Europe, as well as the United States and Canada, were the world’s infection hotspots. The two regions respectively represented 49% and 33% of global Covid cases in the past week. Covid cases skyrocketed by 47% in Europe and 76% in the United States and Canada compared with the previous week. In the same period, Covid infections increased by 224% in Oceania, 148% in Latin America and the Caribbean, 116% in the Middle East and 145% in Asia. The number of new cases reported in Africa remained stable but, as elsewhere, were at their highest level since the start of the pandemic in March 2020. Guardian Australia reporter Christopher Knaus has written on Novak Djokovic’s court battle to enter Australia without proof of a Covid vaccination. He writes: Novak Djokovic relied on a weeks-old Covid infection to justify his vaccine-free travel to Australia and was given a green light by the federal government just days before arriving in the country, court documents reveal. Court documents associated with Djokovic’s challenge to his visa cancellation were published by the federal circuit court late Saturday, ahead of an urgent hearing on Monday. The documents reveal that Djokovic relied on a very recent Covid-19 infection, recorded on 16 December by the Institute of Public Health of Serbia, to argue he was exempt from vaccine travel requirements. They reveal he has also accused Australian government officials of unfairly pressuring him to accept a decision on his visa cancellation in the early hours of the morning, without the chance to properly talk with his lawyers or rest after 25 hours of travelling. The north-east and north-west of England are seeing “concerning” rates of the Omicron variant, an expert has said. Figures showed that three of the five UK areas with the biggest week-on-week rises in Covid case rates are Middlesbrough (748.8 to 2,651.4), Copeland (1,731.3 to 3,525.8) and Redcar &amp; Cleveland (846.8 to 2,564.3). Dr Mike Tildesley, from the University of Warwick and a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Modelling group (Spi-M) highlighted these regions, along with the Midlands, as areas of concern. He said cases in London are “slowing down”, but scientists need two weeks to see if this continues. “Most other parts of the country are about two to three weeks behind where London is in their epidemic profile,” Tildesley told Times Radio. “Particularly concerning is the north-east and the north-west – if you look at hospital admissions in those two regions they are going up, also the Midlands, where I live, that’s also a little bit concerning, so it is a worry. “On the slightly more positive side, so it doesn’t sound all doom and gloom, what we are seeing from hospital admissions is that stays in hospital do appear to be on average shorter, which is good news, symptoms appear to be a little bit milder, so this is what we are seeing consistently with the Omicron variant.” The most bizarre lockdown news of the day so far comes to us from India: Pandemic restrictions have been tightened in Romania, amid a sharp rise in daily new coronavirus infections. In mid-December, Romania was reporting fewer than a thousand Covid-19 infections a day, but over the past week, daily cases have surged to around 6,000 - the highest number of infections since early November The new measures, which came into force on Saturday include the mandatory wearing of face masks in outdoor and indoor public spaces, and the banning of textile masks. Fines of up to 500 euros ($567) can be imposed on those who do not comply, authorities said. Bars and restaurants must close at 10pm and operate at 50% or 30% capacity depending on the area’s infection rate, and Covid passes are required. The same goes for sporting events, gyms, and cinemas. Meanwhile, quarantine and isolation periods have been reduced. The health minister, Alexandru Rafila, told a press briefing on Friday that Romania is “already in the fifth wave of the pandemic” and that omicron is expected to soon become the dominant virus strain. “For the time being, there is a sporadic transmission (of omicron),” he said. “But it is very possible that in the coming days, the coming weeks, we will witness a community transmission supported by this new strain.” The Omicron variant could make Covid endemic in the UK, a senior government adviser has said. Dr Mike Tildesley, from the University of Warwick and a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Modelling group (Spi-M), told Times Radio that the latest mutation of the virus was more contagious but less severe than previous iterations. “The thing that might happen in the future is you may see the emergence of a new variant that is less severe, and ultimately, in the long term, what happens is Covid becomes endemic and you have a less severe version. It’s very similar to the common cold that we’ve lived with for many years,” he said. “We’re not quite there yet but possibly Omicron is the first ray of light there that suggests that may happen in the longer term. It is, of course, much more transmissible than Delta was, which is concerning, but much less severe. “Hopefully, as we move more towards the spring and we see the back of Omicron, we can get more inter-relationship of living with Covid as an endemic disease and protecting the vulnerable. “Any variant that does emerge which is less severe, ultimately, in the longer term, is where we want to be.” Novak Djokovic has told a court in Melbourne that he had immigration clearance to enter Australia after contracting Covid-19 in December. On his third day in immigration detention in Melbourne, the tennis world number one’s court filing has escalated a row over Australia’s handling of a medical exemption from vaccination rules that has become a flashpoint for opponents of vaccine mandates around the world. Djokovic, a vocal opponent of vaccine mandates hoping to win his 21st Grand Slam at the Australian Open, has been detained since Thursday in a Melbourne hotel after his visa was cancelled. He is hoping to win his 21st Grand Slam at the Australian Open. Djokovic had received the exemption from tournament organiser Tennis Australia, with a follow-up letter from Australia’s department of home affairs saying he was allowed into the country. “I explained that I had been recently infected with COVID in December 2021 and on this basis I was entitled to a medical exemption in accordance with Australian Government rules and guidance,” Djokovic says in the filing, according to Reuters. Djokovic says he told Australian Border Force “officers that I had correctly made my Australian Travel Declaration and otherwise satisfied all necessary requirements in order to lawfully enter Australia on my visa.” The filing confirms rumours that Djokovic had Covid last month. It said he returned his first positive test on 16 December, but by 30 December “had not had a fever or respiratory symptoms of COVID-19 in the last 72 hours”. On 1 January, it says, he received a document from Home Affairs telling him his responses indicated he met “the requirements for a quarantine-free arrival into Australia”. Video of an NHS doctor challenging the UK health secretary over vaccine mandates for healthcare workers has gone viral on social media. The scene, which was caught by Sky News cameras, was first broadcast on Friday after Javid visited Kings College Hospital in south London. While on a walkabout in the hospital, Javid had asked doctors and nurses there what they thought about government plans to require vaccination for all NHS staff. After an brief but uncomfortable silence, Steve James, a consultant anaesthetist who has been working throughout the pandemic, replied: “I’m not happy about that.” James told Javid: “I’ve had Covid at some point, I’ve got antibodies, and I’ve been working on Covid ITUs since the beginning; I have not had a vaccination, I do not want to have a vaccination. The vaccine is reducing transmission only for about eight weeks with delta. With Omicron it’s probably less. And for that I would be dismissed if I don’t have a vaccine? The science isn’t strong enough.” “That’s your view,” Javid replied. Turning to a group of nurses he added: “And you views?” However, they did not respond. Turning back to James, Javid continued: “I respect that but there is also many different views.” Javid added: “I understand that but obviously we have to weigh all that up for both health and social care and there will always be a debate about it ...” James replied: “Maybe there is an opportunity to reconsider with Omicron and the changing picture, or at least the nuance that will allow doctors who have had antibody exposure, who’ve got antibodies, who haven’t had the vaccination, to not have it, because the protection I’ve got is probably equivalent to someone who is vaccinated.” “Yes, but at some point that will wane,” Javid said. James said: “But if you want to provide protection with a booster you’d have to inject everybody every month. If the protection has worn off for transmission after two months then after a month you’ve still got a bit of protection. But if you want to maintain protection you’re going to need to boost all staff members every single months, which you’re not going to do.” Javid answered his challenge by saying: “We take the very best advice that we can, from vaccine experts.” Half a day after the video was published on Twitter, it had been watched about 1.2m times. Vaccine experts have advised the UK government to prioritise distributing the first booster jab. Figures from the UK Health Security Agency show that the vaccine booster is 90% effective against admission to hospital from the Omicron variant for the over-65s after three months. Meanwhile, protection for those with two doses dropped to about 70% after three months and to 50% after six months. Taking this data into account, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation has advised the government against giving a second booster dose, or fourth jab, to care home residents and those aged over 80, the PA Media news agency reports. It added that priority should continue to be given to rolling out the first booster dose, and that unvaccinated people should come forward for their first two doses as soon as possible. The UK government is planning for Covid-related absences from up to one in four teachers when all schools finally go back after the Christmas holidays. Term has already begun at many schools across the country, but others are yet to welcome children back after the festive break. Speaking on BBC Breakfast on Saturday morning, Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said there is a “mixed picture” of how Covid is affecting absences in schools so far this term. He said: “Not all schools and colleges are open yet and won’t be until Monday so we’re not going to get a proper picture of staff absence until next week. “There’s a snatched snapshot taken from a small number of primary schools earlier in the week that suggested that might be around 10% of the staff absent. The government itself is planning potentially for 25% of staff.” Novak Djokovic had written clearance from Australia’s immigration department before travelling to the country with a medical exemption from its vaccination rules, his lawyers said in a court filing on Saturday. According to the filing, the world No 1 tennis player contracted Covid-19 last month but was not experiencing symptoms. He returned his first positive coronavirus test on 16 December, 2021, but 14 days later “had not had a fever or respiratory symptoms of Covid-19 in the last 72 hours”, the filing said. On 1 January, the Serbian sports star received a “a document from the Department of Home Affairs (which) told Mr Djokovic that his ‘responses indicate(d) that (he met) the requirements for a quarantine-free arrival into Australia”, the documents added. Djokovic is in immigration detention in Australia after having his visa cancelled on arrival on Thursday Djokovic, an outspoken critic of mandatory vaccination, has never disclosed his own vaccination status. He is challenging his visa cancellation in Australia’s federal court in hopes of winning his 21st grand slam at the Australian Open which starts on 17 January. A record 26,458 confirmed new coronavirus cases were recorded in the Philippines on Saturday, according to the latest official data. A health ministry official said confirmed cases have exceeded 2.93m. Deaths have reached over 52,000, after 265 new fatalities were recorded on Saturday. The previous daily record in Covid-19 cases was 26,303 on 11 September 2021. Good morning and welcome to the coronavirus news blog. I’m Damien Gayle and I’ll be your guide through the day’s latest covid-related headlines and breaking news.The Duchess of Cambridge has marked her 40th birthday by releasing three glamorous portraits of herself. Pictured in different Alexander McQueen dresses, Kate posed for fashion photographer Paolo Roversi, who has worked with stars such as Naomi Campbell and Kate Moss and described photographing the duchess as “a moment of pure joy”. Roversi said the duchess could “bring hope to the whole world” with her “positive energy”. The duchess will reportedly celebrate her 40th birthday on Sunday in private with family at the Cambridges’ home in Norfolk. Roversi said: “Taking the portrait of Her Royal Highness the Duchess of Cambridge was a true honour for me and a moment of pure joy. “I was moved by her warmth and friendly welcome and enchanted by her shining eyes that reflected the loveliness of her soul and her smile showing the generosity of her heart. “It was a profound and rich experience for me, an unforgettable moment. I have met a wonderful person, a person who, with her positive energy, can bring hope to the whole world.” In the only coloured image of the series, Kate wears a red asymmetric off-shoulder McQueen dress, earrings loaned by the Queen, and an open hairstyle with loose curls while striking a casual pose with her hands seemingly in the gown’s pockets. The remaining images have been produced in monochrome. In one, a head and shoulders image, she smiles broadly while the other shows her sitting in profile and looking into the distance, with her engagement ring prominently on display against the light fabric of her dress. In both photographs, she wears earrings that belonged to Diana, Princess of Wales, PA reported. Ahead of her birthday, Kate was praised for her “vision and commitment” in establishing her Royal Foundation Centre for Early Childhood to support the development of children. Michael Samuel, chairman of trustees at the Anna Freud National Centre for Children and Families, one of the country’s leading mental health charities for children and young people, commended the likely future queen for her work championing research into a child’s formative years, adding she had shown “passion and compassion” in her role as the organisation’s patron.